1999 MODEL YEAR NAVIGATION SYSTEMS 

OVERVIEW 

The 1999 Model Year has expanded Navigation System availability for all BMW vehicles. 
The E38/E39 systems are primarily carry over from previous systems with software 
improvements. 

Currently there is one Navigation system available for the E46 which is based on the famil¬ 
iar Mark II original equipment system. In the future there will be three additional systems 
(refer to chart on next page). 

For background infor¬ 
mation on previous 
model year Mark II, 

Mark III and E36 
Accessory Navigation 
Systems refer to: 


On-Board Monitor 
with GPS 
Navigation 
System 


1998 New Model 
Update (titled 
1997 Part 2). 

This section will cover the changes that occurred to the systems where different for the E46 
Mark II system. The release of future systems (E46 Radio Navigation and E46 Mark III 
accessory system and E46 Mark III monochrome accessory system) will be addressed 
when released. 



148 




























































Original 

Equipment 

Systems 


1999 Model Year Navigation Systems 


E38 - E39 


E36 - roadster 


E46 


Mark II Board Monitor 
System 

Same System as 1998 
Model Year with 
software improvements 
(Refer to 1998 New 
Model Update Book) 



None Available 


Mark II Board Monitor 



System 

Same as E38/E39 Mark 
II with E46 specific 
Board Monitor. 

Availability: 10/98 


Mark II Radio 
Navigation System 

Monochrome Text 
display (no maps) and 
Audio Navigation System 
based on Mark II. 

Display unit integrated 
into radio. 

Availability: Future 



Accessory 

Navigation 

Systems 


Mark Hi 

BMW center installation. 
Same as 1998 Model 
Year System. Goose 
neck mounted display. 
(Refer to 1998 New 
Model Update Book) 


E36 Accessory 
Navigation System 

BMW center installation. 
System manufactured by 
Siemens. Same as 1998 
system. (Refer to 1998 
New Model Update 


Mark Hi 

BMW center installation. 
System based on 
E38/E39 Mark Hi with 
exception of display 
mounting location. 
Availability: Future 



Refer to SI 84 01 99 

for installation instruction 
modifications to 1999 
E38/E39 vehicles. 

(except sport wagon) 




E46 Monochrome 
Accessory Navigation 
System 

BMW center installation. 
Monochrome Text 
display (no maps) and 
Audio Navigation System 
based on Mark Hi. 
Separate display unit 
with rotary push button 
installed in lower center 
console. 

Availability: Future 
Refer to installation 
instruction set. 



149 







































E46 MARK II NAVIGATION SYSTEM 


COMPONENT OVERVIEW 

The E46 Mark II Navigation System is similar to E38/E39 Mark II. All of the E38/E39 Mark 
II system components are carried over with the exception of the B M BT: 


E46 Specific Board Monitor (BMBT): 


5 inch display (320 X 234 pixel resolution) 

Uses on screen soft keys for telephone send/end functions. E38/E39 uses buttons. 
Does not include auxiliary ventilation function (not a function of E46 BC/IH KA). 
Provides display and control functions for the Audio System (radio, cassette and CD). 
Provides display and control functions for systems in the menu display. 


TAPE PROGRAM AND DOLBY NR MODE = Selection between PHOTOCELL SENSOR 5 INCH 
EJECT BUTTONS SELECTION Radio, Tape or CD Functions (ADJ UST BACKLIGHTING) DISPLAY 



02/05/99 Friday 


SELECT 


SEARCH 

BUTTONS 

PROGRAM 

TYPE 


RADIO 

BROADCAST 
DATA SYSTEM 


M 




|On-board computer GPS-Navigation 
Telephone 


Monitor Off 


RADIO CONTROL KNOB 
(INCREMENTAL SENSOR) 


BMBT CONTROL KNOB 
(INCREMENTAL SENSOR) 


1 - 6 BUTTONS - Correspond to stored 
radio stations and audio CD selections 


RADIO STATUS INDICATOR MENU BUTTON LOCATION - Recalls Main 
(SIGNAL FROM RADIO VIA k BUS) Menu in Board Monitor Display 


1999 MODEL YEAR RADIO CHANGES 


The 1999 model year radios do not have the weatherband feature. 

RDS = Radio Broadcast Data System. In the future, this button will put the vehicle 
occupants in touch with a wide variety of broadcast data including weather information. 

PTY = Any unit having RDS will also have a separate button for the PTY feature. It 
stands for Program Type and will indicate the type of music being played. This is help¬ 
ful for organizing favorite station programming. Both RDS and PTY features require the 
cooperative input of the various radio stations. 

150 







AUDIO SIGNALS 
FOR AMPLIFICATION 


CD 

PLAYER 

AUDIO 


GPS 
ANTENNA 


t 


TAPE PLAYER 
AUDIO SIGNALS 


m 



0FM3IJ 



SIGNALS 


Mark II NAV 

nr 


NAVIGATION COMPUTER 



BACK UP LIGHTS ON 
12 VOLT INPUT SIGNAL 



ASC/DSC 
(processed 
left rear wheel 
speed signal) 


The BMBT communicates with interfacing control modules via the K Bus. As with all pre¬ 
vious Original Equipment Navigation Systems, the radio electronics are installed in the 
trunk. The BMBT sends and receives operation instructions to the radio via bus communi¬ 
cation. The Mark II Nav computer continues to provide the RGB output signals to the 
BMBT for system function display. 


151 

























































































E46 BOARD MONITOR & NAVIGATION SERVICE MODE DISPLAYS 


The Mark II system provides a service mode display function. These screens provide sys¬ 
tem hardware/software identification numbers and status of Board Monitor and Navigation 
specific functions for use as a diagnostic tool. The screens are accessed as follows: 

From the Main Menu select "Set". 

Once in the Set function, press and hold the menu button for 8 seconds. 

The next screen to appear is the SERVICE MODE menu. 


The first accessible function is "On-board monitor". Pressing this selection calls up the ver¬ 
sion screen which provides identification of hardware/ software specific index versions for the 
installed system. 


Pressing the func¬ 
tions key at the 
bottom continues 
into additional 
screens including 
the Key Functions 
and Brightness 
controls. 


Key Functions tests the key input on the B M BT. 
Input status (1-25) will display in the window. 


|On-board monitor 

NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 

Video module 


GPS 


Sensor check 


Telematics 


02/05/99 Wednesday 

7:05 PM 


If no keys are 
pressed the sta¬ 
tus will be dis¬ 
played as "FF". 

Rotating the left 
or right rotary 
knob displays hex 
code inputstatus. 


SW level: 

HW level 
DIAG index: 
BUS index: 
Encoding Index 
Supplier: 


Version 
[Key Functions 
Brightness 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


Functions 


7:05 PM 


Rotated slowly the display changes with each incre¬ 
ment. The display eventually stops at "IF" in the left 
rotated direction and "EO" to the right. 

The key function test terminates automatically if no keys 
or knobs are moved after a short duration ("00"). 

The brightness control allows the display illumination to 
be manually adjusted. 

152 


SW level: 

HW level 
DIAG index: 
BUS index: 
Encoding Index 
Supplier: 


02/05/99 Wednesday 



IFunctions 


7:05 PM 


Key 

OBM increm. sensor 
Radio increment sensor 



Functions 
















The next accessi¬ 
ble function is the 
NAVI/GRAPHIC 
ELEMENT. 

This screen iden¬ 
tifies hardware/ 
software specific 
index versions for 
the installed sys¬ 
tem. 


On-board monitor 




(NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 
Video module 
GPS 

Sensor check 
Telematics 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 



The Video module selection is not functional since the US version Mark II nav sys¬ 
tem does not utilize the video module. 


The next available selection from the service mode menu is "GPS" 


This display pro¬ 
vides the GPS 
receiver module 
hardware version 
number and 
date of pro¬ 
grammed soft¬ 
ware. 



Pressing the functions button in the lower 
right corner of this screen provides a sub¬ 
selection menu. 

GPS Status pro¬ 
vides information 
on the exact 
coordinates of 
the vehicle 
based on the 
calculations of 
the GPS receiver 
module. 

GPS Tracking provides information about the indi¬ 
vidual satellites currently sending signals to the GPS 
receiver module. Though interesting, this display 
provides data which is not usable for B M W service 
technician scope of diagnosis. 



02/05/99 Wednesday 7:05 PM 


Latitude: 

33 44'12" 

Longitude: 

123 22'33" 

Altitude: 

0 m 

Date/time (UTC): 

00.00.97 

15:56 

G-speed/heading: 

0.0 m/s 

000 

Rec-Stat/Pos-Src: 

SEARCH 

0 

PDOP/HDOP/VDOP: 



Functions 


02/05/99 Wednesday 7:05 PM 



153 




































The next selection available from the SERVICE MODE menu is "Sensorcheck" which provides 


Wheel 
speed input 
(only one 
wheel speed 
signal, dis¬ 
played). 

Number of 

satellites 

detected. 



What mode the GPS receiver module is currently in; (ie: Search) 

The Gyro status provides the millivoItage value the Nav computer is utilizing for the cur¬ 
rent vehicle position. This area also includes an icon representing what direction the 
vehicle is heading in. 

The direction status indicates what gear is selected (forward or reverse). 

The Sensorcheck display is intended to be used while test driving the vehicle. Use the leg¬ 
end below to compare with the display status. 


signal input. 


154 























possible. 


The last selection available is the Telematics entry display. This replaces the "VIN" selection 
from the E38/E39 M ark II systems. The only requirement of this entry screen is that the VIN 
is entered at the VPC when prepped prior to distribution. 

This is neces¬ 
sary for the 
Emergency pro¬ 
gram if needed 
when calling the 
Cross Country 
Group Roadside 
Assistance 
Program. 

Additionally, if the vehicle is equipped with a Phase V phone the system will automatically uti¬ 
lize the entered VIN as per E38/E39 M ark II systems. 

The VIN is entered at the VPC for all vehicles (with or without a Phase V phone). If the VIN 
has been incorrectly entered it can be changed by turning and pressing the rotary knob 
when the correct letter or digit of the last seven character of the VIN is displayed. 

The balance of the data displayed below the VIN entry is not currently used in the US mar¬ 
ket. 


On-board monitor 

NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 

Video module 


Sensor check 


Telematics 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 



155 

















1999 NAVIGATION SYSTEM SOFTWARE 0.9 


(EXCLUDING E36 Accessory Navigation System) 

Software version 0.9 is required forthe M ark II system. Loading procedures are unchanged 
forthe Mark II system, refer to the original On-board M onitor with GPS Navigation system 
handout or SI 84 01 97 for detailed procedures. 

The following enhancements have been introduced with Software Version 0.9, This 
update will be appropriate for installation in all navigation system equipped vehi¬ 
cles produced after September 1,1997. 

A "Route list" is available within the "Information" screen of "GPS-Navigation", display¬ 
ing the planned routes cities, streets, & distance segments. The route list will be updat¬ 
ed during a trip. 

The "Route Direction Arrow" (RDA) will dynamically point the way around turns in partly 
digitized (intertown) areas when "Guidance" is active. This safety feature helps ensure 
the driver stays on the planned route and doesn't deviate onto roads that are not digi¬ 
tized. This feature is especially helpful on unknown roads at night, in fog, and/or rain. 

The "Map" will be continuously updated in the background, reducing map display time 
when switching from "Guidance" to "Map" mode. This feature will be stopped during 
destination input and route planning to reduce microprocessorcalculation time forthese 
activities. 

The default scale forthe "Map" which appears when leaving digitized roads will be 
reduced from 1/2 mile to 1/4 mile. More features of the local area are displayed at this 
scale. All other maps will be displayed in the same scale as last selected by the user 
after a restart of the vehicle. 

In the "Destination Input" menu, intersections will now be enterable by the "intelligent 
keyboard" if the number of possible options exceed five. This will speed up the proce¬ 
dure compared to the previous selection from "List" procedure. 

In "Map" mode, a new menu item, "Repeat" will become available. Pushing this default 
soft key will prompt the system to repeat the last audible instruction, like pushing the 
same soft key in the "Guidance" (pictogram) mode. 

The audible instructions can be turned off completely if the driver chooses by holding 
the soft key "Repeat" down for at least 1 second. After restart of the vehicle, or, by 
pushing the "Repeat" soft key again, the audible instructions are restored. 

Audible instruction status is displayed next to the "Repeat" soft key by way of a speak¬ 
er symbol, with or without a line through it. 

156 


The current car position (CCP) icon in the "Map" display is doubled in size & doesn't 
blink. 

The last ten destinations entered are automatically stored in & are retrievable from the 
"Address book", underthe sub-heading "Last destination". These addresses, as well as 
those in the normal Address book, can be deleted in one operation, by holding down 
the "Delete" soft key for more than one second. The user is asked to confirm this oper¬ 
ation to prevent inadvertent erasure. 

Guidance improvements include more frequent usage of the audible command, "Follow 
the main road" and dynamic re-planning & presentation of advice if the driver deviates 
from the planned route while driving around a traffic circle or rotary. 

On E46 Mark II systems, the distance-to-junction (execution of next instruction) is dis¬ 
played in the board computer display of the instrument cluster. The "distance" display 
instruction begins at 800' to the junction. 

Service/system diagnosis mode enhancements: 

Aftera software CD is inserted the display "SW-CD inserted" will appear. A few seconds 
later, this display is followed by a system reset & then the software loading starts. 


157 





















MARK II NAVIGATION SYSTEM CALIBRATION 


The calibration procedure of the Mark I system is not required with the M ark II system. This 
system self calibrates automatically as the vehicle is driven after following the steps below. 

System must be fully functional with no faults present in fault memory. 

Correct M ap data base CD installed for your. 

Vehicle outside with an unobstructed overhead view. Switch ignition on and allow sys¬ 
tem adequate time to receive a minimum of three GPS signals. This is confirmed by the 
green GPS indicator in the map display. 

Set the map display to the 400' scale and drive the vehicle on digitized roads. M ake fre¬ 
quent turns at intersections where possible. 

While driving, the system utilizes the map CD, the received GPS coordinates, the Gyro sen¬ 
sor to determine turn activity and the wheel speed sensor input. It compares all of these 
variables and automatically pinpoints the vehicle position. 

MARK II NAVIGATION SYSTEM DIAGNOSIS 

The Nav computer does not communicate with the DIS/M 0 D 1 C. 

Diagnosis of the Nav Computer is performed with conventional proce¬ 
dures and by utilizing the Status displays on the previous pages. 

Refer to the DIS for RGB output signal oscilloscope displays for visual 
confirmation of signal integrity. 

The Board monitor (BMBT) does however communicate with the 
DIS/M 0 D 1 C. Follow the fault symptom path of the DIS Diagnosis 
Program for detailed diagnostic procedures. 



158 




















