DME-ME 7.2 ENGINE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


DM E - ME 7.2 is the next generation of engine management systems for current and future 
powertrain control. M E 7.2 replaces M 5.2.1 for all 8 cylinder engine applications. The "ME” 
designation identifies the system as "M = M otronic, E = EM L. 



SKE BREAKOUT BOX SET 
P/N 90 88 6 121 300 


ENGINE CONTROL 
MODULE HARNESS 


anufactured by Bosch to BMW specifications 
134 pin SKE (standard shell construction) con¬ 
trol module located in E box 
New diagnostic communication protocol 
(KWP2000) 

Uses break-out box set (P/N 90 88 6 121 300) 

Integral EML throttle control system 

- monitors an interior installed PWG 

- actuates an electric throttle valve (EDK) 

Integral Cruise control functionality 

- monitors cruise control requests 

- monitors brake pedal and clutch switches 

- carries out throttle control directly via EDK 
Carries out DSC III torque reduction requests. 

VANOS control 
Integrated altitude sensor 
Integrated temp sensor for monitoring E box 
temperatures 
Control of E-box fan 
One touch engine start control 
Oxygen Sensor heating 
Engine overrev & M ax speed 
limitation 

Active Hall sensor for camshaft 
position monitoring 
Single speed secondary air 
injection system 

Electrically heated coolant system thermostat (same function as previous M62 engine) 
Longlife spark plugs 
IH KA Auxiliary Fan control 



1 2 

(9 pins) (24 pins) 


4 5 

(40 pins) (9 pins) 


This training manual only covers new or modified input signal components and output con¬ 
trol functions. The balance of the M E 7.2 system functions are as per previous engine man¬ 
agement systems. Referto Engine Electronics (5T055) and OBD II (ST060) training course 
material for detailed functional descriptions. 


30 









































ME 7.2 I.P.O. 



HEATED 

THERMOSTAT 















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































INTEGRAL ELECTRIC THROTTLE SYSTEM (EML) 


FUNCTIONAL DESCRIPTION 

When the accelerator pedal is moved, the PWG provides a change in the monitored sig¬ 
nals. The M E 7.2 compares the input signal to a programmed map and appropriately acti¬ 
vates the EDK motorvia proportionally high/low switching circuits. The control module self¬ 
checks it's activation of the EDK motorvia the EDK feedback potentiometers. 



Requirements placed on the Electric Throttle System: 

Regulate the calculated intake air load based on PWG input signals and programmed 
mapping. 

Control idle air when LL detected with regard to roadspeed as per previous systems. 

M omtor the driver's input request for cruise control operation. 

Automatically position the EDK for accurate cruise control (FGR) operation. 

Perform all DSC III throttle control interventions. 

M omtor and carryout max engine and roadspeed cutout. 


32 


























































































PWG SIGNAL MONITORING & PWG FAILSAFE OPERATION: 


As a redundant safety feature the PWG provides two separate signals from two integral 
potentiometers (Pot 1 and Pot 2) representing the driver's request forthrottle activation. 

If the monitored PWG potentiometer signals are not plausible, M E 7.2 will only use the 
lower of the two signals as the driver's pedal request input providing failsafe operation. 
Throttle response will be slower and maximum throttle position will be reduced. 

When in PWG failsafe operation, ME 7.2 sets the EDK throttle plate and injection time 
to idle (LL) whenever the brake pedal is depressed. 

When the system is in PWG failsafe operation, the instrument cluster matrix display will 
post "Engine Emergency Program" and PWG specific fault(s) will be stored in memory. 

Refer to page 38 for additional PWG component and signal information. 

EDK FEEDBACK SIGNAL MONITORING & EDK FAILSAFE OPERATION: 

The EDK provides two separate signals from two integral potentiometers (Pot 1 and Pot 
2) representing the exact position of the throttle plate. 

EDK Pot 1 provides the primary throttle plate position feedback. As a redundant safe¬ 
ty feature, Pot 2 is continuously cross checked with Pot 1 for signal plausibility. 

If plausibility errors are detected between Pot 1 and Pot 2, ME 7.2 will calculate the 
inducted engine airmass (from HFM signal)and only utilize the potentiometersignal that 
closely matches the detected intake air mass. 

- The ME 7.2 uses the air mass signalling as a "virtual potentiometer" (pot 3) for a 
comparative source to provide failsafe operation. 

- If M E 7.2 cannot calculate a plausible conclusion from the monitored pots (1 or 2 
and virtual 3) the EDK motor is switched off and fuel injection cut out is activated 
(no failsafe operation possible). 

The EDK is continuously monitored during all phases of engine operation. It is also 
briefly activated when KL 15 is initially switched on as a "pre-flight check" to verify it's 
mechanical integrity (no binding, appropriate return spring tension, etc). This is accom¬ 
plished by monitoring both the motor control amperage and the reaction speed of the 
EDK feedback potentiometers. If faults are detected the EDK motor is switched off and 
fuel injection cut off is activated (no failsafe operation possible). The engine does how¬ 
ever continue to run extremely rough at idle speed. 

When a replacement EDK is installed, the ME 7.2 adapts to the new component 
(required amperage draw for motor control, feedback pot tolerance differences, etc). 
This occurs immediately after the next cycle of KL 15 for approximately 30 seconds. 
During this period of adaptation, the maximum opening of the throttle plate is 25%. 

Refer to page 39 for additional EDK feedback signal information. 

33 


NEW OR MODIFIED INPUT SIGNALS/COMPONENTS 

CAMSHAFT POSITION SENSORS 


Located on the upper timing case covers, the camshaft position sensors monitorthe posi¬ 
tion of the camshafts to establish start of ignition firing order, set up sequential fuel injection 
triggering and for accurate camshaft advance-retard (VANOS) timing feedback. 

Each intake camshaft's advance-retard angles are adjusted simultaneously yet indepen¬ 
dently. For this reason M E 7.2 requires a camshaft position sensor on each cylinder bank 
for accurate feedback to monitor the VANOS controlled camshaft positioning. 


The sensors are provided with operating powerfrom the EC M main relay. The sensors pro¬ 
duce a unique asymmetrical square-wave signal representative of the impulse wheel shape. 
The sensors are new in the fact that they are "active" hall effect sensors. Active hall sen¬ 
sors provide: 

low signal when a tooth of the camshaft impulse wheel is located in front of the sensor 
high signal when an air gap is present. 

The active hall sensors supply a signal representative of camshaft position even before the 
engine is running. The ME 7.2 determines an approximate location of the camshafts posi¬ 
tions prior to engine start up optimizing cold start injection (reduced emissions.) 


DUAL CAMSHAFT 
POSITION SENSORS 



BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 




Function 


Document 


Test 

Selection 




Module 


<] > 


-25 -15 -5 5 15 

-20 -10 0 10 20 


Test 

System 


UNIQUE SIGNAL 
AS SEEN IN 
MEASURMENT 
SYSTEM 

OSCILLOSCOPE 











HtT 

~\—f 

“I- 



□ 






D 

O 

o 















VANOS SOLENOID 
CONTROL REFERENCE 



34 















































































































































































































































































































HOT FILM AIR MASS SENSOR (HFM 5) 


The M 62 TU is equipped with a new Hot Film 
Air Mass Sensor identified as HFM 5. It is a 
combined air mass/intake air temperature 
sensor. The separate intake air temperature 
sensor is no longer used on the M 62 TU. 

The HFM 5 is provided with operating power 
from the ECM main relay. Based on calcu¬ 
lated intake air mass, the HFM 5 generates a 
varying voltage between 0.5 and 4.5 volts as 
an input signal to the M E 7.2 





An additional improvement of the HFM 5 is that the hot 
film element is not openly suspended in the center bore 
of the sensor as with previous HFMs. It is shrouded by 
a round fronted plastic labyrinth which isolates it from 
intake air charge pulsations. 

This feature allows the HFM to momtorand calculate the 
intake air volume with more accuracy. This feature adds 
further correction for calculating fuel injection "on" time 
(ti) which reduces emissions further. 


35 


































































INTEGRATED AMBIENT BAROMETRIC PRESSURE SENSOR 


The M E 7.2 Control Module contains an integral ambient barometric pressure sensor. The 
sensoris part of the SKE and is not serviceable. The internal sensoris supplied with 5 volts. 
In return it provides a linear voltage of approx. 2.4 to 4.5 volts representative of barometric 
pressure (altitude). 


The ME 7.2 monitors barometric pressure for the following reasons: 


The barometric pressure signal along with calculated air mass provides an additional 
correction factor to further refine injection "on” time. 


Provides a base value to calculate the air mass being injected into the exhaust system 
by the secondary air injection system. This correction factor alters the secondary air 
injection "on" time, optimizing the necessary airflow into the exhaust system. 


To recognize downhill 
driving to postpone 
start of evaporative 
emission leakage diag¬ 
nosis. 


f - 

INTEGRAL 

BAROMETRIC 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 

In 


PROVIDES ADDITIONAL CORRECTION 
FACTOR FOR FOLLOWING FUNCTIONS 





FUEL 

INJECTION 

ONTIME 




LEAK DIAGNOSIS TEST 
POSTPONEMENT 



+ 


LDP 



36 


































































































































































RADIATOR OUTLET TEMP SENSOR 


First seen on the M 5 42.0 control system, the M E 
7.2 uses an additional water temperature sensor 
located on the radiator outlet. 

ME 7.2 requires this signal to monitor the water 
temperature leaving the radiator for precise acti¬ 
vation of the IHKA auxiliary fan. 



DSC III - ROAD SPEED SIGNAL 

ME 7.2 receives the road speed signal directly 
from the DSC III control module for maximum 
vehicle speed management. The DSC control 
module provides a processed output of the right 
rear wheel speed sensor as a digital square wave 
signal. The frequency of the signal is proportion¬ 
al to the speed of the vehicle (48 pulses per one 
revolution of the wheel). 


RADIATOR 

OUTLET 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 



The cruise control function (FGR) of the M E 7.2 also monitors vehicle speed from the redun¬ 
dant vehicle speed CAN bus signal. The CAN bus speed signal is provided by the DSC III 
control module and based on the combined average of both front wheel speed signals. 


Additionally, M E 7.2 monitors all four wheel speed signals via CAN bus signalling to detect 
abrupt fluctuations in vehicle speed signals for the purpose of detecting rough road sur¬ 
faces. This is continuously monitored as part of the OBD II emission requirements provid¬ 
ing a correction factor for misfire detection plausibility. Earlier systems only monitored the 
right rear speed signal input from DSC. 





n ruun 



w LEFT 
FRONT 



ruiruL 



RIGHT 

A REAR 
■\ V 



n n nrLn 



RIGHT 

FRONT 

nJlTLTL 



PROCESSED 
RIGHT REAR 
WHEEL SPEED 



m 

-si 

ro 






37 
































































ACCELERATOR PEDAL SENSOR (PWG) 


The driver's application of the accelerator pedal is monitored by a PWG sensor in the dri¬ 
ver's footwell as with previous non-bowden cable EML systems. 


PEDAL 

POSITION 

SENSOR 

(PWG) 



ME 7.2 


The PWG provides two separate variable 
voltage signals to the ME 7.2 control 
module for determining the reguest for 
operating the Electric Throttle Valve (EDK) 
as well as providing a kickdown request 
with automatic transmission vehicles. 

The M E 7.2 monitors the changing signal 
ranges of both circuits as the pedal is 
pressed from LL to VL. 


PWG Pot 1 = 0.5V to 4.5 V 


PWG Pot 2 = 0.5V to 2.0 V 


Standard transmission 
vehicles (E39 540i) 
have slightly lower 
voltage signals at max 
throttle position due to 
the throttle pedal stop 
ie Pot 1 = 3.8volts). 




THROTTLE PEDAL 
POSITION (PWG) 


100% 


However, ME 7.2 programming recog¬ 
nizes the lower values of a standard trans¬ 
mission vehicle as the max throttle posi¬ 
tion. 

In vehicles equipped with an automatic 
transmission (A5S 440Z), the ME 7.2 rec¬ 
ognizes the max pedal value (4.5V) as a 
kickdown request and signals the AGS via 
CAN bus. 

The signals are continually monitored for 
plausibility. If the signal ranges are detect¬ 
ed as incorrect, M E 7.2 will only utilize the 
signal of lesser voltage value as a failsafe 
measure. With this condition, the EDK will 
also be set to idle (LL) wheneverthe brake 
pedal is pressed. Refer to PWG monitor¬ 
ing and failsafe operation on page 33. 



































































EDK THROTTLE POSITION FEEDBACK SIGNALS 


The EDK throttle plate position is monitored by two integrated potentiometers. The poten¬ 
tiometers provide DC voltage feedback signals as input to the M E 7.2 for throttle and idle 
control functions. 


MOTOR 

CONTROL 


Feedback potentiometer 1 provides a sig¬ 
nal ranging from 0.5V (LL)to 4.5V (VL), 


ELECTRIC THROTTLE 



Feedback potentiometer 2 simultaneously 
provides a signal ranging from 
4.5V (LL)to 0.5V (VL). 


POT1 SIGNAL 

POT2 SIGNAL 
POT POWER 

GROUND 





5V 

4.5V 


0.5V 

OV 


► 


THROTTLE PLATE POSITION 



0 


100 % 


Pot signal 1 is the primary signal, signal 2 is 
used as a plausibility cross-check through 
the total range of throttle plate movement. 

If there is an open or short in signal 1, signal 

2 is used as a temporan/ substitute providing 
failsafe operation (faults stored). 

If the signals are not plausible, M E 7.2 deter¬ 
mines intake air mass from the HFM signal 
(virtual Pot 3) and compares it with Pot 1 and 
Pot 2. The signal that is closest to virtual Pot 

3 is then used and the other disregarded. 

If M E 7.2 cannot calculate a plausible con¬ 
clusion from the monitored pots (1 or 2 and 
virtual 3) the EDK motor is switched off and 
fuel injection cut out is activated (no failsafe 
operation possible). 


Refer to EDK monitoring and failsafe opera¬ 
tion on page 33. 


39 











































































MFL CRUISE CONTROL DATA SIGNAL 


The M E 7.2 control module provides the FGR cruise control function. Throttle activation is 
provided by M E 7.2 automatic control of the EDK and monitoring of the throttle plate posi¬ 
tion feedback potentiometer signals. 

All of the familiar driver requested cruise control function requests are provided to the M E 
7.2 control module via the M FL control module on a single FGR data signal wire. 



BRAKE LIGHT SWITCH 





CRUISE CONTROL 
(FGR) DATA SIGNAL 


BRAKE LIGHT 

SIGNAL 

BRAKE TEST 

SIGNAL 

CLUTCH 

SIGNAL 



The Electronic Brake Switch (Hall effect) provides brake pedal position status to the M E 7.2. 
The control module monitors both the brake light and a separate brake light test switch cir¬ 
cuits for plausibility. 

When the brake pedal is pressed the brake light segment of the switch provides a ground 
signal. Simultaneously the brake light test switch (located in the same housing) provides a 
high signal. 

CLUTCH SWITCH 


The clutch switch is equipped on manual transmission vehicles for deactivating the FGR. It 
is housed in the footwell by the clutch pedal. The hall effect clutch switch interrupts the sin¬ 
gle wire circuit to the M E 7.2 control module when the clutch pedal is pressed. 


40 






























































ME 7.2 & M5.2.1 CAN BUS TOPOLOGY 


The CAN bus consists entirely of 
a twisted pairwireset. This con¬ 
figuration eliminates the need for 
a ground shield. 

The Engine Control Modules 
(ME7.2 & M5.2.1) have two CAN 
bus communication ports, one 
dedicated to AGS (and DME I of 
the 750iL to EML) and the other 
for the balance of the vehicle's 
CAN bus control modules. 

This configuration improves the 
reliability of CAN bus signalling. If 
an open occurs in one area, the 
other control systems can still 
communicate on either side of 
the open. 

However, signals not reaching 
their intended recipients will 
cause CAN bus faults to be 
stored in the affected systems. 


K BUS 


750iL, M73 TU - M5.2.1 
CAN BUS 




f - 




m 


•vi 


ro 





© 


©, 


umjifirruinminm 







































































































































NEW OR MODIFIED OUTPUT CONTROL FUNCTIONS 


FUEL PUMP RELAY CONTROL 


M E 7.2 controls the fuel pump relay as with previous systems with regard to engine speed 
input for continual activation of the relay. 


When MRS III is incorporated into production vehicles (SOP 3-99) the ME 7.2 will also 
switch off the fuel pump relay when an airbag is activated as an additional safety function. 



SENSOR 


FUEL 

PUMP 

RELAY 

CONTROL 


E BOX FAN CONTROL 


The E Box fan is controlled by M E 7.2. The control module 
contains an integral NTC temperature sensor for the pur¬ 
pose of monitoring the E box temperature and activating the 
fan. 

When the temperature in the E-Box exceeds predetermined 
values, M E 7.2 provides a switched ground forthe E Box fan 
to cool the E box located control modules. 

With every engine start-up, ME 7.2 briefly activates the fan 
ensuring continued fan motor operation forthe service life of 
the vehicle. This feature is intended to prevent fan motor 
"lock up" from lack of use due to pitting or corrosion over 
time. 




■j 

E-BOX FAN 
CONTROL 







































































SECONDARY AIR INJ ECTION 


The secondary air injection system is new to the 4.4 liter V8 engine. The system consists 
of the same components as previous systems with V8 specific locations. 



The DM E M E7.2 control unit controls the vacuum vent valve and the secondary air injec¬ 
tion pump relay separately but simultaneously. 


The secondary airpump operates ata start temperature of between 10°C and 40°C. It con¬ 
tinues to operate for a max. of 2 minutes at idle speed. 

M E 7.2 contributes an additional correction factorfor secondary air "on” time with the addi¬ 
tional input from the integral ambient barometric pressure sensor. 



This sensor provides a base value to calculate the air mass being 
injected into the exhaust system. This helps to "fine tune" the sec¬ 
ondary air injection "on" time, optimizing the necessary air flow 
into the exhaust system which reduces the time to catalytic con¬ 
verter light-off. 


VACUUM 

VENT 

VALVE 



43 
































































AUXILIARY FAN CONTROL 


The Auxiliary Fan motor incorporates an out¬ 
put final stage that activates the fan motor at 
variable speeds. 

The auxiliary fan is controlled by ME 7.2. The 
motor output stage receives power and 
ground and activates the motor based on a 
PWM signal (10 - 100 Hz) received from the 
ME 7.2. 

5imilarto the aux fan in the E46 with MS 42.0 
control, the fan is activated based on the fol¬ 
lowing factors: 



Radiator outlet temperature sensor input exceeds a preset temperature. 

IHKA signalling via the K and CAN bus based on calculated refrigerant pressures. 
Vehicle speed 
Battery voltage level 


When the over temperature light in the instrument cluster is on (120°C) the fan is run in the 
overrun function. This signal is provided to the DME via the CAN bus. When this occurs 
the fan is run at a freguency of 10 Hz. 



RADIATOR 

OUTLET 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 


AUX FAN 
OUTPUT 
STAGE/MOTOR 


IHKA SIGNALING VIA CAN BUS: 
-Variable Speed Auxiliary Fan Control 

- IHKA on 

- Compressor Activation Status 


44 











































































ELECTRIC THROTTLE VALVE (EDK) CONTROL 


The throttle valve assembly of the M 62 TU is an elec¬ 
tric throttle valve (EDK) controlled by an integral EM L 
function of the ME 7.2. The throttle plate is posi¬ 
tioned by a gear reduction DC motor drive. 

Similar to the original Bosch EML 1.2 and 1.7 sys¬ 
tems, the motor is controlled by proportionately 
switched high/low PWM signals providing precise 
plate positioning. The PWM signal is at a basic fre¬ 
quency of 2000 Hz. 



ELECTRIC THROTTLE 
VALVE (EDK) 



45 












































































