DYNAMIC STABILITY CONTROL SYSTEMS 


INTRODUCTION 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC III version 5.3) was introduced on the 1998 M odel Year E38 
and E39 - 540 vehicles. For M odel Year 1999, the system is enhanced with additional con¬ 
trol functions and a new combined rotational rate/lateral acceleration sensor as version 5.7. 

It continues to be offered as standard equipment in the E38 and E39 - 540 models. The 
new functions are titled as the Dynamic Braking System and include the: 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

Maximum Brake Control (M BC) 

The DSC III 5.3 system for the E38 and E39 is supplied by Bosch and the complete sys¬ 
tem operation is covered in the 1997 M odel year Update - Part Two training manual. The 
new functions of operation of the DSC III 5.7 system will be covered in this training manu¬ 
al. 


Dynamic Stability Control (DSC III) is also being introduced for the E46 vehicles as option¬ 
al equipment. This system is supplied by ITT Teves, however many of the system compo¬ 
nents and features are similar to the Bosch system. The full function description and oper¬ 
ation of the Teves system will be covered in this training manual. 


106 


DYNAMIC BRAKING SYSTEM 


The dynamic braking system is designed to enhance the braking control of the DSC forthe 
driver of the vehicle. The dynamic braking control and maximum braking control are func¬ 
tions that are programmed into the control electronics of the DSC with no additional hard¬ 
ware changes. 

DYNAMIC BRAKING CONTROL (DBC) 

The DBC function is designed to provide the maximum braking force available during rapid 
(panic) braking situations. The DSC control module looks atthe inputs from the brake pedal 
switch and the signal from the brake pressure sensor on the master cylinder. The criteria 
for activation of DBC is how rapidly is the brake pressure built up with the brake pedal 
depressed. The total criteria required for DBC activation includes: 

Brake switch ON 

Brake pressure build up >threshold value 

Vehicle road speed > 5M PH 

Vehicle not in reverse 

Not all wheels in ABS regulation 

If the threshold for DBC activation is achieved, the DSC control module will activate a pres¬ 
sure build up regulation phase through the hydraulic unit. The pressure at all wheels is 
increased up to the ABS regulation point. This occurs even if the driver does not achieve 
the ABS regulation point with the pedal. 

The rear axle brakes are controlled with select-low regulation and the front axle brakes are 
controlled individually. ABS regulation will continue until the driver releases the pedal and 
the pressure in the master cylinder drops below the threshold value stored in the DSC con¬ 
trol module. 

MAXIMUM BRAKE CONTROL 

The MBC function is also designed to enhance a driver initiated braking procedure. The 
M BC will build up the pressure in the rear brake circuit when the front brakes are already in 
an ABS regulation cycle. The additional braking pressure atthe rearwheels will shorten the 
stopping distance. The following criteria must be met before the DSC control module will 
activate MBC: 

Both front wheel brakes in ABS regulation 
Vehicle speed > 5 M PH 
Vehicle not in reverse 

DBC and pressure sensor initialization test OK 
Rearwheels not in ABS regulation 


107 


BOSCH DSC III - 5.7 COMPONENTS 


With the exception of the following, all components of the DSC - 5.3 are carried over and 
their functional operation remains the same. 

Control Module/Hydraulic Unit 
Rotational Rate/Lateral Acceleration Sensor 
M aster Cylinder Pressure Sensor 


CONTROL MODULE HYDRAULIC UNIT 

The control module is now integrated into the hydraulic unit as one compact unit. This 
reduces the size and wiring required for DSC operation. Additionally the motor relay and 
valve relay have been replaced by solid state final stages in the control module. The 
hydraulic unit continues to use: 

Two pre-charge solenoid valves 
Two changeover solenoid valves 
Four intake solenoid valves 
Four outlet solenoid valves 
One return pump 



108 



ROTATION RATE/TRANSVERSE ACCELERATION SENSOR 


Located under the driver's seat, the rotation rate and transverse acceleration sensor have 
been combined into one unit. The new sensor is smaller in size and weight and is isolated 
from chassis vibrations through its rubber mounting. 

The sensor provides the same information as the two separate sensors used on the DSC 
5.3 version. It receives power and ground from the DSC control module. 

For rotational speed, the sensor produces a reference signal of 2.5 volts and a linear volt¬ 
age signal from 0.7 to 4.3 volts. This linear voltage input signal is used by the DSC control 
module as the degree of rotational rate (yaw). 

The sensor also produces a linear voltage signal for the lateral acceleration (G-force) that 
ranges from 0.5 to 4.5 volts. The DCS control module uses this input to determine the side 
forces acting on the vehicle for DSC regulation. 



109 





































BRAKE PRESSURE SENSOR 


A brake pressure sensor is installed in the master cylinder to determine the degree of pres¬ 
sure build-up for Dynamic Brake Control. It is installed in the front axle brake circuit. 

The sensor receives its power supply from the DSC control module and produces a linear 
voltage input signal ranging from 0.5 to 4.5 volts depending on how hard the brakes are 
applied. 



110 





LEFT 

REAR 

BRAKE 


111 
















































































ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 


\ 


n 


KL 30 
KL 15 


DSC SWITCH 


LF 


RF 


LR 


%' A 

0 

M 


n n n 


RR^ 


BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 


■=U 

— 

WHEEL 


=c 



SPEED 



=D 

ru“un 


SENSORS 



i—r 

nunun 

-> 


DSC III 


CHARGE PUMP 
CONTROL 



DSC LAMP 



POWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 


PUMP 


INLET (4X) 


OUTLET (4X) 


CHANGEOVER (2x) 


PRE-LOAD (2x) 


i 


§ 

i 



loqooqi —| 

"iflcmi - r 


1000001 —1 



DSCIII 

HYDRAULIC 

UNIT 


POWER SUPPLY 


GROUND 


.SENSOR TEST 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


STEERING ANGLE 
SENSOR WITH 
INTEGRAL MICRO- 
PROCESSOR 


112 

























































































































E46 DYNAMIC STABILITY CONTROL (DSC III) 


INTRODUCTION 

The DSC III system is being introduced as an option forthe E46 beginning with Model Year 
1999 production. The system is similarto the DSC III being used on the E38 and E39 vehi¬ 
cles, however it is manufactured by Teves for use in the E46. 

The system incorporates all of the features of the previous Teves slip control system and 
adds the lateral dynamic control of the DSC III system already installed on the E38/E39s. 

The Teves DSC system is designed to maintain the lateral locating forces for following: 

ABS braking control 
ASC +T traction control 

DSC - Dynamic Stability Control for oversteer and under steer conditions 


SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

The E46 DSC III system consists of the following components: 

Control module/Hydraulic Unit (combined) 

Four wheel speed sensors 
Charge pump 

Tandem Brake M aster Cylinder 
Steering Angle Sensor 
Yaw Rate Sensor 
Lateral Acceleration Sensor 
Two Brake Pressure Sensors 
Brake Fluid Level Switch 
DSC Button 
DSC Warning Indicator 
CAN Interface (DM E/AGS) 


113 


DCS CONTROL OVERVIEW 


The Teves DSC system maintains the lateral location forces during all phases of operation 
through; 


ABS - Hydraulic intervention preventing the wheels from locking during hard brak¬ 
ing 

ASC +T - Engine drive torque reduction and/or hydraulic intervention on the drive 
wheels to ensure straight line traction (acceleration - driving and deceleration) 
DSC - Engine drive torque reduction and/or hydraulic intervention on any wheel 
brake during cornering to minimize oversteer and understeer conditions 

DSC control can aid the driver in controlling the vehicle while driving but can not overcome 
the laws of physics if the vehicle is being driven beyond the range of DSC control. 


UNDERSTEER/OVERSTEER CONDITIONS 


3. VEHICLE 
COMES OUT 
OF TURN 
SUCCES- 
FULLY 


UNDERSTEER CORRECTION 


1. VEHICLE APPROACHES TURN; 



WITHOUT 
DSC III 


- regulated brake slows 
wheel down (and helps to 
reduce vehicle speed). Wheel on 
outside of curve speeds up due to power transfer thru differential. 
Vehicle pivots in favor of curve. Combined, this forces the vehicle into the turn. 


114 


3. VEHICLE COMES 
OUT OF TURN 
SUCCESFULLY 


WITH DSC 


OVERSTEER CORRECTION 


1. VEHICLE APPROACES TURN AT HIGH RATE OF SPEED: 
- Driver steers into turn and applies brakes to slow down. 

dmun 



2D. The torque reduction and rear brake regulation 
should stabilize the vehicle at this point. If not 
the left front wheel has a high degree of lateral 
locating force and is momentarily regulated. 

This action deliberately causes the wheel to shed 
a calculated degree of it's locating force. This 
counteracts oversteer yaw at this wheel and also 
aids in slowing the vehicle down to correct it. 


2B. Driver tries to compensate by oversteering which 
diminishes lateral locating force even further. 
Simultaneously, rear of car starts to slide out. 

2C. DSC III determines an OVERSTEER condition. 
Engine torque is reduced via CAN Bus signalling. 
Outside rear wheel is momentarily regulated to 
counteract severe yaw angle (also helps to reduce 
drive torque further.) 


115 


COMPONENTS 


CONTROL MODULE/HYDRAULIC UNIT 

The control module is installed in the engine compartment on the right side next to the strut 
tower 

Both the control module and the hydraulic unit are replaceable as separate components. 

All processing functions for ABS/ASC or DSC regulating functions are carried out in the one 
control module. The module is linked to the CAN bus forcommunication with the DM E and 
AGS control modules. Additionally the CAN bus is used for communication with the steer¬ 
ing angle sensor and for illumination of the ABS and DSC indicator lamps in the instrument 
cluster. 

The hydraulic unit consists of the following: 

Four inlet solenoids 
Four outlet solenoids 
Two changeover solenoids 
Two charge solenoids 



116 


WHEEL SPEED SENSORS 


The E46 DSC III system uses the wheel speed sensors from the ASC system. 



BRAKE LIGHT SWITCH 

The brake light input signal is used by the control module to interrupt an ASC regulation 
control if the driver steps on the brakes during its operation. 

This interruption does not take place during DSC regulation. 


117 
























BRAKE FLUID LEVEL SWITCH 


Fluid level switch is mounted in the brake master cylinder reservoir. If the fluid level is cor¬ 
rect, the switch provides a ground signal to the DCS control module. 

If the fluid level drops below the specified level, the switch opens and the ASC/DSC func¬ 
tions are switched off. 



DSC BUTTON 

The DSC system comes on every time the vehicle is switched on. The DSC button can be 
used to switch the system off. The warning indicator lamp comes on when the system is 
manually switched off 



118 









































STEERING ANGLE SENSOR 


The steering angle sensor is mounted at the bottom of the steering column, in front of the 
flexible coupling. It utilizes two potentiometers to determine steering angle and the rate of 
steering change. These signals are processed in the steering angle sensorand a digital out¬ 
put signal is passed over the CAN bus to the DSC control module. 

The sensor requires calibration after repairs to the steering or suspension system. The sen¬ 
sor is calibrated using the DIS or M 0 D 1 C. Once calibrated, the sensorsends an ID number 
to the DSC control module. The ID provides confirmation to the module that the angle sen¬ 
sor is properly calibrated. 

Installing a new sensor or exchanging sensors with another vehicle will require that this cal¬ 
ibration procedure is carried out. 


POTENTIOMETER 

HOUSING 





CAN BUS MICROPROCESSOR 


119 











CAN INTERFACE 


The DSC control module communicates over the CAN line for the following 

Steering angle from the steering angle sensor 
Engine control module for engine intervention 
Transmission control module for shift intervention 
Instrument cluster for illumination of the warning indicator lamps 


INSTRUMENT 
CLUSTER 



120 









































ROTATION RATE SENSOR 


The rotational rate sensor is mounted underthe driver's seat. It provides a signal to the DSC 
control module that corresponds to the vehicle's rotational speed around its axis (yaw 
speed). 

The sensor receives its operating power (5 volts) from the DSC control module and pro¬ 
vides an output voltage of approx. 0.25 to 4.65 volts depending on the amount of yaw 
exerted on the vehicle. 

The sensor operates on the Coriolis effect to produce the output voltage. The element of 
the sensor is a micromechanical double quartz tuning fork. A frequency of 11 Hertz is 
applied to one side of the fork and as the vehicle turns on its axis, vibrations are induced 
into the tips at the other end. 

The sensor processes the signals produced by the fork and produces an analog voltage 
signal that is proportional to the amount of yaw. 

Based on the control module's programming parameters, the DSC will activate a DSC reg¬ 
ulation cycle to ensure that the vehicle remains stable under all driving conditions. 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 



121 


















LATERAL ACCELERATION SENSOR 


The lateral acceleration sensor is mounted in the left "A" pillar. The sensor provides the DSC 
control module with an input signal that corresponds to the degree of lateral acceleration 
("G" forces) acting on the vehicle. 

The sensor is a capacitive type with two capacitive plates (one fixed and one moving). 
Under the effect of lateral acceleration, the one plate moves in relation to the fixed plate. 
This results in a voltage signal being produced in proportion to the degree of lateral accel¬ 
eration. 

The voltage signal output of the sensor to the DSC control module ranges from 0.5 to 4.5 
volts. When the vehicle is stationary, The standing voltage from the sensor is approximate¬ 
ly 1.8 volts. 

This signal is used in conjunction with the yaw sensor input to determine the degree of DSC 
regulation required to maintain the vehicle's stability. 



122 








123 






















































































































HYDRAULIC SYSTEM COMPONENTS 


CHARGE PUMP 

the charge pump is installed between the master cylinder and the brake fluid reservoir. 
During DSC controlled regulations that involve brake intervention, the charge pump ensures 
that the reguired volume of fluid is available for the hydraulic unit. 

When activated, the charge pump draws fluid from the reservoir and delivers it to the mas¬ 
ter cylinder at a pressure of 10 Bar. 



124 


MASTER CYLINDER/FLUID RESERVOIR 


The master cylinder contains the central valves in both the front and rear brake circuits, 
Similarto the Bosch DSC system. The central valves allow fluid to transferduring DSC con¬ 
trolled interventions. 

The brake fluid reservoir has internal baffles that minimize fluid foaming during controlled 
interventions. The charge pump pick up is mounted low on the reservoir to prevent air from 
entering the system during regulation. The fluid level switch will signal the control module to 
cancel DSC regulation if the fluid is below the safety margin level. 



PRESSURE SENSORS 

Two pressure sensors are installed on the master cylinder in the outlet ports for the front 
and rear brake circuits. The sensors provide the DSC control module with an analog volt¬ 
age signal in proportion to the brake pressure in the master cylinder. 



125 


































































































































DSC HYDRAULIC OPERATION 


Based on the programming of the DSC control module, hydraulic intervention can be acti¬ 
vated at any wheel brake as follows: 

ABS regulation for any wheel that is in danger of locking - causing the wheel to 
skid. 

ASC regulation for either or both rear wheels to ensure that the optimum traction 
is applied to the drive wheels. 

DSC regulation for any wheel to correct for dynamic forces that are causing the 
vehicle to become unstable. The DSC intervention only takes place on one wheel 
of a corresponding axle. 

Depending on the hydraulic intervention required, the charge pump, return pump, change¬ 
over valves, charging valves, inlet and outlet solenoids are activated to provide: 

Pressure build up for brake application 
Pressure hold to slow or stop the wheel 
Pressure release to allow the wheel to turn 




VALVE 


CHANGEOVER 


CHANGEOVER 


PRELOAD 


PRELOAD 


VALVE 


VALVE 


PUMP 


PUMP 


sa HI 


SI OUTLEjlf WDQMET INLET] 

alvei valve valve IValve 


VALVE 


LEFT 

REAR 

BRAKE 



RIGHT 

FRONT 

BRAKE 


126 





































DIAGNOSIS 


Troubleshooting the E46 TEVES DSC system is carried out using the DIS or MoDiC. 

The fault indicators in the instrument panel will illuminate when there is a fault and the sys¬ 
tem is off-line. 

Follow the diagnostic procedures as outlined with the tester to troubleshoot the E46 Teves 
DSC system. 



127 







