EMISSION COMPLIANCE REVIEW 

NATIONAL LOW EMISSION VEHICLE PROGRAM 

The concept of a "Low Emission Vehicle Program" was originally developed and imple¬ 
mented by the California Air Resource Board (CARB or ARB) in the late 1980s. This was 
necessary to address the unique air quality conditions in California. The LEV Program 
required thatall new vehicles sold in California comply with ARB tailpipe emission standards 
and that vehicle manufacturers warranty emission control devices for longer periods of time 
ensuring higher air quality standards. 

The California program established the criteria for each level of compliance and provided 
them with their now well known names; TLEV (Transitional Low Emission Vehicle), LEV 
(Low Emission Vehicle) and ULEV (Ultra Low Emission Vehicle). 

With each level of compliance, the 
requirements become more stringent. 

Vehicles must comply with the set of val¬ 
ues during cold engine start up as well 
as maintain expected levels through the 
life of the vehicle. 

The EPA adopted the ARB program as 
the model for the National Low 
Emission Vehicle Program (NLEV). 

The NLEV program has been used vol¬ 
untarily by the northeastern states of the 
U.S. to address increasing smog prob¬ 
lems in this area of the country. 


The NLEV program became law earlier this year. The law requires that all vehicles sold in 
the northeastern states of the country comply with the NLEV standards. Compliance level 
is based on the total number of vehicles sold starting with the 1999 model year. Complete 
national phase in will be realized by 2004. 

The NLEV program will reduce air pollution nationwide, harmonize Federal and California 
standards to reduce manufacturers design and testing costs and to avoid a patchwork of 
statewide regulatory requirements. All of the recent advancements in emission control 
technologies are due to EPA compliance. 

The evolution of the 1999 model year BMW engines described in this manual is partly due 
to achieving LEV compliance. However, there are changes that have been made to ' 'tech¬ 
nically update" the engines, helping to maintain the world class performance and reliability 
of our vehicles. 

2 


Grams per Mile @ 50° F - Cold Engine Startup 


Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non Methane 
Hydrocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.250 

3.4 

0.4 

LEV 

0.131 

3.4 

0.2 

ULEV 

0.040 

1.7 

0.2 


Grams/Mile at 50,000 miles 

Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non Methane 
Hydrocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.125 

3.4 

0.4 

LEV 

0.075 

3.4 

0.2 

ULEV 

0.040 

1.7 

0.2 


Grams/Mile at 100,000 miles 

Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non Methane 
Hydrocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.156 

4.2 

0.6 

LEV 

0.090 

4.2 

0.3 

ULEV 

0.055 

2.1 

0.3 
































MANAGING VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS 


Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) are hydrocarbon-based emissions released through 
evaporation or combustion. Tailpipe emissions are not the only contributor of VOCs. The 
term "VOC" is usually used in regard to stationary emission sources which escape to 
atmosphere and contribute to poor air quality. 

The most familiar VOC is fuel system hydrocarbons (gasoline vapors). However, other 
VOCs are produced by motor vehicles. These include evaporating engine oil, windshield 
washer fluid, paints, solvents and the gradual outgassing of petroleum based vehicle com¬ 
ponents such as plastics, rubber materials and compounds. 


V I i 

4 

OUTGASSING 


y 



The EPA has addressed outgassing or release of VOCs to atmosphere by categorizing and 
mandating the following: 

Use vehicle components and materials manufactured to minimize VOCs. BMW 

only uses "environmentally friendly" products, components or materials which minimize 
VOC generation. 

Running Losses Compliance: Reduce the generation of fuel system HC as the vehi¬ 
cle is being driven. 

Monitor the vehicles evaporative fuel system for leaks (OBD II compliance). 

Onboard Refueling Vapor Recovery (ORVR) Compliance: Reduce the release of 
fuel system HC to atmosphere while refueling. 

The following pages provide an overview of the systems added to the vehicles to meet the 
EPA requirements. Attend the Engine Electronics (5T055) and On Board Diagnostics II 
(5T060) technical training courses for detailed functionality and hands-on diagnostic prac¬ 
tical exercises for these systems. q 
























RUNNING LOSSES 


The fuel system is the largest contributor to running losses. For example; 


An electric fuel pump cycles the entire contents of the fuel tank through the fuel rail and 
back to the tank twice every hour. 

The fuel absorbs the heat of the engine compartment as it continually cycles through 
the fuel rail and raises to a temperature as high as 158°F. 

The added heat causes the gasoline to vaporize increasing the amount of HC in the fuel 
system. 

If a leak develops in the system or when the fuel cap is removed at the gas station the 
additional gasoline vapors generated by the heat of the engine compartment only add 
to the escaped VOC. 

BEFORE RUNNING LOSS COMPLIANCE 



AFTER RUNNING LOSS COMPLIANCE 


HYDROCARBON 

GENERATION 

REDUCED 


FUEL SUPPLIEDTO FUEL RAIL 
IS CONSUMED AND NOTRETURNED 
TO FUELTANK (NO HEAT TRANSFER) 


FUEL RAIL 



DEVICE RETURNS FUELTOTANK IN A COOLER LOCATION 
THAN ENGINE COMPARTMENT(ie:UNDER CAR) 


The EPA requires a method of minimizing Running Losses. The system must minimize the 
temperature build up of the fuel to reduce the generation of hydrocarbons as the vehicle is 
being driven. 


4 


































































3/2 WAY RUNNING LOSS VALVE 


Starting with the 1995 model year, a redesigned fuel pressure regulator with by-pass sole¬ 
noid known as the 3/2 Way Running Loss Valve was introduced on a small percentage of 
325 i models. As of the 1998 model yearall BMW vehicles are now equipped with the valve. 

The valve is located under the vehicle away from the engine compartment heat and incor¬ 
porates the fuel pressure regulator. During engine start, the valve is activated providing 
100% fuel flow to the fuel rail for 20 seconds. After 20 seconds, the valve is switched off 
providing an open port for fuel return back to the tank. 


A regulated fuel supply is continually provided to the fuel injectors for combustion but the 
supply is not returned to the tank. 


The addition of the 3/2 
Way Running Loss valve 
prevents the build up of 
heat in the return fuel 
flow reducing HC vapor 
generation in the fuel 
tank providing Running 
Loss Compliance. 



5 

















































































































































































EVAPORATIVE SYSTEM MONITORING 


As part of OBD II compliance, the engine control module must momtorthe evaporative fuel 
system for leaks as small as 1.0mm (.040"). 

E36TLEVVACUUM SYSTEM 

Starting with the 96 328i and through the 97/99 model years on all E36 vehicles, the fuel 
tank and evaporative system was modified to comply with evaporative system leak detec¬ 
tion and for monitoring purge valve function. 

Components: The evaporative system was redesigned from previous systems. Additional 
components were added to provide leak detection capabilities and to store a larger volume 
of fuel hydrocarbons. The components include: 


Charcoal Canister with integral Shut Off Valve Liguid/Vapor Separator 

Evaporative Purge Valve Vehicle Fuel Tank 

Fuel Tank Pressure Sensor (transducer) 



Functional Overview: The ECM detects leaks by closing the shut off valve on the char¬ 
coal camsterto seal the system. The purge valve is opened subjecting the evaporative sys¬ 
tem and fuel tank to manifold vacuum. The ECM measures the vacuum value with the fuel 
tank pressure sensor. The duration of time the system retains the vacuum is the method 
used to determine the system's integrity. 

6 














































































































LEAK DIAGNOSIS PUMP (LDP SYSTEM) 


Starting with the 98 model year a new method of evaporative system leak detection was intro¬ 
duced on E38 and E39 vehicles. 

Components: The Leak Diagnosis Pump (LDP) was added to the evaporative fuel system as 
a new component replacing the electric shut off valve on the charcoal canister and fuel system 
pressure sensor of the E36 TLEV vacuum system. 



Functional Overview: 

The function of the LDP is to pres¬ 
surize the fuel tank and the evapora¬ 
tive emission system to detect leaks. 
The pump also serves as the fresh 
air inlet path during normal purge 
operation when leak diagnosis is not 
occurring. 

The pump contains a spring loaded 
diaphragm which is moved up and 
down by solenoid controlled engine 
vacuum to generate the air pressure 
used for leak testing. 



7 

































































































































During a leak test, the nor¬ 
mally open vent valve is 
sprung closed to retain the 
built up pressure. 

The purge valve(s) are also 
sprung closed to seal the 
system. 

The reciprocation of the 
diaphragm pulls in filtered 
ambient air and pumps it 
into the fuel system via the 
purge canister as the vacu¬ 
um supply is repetitively 
opened and closed electri¬ 
cally by the ECM. 

The ECM monitors the 
diaphragm movement 
through a reed contact 
feedback signal and com¬ 
pares it to its activation out¬ 
put freguency of the vacu¬ 
um solenoid in the LDP. 

As the pump continues to 
operate the diaphragm 
begins to slow down 
against the built up pres¬ 
sure in the system. The 
time delay between the 
vacuum solenoid activation 
and the reed contact feed¬ 
back is the basis for leak 
detection. 



- If the reed contact feedback signal slows down considerably this indicates the pres¬ 
sure is being held by the system and no leaks are present. 

- If the reed contact feedback signal is slowed down but not to the satisfaction of a 
sealed system the ECM will determine a small leak is present. 

- If there is no delay in the feedback signal the ECM determines a large leak is present 
(ie: missing fuel filler cap). 





































































































































































0.5mm LEAK DETECTION COMPLIANCE 


0.5mm leak detection compliance was originally scheduled for E46 and Z3 vehicles 
(excluding M) starting with 4-99 production. Compliance phase in has been postponed 
until model year 2000. Vehicle control modules were however produced to comply with 
the smaller 0.5mm diameter leak detection program prior to the postponement decision. 

Therefore, E46 and Z3 vehicles with MS 42.0 engine management system (SOP 4-99) will 
detect evaporative system leaks as small as 0.5 mm and set a specific fault code. However 
the check engine light will not illuminate if this specific fault is determined. 

This system will continue to monitor the evaporative system as it currently does and illumi¬ 
nate the check engine light following the existing OBD II criteria for 1.0mm leak detection. 


ON-BOARD REFUELING VAPOR RECOVERY (ORVR) 

The ORVR system recovers and stores hydrocarbon fuel vaporthat was previously released 
during refueling. Non ORVR vehicles vent fuel vapors from the tank venting line back to the 
filler neck and in many states reclaimed by a vacuum receiver (Stage II) on the filling sta¬ 
tion's fuel pump nozzle. 


When refueling, the pressure of 
the fuel entering the tank forces 
the hydrocarbon vapors through 
the tank vent line 
to the liquid/ 
vapor separator, 
through the 
rollover valve and 
into the charcoal 
canister. 

The HC is stored 
in the charcoa 
canister, and the 
system can then 
"breathe" through 
the LDP and the 
air filter. 


LARGE 
DIAMETER, 
TANK VENT 
LINE 


SMALL LINE ONLY 
USED FOR DETECTING 
LEAKS AT FUEL CAP 
DURING LDP TEST 
(NO HC VAPOR RETURN) 


VAPORS TO A 
PURGE VALVE T 




LIQUID VAPOR 
SEPARATOR 


REFUELING 
VAPORS 
STORED IN 
PURGE 
CANISTER 


ENGINE VACUUM 
LDP 




FILTER 


HYDROCARBON 
VAPOR PRESSURE 


ORVR phase in started in the 1998 model year. By model year 2000, all new vehicles sold 
must be equipped with an ORVR system. The EPA estimates an average of 78 million gal¬ 
lons of gasoline will have been saved from evaporation between the years 1998 and 2020. 
Additionally, 400,000 tons of smog producing volatile organic compounds (VOC) will be 
captured annually because of ORVR 


9 









































ON BOARD DIAGNOSTICS II 


In parallel with the Low Emission Vehicle program, the ARB developed and mandated OBD II. 
OBD II as we are aware, requires thatall vehicle manufacturers comply with extensive fault mon¬ 
itoring capabilities for all emission related drivetrain control systems. 

These systems; DM E, AGS and EM L must monitor their components electrically and monitor 
for plausible mechanical engine function. Additionally, OBD II provides a separate Diagnostic 
Link Connector (DLC) located in the vehicle interior to access OBD II fault codes with an after- 
market scan tool. 

BMW center technicians have the advantage of utilizing BMW diagnostic equipment and 
software (DIS/MoDiC) to interface with all vehicle control systems. However, understand¬ 
ing how OBD II compliance has changed engine mechanical hardware and control system 
monitoring capabilities should be understood by all BMW center technicians. 

All U.S. market BMW vehicles have been OBD II compliant since the 1996 model year. 

Enroll in the On Board Diagnostics II (ST060) training course for; 

Detailed understanding of OBD II. 

How OBD II effects vehicle systems. 

Detailed system diagnosis of all current emission related components. 


The OBD II training course provides a hands on 
training environment for diagnosis and working 
with OBD II specific diagnostic exercises per¬ 
taining to : 

Drive Cycles/Trips and the Check Engine 
Light 

OBD II Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTC) 

Engine M isfire diagnosis 

Understanding oxygen sensor signals spe¬ 
cific to Catalytic converter monitoring. 

Oxygen sensor monitoring 

Evaporative emission system monitoring 

Fuel System M onitoring 

Secondary Air Injection System monitoring 

Comprehensive Component Monitoring 



10 













































































