M62 TU & M73 TU WATER COOLED GENERATOR 


OVERVIEW 

With continual expansion of electrical sys¬ 
tems in the areas of emission compliance 
and added occupant convenience features, 
the demands placed on vehicle power sup¬ 
ply and charging systems also increases. 

To keep up with electrical system demands 
BMW is utilizing a new water cooled gener¬ 
ator on M 62 TU and M 73 TU equipped vehi¬ 
cles. 

The water cooled generator (F-alternator) 
has a variable output of 90 to 150 Amps 
based on engine speed. 

MECHANICAL BENEFITS 



High overall power output varied by engine speed 

- idling speed = 90 A 

- part load: =150 A 

Stabilized water cooling temperatures 
Generator noise levels are significantly reduced. 


Improved durability and longer component lifespan due to omission of carbon brushes. 


Omission of aircooled generator ram air ducting freeing up precious underhood space. 


FUNCTIONAL BENEFITS 


The generator is fitted with a load response feature. This feature activates a time delay of 
generator output between engine start-up and engine running phases of operation. This 
prevents generator induced drag during engine start-up. 


73 











The charts below show the demands placed on the vehicle batteries and charging system 
of the M73 TU engine with E-CAT control system. 


Consumers during electric cat operation: 

Minimum 

power 

consump¬ 

tion 

Maximum 

power 

consump¬ 

tion 

Electric cat for 30 s 

240 A 

240 A 

Engine 

23 A 

23 A 

Suspension 

4 A 

4 A 

Body 

3 A 

3 A 

Secondary air pump 

30 A 

30 A 

Possible additional consumers: 



Low-beam light 


13 A 

High-beam light 


9 A 

Foglight 


9 A 

Brake light 


4 A 

Reading light 


1 A 

Fan blower 


29 A 

Rear compartment fan blower 


16 A 

A/C unit 


3 A 

Audio systems and telephone 


10 A 

Wiper stage 2 


9 A 

Auxiliary fan 1/2 


25 A 

Total power consumption: 

300 A 

428 A 

Alternator current 
(depending on alternator speed) 

110 A 

95 A 

Load on battery: 

190 A 

333 A 


74 

























GENERATOR CONSTRUCTION 

The water cooled generator is housed in an 
encapsulated metal shell enclosure. It operates 
without brushes. It is only available as a com¬ 
plete unit. 

The field winding is stationary and is attached 
to the end plate via the winding carrier. The sta¬ 
tor is interference fitted into the stator frame. 

The end winding is coated with a heat dissipat¬ 
ing compound to efficiently transfer internally 
generated heat to the outer surface of the 
housing shell. 

All internal components susceptible to the 
effects of high temperatures are mounted to the 
housing by heat sinks. 

The generator electrical connections are all 
located at the front. This is necessary since the 
rear of the generator is not accessible. 

To prevent accidental contact with the B + con¬ 
nection it is shrouded by the molded plastic of 
the front cover. 



75 
























GENERATOR MULTI-FUNCTION CONTROL ELECTRONICS 


As well as regulating output charging voltage, the multi-function control electronics provide 
the following features: 

Load response during start-up 
Load response during driving 
Fault display 

The start-up load response system provides for the alternator exciter current to be started 
by a transistor two seconds after the batten/ indicator (KL 61 E) goes out. This means that 
engine start-up is unaffected by generator induced drag. 


With the engine running, the load response system is particularly useful when the engine is 
at idling speed. It ensures that when large current consumers are switched on (blower 
motor, headlights, rear window defroster, etc.) the sensed additional load causes the gen¬ 
erator to linearly increase power output allowing the DM E/EM L system to stabilize the 
engine speed and or modify injection time if necessary 


Gl— T 


B+ 



1: KL 15, 2: KL 61 E, 3: Multi-Function Control Electronics 



SERVICE INFORMATION 


On early production vehicles (up to 12/18/98 production), the generator's multi-function 
controller may be affected by extreme fluctuations in the KL 15 voltage input. The gener¬ 
ator will not produce charging voltage and the battery indicator remains on. 

The voltage fluctuation causes the multi-function controllerto stop operating (lock-up). This 
condition can be remedied by disconnecting the battery cable to interrupt B+ to the gen¬ 
erator. When reconnected the multi-function controller "reboots" and functions correctly. 

A Service Action is being developed for all vehicles within the affected production range. 
Contact the Technical Hotline for further information. 


76 




































GENERATOR TEMPERATURES 


In a conventional air-cooled generator, rapid temperature increases occur immediately after 
engine start-up and during peak current demands (rainy day: lights on, wipers on, etc.). As 
engine speed increases, airflow increases which provides generatorcooling. Conventional 
aircooled generator temperatures fluctuate based on engine speed, vehicle speed (ram air) 
and generator load. 


On the other hand, watercooled generator temperatures are more stable since they are not 
influenced by engine or vehicle speed. This stabilizes the internal temperature significantly 
improving the lifespan of the generator since individual components are not subjected to 
stress of fluctuating temperature. 


GENERATOR COOLING SYSTEM 


The generator is installed in an alu¬ 
minum shell that essentially becomes 
an extension of the engine cooling sys¬ 
tem. The space between the inner 
surface of the shell and the outer sur¬ 
face of the generator creates a water 
jacket that engine coolant flows 
through. 

The aluminum shell is an integral part 
of the lower timing case cover on the 
M 62 TU (shown) or as a separate bolt 
on component used on the M73 TU. 

Coolant flows from the engine into the 
shell through internal ports and exits 
via hose connection(s). 



v.. 


COOLANT 
OUTLET PORTS 


r 


V’. 


COOLANT 
INLET PORT 


A* 


M62TU SHOWN ■ M73TU HAS ONLY OUTLET 


The thermostatically controlled transmission oil heat exchanger is provided with warm 
engine coolant from the outlet port of the shell. 

REDUCED NOISE EMISSIONS 


Since the generator is fully encapsulated and surrounded by a coolant jacket, generator 
noise is reduced significantly. Additionally, the water cooled generator does not use a fan 
for cooling purposes as on a conventional generator which also contributes to noise. 


77 























