PASSIVE SAFETY SYSTEM 
2-STAGE AIRBAG 


INTRODUCTION 

The new passenger front airbag is a further step in passenger protection offered by the sup¬ 
plemental restraint system. The new passenger airbag features a 2- stage air bag activa¬ 
tion system. 

The E38 and E39 will receive the new 2-stage airbag system as of 9/98 production.. 

The passenger's airbag is the only modification to the system. The remainder of the SRS 
will remain the M RS II system carried overfrom the 1998 models. The new system is mod¬ 
ified from the existing system as follows: 

New pressure accumulator generator 

New airbag - volume of 105 liters 

Two ignition capsules - for two stage activation 

Propellant gas made from 13.5% hydrogen and 86.5% oxygen 

Deployed units can be disposed of as scrap metal 

The use of two ignition stages, coupled with the lower volume and new propellant, opti¬ 
mizes the deployment of the airbag and makes it less aggressive when the airbag inflates. 
Although BMW is using the term "DEPOWERED", when referring to this new assembly, It 
continues to provide the level of protection offered by the previous passenger side front air¬ 
bag assembly. 




142 






COMPONENTS 


The main new component of the new system is the gas generator which mounts below the 
airbag on the passenger's side of the dashboard. The gas generator consists of a pressure 
chamber with an ignition set at each end. A hose connects the airbag with the pressure 
chamber. 


PRESSURE CHAMBER 

The propellant charge in the chamber is a mixture of approximately 13.5% hydrogen and 
86.5% oxygen underpressure. 


IGNITION STAGE ONE 


The main ignition capsule consists of the ignitor, combustion chamber, the impact pin and 
the sealing plate. 


COMBUSTION CHAMBER 
IMPACT PIN 



SEALING PLATE 


IGNITION STAGE TWO 


The second ignition capsule consists of an ignitor, ball seal and combustion tube 



143 







AIRBAG ACTIVATION 


Ignition stage one is always the first to be ignited during an impact. Ignition stage two is 
ignited after a time threshold that is programmed in the MRS II control module. The two 
stage activation is optimized by the airbag's inflation curve for each model. 

When the ignition capsule is ignited, the impact pin is pushed against the sealing plate and 
the passageway for inflating the airbag is opened. The flame from the ignition capsule 
ignites the propellant gas and the expanding gas is forced through the tube into the airbag. 

After the timed threshold, the second stage is ignited and the ball seal is forced off of its 
seat. The flame from the second stage ignites the propellant on the opposite side of the 
pressure chamber and causes further expansion of the gasses. This ensures that the 
required volume of gas is produced by the pressure chamber to fully inflate the airbag. 


After inflation, the gasses are allowed to escape from the airbag as with previous systems 
However, the escaping gasses are not harmful to the passengers of the vehicle. 



144 






