INTERIOR DOOR HANDLE LIGHTING 


COMPONENTS/OPERATION 


Interior door handle illumination is provided 
by orange glow light strips illuminated by 
LED's. 

The light strips are part of the door han¬ 
dle shell and are not replaceable. 

The LED's are individually replaceable 
(P/N 63 31 8 381 051). 


'Orange Glow 
Light Strip 




Replacement LED 
P/N 63 31 8 381 051 


The LED's are connected to the KL 58g interior panel lighting circuit. KL 58g is an output 
pulse width modulated control signal from the LCM III. The duty cycle changes when the 
LCM III detects a change in the voltage drop at the light dimmer input signal. 


Interior Door Handle Lighting is on whenever the vehicles lights are switched on. 



VEHICLE EXTERIOR 
LIGHT CONTROL 


139 

















































EXTERIOR DOOR HANDLE LIGHTING 


COMPONENTS/OPERATION 

Control Module: The Visual Entry Aid 
Control Module is located in the electrical 
carrier forward of the glovebox. 

To control the system, the Visual Entry Aid 
control module requires: 

KL 30 
KL 15 
KL 31 

Interior Light control signal (G M Output) 



KL 30 



^-y/- 



Pin 9 


KL 31 


- Pin 5 


INTERIOR LIGHTS 


Pin 7 



RmirL 


RTCrLTL J/. 


rmnrL 


muiTL 


The G M III controls the soft on/off feature of the vehicle interior lights by 
a pulse width modulated control signal (IB). Signal IB is also an input 
signal for the Visual Entry Aid control module which is an input request 
to simultaneously control (soft on/off) each exterior door light source. 



Control Module Function: 


Lights ON: The exterior visual entry aid lighting is activated "on" when the vehicle interi¬ 
or lights are activated "on" automatically by the G M III. 

Lights OFF: Immediately after KL 15 recognition (immediate off - no soft off function). 

Soft off after a short delay once all doors are closed 

After a maximum of 20 seconds "on" time (control module switches exterior 
visual entry aid lighting off regardless of interior light status). 


140 


























































Light Source Modules: M ounted in each door are the 
light source modules. The light source modules are 
made up of the housing, halogen bulb and reflector. 

The reflector holds the bulb and focus the bulbs light 
into the housing. The bulbs are are available for indi¬ 
vidual replacement (P/N 63 31 8 371 610). 



Fiberoptic Light Conductor Cable: The fiberoptic cables carry the light to their respec¬ 
tive light output modules at each exterior door handle. Installation note: the bending 
radius of the fiber optic cable should be less than 20mm when installing. 



Light Output Modules: The exterior door 
handle frames have an additional mountto 
accept the light output module. 

The light output modules carry the light 
from the conductor cables to the exterior 
door handle recess as well as casting a 
soft exterior light on the outside floor area. 


LIGHTOUTPUT MODULE 


LIGHTSOURCE MODULE 



141 






















