XENON HEADLIGHTS 


OVERVIEW 

The automotive industry/press often identify xenon lighting systems as HID (high intensity 
discharge) systems. Xenon headlight technology was first introduced to the US market 
exclusively on the E32 750iL in 1993. BMW xenon headlight systems have evolved and 
their availability as optional equipment has spread throughout the model lineup. 

Blue/White in color and using ellipsoidal technology Xenon headlights provide improved 
night time visibility in all driving conditions compared with traditional Halogen bulb head¬ 
lights. 

BENEFITS: 

Xenon headlights provide the following benefits: 

Longer bulb life. Typically, xenon bulbs will last from 3 to 5 times longer than halogen. 

More light output. Xenon headlights produce from 2.5 to 3 times more lumens than 
halogen. 

Blue/White light (simulates natural daylight) Xenon bulbs produce a blue/white light 
while halogen bulbs produce a yellow light. The light color of a light source is measured 
in color temperature (not to be confused with thermal temperature). Color temperature 
is measured in Kelvins (K). The higher the color temperature the whiter the light. 

Natural daylight = 4,500 to 5,000 K 
Xenon headlights =4,000 to 4,500 K 
Halogen headlights =3,200 K (yellow in color) 

Better driving visibility. 

The combination of higher 
lumens and higher color 
temperature provide a supe¬ 
rior lighting source. 

The beam is wider and 
brighter in front of the vehi¬ 
cle than conventional halo¬ 
gen bulbs improving safety 
and driver comfort. 

Lower operating temper¬ 
ature. 

Lower power consump¬ 
tion. 


XENON 


HALOGEN 



129 



















































































































































VERSION IDENTIFICATION & SYSTEM SUMMARIES 


Version identification is specific to vehicle model with the exception of the E38 

There are two E38 Xenon systems. The early sys¬ 
tem identified as Generation 2.1 and equipped on 
95-98 model year 750iL vehicles. The headlight 
design of this version has a flat bottom edge. 

The Generation 3 system has been introduced on 
1999 model year E38 vehicles. This system can be 
visually identified by the rounded bottom edge as of 
the headlight assembly shown. 

LWR: All 1999 model year systems are also equipped with LWR (Headlight Beam Throw 
Control). This system automatically adjusts the vertical position of the headlight beams to 
compensate forvehicle loads ensuring optimum beam throw. LWR components and func¬ 
tion is described further on in this section. 

Headlight Replacement Parts: In previous model years, individual replacement parts 
were not available for headlight assemblies. This was due to the Federal Motor Vehicle 
Safety Standards (FMVSS) relating to pitting or corrosion of the reflector components in 
non-sealed beam light assemblies. 

BMW has recently submitted corrosion test data for headlight replacement components 
which have passed the FMVSS providing availability of headlight assembly spare parts. The 
approval has been given for all Bosch headlight assemblies (including halogen systems). 
Hella system components are currently being tested and in all likelihood be available in the 
near future. 


Vehicle/ 

Model 

Model 

Year 

Manufacturers)/ 
Version ID 

LWR- Head 
Light Beam 
Throw Cont. 

Individual 

Replacement 

Parts Available 

E 32/ 

93-94 

Hella (Light & 

No 

No 

750iL 


CM "control module") 





Generation 1 



E 3 8/ 

95-98 

Bosch (Light & C M) 

No 

Yes 

750iL 


Generation 2.1 



E 3 8/ 

99- 

Bosch (light) 

Yes 

Yes 

All 


Hella (CM) 





Generation 3 



E39 

99- 

Hella 

Yes 

No 

All 


Generation 3 


(possible in future) 

E46 

99- 

Bosch (Light & CM) 

Yes 

Yes 



E38 Generation 3 Headlight 


130 










XENON HIGH INTENSITY DISCHARGE BULBS 


Xenon bulbs are identified as D-2S (D=Discharge). 
Xenon bulbs illuminate when an arc of electrical cur¬ 
rent is established between two electrodes in the bulb. 

The xenon gas sealed in the bulb reacts to the electri¬ 
cal excitation and heat generated by the current flow. 
The distinct bluish/white brilliant light is the result of the 
xenon gas reacting to the controlled current flow. 


Phases of Bulb Operation: 

Starting Phase: The bulb requires an initial high voltage starting pulse of 18-25kV to estab¬ 
lish the arc. 

Warm Up Phase: Once the arc is established the power supply to the bulb is regulated to 
2.6A generating a lamp output of 75 watts. This is the period of operation where the xenon 
gas begins to brightly illuminate. The warm up phase stabilizes the environment in the bulb 
ensuring continual current flow across the electrodes. 

Continuous Phase: Once the warm up phase is completed, the system switches to a con¬ 
tinuous mode of operation. The supply voltage for the bulb is reduced and the operating 
power required for continual bulb illumination is reduced to 35 watts which is less than a 
conventional halogen bulb. 



FUNCTIONAL DESCRIPTION 

To regulate the power supply to the bulbs, additional components are required. The xenon 
control modules (1 per light) receive operating powerfrom the lighting control module (LCM 
E38/E39 -- LSZ E46) when the headlights are switched on. The xenon control modules pro¬ 
vide the regulated power supply to illuminate the bulbs through their phases of operation. 


The igniters establish the electric arcs. Integral coils generate the initial high voltage start¬ 
ing pulses from the control module provided starting voltage. Thereafter they provide a 
closed circuit for the regulated power output from the control modules. 




+ 




LEFT 




XENON 




CONTROL 

LCM 


MODULE 

(E38/E39 


LSZ 


(E46) 






RIGHT 




XENON 




CONTROL 

i 

l 


MODULE 


LEFT 

IGNITER 


RIGHT 

IGNITER 


- V** 




5 V* ■ 


131 














































XENON BULB MONITORING 

Xenon bulb function is monitored by the Lighting Control Module (LCM E38/E39 - L5Z 
E46). The bulbs are only "hot" monitored. Cold monitoring is not possible since the light¬ 
ing control module is not in direct control of the xenon bulb. For this reason cold monitor¬ 
ing for low beam headlights is encoded off in the lighting control module for Xenon head¬ 
light equipped vehicle. 

The lighting control module detects xenon bulb failure via a reduction in current flow to the 
xenon control module. When a bulb fails, the xenon control module's current consumption 
drops to 60mA indicating unsuccessful xenon bulb illumination. The lighting control mod¬ 
ule then posts the appropriate matrix display message or LED illumination in the Check 
Control Pictogram display of the E46 and E39 Low Instrument Clusters. 

XENON HEADLIGHT ASSEMBLY COMPONENTS (Example - E46) 



132 












DIAGNOSIS 


Xenon control modules are not connected to the diagnostic link. However, the vehicle spe¬ 
cific Lighting Control Module (E38/E39 - LCM orE46 - LSZ)does incorporate xenon head¬ 
light specific diagnosis up to the xenon control module. 


XENON HEADLIGHT TESTING 

Warning: Xenon headlight control systems generate high output voltage. Prior to head¬ 
light removal or testing observe the vehicle warning labels and be cautious by following 
safeguards to prevent accidental injury. 

All xenon headlight systems (control 
module, igniter and bulb) can be test¬ 
ed with Special Test Adapter (P/N 90 
88 6 631 000) in conjunction with the 
DIS M easurement System only. 


Refer to SI 04 33 96 for detailed 
adapter introductory information. 

The DIS Measuring System includes all 
of the cable connection information 
and test procedures in the "Xenon 
Preset Measurement". 

The test provides an automatic oscilloscope setup and provides conclusive "defective/not 
defective" test results. 

XENON HEADLIGHT SI/TRI BULLETINS 

• SI 6308 98: Xenon Headlamp Reduced Service Life - 1999 740iL. This bulletin address 
a small group of possibly defective xenon control modules. This bulletin uses the spe¬ 
cial test adapter and specific oscilloscope setup procedures to check the xenon con¬ 
trol module output. 


_j ■ j - 1 i “ 

UMW TB Eibtre 


W-MV'lM .Vj _1« Utf 


In* ni"■■ 


SUeJECT. Nr v, ThhI CmUui 

MODEL; -J. 

iaUU#!. Z-aFMb.'hfri &!*■£ InEtti fe/UBlK Tilffl 

Pvwirf *T^n Uhd bri-ir, hr pi-tn-d V*“■ HV 

*nn Tto-alVn Wiiiw Mrtail-IM mi -Mr!-!> mw f 
HU M ClTiUflrHM LUC4 U£ Tfi* T Cm i> K Eftl tfCC j xCii 



SI 63 02 98: E39 Headlight Alignment Procedure 
SI 63 02 93: Xenon Headlights - Color, Fuses, Warranty 
TRI 63 01 92: Gas Discharge Xenon Low Beam Headlights 


133 















