Table of Contents 
E46 MODELS 

Subject Page 

E46 Sedan and Coupe .3 

E46/4 Sedan.4 

E46/2 Coupe.6 

Body 

Body Shell.8 

Hood and Headlights.9 

Doors.10 

Door Anchoring System.11 

Door Handles.12 

Sunroof.13 

Interior Features.14 

Driver Information Displays.15 

Seats.16 

Power Distribution.18 

Front Suspension.20 

Rear Suspension.22 

Final Drive.23 

Brake System.23 

E46 Sport Wagon .24 

Body Specifications.25 

Body.26 

Interior..27 

Initial Print Date: 11/00 Revision Date:11/16/00 
























Subject Page 

Rear Seats.27 

Center Arm Rest.28 

Child Seat Restraint.29 

Cargo Area.30 

Tailgate.32 

Emergency Release.33 

Rear Window.34 

E46 Convertible .36 

Introduction.37 

Technical Data.38 

Body Shell 

Floor Pan.40 

Windshiel Frame.40 

Rear Bulkheads.41 

Tension Strut.41 

Aluminum Support Plate..41 

Rear Seats.42 

Variable Top Storage Compartment..43 


E46 All-Wheel Drive 


.45 


Introduction.46 

Chassis 

Front Axle.48 

Steering.49 

Differential and Front Axles.50 

Rear Axle.51 

Tires and Wheels.51 


Transmissions.52 

Transfer Case.53 


Review Questions 


55 






























E46 Sedan and Coupe 

Model: E46/4: Sedan, E46/2: Coupe 

Production Dates: E46/4 from 6/98, E46/2 from 6/99 


Objectives: 

After Completing this module you should be able to: 

• Identify the location and purpose of the Door Anchoring Hooks. 

• Describe the Suspension Systems used on the E46. 

• Describe how to make a Camber adjustment to the front wheels. 

• Identify vehicle fuse locations. 


3 


E46 Models 




E46/4 Sedan 

The E46 is the successor to the E36 and is the next evolution in the 3 series development. 
The E46/4 Sedan was introduced as a 1999 model as both the 323i and 328i. 



The E46 3 series vehicle offers more comfort, safety, space and equipment than the previ¬ 
ous E36, without compromising the sporty characteristics of the 3 series vehicle. 

Since start of production,two engine variants have been offered, the M52TU and the M54 
six cylinders. Both engines introduced changes and design improvements that will be cov¬ 
ered in the Engine and Engine Management chapters. 


ABS/ASC 



4 


E46 Models 





















































































E46/2 Coupe 


The E46/2 Coupe was introduced as a 2000 model year vehicle in both 323Ci and 328Ci 
variants. 



The body of the E46 /2 Coupe is not a modified sedan, but is a completely distinct body. 
There are no sheet metal parts shared between the Sedan and the Coupe Only the design 
technology of the E46/4 was used to create the E46 Coupe. The Coupe is even longer and 
wider than the sedan. 

The E46 Coupes have been given the “Ci” (coupe injected) trunk badge designation. This 
is a departure from the “is” (injected sport) from previous 3 series coupes. 

Since start of production,two engine variants have been offered, the M52TU and the M54 
six cylinders. Both engines introduced changes and design improvements that will be cov¬ 
ered in the Engine and Engine Management chapters. 


6 


E46 Models 








































2725 


989 














































Body 


Body Shell 

The structural rigidity of the E46 body shell was increased using computer aided design 
(CAD) techniques. Every component of the new body structure was designed using this 
method. CAD allows the design to be translated into computer aided manufacturing (CAM) 
more efficiently. To reduce the weight of the vehicle, while retaining strength, high strength 
steels are used and now amount to 50% of the body shell weight. 



The second area of focus of the body shell is "structural dynamics". This deals with vibra¬ 
tion frequencies that effect the ride quality and rigid feel. The E46 body shell was designed 
so that the frequencies for torsional twisting and bending are separated and are in an 
inaudible range. The ranges match the E39 for twisting at 29 hertz and bending at 26 hertz. 

The E46 continues with BMW’s safety cage concept for passenger protection. The tubular 
impact structures continue to provide protection against body damage during front or rear 
impacts. 

The E46 is 1.8 times more able to absorb energy in a 40mph offset frontal crash than the 
E36. 


8 


E46 Models 








Hood and Headlights 

The E46 follows the E38/E39 design with the kidney grille being integrated into the hood. 
The grille openings are more rounded and sweep down to the front bumper. The cowl 
opening is now integrated in the hood and is similar to the E38. The hood can be opened 
to a maximum of 90°, the workshop position, by disconnecting the gas struts and insert¬ 
ing a pin in the aligned holes. 

The hood is opened by first pulling the release lever located inside the vehicle and then 
releasing the secondary catch that pops out of the grille. 



The E46 carries on with the traditional four head lamp configuration, however, no internal 
lens is used over each lamp. The free-form reflectors are clearly visible through the smooth, 
plastic covers. The plastic covers are lighter in weight and more resistant to breakage than 
the previous glass covers. 

Vertical and horizontal adjustments for the head lamps are located on the upper rear edge 
of the assemblies. 

Xenon low beam head lamps will be an available option starting with 9/98 production. 

Xenon headlights are discussed in the E46 Driver Information Chapter. 


9 


E46 Models 

















Doors 

The doors on the E46 feature the door anchoring system introduced with the E38. The 
anchor consists of a horizontal bar in the door and a hook at the rear edge. The hook rests 
in a recess in the "B" and "C" pillars and it reinforces the body in the event of a side impact. 

The door seal design is copied from the E39 and is a single piece seal. 



FRONT PASSENGER'S DOOR 


LASER WELDED TO ROOF PANEL 


SINGLE PIECE STAMPING 



SINGLE PIECE TUBE DESIGN 
PRIMARY DOOR SEALS 



E46 Models 




































Door Anchoring System 


Cross section of driver’s door and 
“B" pillar in the normal closed posi¬ 
tion. 


hnMiWihjni 


m i . - 




Fn-nrit^jr 







■— 


Upon severe impact, the hook 
locks into the recessed notch to 
provide a unitized side impact pro¬ 
tection system. 



After impact, the door springs 
back and unhooks the notch. 

The door is clear of the “B” pillar 
and can be opened. 




E46 Models 





Door Handles 

The door handles and locking system on the E46 are of a new design. The new bow type 
handles allow the doors to be opened easier. The locks are fully encapsulated including the 
electrical components. The new door handle/latch/lock assembly offers improved reliability 
and security against theft. The micro-switches for door position and lock condition have 
been replaced by hall sensors. 

There are no serviceable components on the lock assembly and it must be replaced as a 
unit. 



From September 2000 production, there was a modification done to the door handles of 
the E46. The modified door handles when pulled, fold upward instead of straight out as 
previous. The lock assembly was also modified to accommodate the new articulation of 
the door handles. 



E46 Models 



Sunroof 

The sunroof design is similar to the E38/E39, however, the sunroof cassette is not service¬ 
able and must be replaced as a complete unit. The sunroof is an option on the E46 and will 
come with a glass panel (moon roof) instead of a steel panel. 




E46 Models 



Interior Features 


The interior of the E46 has been completely redesigned with an emphasis on more space, 
luxury and convenience without compromising the 3 series sporty characteristics. 

The new instrument panel/dash is similar in design to the E39 with a slightly less pro¬ 
nounced orientation to the driver. The E38/E39 type face vent grills are used for air distrib¬ 
ution. 

The multi-function steering wheel is available on both the 323/325 models and standard 
on 328/330 models. There are two different steering wheels available, the four spoke wheel 
with MFL and a three spoke sport wheel with MFL. The three spoke sport wheel is option¬ 
al for sedans and standard in coupes. The MFL includes the controls for the audio system 
on the left and the cruise control on the right. 



The E46 comes equipped with a manually adjustable (tilt/telescopic) steering column. There 
is 30 mm of vertical and horizontal adjustment for the steering column. 



1. Spring 

2. Clamping mechanism 

3. Steering lock with 
steering column tube 



E46 Models 







Driver information Displays 

The primary display for driver information is located in the instrument cluster. The coupe and 
sedan have different cluster lettering and faces. The secondary display in the console con¬ 
sists of the audio system and automatic climate control panel (if equipped with IHKA). 



Two different radio types are available. One 
with the integrated tape player and the other 
radio incorporating a single in dash CD player. 

Accessory switches are located in the console 
below the heater control panel. These include 
the ASC switch and the heated seat switches. 
Later production vehicles (2000 M.Y.) utilize the 
SZM (Center Console Switching Center) in 
place of the separate switches. 

A new design (push to open/pull up to close) 
window switches are located in the center con¬ 
sole on either side of the gear shift lever. The 
power window circuits include the one-touch 
and anti-trap features. 

Instrument Cluster electronics and audio systems 
are covered in the E46 Driver Information Chapter. 




E46 Models 























Seats 

The front seats are similar in design to the E36 seats with new internal construction to 
improve their support and comfort. Memory for the drivers seat position is available. The 
seat controls, including memory storage buttons are located on the side of the seat base. 
An optional lumbar support is also available for the E46. 



16 


E46 Models 














A split folding (40/60) seat is available as an option on sedans and standard on coupe 
models. 


The release for the folding seat backs is located in the trunk on the left and right sides near 
the wheel arches. This increases the security aspect when keeping items locked in the 
trunk. 




E46 Models 
















Power Distribution 


The battery is installed in the trunk of the E46 and features lead/calcium plate material for 
true maintenance free operation. The water usage of this battery is low throughout its ser¬ 
vice life. 

The Battery Safety Terminal is installed at the positive terminal of the battery. A repair kit is 
available for the BST. 

The E46 is produced with a vehicle specific wiring harness. This harness is based on the 
ordered optional equipment of the vehicle so that it contains the proper connectors and 
connections. Options can not be added at a later time without replacing the entire harness. 

Specific kits are available to repair the harness in the event of an accident or damage to the 
harness. These repair kits include: 

• Engine compartment 

• Vehicle’s rear area 

If the entire harness need to be replaced, a new harness with the maximum equipment or 
options must be ordered. This is the only harness that will be stocked in the parts system. 




E46 Models 









There are three locations for fuses on the E46: 


• The fuse holder above the glove box 

• The E-Box in the engine compartment 

• In the trunk near the battery 

The E46 uses high amperage fuses for circuit protection. The battery power supply is pro¬ 
tected by a 250 amp fuse in the trunk. 





E46 Models 











Front Suspension 


The single ball joint, strut axle of the E46 is based on the E36 design. Design and compo¬ 
nent changes were developed to improve the ride quality and handling characteristics. The 
following changes are incorporated into the E46 front suspension system: 


• A new forged aluminum control arm is used on the E46 (except all-wheel drive). It offers 
the advantages of weight reduction and lower unsprung mass. 

• Hydraulic bushings are used for the rear lower control arm support. 

• Hollow strut piston rods are used to reduce weight 

• The steering knuckles are press fit into the strut tubes which reduces the tolerances of 
the front suspension geometry. 

• The caster has been increased to improve straight line stability. 

• The track has been widened for improved cornering. 

• Aluminum brake dust shields are used for weight reduction 

Altogether there is 5.72 lbs less unsprung weight in the front suspension which enhances 
ride comfort and handling. 




E46 Models 




Front Camber Adjustment 

The top of the strut is mounted through elongated holes. The strut is fixed in position when 
the vehicle is assembled. If minor corrections need to be made to the front end alignment, 
the pin can be driven down and the strut can be moved in the slots to adjust the camber. 
Approximately .5° of adjustment is available by moving the strut in the slots. 



Follow the instructions for 
making the Camber adjust¬ 
ment described in Repair 
Manual 32 00 610. 

Use Special Tool 32 3 140 
to make the adjustment. 




E46 Models 






Rear Suspension 

The design of the E46 rear suspension is based on the E36 "C" arm type. However, all 
components of the suspension are new and designed to suit the E46 for: 

• Comfort and convenience 

• Handling and stability 

• Noise reduction 

The sub frame is a new design employing steel tubes and metal sections. It is more rigid 
than the previous sub frame. This provides a stable platform for the rear suspension to 
work from. The differential is mounted to the sub frame using a hydraulic mount. The sub 
frame is mounted to the body at four vibration absorbing rubber mounts. 

The upper transverse control arms are made from cast aluminum for weight saving. 




E46 Models 






The final drive is the compact (HAG 
188K) type that is lighter in weight 
than the type used on the E36. 
Features of the compact final drive 
assembly include: 

• Compact housing 

• Shorter pinion shaft 

• Hollow drive flange shafts 

• No side bearing covers 

• Elimination of speedometer gear 

• Lifetime synthetic oil 



Limited slip differential is no longer possible with the compact differential. 


The drive shaft and differential are now mounted on the center line of the vehicle. This 
enables the transmission tunnel to be narrower increasing the interior passenger space. 
With this change, the axle shafts are now different in length and are no longer interchange¬ 
able. 


Brake System 

The braking system is upgraded for the E46 to match the vehicle’s size and braking require¬ 
ments. The dual circuit (front/back) distribution system continues to be used for optimized 
braking response and performance. Refinements to the brake pedal linkage increase the 
brake response time to improve braking performance. 

Single piston floating calipers with vented rotors are 



The E46 uses a 10" vacuum booster, vented in the engine compartment to reduce noise in 
the passenger compartment. 

23 


E46 Models 




E46 SPORT WAGON 


Model: E46/3 
Production: 1/00 


Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Identify the changes to the body of the E46 for the Sport Wagon. 

• List the changes to the interior of the E46 Sport Wagon. 

• Discuss the operation of the rear tailgate/window system. 


The E46/3 “Sport Wagon” is being introduced to the US market as a 2001 Model Year vehi¬ 
cle. It joins the highly successful Sedan and Coupe models to further enhance the product 
line up and offer 3 series customers an alternative choice of vehicle. 

Up to the “B” pillars, the Sport wagon is identical to the E46 sedan. The rear doors have 
been remodeled for wagon usage and the tail gate is similar to the E39 Sport Wagon with 
an opening rear window. 

The rear seats fold down to provide 1345 liters of cargo space. With the seats up, the rear 
compartment provides 435 liters of load space. 




E46 Models 




BODY SPECIFICATIONS 




4478 mm 







41E46SPTWGNSPEC0000 

The E46 Sport Wagon is 7 mm longer that the sedan and the unloaded height is 6 mm 
lower. The wheel base, width and turning radius are the same as the E46 sedan. The fol¬ 
lowing are the maximum cargo capacity/ loads: 

• 435 Liters luggage capacity - with rear seat back up 
•1345 Liters luggage capacity - with back rest down 

• 540KG in the rear 

• 75 KG on the roof. 



E46 Models 





Body 


From the front bumper up to the “B" pillar the E46 Sport Wagon body is identical to the 
sedan. From the “B” pillar rearward, the body shell of the Sport Wagon is all new and 
includes: 

• New Rear doors 

• New Tailgate and hinge mechanism 

• New Frameless rear window 

• New Rear Bumper 

• No tail gate lock cylinder 

• Roof rails as optional equipment 

The structural rigidity and “structural dynamic” characteristics introduced with the E46 
sedan are carried over to the E46 Sport wagon. As with the sedan and coupe, the Sport 
Wagon body shell acts as the passenger’s safety cage along with the tubular impact struc¬ 
tures for the front and rear bumper mountings. 




E46 Models 


Interior 


Up to the “B" pillar, the interior equipment and trim level corresponds to the E46 sedan. The 
front seat options are the same as the E46 Sedan, while the rear seating area has been 
newly designed to provide an attractive package that offers optimum functionality and use- 
able space when the seats are folded down for cargo loading. 



The rear seats backs are a 60/40 split with the center arm rest section on the left seat back. 
The center passenger’s inertia reel is mounted to the left seat back, while the left/right rear 
passenger’s belt reels are mounted on the wheel housings. The lower section of the seat 
back is separate foam piece that enables the back rest pivot point to be higher on the seat 
back. This allows the back rest to fold flat for more useable cargo loading space. 




E46 Models 



Center Arm Rest 


The center arm rest incorporates the non-adjustable center head rest. The center arm rest 
is folded down to gain access to the storage compartment and cup holders , which are 
integrated into the rear of the head rest. 




CUPHOLDER 



STORAGE COMPARTMENT 


T 







E46 Models 




Child Seat Anchor 


There are three child seat hold down anchors positioned behind the rear seat back rest. 
The plastic covers must be removed to access the hold down anchors, 





E46 Models 



The ca 
liters' 
ilar to 


th the rear seat back rest raised and 1345 
ig loaded - roller blind and cargo net sim- 


De wit 
sprin 


















Storage Compartments 

Storage areas on the left and right in the 
rear are used to house the rear window 
washer fluid reservoir on the right and vari¬ 
ous sound system components on the left. 


Load Floor/Spare 

The load floor is removable to access the 
spare tire and control module mounting 
area located beneath. A strap is provided to 
hold the load floor up while accessing the 
storage area. The interior trim panel must 
also be removed for access to the spare 
and control modules. 


Power Socket 


A 12 Volt power socket is installed on the 
left side of the cargo area behind the rear 
seat back. 



E46 Models 












































































Tail gate 


The tail gate is similar in design to the E39 Sport Wagon, including the rear glass that is 
hinged separately and can be opened independently from the tail gate. 



Rear Actuator 

The actuator for the tailgate release is mounted 
on the rear apron behind the trim panel. Control 
of the actuator is a function of the GM - ZKE 
system. 






E46 Models 
















Emergency Release 


The tailgate does not feature a lock cylinder so an emergency release mechanism is incor¬ 
porated into the tail gate latch. It allows mechanical opening of the gate actuator in the 
event of an electrical failure. The release is located along the lower edge of the rear apron 
behind a small access cover. After removing the cover, the lever is pushed to the right to 
mechanically release the tail gate. 



EMERGENCY RELEASE 



The rear apron of the E46 Sport Wagon is lowered for easier loading/unloading. A plastic 
rubbing strip prevents the bumper from being scratched when cargo is being 
loaded/unloaded. 



33 


E46 Models 


































Rear Window 

The Frameless rear window is bonded to a metal carrier which is hinged to the body. If the 
rear window needs replacement, it is supplied with the glass bonded to the metal carrier. 



The release switch for opening the rear glass is incorporates into the rear wiper arm cover 
under the triangle trim plate. 




REAR WINDOW SWITCH 



E46 Models 




Rear Glass Hinge 


The hinges are a new design (torsional 
coil spring) that are compact in shape for 
space saving reasons. 




41460001 


The rear window is adjusted through the 
slotted mounted bolts. The gap of the 
window should be uniform on all sides. 
The height of the rear window is adjust¬ 
ed using shims on the hinge mounts. 
Refer to the repair manual for complete 
adjustment procedures and sequence. 



Rear Washer Nozzle 

The rear window washer spray nozzle, as well as the third brake light, is mounted at the top 
left side integrated into the spoiler. 



E46 Models 











E46 Convertible 

Model: E46/2C 
Production: 01/00 

Objectives: 

After completing this module, you should be able to: 

• Describe how the body shell is reinforced to improve Torsional Rigidity 

• Identify the floor pan reinforcements for energy absorption on the SGS seats. 

• Identify the body shell reinforcements necessary for the addition of the Variable 
Convertible Top Storage Compartment Floor. 

• Describe how the windshield frame is reinforced. 

• Identify and describe the functions of the Tension Strut. 

• Identify and describe the function of the Aluminum plate. 



E46 Models 



Introduction 


The E46 Convertible is the replacement for the E36 Convertible and is based on the E46 
Coupe. It is initially being introduced in March 2000, as a 323 Model only with the M52 TU 
2.5 liter engine. The 3 liter version of the E46iC will begin production starting in 6/2000. 

The E46 323 features a new design top that consists of a three layer top and all glass rear 
window. The 323 comes with a manual top as standard equipment. The new fully automatic 
electro-hydraulic top is available as an option. The 330 E46iC will come with the fully auto¬ 
matic top as standard equipment. 

The roll over protection system is standard equipment and is similar in design to the E36 
system. The roll over protection bars are hidden by the rear headrest and deployed under 
the same criteria as the E36 system. 

The front seats of the E46iC are a new design with the seat integrated belt (SGS) system 
similar to the system introduced on the E31 - 8 series vehicles. 



37 


E46 Models 






t T mm 


E46 Models 







ivj 


■ !; ill 1 |j|. IJSf' ^ tl rjl | 





i^eaiva 



Bipi 


■mg 



> __i h __ L _ m . l 


£s£ ■ 






L^g 

BB 

BBi 






nr« 

m 


__?7g& mm__ 

aaa mm 

L 

443 

-m-*i 

Q.rrun J 















































































TECHNICAL DATA 


E36 E46 

Convertible Convertible 


Outside Car Dimensions 

Length (mm) 

4433 

4488 

Width (mm) (With Mirrors) 

1710 (1875) 

1757 (1947) 

Height (mm) 

1648 

1672 

Inside Car Dimensions 

Shoulder Room, front (mm) 

1352 

1384 

Shoulder Room, rear (mm) 

1108 

1165 

Elbow Room, front (mm) 

1412 

1443 

Elbow Room, rear (mm) 

1120 

1208 

Effective headroom, front (mm) 

968 

974 

Effective headroom, rear (mm) 

921 

937 

General Information 

Cd 

0.36 

0.36 

Unladen weight 

3319 

3516 


(3396 auto) 

(3649 auto) 

Total Weight 

4035 

4322 


(4112 auto) 

(4410 auto) 

Luggage Comp. Volume (L) 

230 

260 

(Comp Floor Extended 


(300) 

Speed Rating 

Top Speed (MPH) 

128 

128 


governed 

governed 

Acceleration 0-60 MPH (Sec.) 

7.7 

8.8 


8.8 auto 

9.7 auto 


preliminary 



E46 Models 








Body Shell 


The body shell of the E46iC has been developed specifically for the convertible to improve 
crash performance which is similar to the E46 Coupe. This was achieved by the use of 
reinforcements on the body shell that improved torsional rigidity (body twisting). In the main 
body floor pan, reinforcements were necessary to accommodate the new SGS (Seat 
Integrated Belt System) seat system. In the rear floor pan, reinforcements were necessary 
to account for the variable convertible top storage, compartment floor. 



ART-E46BODY3 


Components 


Floor Pan 

The floor pan is reinforced to support the SGS seat by heavier cross brace members, rein¬ 
forced tunnel/floor pan and reinforced engine support brackets. During a collision all forces 
occurring on the seat are channeled to be absorbed by the floor pan. 


Windshield Frame 

The windshield frame is reinforced with stepped 
reinforcing tubes to allow it to act as a roll-over pro¬ 
tection. During the rollover all of the forces exerted 
on the A-pillar of the windshield frame are transmit¬ 
ted as a Moment (Torque) to the bottom of the A- 
pillar where stepped reinforced tubes are reinforced. 



ART-E46BODY4 



E46 Models 




Rear Bulkheads 

The rear bulkheads are redesigned to support the roll¬ 
over protection and seat belts. They are welded to 
increase structural rigidity and to secure rear seat, rear 
seat belts and the mounting point for the ISO child seat. 



ART-E46BODY5 


Variable Top Storage Compartment 

The variable top storage compartment is reinforced to make the top storage compartment 
rigid and stronger, not to allow twisting moments when the soft top is in its compartment 
or when the compartment is opened to enlarge the storage area. 



Aluminum Support Plate 

An aluminum support plate is incorporated into 
the front suspension carrier to achieve a high 
degree of rigidity combined with low weight. 


All of these design improvements increased the 
E46iC torsional rigidity by 50% compared to the 
E36iC: 


Tension Strut 

Tension struts are integrated into the rear of the 
body shell to improve the torsional rigidity by not 
allowing body twist in the rear. It also keeps the 
rear end of the car intact with the middle floor 
pan. 



• E36 Convertible Torsional Rigidity 6000Nm/degree 

• E46 Convertible Torsional Rigidity 9000 Nm/degree 



E46 Models 













REAR SEATS 


The E46iC is designed as a four passenger vehicle. Only two seat belts are installed in the 
rear that correspond to the seat belt system of the E36iC. 



The E46iC is equipped with child seat mounting brackets on the left and right sides below 
the seat base. The brackets conform to ISO (International Organization of Standardization) 
for placement on the rear floor pan. Any ISO child seat can be installed by simply sliding 
the seat into position between the seat base and backrest and locking it into place. 




E46 Models 






VARIABLE CONVERTIBLE TOP STORAGE COMPARTMENT FLOOR 
Purpose of the System: 


The trunk of the E46 convertible offers a new feature called the “Variable Convertible Top 
Storage Compartment Floor”. This feature allows the luggage storage area to be enlarged 
by approximately 40 liters when the soft top is raised or removed for hard top installation. 



Components of the system: 

Variable Compartment Floor 

The variable compartment floor is constructed of plastic with fabric covering. It is hinged 
mechanically so that it can be rotated up into the top storage area providing additional lug¬ 
gage storage space in the trunk. The floor is hinged at four points to allow it to articulate 
and fold upwards: 




E46 Models 








Actuating Lever 


An actuating lever is integrated in the variable com¬ 
partment floor on the right side. It allows the com¬ 
partment floor to be opened and closed using the 
actuating lever. It also locks the compartment floor 
into position. 


Dampening Piston 



A dampening piston is also integrated in the 
variable compartment floor on the right side. 
It assists in the movement of the variable 
compartment floor to either position and keep 
it fixed in that set position (retracted or 
extended). The lower dampening piston 
hinge switches the micro switch integrated 
on the right side of the compartment floor 
when the variable compartment floor is in the 
raised position. This signal is provided to the 
CVM to lock out the operation of the convert¬ 
ible-top. 


System Operation: 

Opening the variable compartment floor 

• The convertible top must be raised or removed from the storage compartment. 

• Pull the actuating lever rear wards and push it down and toward the rear bulkhead. 

Closing the variable compartment floor 

• Pull the actuating lever down. 

• Pull the compartment floor rear wards to close the floor. 



MICRO-SWITCH 



E46 Models 







E46 ALL-WHEEL DRIVE SYSTEM 

Model: E46/16 (330xi/A, 325xi/A, 325xi/A Sport Wagon). 

Production date: 330xi 8/00, 325xi 9/00. 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Identify the changes made to the E46 to accommodate all-wheel drive. 

• Understand the construction of the NV124 transfer case. 



E46 Models 




Introduction 


The E46/16 introduces the return of the BMW all-wheel drive car to the United States. This 
time all-wheel drive will be an option (SA 203), available on E46 sedans and Sport Wagons 
beginning 2001 M.Y. 

Vehicles with the all-wheel drive option have been given the engineering designation of 
E46/16. 

One of the significant changes from the previous E30 ix is that the E46/16 does not use a 
viscous coupling or limited slip differential. The all-wheel drive system has largely been 
taken from the X5 concept. It uses two open differentials and a single speed transfer case. 
Power distribution is 38% to the front and 62% to the rear, giving the E46/16 the feel of a 
genuine rear-drive road car. 

With it’s additional 17mm ground clearance, the xi is particularly suited to stretches of snow 
and ice covered roads and its sure footedness is made possible by the use of the Bosch 
DSC III 5.7 system, first used on the X5. 

Performance of the all-wheel drive E46 does not suffer either, this is because of a light¬ 
weight all-wheel drive system that only adds 100kg (220lbs). Weight distribution is largely 
unaffected at 52.7% front and 47.3% rear (2wd: 51.0% front, 49.0% rear). 




E46 Models 




Changes from the standard drive version are: 

• A specially designed body pan with a widened transmission tunnel and modifications on 
the driver’s side to accept the transfer case. 

• Modified oil pan and engine mounts to provide access for the front axles. 

• A completely new front engine carrier. 

• Re-reinforcements for the front strut bearings. 

• A compact new transfer case (NV 124). 

• New transmission cross-member. 

• Bosch DSC III 5.7 




E46 Models 





















Chassis 


Front Axle 

The front axle has been completely re-designed over the standard drive E46. All 
components are constructed of steel. 



The front axle carrier consists of two 
square frame sections welded to two 
tubes to form a box structure. The 
axle carrier is bolted to the vehicle 
frame at both the front and rear 
attachment points. 

The steel lower control arms, which 
are smaller than the aluminum arms 
used on the 2wd model attach at the 
rear to the axle carrier. 


The pivot at the apex of the lower 
control arms are a separate ball joint 
bolted to the axle carrier. 

The purpose of the re-design of the 
lower control arms and mounting 
points is to provide clearance for the 
front axle shafts. 


The hydraulic engine mounts are 
different from the 2wd version and 
have also been relocated to provide 
front axle clearance. 

The front sway bar has been increased in diameter to 23.5mm (2wd standard: 23mm, 
sports suspension: 24mm) to accommodate the additional weight. A sports suspension 
option is not available for the xi. 




E46 Models 




The struts are shorter than the 2wd and there are reinforcement plates between the strut 
bearing and the sheet metal of the strut towers to prevent deformation when traveling on 
very poor road surfaces. 



The spring travel of the E46/16 is 
approximately 20mm less than 
the 2wd version. 

The shorter front axle spring 
travel is due to the limited angle 
of deflection of the front axle 
shafts. 


Steering 

The rack and pinion steering unit 
has been modified from the 2wd. 
It is constructed with a 
larger diameter piston. 

This is necessary to counter the 
additional drag of the all-wheel 
drive system and the wider 
standard wheels and tires. 

The lower steering spindle is 
different than the 2wd and 
connects to the steering rack via 
a double cardan joint. 

Turning radius of the E46/16 is 
35.8ft, 1,4ft greater than the 
2wd. 




E46 Models 




Differential and Front Axles 

The differential for the front axle is bolted to left side of the engine oil pan. The differential 
is driven by a 40mm single piece drive 
shaft. The drive shaft has universal 
joints at both ends. 

Type: VAG 174 

Axle ratios: 330xi 325xi 

Auto: 3,46:1 3,46:1 

Man: 3,07:1 3,23:1 

Max torque: 2000Nm 

Weight: 40 lbs 

Lifetime fluid fill: SAF-XO 


The oil sump has been modified to accommodate the right side axle. A connecting tube is 
welded into the oil pan. A shaft runs inside of the connecting tube between the front 
differential and the axle shaft on the right side. 


Two drive shafts of equal length are used to 
transmit power to the front wheels. 


The steering knuckle is modified to 
accept the CV joint of the front axles. 
The front wheel bearings are unique 
to the E46/16 and incorporate the 
wheel speed sensor pulse wheel into 
the bearing seal. 


50 





E46 Models 




Type: 

HAG 188N 

Axle ratios: 

330xi 

325xi 

Auto: 

3,46:1 

3,46:1 

Man: 

3,07:1 

3,23:1 

Max torque: 

3000Nm 


Weight: 

84 lbs 


Lifetime fluid fill: 

SAF-XO 




Rear Axle 

The complete rear axle and the rear differential are the same as the 2wd version of the 325i 
and 330i. 


The rear spring/strut travel of the E46/16 is approximately 17mm less than the 2wd version. 
The reason for the reduced travel in the rear is to oppose any excessive body roll as a result 
of the higher body profile. 


The rear sway bar has been increased in diameter to 20mm (2wd standard: 18mm, sports 
suspension: 19mm) to accommodate the additional weight. 


Tires and wheels 

Standard wheel size is 17x 7.0 to ensure there is enough room for the front axles and 
brakes. Tire size is 205/50 R17 All-season radials 




330xi Double Spoke 17x7.0 


325xi Radial Spoke 17x7.0 



E46 Models 




Transmissions 


There are two transmission variants for the 325xi and 330xi. 


The manual transmission for both versions is 
the S5D-280Z direct gear transmission. The 
extension housing is modified to accept the 
transfer case. 

The transmission has a lifetime fill of MTF-LT1 
synthetic transmission fluid. 




A5S-390R 


The automatic transmission for both the 330xi 
and 325xi is the A5S-390 R (General Motors) 
transmission with GS 20 AGS control and 
Steptronic shifter. 

The transmission has a lifetime fill of Texaco 
8072B. 


Transmission Cross-member 

Along with the lower transfer case section, the 
cast aluminum transmission cross-member is a 
low profile design to optomize ground clear¬ 
ance. 

Both manual and automatic transmissions 
utilize the same part. 




E46 Models 





Transfer Case 


The Transfer case for the E46/16 is the NV 124 manufactured by New Venture. The 
primary difference between the NV 124 and the NV 125 used in the X5 SAV is that it uses 
gears instead of a drive chain for torque transfer to the front axle. 



The reason gears are used is to produce a 
compact low profile transfer case that could 
fit in the transmission tunnel of an E46 with¬ 
out excessively limiting the forward travel of 
the drivers seat. 


Manufacturer: 

Type: 

Torque Distribution: 
Maximum Torque: 


New Venture 
NV 124 
38%: 62% 
300Nm 


The transfer case is only one speed and 
does not use any viscous coupler. 

The transmission ratio of the planetary gear 
set provides a fixed torque transfer of 38:62 
(front:Rear). The output speeds to the front 
and rear axle are the same (1:1). 



The input to the Planetary 
Carrier is from the output shaft 
of the transmission. 

The Sun Gear of the Planetary 
assembly is turned by the 
Planetary Gears, the Sungear 
then provides torque to the 
Transfer Gear. 


Output Gear 

The Transfer Gear drives the Front Axle. 
Output via gear-to-gear 
contact. The front axle is driven 
via a flange connected to the 
output gear. 


Transfer Gear 


to 


Planetary Gear 
Set 


Planetary Carrier 


Hole for Rubber 
Mounting 



E46 Models 





Planetary Ring Gear 



From the Ring Gear, the power is transmitted via the driveshaft to the rear axle differential. 



62 % 


38 % 


Torque Transfer from the 
Planetary Gear Set. 


The transfer case is filled with a lifetime fill of 
MTF-LT1 P/N 83-22-9-408-942. The only 
repairs possible are the replacement of the 
three oil seals and the hydraulic mount. 

Oil Volume: 0.24 liter 

Drain/Fill plug torque: 33Nm 




E46 Models 



Review Questions 

1. How is the hood of an E46 placed into the workshop position? 


2. Explain the door anchoring system of the E46. 


3. Describe the fuse locations of the E46. 


4. Describe the changes made to the E46 front and rear suspension from the previous 
3 series (E36)._ 


5. Where is the emergency release for the tailgate located on the E46 Sport Wagon? 


6. What allows the windshield frame of the E46 Convertible to act as a roll over protection 
device? 


7. How is the floor pan on the E46 Convertible improved for structural rigidity? 


8. Describe the components used in the E46 all-wheel drive running gear. 


9. Describe the changes made to the front suspension of the E46 to accommodate the 
all-wheel drive system._ 



E46 Models 









