Table of Contents 


E46 TRACTION AND STABILITY CONTROL 
SYSTEMS 


Subject Page 

MK20EIASC 4 

Corner Braking Control (CBC).5 

Electronic Brake Proportioning (EBV). 6 

Diagnosis.6 

DSC III MK20 7 

System Overview.8 

DSC Control Overview.9 

Components 

Control Module/Hydraulic Unit.11 

Wheel Speed Sensors.12 

Brake Light Switch.12 

Brake Fluid Level Switch.13 

DSC Button.13 

Steering Angle Sensor..14 

CAN Interface.15 

Rotation Rate Sensor..16 

Lateral Acceleration Sensor..17 

I.P.O.18 

Hydraulic System Components 

Charge Pump.19 

M aster Cylinder/Fluid Resevoir..20 

Pressure Sensors.20 

DSC Hydraulic Operation.21 

Diagnosis.22 


TEVES DSC III MK60 

Purpose of the System 
I.P.O. 


System Components. 

Control umt/Hydraulic unit 

CAN Interface. 

Tandem Master Brake Cylinder. 


.23 

24 

25 

26 
27 

29 

30 
































Subject 


Page 


Expansion Tank and Brake Fluid Level Switch.30 

Brake Pressure Sensors.31 

Wheel Speed Sensors.32 

Rotation Rate Sensor..35 

Steering Angle Sensor..36 

Transverse Acceleration Sensor..37 

DSC Button.38 

Instrument Cluster Warning Indicators.39 

Principle of Operation.40 

ABS.40 

ASC.44 

DSC.48 

Workshop Hints.55 
















MK20EI ASC 
Model: E46/4 

Production Dates: 6/98 to 6/99 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

Q Identify the communication link between ASC and DM E. 
D Understand the CBC function of ASC. 

Q Understand the EBV function of ASC. 




MK20EI ASC 


ASC was standard equipment on both the 1999 323i and 328i M odels. The Teves - 
Mark 20 El system is used for the E46. The theory/operation of the slip control system is 
unchanged from the previous ASC system. The major changes of the Mark 20 El are: 


Q The electronic control module is integrated into 
the hydraulic unit. 



Q The throttle reduction operation is carried out 
through the DME activation of the MDK motor. 



Q The ASC control module communicates with the AGS and DME control modules over 
the CAN Bus. 


4 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



The Mark 20 El system includes the Cornering Brake Control (CBC) utilized in the Bosch 
ASC 5 system. This feature reduces pressure build-up on the inside rear brake circuit 
while cornering, if the threshold values for activation are exceeded. 



5 

E46 Traction and Stsbility Control Systems 






















ELECTRONIC BRAKE PROPORTIONING (EBV) 


A new feature of the Mark 20 El system is the Electronic distribution of the braking force 
(EBV). This feature will adjust the braking force to the rear wheels based on the vehicle's 
loading to maximize the braking force at all wheels. 


The control module monitors the wheel speed sensor inputs, when the brakes are applied, 
to determine vehicle loading. The control module compares the rate at which the front and 
rear axles are slowing down. 

If the rear axle is slowing at a rate similar to the front it indicates that the vehicle is loaded 
and more braking force can be applied to the rear calipers to stop the vehicle. 

If the decel rate of the rear wheels is far less than the front, it indicates a lightly loaded vehi¬ 
cle. At this point, if the same braking force were applied to the front and rear axles, the vehi¬ 
cle would become unstable. 

If this difference exceeds the threshold values programmed in the control module, EBV is 
activated. The control module will cycle the inlet valves to the rear brakes to regulate the 
braking force. 


DIAGNOSIS 

Diagnosis of the slip control system is carried out with the DI5 or MoDiC using the fault 
symptom driven troubleshooting procedures. 


6 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



DSC III MK20 

Model: E46 all versions except all-wheel drive 
Production Dates: 6/99 to 9/00 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

Q List the components used in the DSC III system. 

Q Explain the intervention the DSC III can execute to control oversteer or understeer. 
Q Describe the calibration required when replacing a steering angle sensor. 

Q Explain the reason why a pre-charge pump is necessary. 




INTRODUCTION 


The DSC III system was introduced for the E46, beginning with Model Year 2000 produc¬ 
tion (E46/2: 6/99, E46/4: 9/99). The system is similar to the DSC III used on the E38 and 
E39 vehicles, however it is manufactured by Teves for use in the E46. 

The system incorporates all of the features of the previous Teves slip control system and 
adds the lateral dynamic control of the DSC III system already installed on the E38/E39s. 

The Teves DSC system is designed to maintain the lateral locating forces for the following: 

Q ABS braking control 
Q ASC +T traction control 

□ DSC - Dynamic Stability Control for oversteer and understeer conditions 


SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

The E46 DSC III system consists of the following components: 

0 Control module/Hydraulic Unit (combined) 

Q Four wheel speed sensors 
Q Charge pump 

Q Tandem Brake M aster Cylinder 
Q Steering Angle Sensor 
Q Yaw Rate Sensor 
Q Lateral Acceleration Sensor 
Q Two Brake Pressure Sensors 
Q Brake Fluid Level Switch 
Q DSC Button 
Q DSC Warning Indicator 
□ CAN Interface (DME/AGS) 


8 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



DSC CONTROL OVERVIEW 


The Teves DSC system maintains the lateral location forces during all phases of operation 
through; 


□ ABS - Hydraulic intervention preventing the wheels from locking during hard brak¬ 
ing 

D ASC +T - Engine drive torque reduction and/or hydraulic intervention on the drive 
wheels to ensure straight line traction (acceleration - driving and deceleration) 

Q DSC - Engine drive torque reduction and/or hydraulic intervention on any wheel 
brake during cornering to minimize oversteer and understeer conditions 


DSC control can aid the driver in controlling the vehicle while driving but can not overcome 
the laws of physics if the vehicle is being driven beyond the range of DSC control. 


UNDERSTEER/OVERSTEER CONDITIONS 


3. VEHICLE 
COMES OUT 
OF TURN 
SUCCES- 
FULLY 


UNDERSTEER CORRECTION 

WITH DSC III 1. VEHICLE APPROACHES TURN: 

- Driver steers into turn 

- Brakes are applied 



WITHOUT 
DSC 


- regulated brake slows 
wheel down (and helps to 
reduce vehicle speed). Wheel on 
outside of curve speeds up due to power transfer thru differential. 
Vehicle pivots in favor of curve. Combined, this forces the vehicle into the turn. 


9 

E46 Traction and Stability control systems 






3. VEHICLE COMES 
OUT OF TURN 
SUCCESFULLY 

WITH DSC 


OVERSTEER CORRECTION 


1. VEHICLE APPROACES TURN AT HIGH RATE OF SPEED: 
- Driver steers into turn and applies brakes to slow down. 



2D. The torque reduction and rear brake regulation 
should stabilize the vehicle at this point. If not 
the left front wheel has a high degree of lateral 
locating force and is momentarily regulated. 

This action deliberately causes the wheel to shed 
a calculated degree of it's locating force. This 
counteracts oversteer yaw at this wheel and also 
aids in slowing the vehicle down to correct it. 


2B. Driver tries to compensate by oversteering which 
diminishes lateral locating force even further. 
Simultaneously, rear of car starts to slide out. 

2C. DSC III determines an OVERSTEER condition. 
Engine torque is reduced via CAN Bus signalling. 
Outside rear wheel is momentarily regulated to 
counteract severe yaw angle (also helps to reduce 
drive torque further.) 


10 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




COMPONENTS 


CONTROL MODULE/HYDRAULIC UNIT 

The control module is installed in the engine compartment, on the right side, in the battery 
well. 

Both the control module and the hydraulic unit are replaceable as separate components. 

All processing functions for ABS/A5C or DSC regulating functions are carried out in the one 
control module. The module is linked to the CAN bus forcommunication with the DM E and 
AGS control modules. Additionally the CAN bus is used forcommunication with the steer¬ 
ing angle sensor and for illumination of the ABS and DSC indicator lamps in the instrument 
cluster. 


The hydraulic unit consists of the follow 



Q Four inlet solenoids 
0 Four outlet solenoids 
[|Two changeover solenoids 
Q Two charge solenoids 



11 

E46 Traction and Stability control systems 





WHEEL SPEED SENSORS 


The E46 DSC III system uses the same inductive wheel speed sensors from the ASC 
system. 



BRAKE LIGHT SWITCH 

The brake light input signal is used by the control module to interrupt an ASC regulation 
control if the driver steps on the brakes during its operation. 

This interruption does not take place during DSC regulation. 


12 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 

































BRAKE FLUID LEVEL SWITCH 


Fluid level switch is incorporated into the brake master cylinder reservoir. If the fluid level is 
correct, the switch provides a ground signal to the DCS control module. 

If the fluid level drops below the specified level, the switch opens and the ASC/DSC func¬ 
tions are switched off. 



DSC BUTTON 

The DSC system comes on every time the vehicle is switched on. The DSC button can be 
used to switch the system off. The warning indicator lamp comes on when the system is 
manually switched off 



13 

E46 Traction and Stability control systems 























































STEERING ANGLE SENSOR 


The steering angle sensor is mounted at the bottom of the steering column, in front of the 
flexible coupling. It utilizes two potentiometers to determine steering angle and the rate of 
steering change. These signals are processed in the steering angle sensor and a digital out¬ 
put signal is passed over the CAN bus to the DSC control module. 


The sensor requires calibration after repairs to the steering or suspension system. The sen- 
soris calibrated using the DIS or MoDiC. Once calibrated, the sensorsends an ID number 
to the DSC control module. The ID provides confirmation to the module that the angle sen¬ 
sor is properly calibrated. 


Installing a new sensor or exchanging sensors with another vehicle will require that this ca 
ibration procedure is carried out. 


POTENTIOMETER 

HOUSING 



\ 


CAN BUS MICROPROCESSOR 


14 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 











CAN INTERFACE 


The DSC control module communicates over the CAN line for the following 


Q Steering angle from the steering angle sensor 
Q Engine control module for engine intervention 
Q Transmission control module for shift intervention 
Q Instrument cluster for illumination of the warning indicator lamps 



GS 20 


MS 42.0 


INSTRUMENT 
CLUSTER 


SPLICE CONNECTIONS 
FOR TWISTED PAIR CAN 


15 

E46 Traction and Stability control systems 

























































ROTATION RATE SENSOR 


The rotational rate sensor is mounted underthe driver's seat. It provides a signal to the DSC 
control module that corresponds to the vehicle's rotational speed around its axis (yaw 
speed). 

The sensor receives its operating power (5 volts) from the DSC control module and pro¬ 
vides an output voltage of approx. 0.25 to 4.65 volts depending on the amount of yaw 
exerted on the vehicle. 

The sensor operates on the Coriolis effect to produce the output voltage. The element of 
the sensor is a micromechanical double quartz tuning fork. A frequency of 11 Hertz is 
applied to one side of the fork and as the vehicle turns on its axis, vibrations are induced 
into the tips at the other end. 

The sensor processes the signals produced by the fork and produces an analog voltage 
signal that is proportional to the amount of yaw. 

Based on the control module's programming parameters, the DSC will activate a DSC reg¬ 
ulation cycle to ensure that the vehicle remains stable under all driving conditions. 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 



16 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 






























LATERAL ACCELERATION SENSOR 


The lateral acceleration sensor is mounted in the left "A" pillar. The sensor provides the DSC 
control module with an input signal that corresponds to the degree of lateral acceleration 
("G" forces) acting on the vehicle. 

The sensor is a capacitive type with two capacitive plates (one fixed and one moving). 
Under the effect of lateral acceleration, the one plate moves in relation to the fixed plate. 
This results in a voltage signal being produced in proportion to the degree of lateral accel¬ 
eration. 

The voltage signal output of the sensor to the DSC control module ranges from 0.5 to 4.5 
volts. When the vehicle is stationary, The standing voltage from the sensor is approximate¬ 
ly 1.8 volts. 

This signal is used in conjunction with the yaw sensor input to determine the degree of DSC 
regulation required to maintain the vehicle's stability. 



17 

E46 Traction and Stability control systems 



ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 





KL 30 
KL 15 





r ■ 1 i" * . ,_ 

■. ~. i * * \ . i 

■ 

1 i" ■ ■ |" 

1 S ■ 1 ■ 1 s . 

DSC SWITCH 

— 

i ■ ■ | . _■ 1 i ■ 1 i 




r \AT 


•— U 

i- 1 

WHEEL 

«=D 


1 1 

SPEED 


«=D 

1 

1 1 

SENSORS 



i TAT 


CHARGE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 

CHARGE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 
SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 



+ 

SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


LATERAL 
ACCELERATION SENSOR 


ELECTRONIC 
BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 





i 


TO LCM 



PARK BRAKE 
SWITCH 


DSC E46 


KL 15 



POWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 


PUMP 


INLET (4X) 


OUTLET (4X) 


CHANGEOVER (2x) 


PRE-LOAD (2x) 


— 

'iflfiflflur 




DSCIII 

HYDRAULIC 

UNIT 


POWER SUPPLY 

GROUND 

SENSOR TEST 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


CHARGE PUMP 
CONTROL 



STEERING ANGLE 
SENSOR WITH 
INTEGRAL MICRO¬ 
PROCESSOR 


CAN 






T 


DME 


WHEEL SPEED X 4 


DIAGNOSIS 



18 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 










































































































































































HYDRAULIC SYSTEM COMPONENTS 


PRE-CHARGE PUMP 

The pre-charge pump is installed between the master cylinder and the brake fluid reservoir. 
During DSC controlled regulations that involve brake intervention, the pump ensures that 
the required volume of fluid is available for the hydraulic unit. 

When activated, the pre-charge pump draws fluid from the reservoir and delivers it to the 
master cylinder at a pressure of 10 Bar. 



19 

E46 Traction and Stability control systems 



MASTER CYLINDER/FLUID RESERVOIR 


The master cylinder contains the central valves in both the front and rear brake circuits, 
5 imilar to the Bosch DSC system. The central valves allow fluid to transfer during DSC con¬ 
trolled interventions. 

The brake fluid reservoir has internal baffles that minimize fluid foaming during controlled 
interventions. The charge pump pick up is mounted low on the reservoirto prevent airfrom 
entering the system during regulation. The fluid level switch will signal the control module to 
cancel DSC regulation if the fluid is below the safety margin level. 



PRESSURE SENSORS 

Two pressure sensors are installed on the master cylinder in the outlet ports for the front 
and rear brake circuits. The sensors provide the DSC control module with an analog volt¬ 
age signal in proportion to the brake pressure in the master cylinder. 



20 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




















DSC HYDRAULIC OPERATION 


Based on the programming of the DSC control module, hydraulic intervention can be acti¬ 
vated at any wheel brake as follows: 


D ABS regulation for any wheel that is in danger of locking - causing the wheel to 
skid. 

□ ASC regulation for either or both rear wheels to ensure that the optimum traction 
is applied to the drive wheels 

□ DSC regulation for any wheel to correct for dynamic forces that are causing the 
vehicle to become unstable. The DSC intervention only takes place on one wheel 
of a corresponding axle. 


Depending on the hydraulic intervention reguired, the charge pump, return pump, change 
over valves, charging valves, inlet and outlet solenoids are activated to provide: 


G Pressure build up for brake application 
G Pressure hold to slow or stop the wheel 
G Pressure release to allow the wheel to turn 



21 

E46 Traction and Stability control systems 








































































































DIAGNOSIS 


Troubleshooting the E46 TEVES DSC system is carried out using the DIS or MoDiC. 


The fault indicators in the instrument panel will illuminate when there is a fault and the sys¬ 
tem is off line. 


Follow the diagnostic procedures as outlined with the tester to troubleshoot the E46 Teves 
DSC system. 



22 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 


















TEVES DSC III MK60 

Model: E46 (except M3 and Xi) and E36/7 

Production Date: From 9/00 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

Q Identify the changes of the M K60 over the previous M K20EI system. 
Q Understand the operation of the new wheel sensors. 

0 Review the operating principles of AB5, A5C and DSC. 

Q Describe the new ADB and DBC functions. 


23 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




Purpose of the system 

DSC III M K60 is supplied by Continental Teves and supersedes the Teves DSC III M K20 El 
system. The M K60 includes all of the features of the previous M K20 El system and incor¬ 
porates two additional functions: 

D DBC function 

Q Modified ADB function 

The most important changes from the MK20 El are: 

Q Reduction in size of the control unit/hydraulic Unit. 

Q Installation of the hydraulic unit close to the master cylinder. 

Q Elimination of a pre-charge pump. 

Q Magneto resistive wheel speed sensors. 

The Teves MK60 system is designed to maintain the vehicles stability during: 

Q AB5 braking regulation 
Q ASC+T traction control 
Q DSC for oversteer and understeer control 

Additional features are also programmed into the control module to enhance driver safety 
and comfort. These features are: 

□ CBC Corner Brake Control 

Q EBV Electronic Brake Proportioning 

G MSR Engine Drag Torque Regulation 

G ADB Automatic Differential Brake 

G DBS Dynamic Brake System 


24 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



KL 30 


DME 

MAIN 

RELAY 




KL 15 





1 - 1 - 
■ ■ ■ ' *. ■ 1 


DSC SWITCH 

— 

■ L 

i . i * ■ . i 

,. ■ . i ■ . i 




LF 





RF 


/^S 



LR 





RR 





•— U 

•=0 

1 - 1 

WHEEL 

1 , 

1 ' 

•=0 

SPEED 

1 , 

1 ' 


SENSORS 

_i 


BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSORS 


■|J 


BRAKE 
PRESSURE 
SIGNAL X2 



SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 



SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


LATERAL 
ACCELERATION SENSOR 


BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 



TO 


f * 

LSZ 



PARK BRAKE 
SWITCH 


i—* 


SPLICE TO KOMBI 


i— 


BRAKE FLUID 
LEVEL SWITCH 


DSC 
MK 60 

47 PIN 


ABS LAMP 


KL 



POWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 


PUMP 


INLET (4X) 


OUTLET (4X) 


CHANGEOVER (2x) 


INTAKE (2x) 


mm — 


mm— 


MK60 

HYDRAULIC 

UNIT 


POWER SUPPLY 


GROUND 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


REFERENCE 

VOLTAGE 




BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSORS 


POWER 


GROUND 



LATERAL 

ACCELERATION SENSOR 


STEERING 
ANGLE SENSOR 



RIGHT REAR 


LEFT REAR 


PROCESSED WHEEL SPEED 




DSC LAMP 

GENERAL BRAKE 
WARNING LAMP 


WHEEL SPEED SENSOR REFERENCE VOLTAGE X 4 



25 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 






























































































































































System Components 

The Teves DSC III M K60 consists of the following components: 
Q Integrated Control unit/Hydraulic unit with CAN Interface 
Q Tandem Master Brake Cylinder 

Q Brake Expansion Tank with Fluid Level Reed Contact in Cap 

Q 2 Brake Pressure Sensors 

Q Brake Light Switch 

Q 4 Wheel Speed Sensors (active) 

Q Rotation Rate Sensor (yaw) 

Q Steering Angle Sensor (LEW) 

Q Transverse Acceleration Sensor 

Q DSC Button (part of SZM) 

Q Instrument cluster Warning indicators 

• Hand brake Switch 

Q Wiring Harness 


26 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Control Unit/Hydraulic Unit 


The M K60 control unit/hydraulic unit is located 
in the engine compartment on the left side 
under the brake master cylinder. 

Both the control unit and the hydraulic unit are 
replaceable as separate components. 

The pre-charge pump used on previous 
systems is no longer required. Rapid pressure 
build up is possible because of the close 
proximity of the hydraulic unit to the master 
cylinderand improvements in the design of the 
return pump. 

The control unit/hydraulic unit itself is 20% 
smaller and lighter than the previous M K20 El. 



All processing functions for ABS, ASC or DSC are performed by the combined control 
unit/hydraulic unit. The M K 60 control unit is also responsible for processing the wheel 
speed signals and providing them to other control units. 


The M K60 control unit for MY 2002 incorporates the RDW function into its scope of 
control, making a separate RDW control unit unnecessary. The operating principle 
continues to be based on the analysis of wheel speed. 



27 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




MK60 Hydraulic Unit 



DSC HYDRAULIC UNIT 


REAR AXLE BRAKE CIRCUITS 




FRONT AXLE BRAKE CIRCUITS 



INTAKE 

VALVE 


CHANGEOVER 

VALVE 


401 


INTAKE 

VALVE 





INLET OUTLET 
VALVE VALVE 


RUMP 

m 



OUTLET INLET 
VALVE VALVE 



ir 


LEFT 

REAR 

BRAKE 


PUMP 


'NLET OUTLET 
VALVE VALVE 


*K 


OUTLET INLET 
VALVE VALVE 


ir 



right 


\ LEFT 

RIGHT 


REAR V*. 

>; 

) FRONT 

FRONT 


BRAKE 

-h ^ y 

BRAKE 

BRAKE 


The hydraulic unit consists of an aluminum block containing 12 solenoid valves, 2 pressure 
accumulators and the return pump. 

0 4 inlet solenoid valves (N/0) Q 2 changeover solenoid valves (N/O) 

Q 4 outlet solenoid valves (N/C) Q 2 Intake solenoid valves (N/C) 

The solenoid valving ensures that normal braking is possible in the event of a defective 
control unit. 

In ABS regulation the pump returns fluid back to the master cylinder circuits. In ASC/D5C 
regulation with brake intervention, the pump is responsible for building up the brake 
pressure required for the front and rear hydraulic circuits. 

Note: 

N/0= Normally Open 
N/C= Normally Closed 

28 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 







CAN Interface 

The MK60 is connected to the CAN bus for communication with the AGS, DME control 
module, Steering Angle Sensor and the Instrument Cluster. 

The CAN bus allows all of the connected control modules to send and receive information 
and commands. 

Communication with the M K60 includes: 


Q DME - The DME sends current engine torque. M K60 commands the DME to reduce 
(ASC/DSC) or raise (MSR) engine torque. 

□ AGS - The M K60 commands the AGS to suppress shifts during regulation. 

0 LEW - The M K60 receives steering angle information. 

0 KOMBI - The M K60 commands the instrument cluster to activate or deactivate the 
warning lamps. 

Q All four wheels speed signals are sent over the CAN bus for use by other modules. 


INSTRUMENT 



29 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 
















Tandem Master Brake Cylinder 



The M K60 system uses a tandem master brake 
cylinder fitted with central valves as in other DSC 
master cylinders. The central valves allow fluid 
to be drawn through the master cylinder during 
ASC and DSC regulation. The hydraulic circuit is 
divided front/rear. 

An inlet for pre-charge pressure is no longer 
used since the charge pump has been 
eliminated from the M K60. 

Both brake pressure sensors are mounted on 
the master cylinder. 


Expansion Tank and Brake Fluid Level Switch 

The brake fluid expansion tank 
has internal baffles that reduce 
foaming during return pump 
operation. 

The expansion tank includes a 
pick-up tube for clutch master 
cylinder fluid supply. 

The brake fluid level switch is 
incorporated into the cap. The 
switch is a reed contact switch. 

If the brake fluid is at a sufficient 
level, the switch is closed and 
switched to ground. 

If the fluid level drops below a specified level , the reed contacts open and the M K 60 
responds by switching off the ASC/DSC functions. 

Normal braking and ABS operation is unaffected. 



30 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 








Brake Pressure Sensors 


Two brake pressure sensors are mounted on the master cylinder below the outlet ports for 
the front and rear brake circuits. The sensors are provided a 5V reference voltage by the 
M K 60 control unit. 


The sensor provides the control unit with an analog signal proportional to brake pressure. 
Voltage increases with increasing brake pressure. 


Plausibility with BLS 

The signal input from the brake 
light switch is compared with the 
pressure sensor values. 

The pressure sensors must not 
detect more that 5 bar when the 
BLS is not actuated. 

Both signals are used to form a 
redundant BLS input which is 
constantly monitored. 



Note: Refer to the Workshop Hints for instructions on initializing the brake pressure sensors. 

Brake Light Switch (BLS) 


The brake switch is an input to the M K 60 to inform it that the brakes are being applied. If 
the signal is received during an ASC regulation then brake regulation is interrupted. 



31 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Wheel Speed Sensors (active) 

With the introduction of the Teves DSC III M K60, active wheel speed sensors that operate 
on the principle of magnetoresistive effect are used for the first time on BMW vehicles. 


The sensor element and evaluation module are two separate components within the 
sensor housing. 



1. Metal pulse wheel 6. 

2. Magnet 7. 

3. Sensor element 8. 

4. Evaluation module 9. 

5. Support for sensor element 10. 


Sensor wiring with weather boot 
Ground contact ring 
Fastening element 
Sensor housing 
Pick-up surface 


Principle of operation of the magnetoresistive sensor 

The active sensing of the magnetoresistive sensor is particularly suitable for advanced 
stability control applications in which sensing at zero or near zero speed is required. 


A permanent magnet in the sensor produces a magnetic field with the magnetic field stream 
at a right angle to the sensing element. 


The sensor element is a ferromagnetic alloy that changes its resistance based on the 
influence of magnetic fields. 


32 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



As the high portion of the pulse wheel approaches the sensing element, a deflection of the 
magnetic field stream is created. This causes the resistance to change in the thin film 
ferromagnetic layer of the sensor element. 



1. Metal pulse wheel 

2. Magnet 

3. Sensor element 

4. Evaluation circuit 

5. Magnetic field 


The sensor element is affected by the direction of the magnetic field, not the field strength. 
The field strength is not important as long as it is above a certain level. This allows the 
sensor to tolerate variations in the field strength caused by age, temperature or 
mechanical tolerances. 

The resistance change in the sensor element affects the voltage that is supplied by the 
evaluation circuit. The small amount of voltage provided to the sensorelement is monitored 
and the voltage changes (1 to lOOmV) are converted into current pulses by the evaluation 
module. 

inA' 

0 Signal High-14mA If, f —. f —, — 

Q Signal Low-7mA 


I 

The sensorevaluation circuit is supplied 12V by the M K60 control unit. Output voltage from 
the sensor is approximately 10V. The control unit counts the high and low current pulses 
to determine the wheel speed signal. 

Front sensors are three wire because they have a separate ground wire. 

Rear sensors are two wire and use the sensor case as a ground point. 


33 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




Different sensors are used on the left and right side 
front axle of the vehicle. The difference comes in the 
length of the harness. 

The connectors are blue to distinguish them apart 
from the grey connectors used for sensors on the 
M K20 El. 

The DSC III M K60 uses the same metal pulse 
wheels used with the M K20 inductive sensors. 



Front axle E46/Z3 


Rear axle Z3 


Rear axle E46, short 




There are two types of sensors used in the rear axle of the E46: 

Q The short sensor is used on the 325i (any transmission) and 330i automatic. 
Q The long sensor is used on the 330i manual transmission version. 

The Z3 uses the same sensors for the rear axle, left or right. 


34 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Rotation Rate Sensor 


The Rotation Rate Sensor is mounted on a metal bracket under the drivers seat. The 
sensor provides information to the MK60 concerning the vehicles speed around its main 
axis (yaw). 

The sensor has a three pin connector with the following connections: 

Q 5V reference 
D Signal 
D Ground 

The sensor receives a reference voltage of 5V from the M K60 control unit and provides a 
signal output of approximately 0.25 to 4.65V depending on the amount and direction of 
yaw. If the sensor is defective a constant voltage will be sent to the M K60. 

The sensor element is a micro-mechanical double quartz tuning fork. A frequency of 11 
Hertz is applied to one side of the fork and as the vehicle turns on it’s axis, vibrations are 
induced on the other end. 


The sensor analyzes the signal produced by the fork and produces an analog voltage 
signal that is proportional to the amount of yaw. 

The rotation (yaw) rate is compared to the signal from the Steering Angle Sensor and the 
Transverse Acceleration Sensor. If physical limits are beginning to be exceeded, the M K60 
DSC will begin regulation by engine and brake intervention to attempt to stabilize the 
vehicle. This is referred to as a GMR regulation. 



The M K60 DSC III for M ,Y. 2002 incorporates a combined Rotation rate and Transverse 
Acceleration Sensor. The Sensor is connected to the M K60 control unit by the CAN bus. 
The Z3 version will retain separate sensors until the E36/7 is replaced by the E46/6. 


35 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Steering Angle Sensor (LEW) 

The Steering Angle Sensor is mounted towards the lower end of the steering column, 
above the flexible coupling. The LEW consists of a potentiometer and a built in 
microprocessor. The potentiometer has two pickups offset at 90° to one another. The raw 
potentiometer signal is processed and converted into a digital signal that is transmitted over 
the CAN bus to the M K60 DSC III control unit. 



The sensor requires initialization in order to create a zero point default. Once initialized the 
LEW sends an ID number to the DSC control unit. The ID provides confirmation that the 
LEW is properly initialized. 

The total steering wheel angle is determined by combining the CAN telegram signal, the 
stored zero point default and the actual number of turns to the wheel. In order to prevent 
the LEW from loosing count, KL 30 is provided to the sensor and it continues to record 
even after the ignition has been switched off. 


The M K60 DSC III calculates the drivers desired rate of turn from the steering angle signa 


POTENTIOMETER 

HOUSING 



\ 


CAN BUS MICROPROCESSOR 


Pin 1. KL 30 
Pin 2. KL 87 
Pin 3. CAN high 
Pin 4. CAN low 
Pin 5. KL 31 
Pin 6. TXD 


Note: Refer to the Workshop Hints for instructions on coding and initializing the sensor. 


36 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Transverse (Lateral) Acceleration Sensor 


The Transverse Acceleration Sensor is 
mounted in the left "A” pillar behind the driver's 
foot rest. The sensor provides the M K60 DSC 
control unit with a signal that corresponds to 
the degree of transverse acceleration (G forces) 
acting on the vehicle. 

The sensor is a capacitive sensor with two 
plates. One plate is rigidly mounted, the other 
plate is mounted on a spring. Under the effect 
of transverse forces acting on the sensor the 
distance between the plates changes. 


This change of distance between the plates affects the capacitance of the sensor. The 
evaluation circuitry converts the signal into an analog voltage that is transmitted to the 
control unit. 



The output signal of the sensor is between the range of 0.5 to 4.5 Volts. This corresponds 
to -1.5 to 3.5g respectively. When the vehicle is stationary the output is 1.8V. 


The transverse acceleration signal is used in the M K60 DSC III control unit along with the 
rotation rate and steering angle signal to determine if DSC regulation is required to maintaii 
the vehicles stability. 


Note: Refer to Workshop Hints for instructions on initializing sensor. 


37 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




DSC Button 


The DSC button is located on the SZM, however the SZM provides no processing, it is 
simply a housing for the button which is hardwired to the M K60 control unit. 

The DSC Button features two functions that can be set by varying the time the button is 
held down for: 


Button activation 

Function 

Display 

Short press 
<2.5s 

Only the yaw control of the DSC is deactivated. 
The ADB and DBC functions remain active. 

DSC light illuminated 


A higher slip ratio is allowed up to 42 mph for the 
purpose of improving traction in slippery 
conditions. ASC uses different thresholds. 


Long press 
>2.5s 

All ASC, ADB, DSC, GMR (yaw control) and DBC 
control functions are deactivated. 

DSC light and general 
brake warning light 
(yellow ABL) illuminated. 


Used for service and use on dynamometers. 



Pressing the button again returns the system to normal status. It is not possible to go 
directly from one function to the next without first returning to normal status. 



38 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



















Instrument Cluster Warning Indicators 



Three warning indicator lamps are arranged in the instrument cluster: 

Q DSC lamp: Indicates fault in DSC or system disabled by the switch. 

0 ABS lamp: Indicates a fault in the ABS system. 

Q ABL"BRAKE" lamp: This lamp is a general brake warning and illuminates two different 

colors. 

Q Red indicates low brake fluid or hand brake engaged. 

Q Yellow indicates DSC/ABS fault orsystem disabled by the switch. 

The DSC and yellow ABL lamp are controlled by the M K60 DSC III control unit via the CAN 
bus. The ABS lamp is controlled directly by the M K60 via hardwire. 

Hand brake Switch 

The hand brake switch is an input to the M K60 DSC to cancel M SR regulation. 


39 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 







Principle of Operation 

The scope of control for the M K60 DSC III is comprised of three systems: 

□ ABS 

□ ASC+T 

□ DSC 


Based on signals coming from the various sensors, the M K60 DSC III will determine which 
system is best suited to maintain control of the vehicle. 


In addition to the three basic systems, there are several sub-functions which are activated 
during very specific circumstances. The sub-functions are: 


□ CBC 

□ EBV 

□ M SR 

□ ADB 

□ DBC 

□ MBC 



System: Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS) 

The ABS system can prevent wheel lock when braking by comparing the four active wheel 
speed sensors to the average vehicle speed. If a wheel is locking during braking or has 
dropped below a speed threshold programmed in the control unit ABS braking will begin. 
ABS braking is possible when vehicle speeds are above 12 kph (7mph). 

ABS regulation has three phases: 

G Pressure Build 
G Pressure Hold 
G Pressure Release 


40 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Pressure Build already occurs during normal braking, so when ABS first intervenes it will 
start holding pressure by energizing the Inlet Valve. For example, if the right rear wheel is 
locking up, both Inlet Valves will be energized, regulating both wheels together. This logic 
is known as Select Low. Front wheels can be regulated individually as needed to prevent 
lockup. 

Energizing the Inlet Valve closes the brake fluid passage to the calipers and traps the fluid 
at the current pressure, thus not allowing the brake pressure to rise any further. 


If the wheel speed does not increase the Pressure Release phase begins 









FRONT AXLE BRAKE CIRCUITS 


CHANGEOVER 

VALVE 


ACCUMULATOR 


i 


(9 


valve <ss5f ssssr kl 

ir ir 




LEFT 

FRONT 

BRAKE 



RIGHT 

FRONT 

BRAKE 


Pressure Release occurs when the control unit energizes the Outlet Valve while continuing 
to hold the Inlet Valve closed. The trapped brake fluid is released out of the calipers, 
reducing braking pressure. 


At the same time, the pump is switched on which draws in the released brake fluid and 
pumps it back into the pressure-build circuit restoring the volume of brake fluid again in 
front of the Inlet valve. 


Depending on conditions the ABS system may cycle between these three phases from 3 
to 12 times a second to prevent wheel lock. 

41 


Teves DSC III M K 60 














ABS Sub-functions 


Corner Brake Control (CBC) 

CBC can occur if the vehicle is cornering and ABS regulation is not taking place. 

If the control unit detects transverse acceleration in excess of 0.6g and the brakes are 
applied, CBC prevents a build up in brake pressure to the inside rear wheel. This prevents 
the vehicle from entering into an unstable situation that can lead to Oversteer. 

The M K60 accomplishes this by closing the Inlet Valve, thus not allowing brake pressure to 
increase at the brake caliper. 


The difference in braking force between the two rear wheels creates a yaw force that 
opposes the oversteer and allows the vehicle to handle neutrally. 



42 


E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 





Electronic Brake Force Distribution (EBV) 


EBV will adjust brake pressure to the rear axle based on the rate of slow-down of the rear 
wheels, ensuring even brake force between the front and the rear of the vehicle. 

The control unit monitors the wheel speed when the brakes are applied and compares the 
deceleration of the front and rear axle to determine required regulation. 


If the vehicle is moderately to fully loaded, the rear axle will take longer to slow down, rear 
wheel brakes can then be applied at a higher pressure . 


If a vehicle was lightly loaded, a similar brake pressure would be too great and result in an 
unstable situation. 


If EBV control intervention is required, the control unit cycles the inlet valve on the rear brake 
calipers to prevent further build-up. 

Benefits of EBV are: 


0 Enhanced braking due to even distribution of brake force. 
Q Rear wheel brake size can be increased. 

Q Front and rear brakes wear at a similar rate. 


43 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Automatic Stability Control (ASC+T) 

Based on input from the wheel speed sensors, the M K60 control unit determines if the 
vehicle is loosing traction due to excessive longitudinal (straight line) wheel slip. An A5C 
regulating sequence is initiated if the wheel slip exceeds the control units stored allowable 
values. 




A critical slip ratio of up to 5% between the wheels will cause the traction control regulation 
to begin. This slip ratio is established when the system detects a wheel spin difference of 
2M PH or greater. 


ASC regulation is cancelled at any time if the brake pedal is applied. 


44 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 







































































































































































The M K60 can control longitudinal wheel slip by two means 


Q Engine Intervention 

Q Brake Intervention (ADB, drive wheels only) 

Engine Intervention 

Engine torque may be reduced by: 


□ 

□ 

□ 


Reducing the throttle opening angle 
Retarding the ignition 

Canceling individual cylinders by fuel injection cutout. 


The M K60 DSC III control unit determines the amount of torque reduction that is 
necessary and sends the request for regulation to the DM E via the CAN bus. 


Brake Intervention (ADB) 

Brake intervention is applied to the individual drive wheel which is loosing traction by 
regulating the brake calipers in three phases: 


□ Pressure Build 

□ Pressure Hold 

Q Pressure Release 


When brake intervention is necessary, the front wheels must be isolated from the Pressure 

Build sequence in the hydraulic unit. 

Here is an example of an ASC brake intervention at the left rear wheel: 

Q The Changeover Valve forthe rear brake circuit, the right rear and both front Inlet Valves 
are energized and closed. 

Q The rear brake circuit Intake Valve is energized and opened. 

Q The Return/Pressure pump is activated and draws brake fluid through the open Intake 
Valve from the Master Cylinder (via the Central Valve) and delivers the pressurized fluid to 
the open Inlet Valve braking the left rear wheel. 

G Pressure Hold and Pressure Release are done by cycling the Inlet and Outlet Valves 
similar to the ABS sequence described previously. 

The control unit decides which regulation method should take place based on input 

criteria and chooses from two regulating principles: 

G Select-High 

G Select-Low 


45 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Select-High Regulation 

In a Select-High regulation, the M K60 control unit selects the drive wheel with the highest 
amount of traction and uses it as the basis for evaluation. 

Q Engine torque is reduced slightly by request to the DM E. 

Q The wheel with the least amount of traction is braked. This allows a torque transfer to 
the wheel with the higher amount of traction (similarto a locking differential). 

Select-High is used if the vehicle speed is below 40 kph (25 mph). 

Select-Low Regulation 

In a Select-Low regulation, the M K60 control unit selects the drive wheel with the lowest 
amount of traction and uses it as the basis for evaluation. 

Q Engine torque is reduced until the wheel slip is no longer present. 

Q Brake regulation is not carried out. 

Select-Low is used if the vehicle speed is above 40 kph (25 mph). 

ASC Sub-functions 

Engine Drag Torque Reduction (MSR) 

If the vehicle is driven in low gear when coasting down hill, or if there is a sudden shift to a 
lower gear, the wheels may be slowed by the engine's braking effect too rapidly. This could 
result in an unstable situation. 

If the front wheels are turning fasterthan the rear wheels, the M K 60 control unit signals the 
DM E via the CAN bus to raise the engine torque. DM E cancels fuel cut-off and allows the 
engine speed to increase, this allows the drive wheels to accelerate to match the speed of 
the non-driven wheels. 


SR regulation is cancelled if the brake pedal or hand brake are applied. 


46 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Modified ADB function (2-wheel drive vehicles equipped with MK60) 

The ADB is an automatic differential lock that improves traction. The slipping wheel is 
braked by pressure built up in the hydraulic unit. The drive torque can be transferred to the 
wheel with the greater traction, which can transmit drive power to the road. This function 
takes the place of a limited slip differential. 

The MK60 DSC III system incorporates two methods of ADB based on the DSC switch 
input to the control unit. With the system "on" the ADB works with engine intervention at 
a threshold of below 40kph(24 mph). 


Tapping the DSC switch (<2.5 s) increases the slip threshold of the ADB up to 
approximately 70 kph (42 mph) for the purpose of increasing traction. 


This feature is also helpful for example when rocking a vehicle out of mud or snow. 



Coefficient of friction 


47 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 

















Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 


With the introduction of DSC systems, lateral dynamics were taken into account for the first 
time. The MK60 DSC III system will initiate a DSC regulation sequence if the control unit 
detects a difference between the drivers desired turning angle and the actual rotation angle 
of the vehicle. The control unit determines vehicle stability based on: 


Q Steering wheel angle 
D Wheel speed 

Q Transverse acceleration forces 
0 Rotation angle and speed (yaw) 

Once the control unit determines that the vehicle is in an unstable situation, it also 
identifies whether it is oversteering or understeering. This distinction is important because 
it determines which control strategy should be used to help stabilize the vehicle. 

DSC regulation consist of: 

Q Engine intervention 
Q Engine and brake intervention (anywheel) 

Q Brake intervention 


Understeer Detected: 

• Engine Torque Reduction 

• Brake applied to inside 
rear wheel. 

- 1 - 




Oversteer Detected: 


• Engine Torque Reduction. 

e- 

• Brake applied to outside 


wheels. 


t 




48 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Understeer 

Understeer occurs when the driver wishes to turn a corner but despite the front wheels 
being turned in the direction of the curve the vehicle continues its track forward. This 
occurs when the front wheels no longer have sufficient lateral locating force (traction). 

The M K60 DSC III can identify the situation and initiate a corrective action based on engine 
torque reduction followed by a controlled brake intervention sequence if needed. 

Engine torque reduction is carried out by the DM E from a request by the DSC via the CAN 
bus. The DME telegrams the torque reduction confirmation back to the DSC. 

Brake intervention is carried out by the M K60 hydraulic unit if the driver is not actively 
braking. An example of a brake intervention at the inside rear wheel is as follows: 

Q All Inlet Valves are closed except for the right rear inlet. 

0 Intake Valve for rear circuit is opened. 

Q Both Changeover Valves are closed. 

Q Return pump operated. 


3. VEHICLE 
COMES OUT 
OF TURN 
SUCCES- 
FULLY 



UNDERSTEER CORRECTION 

WITH DSC III 1 . VEHICLE APPROACHES TURN: 

- Driver steers into turn 

- Brakes are applied 



WITHOUT 
DSC 


- regulated brake slows 
wheel down (and helps to 
reduce vehicle speed). Wheel on 
outside of curve speeds up due to power transfer thru differential. 
Vehicle pivots in favor of curve. Combined, this forces the vehicle into the turn. 

49 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



ust as an A5C regulation, DSC brake intervention carries out 


□ Pressure Build 

□ Pressure Hold 

D Pressure release 



DSC HYDRAULIC UNIT 


FRONT AXLE BRAKE CIRCUITS 


CHANGEOVER 

: m 



LEFT 

REAR 

BRAKE 


RIGHT 

FRONT 

BRAKE 


50 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 





















Oversteer 

Oversteer occurs when the driver wishes to turn a corner and the tail of the vehicle slides 
outward leading the turn. This is caused by the reartires loosing traction and not being able 
to hold against the centrifugal force acting upon the vehicle. 

The M K60 DSC III can identify the situation and initiate a corrective action based on engine 
torque reduction followed by a controlled brake intervention sequence if needed. 

Engine torque reduction is carried out by the DM E from a request by the DSC via the CAN 
bus. The DM E sends the torque reduction confirmation back to the DSC. 


3. VEHICLE COMES 
OUT OF TURN 
SUCCESFULLY 


WITH DSC 


OVERSTEER CORRECTION 


1. VEHICLE APPROACES TURN AT HIGH RATE OF SPEED 
- Driver steers into turn and applies brakes to slow down. 



2D. The torque reduction and rear brake regulation 
should stabilize the vehicle at this point. If not 
the left front wheel has a high degree of lateral 
locating force and is momentarily regulated. 

This action deliberately causes the wheel to shed 
a calculated degree of it's locating force. This 
counteracts oversteer yaw at this wheel and also 
aids in slowing the vehicle down to correct it. 


2B. Driver tries to compensate by oversteering which 
diminishes lateral locating force even further. 
Simultaneously, rear of car starts to slide out. 

2C. DSC III determines an OVERSTEER condition. 
Engine torque is reduced via CAN Bus signalling. 
Outside rear wheel is momentarily regulated to 
counteract severe yaw angle (also helps to reduce 
drive torque further.) 


51 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




Brake intervention is carried out by the M K60 hydraulic unit if the driver is not actively 
braking. An example of a brake intervention at the left outside wheel is as follows: 


Q All Inlet Valves are closed except for the left rear inlet. 
Q Intake Valve for rear circuit is opened. 

Q Both Changeover Valves are closed. 

Q Return pump operated. 






























DSC Sub-functions 


Dynamic Brake System (DBS) 

DBS is designed to assist the driver in emergency braking situations by automatically 
increasing pressure to the vehicles brake system. This allows the vehicle to stop in the 
shortest distance possible. DBS was first available in 1999 Bosch DSC III 5.7 systems. It 
is available on a Continental Teves system for the first time with M K60 DSC III. 

The DBS system contains two functions: Dynamic Brake Control and Maximum Brake 
Control. DBS functions are programmed into the M K60 control unit and require no addi¬ 
tional hardware over conventional DSC. 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

The DBC function is designed to provide an increase in braking pressure up to the ABS 
threshold during rapid (emergency) braking situations. The M K60 control unit monitors the 
inputs from the brake light switch and the brake pressure sensors on the master cylinder. 
The triggering criteria for activation of DBC is, how rapidly is the brake pressure increasing 
with an application of the brake pedal. The triggering conditions are: 

Q Brake light switch on. 

Q Brake pressure in the master cylinder above threshold. 

Q Brake pressure build-up speed above threshold. 

Q Vehicle road speed above 3mph (5kmh). 

□ Pressure sensor self test completed and sensors not faulted. 

Q Vehicle traveling forward. 

0 Not all of the wheels in ABS regulation range. 

If the threshold for DBC triggering is achieved, the M K60 control unit will activate a 
pressure build-up intervention by activating the return pump. The pressure at all wheels is 
increased up to the ABS regulation point. This ensures that the maximum brake force is 
applied to the vehicle. 

During DBC the rear axle is controlled with Select-Low logic and the front wheels are 
regulated individually. DBC will continue until: 

Q The driver releases the brake pedal. 

0 Brake pressure falls below threshold. 

Q Vehicle road speed below 3mph. 

DBC will also be switched off if a fault occurs in with any of the necessary input sensors. 
A fault in DBC will illuminate the "BRAKE" (ABL) lamp yellow to warn the driver, depending 
on the type of failure the DSC lamp may be illuminated as well. 


53 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Maximum Brake Control (MBC) 

The M BC function is designed to support driver initiated braking by building up pressure in 
the rear brake circuit when the front wheels are already in ABS regulation. 

The additional braking pressure is applied to bring the rear wheels up to the ABS 
regulation point shortening the stopping distance. The MBC function is triggered when the 
brakes are applied more slowly than the threshold needed for a DBC regulation. The trig¬ 
gering conditions are: 

Q Both front wheels in ABS regulation. 

Q Vehicle road speed above 3mph (5kmh). 

Q DBC and pressure sensor initialization test successful. 

Q Vehicle traveling forward. 

0 Rear wheels not in ABS regulation. 

If the threshold for M BC triggering is achieved, the M K60 control unit will activate a 
pressure build-up intervention by activating the return pump. The pressure at the rear 
wheels is increased up to the ABS regulation point. This ensures that the maximum brake 
force is applied to the vehicle. 

The M BC function will be switched off if: 

Q Front wheels drop out of ABS regulation. 

Q The driver releases the brake pedal. 

Q Brake pressure falls below threshold. 

0 Vehicle road speed below 3mph. 

M BC will also be switched off if a fault occurs in with any of the necessary input sensors. 
A fault in M BC will illuminate the "BRAKE” (ABL) lamp yellow to warn the driver, depending 
on the type of failure the DSC lamp may be illuminated as well. 


54 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Workshop Hints 


Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the M K60 DSC 


is carried out using the DISplus or M 0 D 1 C 



Service Functions: 

Provides access to specialized test modules 

used as post repair procedures. To enter: 

□ Function Selection 

□ Service Functions 

□ Chassis 

□ Dynamic Stability Control M K60 

The contents are: 

□ Connection Speed Sensor: A test to 
verify the proper wiring to the wheel 
speed sensors 

G Connection Brake Lines: A test to 
verify the proper brake pipe connections 
to the hydraulic unit. 

G Adjustment Functions: Test modules 
to initialize certain components after 
repair work is performed 
G Steering Angle Sensor 
G Lateral Acceleration Sensor 
G Pressure Sensors 



Test Modules: Faults with the M K60 system can be diagnosed using fault or symptom driven test 
modules. To begin diagnosis: 

• Perform the Quick Test. 

• Select Vehicle Symptom from the Symptom Selection page. 

• Select Test Module from Test Plan page. 

• Press the Test Schedule Button. 

Test Modules are configured in the E46 diagnosis concept. 


55 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 












Coding 

Coding must be performed after replacement 
of the M K60 control module or the steering 
angle sensor. ZCS coding is found in the 
Coding and Programming selection from the 
start screen or when pressing the Change 
button. Follow on-screen instructions for 
initialization of components after completing 
the coding process. 



BMW Coding/programming SELECTION 




1 CAR MEMORY 

2 KEYMEMORY 

3 ZCS CODING 

4 PROGRAMMING 

5 ALIGNMENT EWS-DME 

6 ALIGNMENT EWS-DDE 



Adjustment Functions 

Adjustment (initialization) is required when: 

Q Replacing the M K60 Control Unit. 

Q Replacing/Re-coding the Steering Angle Sensor. 

Q Replacing one or both Brake Pressure Sensors. 

Q Replacing Lateral Acceleration Sensor. 

Steering Angle Sensor 

The steering angle sensor requires an offset adjustment afterthe sensor has been replaced, 
coded or after repairs to the steering or suspension system. The offset adjustment informs 
the steering angle sensor processor of the straight ahead position of the front wheels. 


The adjustment is performed by completing the Test Module found in Service Functions. 
Once the adjustment is complete the sensor sends an identification number over the CAN 
bus to the DSC control unit. The ID provides confirmation that the steering angle sensor is 
coded and has successfully completed the adjustment procedure. 


Special Tools 

Special Tools available for the Teves DSC III M K60 consist of: 


47 Pin V-C able 34 5 250 



W34 5 240 


60 Pin Break-Out-Box 



56 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 















































