Bosch DSC III 5.7 57 

Purpose of the System.58 

I.P.O.59 

System Components.60 

Control unit/Hydraulic unit.61 

CAN Interface.62 

Tandem Master Brake Cylinder..63 

Expansion Tank and Brake Fluid Level Switch.63 

Pre-charge Pump.64 

Brake Pressure Sensor..64 

Brake Light Switch.65 

Wheel Speed Sensors.65 

Integrated Rotation and Transverse Acceleration Sensor. . . 67 

Steering Angle Sensor..68 

DSC Button.69 

Instrument Cluster Warning Indicators.69 

Principle of Operation.70 

ABS.70 

ASC.74 

DSC.77 

Workshop Hints.83 

Traction and Stability Control Systems Application Chart 85 


Review Questions 


86 

























BOSCH DSC III 5.7 
Model: E46/16 

Production Date: 330xi 6/00, 325xi 9/00 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

Q Identify functions of the DSC 5.7 that are specific to All-Wheel Drive. 
Q Identify the components used in the system. 

Q Understand the operating principles of ABS, ASC and DSC. 


57 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




Purpose of the System 

The Bosch DSC III 5.7 is used in the E46/16 in place of the DSC III M K 60 used on 2wd 
vehicles. The DSC system is the same as used in the E53. HDC is not a feature on 2001 
Xi models. 

Functions that are specific for the All-Wheel Drive system are: 

Q Modified ABS function. 

D ASC+T (All-Wheel Drive version). 

Q Four wheel ADB function. 

The Bosch DSC III 5.7 system is designed to maintain the vehicle's stability 
during: 

0 ABS braking regulation 
Q ASC+T traction control 
0 DSC for oversteer and understeer control 

Additional features are also programmed into the control module to enhance driver safety 
and comfort. These features are: 

D CBC Corner Brake Control 

Q EBV Electronic Brake Proportioning 

Q MSR Engine Drag Torque Reduction 

Q DBS Dynamic Brake System 


58 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



DME 

MAIN 

RELAY 






KL 15 

—► 







DSC SWITCH 

— 

•THE 


i . .i ■ i . .i ■ i . .i 1 i 

1 % . 1 ■ 1 s. ■ ■ 1 s. 





LF 





/^S 


RF 



LR 





RR 


m 



•—U 

i- 1 

WHEEL 

«=D 

1 rLJ1 - n i 

1 1 

SPEED 


=□ 


1 1 

SENSORS 



i n n n 




BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 


BRAKE PRESSURE 
SIGNAL 



REFERENCE VQLTAGE | 

SIGNAL VOLTAGE | 

SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 



l 


TO LSZ 



PARK BRAKE 
SWITCH 



- 1 -* 

SPLICE TO KOMBI 

- t -► 

BRAKE FLUID 
LEVEL 


DSC 

5.7 


42 Pin 


ABS LAMP 


KL 15 



POWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 


PUMP 


INLET (4X) 


OUTLET (4X) 


CHANGEOVER (2x) 


"LQQfiQflJ 


PRE-LOAD (2x) 


mms— 


DSCIII 5.7 

HYDRAULIC 

UNIT 


POWER SUPPLY 

.GROUND 

SENSOR TEST 


PRE-CHARGE 

PUMP 

CONTROL 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


STEERING ANGLE 
SENSOR 



QUUQD 

V - 1 — 

DDDDD, 

AGS 


DME 

S'- *G)} 


RIGHT REAR 



MK III 


LEFT REAR 


PROCESSED WHEEL SPEED 






BRAKE 



DSC LAMP 

GENERAL BRAKE 
WARNING LAMP 



VI DIAGNOSIS 



59 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



























































































































































System Components 

The Bosch DSC III 5.7 for the E46/16 consists of the following components: 
Q Integrated Control Unit/Hydraulic Unit with CAN Interface 
Q Tandem Brake M aster Cylinder 

Q Brake Fluid Expansion Tank with Integrated Level Sensor 
Q Pre-Charge Pump 

Q Brake Pressure Sensor (Located on Hydraulic Unit) 

Q Brake Light Switch 
Q 4 Wheel Speed Sensors (Active) 

0 Rotation Rate/Transverse Acceleration Integrated Sensor 
Q Steering Angle Sensor 
Q DSC Button 

Q Instrument Cluster Warning Indicators 
Q Handbrake Switch 
D Wiring Harness 


60 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Control Unit/Hydraulic Unit 


The Bosch DSC III 5.7 control unit/hydraulic 
unit is located inside the engine compartment 
on the right hand side. 

Both the control unit and the hydraulic unit 
are replaceable as separate components. 

All processing functions for ABS, ASC and 
DSC are performed in the combined con¬ 
trol/hydraulic unit. The control unit is also 
responsible for processing the wheel speed 
signals and providing them to other control 
units. 



Bosch DSC III 5.7 
Hydraulic Unit 


LOW BRAKE 
FLUID SIGNAL 

a 1 


—1- 


1 

(—) 

V 

r 


RESERVOIR 


DSC III 5.7 
HYDRAULIC UNIT 



CHARGE 

PRESSURE 

SIGNAL 


INTAKE 

VALVE 


CHANGEOVER 

VALVE 




INTAKE 

VALVE 


CHANGEOVER 
VALVE 




451 


PRESSURE 


LOW 
ACCUMULATOR 


LOW PRESSURE 
ACCUMULATOR 



jjv! 


INLET OUTLET OUTLET INLET 
VALVE VALVE VALVE VALVE 


LEFT 

REAR 

BRAKE 



RIGHT 

REAR 

BRAKE 




RIGHT 

FRONT 

BRAKE 


The hydraulic unit consist of an aluminum block containing 12 solenoid valves, 2 pressure 
accumulators and the return pump. 


□ 4 inlet solenoid valves (N/O) 


Q 2 changeover solenoid valves (N/O) 


U 4 outlet solenoid valves (N/C) 


Q 2 intake solenoid valves (N/C) 


The solenoid valving ensures that normal braking is possible in the event of a defective 
control unit. 


Note: N/0= Normally Open, N/C =Normally Closed 


61 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 






































































































CAN Interface 


The Bosch DSC III 5.7 is connected to the CAN bus forcommunication with the AGS, DM E 
control module, Steering Angle Sensor and the Instrument Cluster. 

Using the CAN bus, all of the connected modules can receive information or send 
commands. 

Communication with the DSC III 5.7 includes: 


Q DME - The DM E sends current engine torque. DSC commands the DM E to reduce 
(ASC/DSC) or raise (MSR) engine torque. 

□ AGS - The DSC commands the AGS to suppress shifts during regulation. 

0 LEW - The DSC receives steering angle information. 

Q KOMBI - The DSC commands the instrument cluster to activate or deactivate the 
warning lamps. 


J All four wheels speed signals are sent over the CAN bus for use by other modules. 



INSTRUMENT 
CLUSTER 


CAN BUS 






SPLICE CONNECTIONS 
FOR TWISTED PAIR CAN 






LEW 


62 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 


DSC III 5.7 


















Tandem Brake Master Cylinder 

The DSC III 5.7 system uses a tandem brake master cylinder fitted with central valves as 
other DSC master cylinders. The central valves allow fluid to be drawn through the master 
cylinder during ASC and DSC regulation. The hydraulic circuit is split front/rear. 

An orifice for pre-charge pressure is fitted into the brake front axle circuit and is connected 
to the pre-charge pump via a steel braided flexible line. 


Brake Fluid Expansion Tank with Integrated Level Switch 


The brake fluid expansion tank 
has internal baffles that reduce 
foaming during return pump 
operation. 

The expansion tank includes a 
pick-up tube for clutch master 
cylinder fluid supply and a 
second lower one for the charge 
pump supply. 

The brake fluid level switch is 
incorporated into the tank. The 
switch is a reed contact switch. If 
the brake fluid is at a sufficient 
level, the switch is closed and 
switched to ground. 



If the fluid level drops below a specified level , the reed contacts open and the DSC 
responds by switching off the ASC/DSC functions. 


Normal braking and ABS operation is unaffected. 


63 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 





Pre-Charge Pump 


During ASC or DSC regulation with brake 
intervention, the DSC control unit activates the 
pre-charge pump. The pump delivers brake 
fluid at a pressure of 10 to 15 Bar to the front 
axle circuit of the master cylinder. The pressur¬ 
ized fluid also acts on the rear brake circuit of 
the master cylinder as well. 

The Pre-charge pump ensures that an 
adequate amount of brake fluid is available at 
the hydraulic unit during brake regulation. 



The pre-charge pump is located below the master cylinder 
compartment. 


the left side of the engine 


Brake Pressure Sensor 

The brake pressure sensor is mounted on the 
DSC hydraulic unit in the front axle circuit. The 
sensor is provided with a 5V reference voltage 
by the DSC control unit. 

The sensor provides the control unit with an 
analog signal proportional to brake pressure. 
Voltage increases with increasing brake 
pressure. 



Plausibility with BLS 

The signal input from the brake light switch is compared with the pressure sensor value. 
The pressure sensor must not detect more that 5 bar when the BLS is not actuated. 

Both signals are used to form a redundant BLS input which is monitored during all phases 


64 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 






Brake Light Switch (BLS) 


The brake switch is an input to the DSC to inform it that the brakes are being applied. If 
the signal is received during an ASC control, brake regulation is interrupted. 



Wheel Speed Sensors (Active) 

The E46/16 uses Hall-effect wheel speed sensors similar to other models with Bosch DSC 
III 5.7. The advantages of the Hall sensors overthe inductive sensors of the Teves M K 20EI 
are: 

□ Speed signal is available from 0.3km/h. 

Q Signal strength is not dependent on road speed. 

Q The signal supplied is a digital square wave. 

The pulse wheel for the front axle circuit is integrated into the wheel bearing inner seal, 
identical to that of E38, E39, E53, E52 models. 

The pulse wheel for the rear axle circuit is identical to 2wd E46 models. The pulse wheel 
is a plastic coated metal wheel attached to the rear stub axle outboard C.V. Both pulse 
wheels produce 48 puIses: 1 wheel revolution. 

The colorofthe sensorconnector is blue, just as the Magnetoresistive sensors ofthe Teves 
M K 60 used on 2wd vehicles. The front sensors of the 2wd and 4wd versions of E46 are 
physically different and will not fit in the wheel hub. 

The rear sensors can be confused with the Teves M K 60 sensors and will fit in the rear axle 
of the 4wd car however they are not compatible with the Bosch system. 


65 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 





Principle of operation of the active wheel speed sensor 

The sensor housing contains the evaluation circuitry, a Hall-effect transmitter and a perma¬ 
nent magnet. The wheel speed sensor receives a stabilized 8V operating power supply 
from the control unit. 

Both front and rear sensors are two-wire. One wire is for the power supply, the other pro¬ 
vides a ground for the Hall element and also provides the input signal to the control mod¬ 
ule 

If a tooth of the pulse wheel is opposite the sensor, the signal to the DSC III is high: approx. 
1.9 to 3.9 V. When opposite of the gap, the signal to the DSC III is low at 0.35 to 1.3 V. 


66 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 


Integrated Rotation Rate and Transverse Acceleration Sensor 


The E46/16 uses the combined rotation rate 
/transverse acceleration sensor used in all 
Bosch DSC III 5.7 systems. The sensor is 
located under the drivers seat in front of the left 
seat rail and is attached to a plate with a rubber 
mounting to isolate it from vibrations. 

For rotational speed, the sensor produces a 
reference signal of 2.5 volts and a voltage input 
signal from 0.7 to 4.3 volts. This signal 
represents the rotational movement (yaw) of the 
vehicle from the neutral straight ahead position. 



The sensor also integrates the transverse acceleration signal (side-ways acceleration). The 
signal range is 0.5V increasing to 4.5V as side forces (g-force) increase. This signal is 
combined with the rotation signal to determine when to start DSC regulation. 



RATE SENSOR/ 
ACCELERATION SENSOR 


12 V 


r2.5v 

H 

yaw 





0.7v - 4.3v 


-50 ; ''+50 





Note: Adjustment of sensors is conducted separately in Service Functions of the Diagnosis 
Program even though both sensors are contained in one housing. 



E46 Traction and Stability Control Systei 

















Steering Angle Sensor (LEW) 

The Steering Angle Sensor is mounted towards the lower end of the steering column, 
above the flexible coupling. The LEW consists of a potentiometer and a built in 
microprocessor. The potentiometer has two pickups offset at 90° to one another. The raw 
potentiometer signal is processed and converted into a digital signal that is transmitted over 
the CAN bus to the DSC control unit. 



The sensor requires initialization in-order to create a zero point default. Once initialized, the 
LEW sends an ID number to the DSC control unit. The ID provides confirmation that the 
LEW is properly initialized. 


The total steering wheel angle is determined by combining the CAN telegram signal, the 
stored zero point default and the actual number of turns to the wheel. In order to prevent 
the LEW from loosing count, KL 30 is provided to the sensor and it continues to record 
even after the ignition has been switched off. 


The DSC calculates the drivers desired rate of turn from the steering angle signal. 


POTENTIOMETER 

HOUSING 



\ 


CAN BUS MICROPROCESSOR 


Pin 1. KL 30 
Pin 2. KL 87 
Pin 3. CAN high 
Pin 4. CAN low 
Pin 5. KL 31 
Pin 6. TXD 


Note: Refer to the Workshop Hints for instructions on coding and initializing the sensor. 


68 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



DSC Button 


The DSC button is located on the SZM however the SZM provides no processing, it is 
simply a housing for the button which is a hardwired input to the DSC control unit. 

The function of the button is different than for 2wd vehicles. Brake intervention 
remains active for the ADB function after pressing the button to turn off the DSC. 
Only ASC engine intervention and DSC yaw intervention are deactivated. 

The DSC warning lamp will be illuminated to remind the driver that these functions have 
been disabled. Pressing the button again returns the system to normal status. 

Instrument Cluster Warning Indicators 



Three warning indicator lamps are arranged in the instrument cluster: 

Q DSC lamp: Indicates fault in DSC or system disabled by the switch. 
Q ABS lamp: Indicates a fault in the ABS system. 


D ABL"BRAKE" lamp: This lamp is a general brake warning and illuminates two different 

colors. 


Q Red indicates low brake fluid or hand brake engaged. 

D Yellow indicates DSC/ABS fault. 

The DSC and yellow ABL lamps are controlled by the DSC control unit via the CAN bus. 
The ABS lamp is controlled directly by the DSC III 5.7 control unit via hard wire. 


69 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 












Principle of Operation 

The scope of control for the DSC III 5.7 is comprised of three systems: 

□ ABS 

□ ASC+T 

□ DSC 

Based on signals coming from the various sensors the DSC III will determine which system 
is best suited to maintain control of the vehicle. 


In addition to the three basic systems, there are several sub-functions which are activated 
during very specific circumstances. The sub-functions are: 


□ CBC 

□ EBV 

□ M SR 

□ ADB 

□ DBC 

□ MBC 



MBC- DSC -DBC 


System: Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS) 

The ABS system can prevent wheel lock when braking by comparing the four active wheel 
speed sensors to the average vehicle speed. If a wheel is locking during braking or has 
dropped below a speed threshold programmed in the control unit ABS, braking will begin. 
ABS braking is possible when vehicle speeds are above 12 km/h (7mph). 

The function of ABS for All-Wheel Drive use has an additional variation. During braking on 
loose surfaces the wedge effect is helpful. Gravel or dirt will build up in front of the tire when 
the wheel is locked, creating an increased braking effect. The system allows the locking of 
one or both front wheels up to approx. 20km/h (12mph). This "poor road surface logic” 
does not affect steerability. As soon as the control unit detects steering wheel change, the 
ABS system regulates normally again. 


70 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 








ABS regulation has three phases: 

Q Pressure Build 
Q Pressure Hold 
D Pressure Release 

Pressure Build already occurs during normal braking, so when ABS first intervenes it will 
start holding pressure by energizing the Inlet Valve. For example, if the right rear wheel is 
locking up, both Inlet Valves will be energized, regulating both wheels together. This logic 
is known as Select Low. Front wheels can be regulated individually as needed to prevent 
lockup. 

Energizing the Inlet Valve closes the brake fluid passage to the calipers and traps the fluid 
at the current pressure, thus not allowing the brake pressure to rise any further. 

If the wheel speed does not increase, the Pressure Release phase begins. 



Pressure Release occurs when the control unit energizes the Outlet Valve while continuing 
to hold the Inlet Valve closed. The trapped brake fluid is released out of the calipers reduc¬ 
ing braking pressure. 

At the same time the pump is switched on which draws in the released brake fluid and 
pumps it back into the pressure build-up circuit restoring the volume of brake fluid again in 
front of the Inlet valve. 

Depending on conditions the ABS system may cycle between these three phases from 3 
to 12 times a second to prevent wheel lock. 


71 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




ABS Sub-functions 


Corner Brake Control (CBC) 

CBC can occur if the vehicle is cornering and ABS regulation is not taking place. 

If the control unit detects transverse acceleration in excess of 0.6g and the brakes are 
applied, CBC prevents a build up in brake pressure to the inside rear wheel. This prevents 
the vehicle from entering into an unstable situation that can lead to Oversteer. 

The DSC III accomplishes this by closing the Inlet Valve, thus not allowing brake pressure 
to increase at the brake caliper. 


The difference in braking force between the two rear wheels creates a yaw force that 
opposes the oversteer and allows the vehicle to handle neutrally. 



Weight of the 
vehicle 





Brake pressure 
allowed to in crease 





72 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 






















































Electronic Brake Force Distribution (EBV) 


EBV will adjust brake pressure to the rear axle based on the rate of slow-down of the rear 
wheels, ensuring even brake force between the front and the rear of the vehicle. 

The control unit monitors the wheel speed when the brakes are applied and compares the 
deceleration of the front and rear axle to determine required regulation. 


If the vehicle is moderately to fully loaded the rear axle will take longer to slow down, rear 
wheel brakes can then be applied at a higher pressure . 


If a vehicle was lightly loaded, a similar brake pressure would be too great and result in an 
unstable situation. 


If EBV control intervention is required, the control unit cycles the inlet valve on the rear brake 
calipers to prevent further build-up. 

Benefits of EBV are: 


0 Enhanced braking due to even distribution of brake force. 
Q Rear wheel brake size can be increased. 

Q Front and rear brakes wear at a similar rate. 


73 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Automatic Stability Control (ASC+T) 

A5C prevents unintentional wheel slip of the drive wheels in every situation. 

The DSC III control unit determines if the vehicle is loosing traction due to excessive longi¬ 
tudinal wheel slip based on input from the wheel speed sensors. An ASC regulating 
sequence is initiated if the wheel slip exceeds the control units stored allowable values. 


The DSC III can control longitudinal wheel slip by two means: 


Q Automatic stability Control ASC. Engine Intervention 
Q Automatic Differential Brake ADB. Brake intervention 

ASC Engine Intervention 

Engine torque may be reduced by: 

Q Reducing the throttle opening angle 
Q Retarding the ignition 

Q Canceling individual cylinders by fuel injection cutout. 


The DSC III control unit determines the amount of torque reduction that is 
necessary and sends the request for regulation to the DM E via the CAN bus. 


ADB Brake Intervention 

The ADB is an automatic differential lock that improves traction. The slipping wheel is 
braked by pressure built up in the hydraulic unit. The drive torque can be transferred to the 
wheel with the greater traction, which can transmit drive power to the road. This function 
acts much like a limited slip differential. 

Brake intervention is applied to the individual wheel which is loosing traction by 
regulating the brake calipers in three phases: 


□ Pressure Build 

□ Pressure Hold 

Q Pressure Release 


74 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



When brake intervention is necessary, the axle not being regulated must be isolated from 
the Pressure Build sequence in the hydraulic unit. This is accomplished by closing both 
Inlet Solenoid Valves for that axle. 


Here is an example of an ADB brake intervention at the left rear wheel: 

Q The Changeover Valve forthe rear brake circuit, the right rear and both front Inlet Valves 
are energized and closed. 

0 The rear brake circuit Intake Valve is energized and opened. 

Q The Return/Pressure pump is activated and draws brake fluid through the open Intake 
Valve from the Master Cylinder (via the Central Valve) and delivers the pressurized fluid to 
the open Inlet Valve braking the left rear wheel. 

G Pressure Hold and Pressure Release are done by cycling the Inlet and Outlet Valves 
similar to the ABS sequence described previously. 


The drive torque can be distributed to the wheels with high friction coefficients (traction). 

Transversal differential-lock function. 



COEFFICIENT OF FRICTION 


75 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 




















































Longitudinal differential-lock function 


By performing brake intervention at 
the axle with a low friction coeffi¬ 
cient, drive torque can be transmit¬ 
ted to the front wheels. 



COEFFICIENT OF FRICTION 


Longitudinal and transversal 
differential-lock function 

By performing brake intervention 
at the diagonally opposing wheels 
with a low friction coefficient, drive 
torque can be transmitted to the 
two wheels with more traction. 



HIGH 



HIGH 

COEFFICIENT OF FRICTION 


76 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 








































































































ASC Sub-function 


Engine Drag Torque Reduction (MSR) 

If the vehicle is driven in low gear when coasting down hill, or if there is a sudden shift to a 
lower gear, the wheels may be slowed down by the engine braking effect to rapidly. This 
could result in an unstable situation. 

If the front wheels are turning faster than the rear wheels the DSC III control unit signals the 
DM E via the CAN bus to raise the engine torque. DM E cancels fuel cut-off and allows the 
engine speed to increase, this allows the drive wheels to accelerate to match the speed of 
the non-driven wheels. 


SR regulation is cancelled if the brake pedal or hand brake is applied. 


Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 


With the introduction of DSC systems, lateral dynamics were taken into account for the first 
time. The DSC III system will initiate a DSC regulation sequence if the control unit detects 
a difference between the drivers desired turning angle and the actual rotation angle of the 
vehicle. The control unit determines vehicle stability based on: 


Q Steering wheel angle 
D Wheel speed 

Q Transverse acceleration forces 
0 Rotation angle and speed (yaw) 

Once the control unit determines that the vehicle is in an unstable situation, it also 
identifies whether it is oversteering or understeering. This distinction is important because 
it determines which control strategy should be used to help stabalize the vehicle. 

DSC regulation consist of: 

Q Engine intervention 
0 Engine and brake intervention (anywheel) 

Q Brake intervention 


77 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Understeer 

Understeer occurs when the driver wishes to turn a corner, but despite the front wheels 
being turned in the direction of the curve, the vehicle continues its forward track. This 
occurs when the front wheels no longer have sufficient lateral locating force (traction). 

The DSC III can identify the situation and initiate a corrective action based on engine torque 
reduction followed by a controlled brake intervention sequence if needed. 

Engine torque reduction is carried out by the DM E from a request by the DSC via the CAN 
bus. The DM E sends the torque reduction confirmation back to the DSC. 

Brake intervention is carried out by the DSC III hydraulic unit if the driver is not actively 
braking. An example of a brake intervention at the inside rear wheel is as follows: 

Q All Inlet Valves are closed except for the right rear inlet. 

0 Intake Valve for rear circuit is opened. 

Q Both Changeover Valves are closed. 

Q Return pump operated. 


3. VEHICLE 
COMES OUT 
OF TURN 
SUCCES- 
FULLY 



UNDERSTEER CORRECTION 

WITH DSC III 1 . VEHICLE APPROACHES TURN: 

- Driver steers into turn 

- Brakes are applied 



WITHOUT 
DSC 


- regulated brake slows 
wheel down (and helps to 
reduce vehicle speed). Wheel on 
outside of curve speeds up due to power transfer thru differential. 
Vehicle pivots in favor of curve. Combined, this forces the vehicle into the turn. 


78 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 





J ust as an ASC regulation, DSC brake intervention carries out 


G Pressure Build 
G Pressure Hold 
G Pressure release 


LOW BRAKE 
FLUID SIGNAL 

I-1 


DSC III 5.7 
HYDRAULIC UNIT 



LEFT , u ^. 

REAR [ (L\<t 
BRAKE 


RIGHT 

FRONT 

BRAKE 


79 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 





















































































































































Oversteer 

Oversteer occurs when the driver wishes to turn a corner and the tail of the vehicle slides 
outward, leading the turn. This is caused by the rear tires loosing traction and not being 
able to hold against the centrifugal force acting upon the vehicle. 

The DSC III can identify the situation and initiate a corrective action based on engine torque 
reduction followed by a controlled brake intervention sequence if needed. 

Engine torque reduction is carried out by the DM E from a request by the DSC via the CAN 
bus. The DM E sends the torque reduction confirmation back to the DSC. 


3. VEHICLE COMES 
OUT OF TURN 
SUCCESFULLY 


WITH DSC 


OVERSTEER CORRECTION 


1. VEHICLE APPROACES TURN AT HIGH RATE OF SPEED: 
- Driver steers into turn and applies brakes to slow down. 



2D. The torque reduction and rear brake regulation 
should stabilize the vehicle at this point. If not 
the left front wheel has a high degree of lateral 
locating force and is momentarily regulated. 

This action deliberately causes the wheel to shed 
a calculated degree of it's locating force. This 
counteracts oversteer yaw at this wheel and also 
aids in slowing the vehicle down to correct it. 


2B. Driver tries to compensate by oversteering which 
diminishes lateral locating force even further. 
Simultaneously, rear of car starts to slide out. 

2C. DSC III determines an OVERSTEER condition. 
Engine torque is reduced via CAN Bus signalling. 
Outside rear wheel is momentarily regulated to 
counteract severe yaw angle (also helps to reduce 
drive torque further.) 


80 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



DSC Sub-functions 


Dynamic Brake System (DBS) 

DBS is designed to assist the driver in emergency braking situations by automatically 
increasing pressure to the vehicles brake system. This allows the vehicle to stop in the 
shortest distance possible. DBS was first available in 1999 Bosch DSC III 5.7 systems. 

The DBS system contains two functions: Dynamic Brake Control and Maximum Brake 
Control. DBS functions are programmed into the DSC III control unit and require no addi¬ 
tional hardware over conventional DSC. 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

The DBC function is designed to provide an increase in braking pressure up to the ABS 
threshold during rapid (emergency) braking situations. The DSC III control unit monitors the 
inputs from the brake light switch and the brake pressure sensor. The triggering criteria for 
activation of DBC is, how rapidly is the brake pressure increasing with an application of the 
brake pedal. The triggering conditions are: 

Q Brake light switch on. 

Q Brake pressure in the master cylinder above threshold. 

0 Brake pressure build-up speed above threshold. 

Q Vehicle road speed above 3mph (5km/h). 

□ Pressure sensor self test completed and sensor not faulted. 

Q Vehicle traveling forward. 

Q Not all of the wheels in ABS regulation range. 

If the threshold for DBC triggering is achieved, the DSC III control unit will activate a 
pressure build-up intervention by activating the pre-charge and return pump. The pressure 
at all wheels is increased up to the ABS regulation point. This ensures that the maximum 
brake force is applied to the vehicle. 

During DBC the rear axle is controlled with Select-Low logic and the front wheels are 
regulated individually. DBC will continue until: 

Q The driver releases the brake pedal. 

Q Brake pressure falls below threshold. 

Q Vehicle road speed below 3mph. 

DBC will also be switched off if a fault occurs in with any of the necessary input sensors. 
A fault in DBC will illuminate the "BRAKE" (ABL) lamp yellow to warn the driver, depending 
on the failure the DSC lamp may be illuminated as well. 


81 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Maximum Brake Control (MBC) 

The M BC function is designed to support driver initiated braking by building up pressure in 
the rear brake circuit when the front wheels are already in ABS regulation. 

The additional braking pressure is designed to bring the rear wheels up to the ABS 
regulation point shortening the stopping distance. The M BC function is triggered when the 
brakes are applied more slowly than the threshold needed for a DBC regulation. The trig¬ 
gering conditions are: 

Q Both front wheels in ABS regulation. 

Q Vehicle road speed above 3mph (5km/h). 

Q DBC and pressure sensor initialization test successful. 

Q Vehicle traveling forward. 

Q Rear wheels not in ABS regulation. 

If the threshold for M BC triggering is achieved, the DSC III control unit will activate a 
pressure build-up intervention by activating the return pump. The pressure at the rear 
wheels is increased up to the ABS regulation point. This ensures that the maximum brake 
force is applied to the vehicle. 

The M BC function will be switched off if: 

Q Front wheels drop out of ABS regulation. 

0 The driver releases the brake pedal. 

Q Brake pressure falls below threshold. 

Q Vehicle road speed below 3mph. 

M BC will also be switched off if a fault occurs in with any of the necessary input sensors. 
A fault in M BC will illuminate the "BRAKE” (ABL) lamp yellow to warn the driver, depending 
on the failure the DSC lamp may be illuminated as well. 


82 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 



Workshop Hints 


Diagnosis of the DSC III 5.7 is carried out using the DIS plus or MoDiC. The diagnosis 
program utilizes the symptom driven diagnostics taken from the E53. 

The all-wheel drive models of the E46 series do not have their own model identification and 
all-wheel drive specific equipment (i.e. DSC III 5.7) is not detected automatically. All-wheel 
drive identification is performed by manually selecting it from a pop-up dialog box when a 
document or test module is called up which has a variation for all-wheel drive. 


Diagnosis: Faults with the DSC III 5.7 system 
can be diagnosed using symptom driven test 
modules. To begin diagnosis: 

• Perform the Quick Test. 

• Page right. 

• Press the Function Selection Button. 

• Select Complete Vehicle. 

• Select Chassis. 

• Select "Yes" for All-Wheel. 

• Select Dynamic Stability Control. 

• Press the Test Schedule Button. 

Diagnosis can occur using Fault Symptoms or 
Expert Mode troubleshooting. 



Service Functions: Provides access to 

specialized functions used in post repair 

procedures. To enter: 

D Select Service Functions while in 
Diagnosis Program. 

The Contents are: 

D Test Code: Used to print control unit 
fault information needed forcomponent 
analysis. 

G Adjust Steering-Angle Sensor: 

Used to adjust off-set for steering angle 
sensor when repairs or adjustments to 
steering have been made. 

G Adjust Transversal Acceleration 
Sensor/Adjust Rotation Rate 
Sensor: Used to adjust offset for each 
sensor. 

G Bleeding,ABS/DSC Hydraulics 
/Precharging-pump circuit 

Used in purging air after repairs and for 
brake fluid flushes. 

G ABS/DSC Final Test: Used to verify 
the proper brake pipe connections to 
the hydraulic unit and wheel speed 
sensor connections. 


83 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 









Coding 

Coding must be performed after replacement 
of the DSC III control module or the steering 
angle sensor. ZCS coding is found in the 
Coding and Programming selection from the 
start screen or when pressing the Change 
button. Follow on-screen instructions for 
initialization of components after completing 
the coding process. 



BMW Coding/programming SELECTION 




1 CAR MEMORY 

2 KEYMEMORY 

3 ZCS CODING 

4 PROGRAMMING 

5 ALIGNMENT EWS-DME 

6 ALIGNMENT EWS-DDE 


Adjustment Functions 

Adjustment (initialization) of certain components is required when: 
Q Replacing the DSC III Control Unit. 

Q Replacing/Re-coding the Steering Angle Sensor. 

Q Replacing Rotation/Lateral Acceleration Sensor. 



Steering Angle Sensor 

The steering angle sensor requires an offset adjustment afterthe sensor has been replaced, 
coded or after repairs to the steering or suspension system. The offset adjustment informs 
the steering angle sensor processor of the straight ahead position of the front wheels. 

The adjustment is performed by completing the Test Module found in Service Functions. 
Once the adjustment is complete, the sensorsends an identification number over the CAN 
bus to the DSC control unit. The ID provides confirmation that the steering angle sensor is 
coded and has successfully completed the adjustment procedure. 

Special Tools 

Special Tools available forthe Bosch DSC III 5.7 consist of: 


42 Pin V-C able 34 5 240 



W34 5 240 


60 Pin Break-Out-Box 


















































Traction and Stability Control Systems Application Chart 



E36 

Z3/Coupe 

E46 

E39 

E38 

E53 

E52 

1998MY 

ASC+T 

ASC+T 

MK IV G 

N/A 

9/97 

ASC+T5 

S: 528i 

DSC III 5.3 

S: 540l 

N/A 528i 

9/97 

DSC III 5.3 

S: 740l/ll 

S: 75OIL 

N/A 

N/A 

1999MY 

ASC+T 

M K IV G 
328iC/318ti 

ASC M K20 El 
except M 
versions 

ASC +T M K IV 

M/coupe/roadst 

er 

ASC M K20 El 

9/98 

ASC+T5 

S: 528i 

DSC III 5.7 

S: 540l 

O: 528l 

3/98 

DSC III 5.7 

S: 740i/iL 

S: 75OiL 

N/A 

N/A 

2000MY 

N/A 

From 4/99 

MK20 DSC III 

6/99 

M K20 DSC III 

6/99 

DSC III 5.7 
Standard all 
models 

3/99 

DSC III 5.7 
Standard all 
models 

9/99 
DSC III 
5.7 

1/00 
DSC III 
5.7 

2001MY 

N/A 

From 9/00 

M K60 DSC III 

M-versions 

M K 20 DSC III 

From 9/00 

MK60 DSC III 

M3 

MK20 El 

E46/16 All 
wheel drive 

DSC III 5.7 

DSC III 5.7 

DSC III 5.7 

DSC III 
5.7 

DSC III 
5.7 


S = STANDARD EQUIPMENT 
0 = OPTIONAL EQUIPMENT 


85 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 












































Review Questions 

1. How does the M K20 El A5C system communicate with DM E to reduce engine power 
during an intervention?_ 


2. Which component in the DSC III M K20 system is used to build-up pressure in the front 
axle circuit during DSC intervention 7 _ 


3. What type of sensors are used in the M K20 ASC and DSC systems 7 


4. What is the difference in ABS control logic for the E46/16 in comparison to the 2wd 
models 7 


5. What service procedures are required when replacing a steering angle sensor 7 


5. What is the effect to the Bosch DSC III when the system is disabled by the DSC 
button 7 What about the button operation in the Teves M K60 7 


6. Describe the operation of the "Automatic Differential Lock" function. 


7. Why is a pre-charge pump not required in the M K60 system 7 


86 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 








Review Questions 


8. What is the purpose of the two sensors on the M K20 and M K60 DSC III master 
cylinder and what is their relationship with the BLS (Brake light switch) 7 



9. What is the difference of the signal produced by the magneto-resistive and a Hall-effect 
wheel sensor 7 



10. List the various sensors used to detect oversteer/understeer in the DSC III systems. 



87 

E46 Traction and Stability Control Systems 





