Subject 


Page 


Sound Systems.39 

Sport Wagon Sound System.40 

Convertible Sound System.43 

NG Radio.47 

Radio Removal Hints.53 

E46 Mark 2 Navigation System.54 

Navigation Service Mode Display.56 

Navigation System Calibration.60 

Navigation System Diagnosis.60 

MK 3 Navigation System.61 

Purpose of the System.62 

System Components.63 

Navigation Computer..63 

GPS Receiver..64 

Gyro Sensor..64 

GPS Antenna.65 

Display Units.65 

Information/Body Bus Interface.66 

Video/Audio Signals.67 

Speed Signals.68 

Reverse Gear Input.68 

Principle of Operation.69 

Workshop Hints.71 

Park Distance Control.76 


Review Questions 


81 




























SOUND SYSTEMS 


Two different sound systems were available for the E46 at the start of production. The stan¬ 
dard radio features the in-dash cassette player and the optional radio has a single in-dash 
CD player. Both radios are prewired for the optional CD changer that mounts in the trunk. 



The sound systems for the E46 continue with the integration feature introduced with the 
E38. The sound system is interconnected on the K-Bus for amplifier and MFL communi¬ 
cation. 

Theft proofing of the radio via a code is no longer required as the radio will not function with¬ 
out the K-Bus connection and a valid K-Bus signal from the instrument cluster. 




E46 Driver Information 























































E46 Sport Wagon Sound System 


Antenna Configuration 

The sound systems available for the E46 Sport 
Wagon are the same as the systems installed in 
the E46 Sedan and Coupe. The following anten¬ 
na layout is used for the Sport wagon body: 

• FM 1 - Rear window on the right side 

• FM 2 - Rear window in the center 

• FM 3 - Left rear side window 

• AM - Rear spoiler 

• FZV - Combined with FM 2 antenna 

The amplifier for FM 1 and FM 2 antennas is 
located beneath the rear spoiler. The signal from 
the antennas passes from the amplifier to the 
diversity module located in the left side storage 
compartment. 





66460002 




FM3 




E46 Driver Information 
































































































































SOUND SYSTEM 


Antenna Configuration 

The FM 3 antenna has a separate ampli¬ 
fier that is integrated into the diversity 
module which is mounted behind the 
storage cover on the left side. 



Diversity Switching 

The FM1/FM2 amplifier can only send one FM 
signal at a time. The diversity module controls 
the switching of the signals by applying a volt¬ 
age signal to the RF cable. When the voltage 
signal is low, the amplifier sends the FM 1 sig¬ 
nal. When the voltage level is high, it sends the 
FM 2 signal. The FM 1 and FM 2 inputs are 
continuously checked for the clearest signal. 
The diversity module then checks the signal 
from FM1/FM2 with the signal from FM 3. The 
clearest of these signals will always be sent to 
the radio for FM reception. 


FZV Antenna 


HF 



The RF receiver module (315MHz) is integrated into the antenna amplifier. The receiver has 
a separate KL 30 power supply for its operation. Signal from the FZV key are processed by 
the module and sent to the GM for locking/unlocking functions over a dedicated line. 



E46 Driver Information 





AUDIO SYSTEM SPEAKERS 


The rear speakers for the sound system are mounted on the left and right wheel housing 
behind the trim covers 



If the Navigation system is installed in the Sport Wagon, the GPS receiver module is 
installed under the load floor in front of the spare tire well. 




E46 Driver Information 












Convertible Sound System 


The audio systems available for the E46iC correspond to the systems available in the E46 
Coupe. Two radios, with either the in dash CD player or cassette player are available. The 
navigation system with the board monitor is optional equipment. All sound systems are pre¬ 
wired for the optional CD changer that mounts in the trunk. The sound systems continue 
to be interconnected on the K-Bus and all radio test functions carry over. 




ART-BAYERN1 



ART-BAYERN2 




E46 Driver Information 



































































HARMAN/KARDEN SOUND SYSTEM 



Speaker and component locations will 
vary depending on the type of sound 
system installed. Four rear speakers are 
mounted in the rear side trim panels, two 
on each side (one wide band 130 mm 
and one tweeter dome). 


The Harman/Karden system incorpo¬ 
rates an additional Subwoofer is 
installed in the trunk in the ski bag cover. 
The subwoofer is 200 mm diameter 
without a subwoofer amplifier. The 
amplification for the subwoofer comes 
from the main sound system amplifier. 







The subwoofer will continue to function 
in either position closed/open. 

As mentioned , with the Harman/Karden 
system, the stereophonic sound is mod¬ 
ified when the top is lowered. The sound system amplifier receives a signal from the rear 
window defroster relay when the top is lowered to switch the stereophonic sound off. 


The subwoofer is hinged so that it will 
swing to the side when the ski bag is 
used. A magnet on the subwoofer cover 
will hold the subwoofer in place against 
the rear bulkhead while the ski bag is 
being used. 



E46 Driver Information 




ANTENNAS/DIVERSITY 


Purpose of the System: 

The E46iC is equipped with a diversity antenna system to provide the sound system with 
the strongest possible radio station signal to receive the best performance possible from 
the sound system. 

Components of the System: 

The Diversity antenna system on the E46iC consists of: 

• Main antenna mast - mounted on the left rear fender. 

• Diversity antenna - mounted in the top storage cover. 

• Main antenna amplifier - mounted directly below the antenna mast 

• Auxiliary antenna amplifier - mounted on the top storage cover. 

• Diversity switching module - mounted below the antenna mast in the trunk. 

The telephone antenna is wound around the main antenna mast. 


r 

t 

/ 


t 

t 

f 

t 



45 


E46 Driver Information 




The second antenna for the FM diversity system is integrated in the convertible top stor¬ 
age cover. The FM2 antenna incorporates a separate amplifier that receives its power 

through the antenna lead. 



AUXILIARY ANTENNA 
AMPLIFIER 


System Operation 

Both antennas receive the signals for radio reception. Each signal is amplified by its own 
antenna amplifier and the signals are passed two the diversity switching module. The diver¬ 
sity module will lock onto the stronger of the two signals and send it to the radio receiver 
for sound system operation. 




E46 Driver Information 






Introduction 


Starting September 2000, a family of new generation radios will begin to be phased into 
production. The exception to this is the E52 which has been available with the MIR (multi¬ 
information radio) NG radio since series launch in mid 2000. 

The NG “New Generation” radios will have increased functions: 

• Radio can be operated without KL R. 

• Radios are world frequency. 

• Car memory programming. 

• Audio mixing on vehicles equipped with navigation. 

The radios external appearance has not changed. NG radios can be identified by their “53” 
designation. 


Overview of the Radios for Each Model 


RADIO 

TYPE 

MANUFACTURER 

MODEL 

INTRODUCTION 

DATE 

C53 

Business with 

cassette 

Philips 

E46 

3/01 

CD53 

Business with in¬ 
dash CD 

Alpine 

E46 

3/01 

C53 

Business with 

MID control and 

cassette 

Phillips 

E39/E53 

9/00 E39 

10/00 E53 

CD53 

Business with 

MID control and 

in-dash CD 

Alpine 

E39/E53 

9/00 E39 

10/00 E53 

C53 

Business MIR 

without cassette 

VDO 

E52 

Start of production 

BM53 

Business with 

BM control 

Becker 

E46/E39/E53 

03/01 E46 

02/01 E39 

04/01 E53 



E46 Driver Information 




KL 30- 

KL 31- 

KL R- 

FROM 

UNLOADER 

RELAY 



RF Cable 


"RADON" 

signal 


DIVERSITY 

ANTENNA/ 

FZV RECEIVER 


AM 

FM 1 

FM 2 

FM 3 



SPEAKER OUTPUT 
TO AMPLIFIER 


l-BUS 


i— 

z> 

CL 

I- 

z> 

o 

o 

O 

ZD 

< 

LU 


DSP AMP 


TELEPHONE £ 

WITH INTERFACE □ 


MUTE SIGNAL 




SPEAKERS 


MFL 



NAV 

AUDIO 


MK III NAV 



T 

A 

P 

E 


R 


G 


B 






BMBT 


KL 58g 



LCM III 



DIGITAL OUTPUT 


IKE 



K-BUS 


GENERAL MODULE 


NG Radio System Overview 

Example: E39 with MK III navigation and BMBT 



E46 Driver Information 


KEY USED 






























































































































Functional Overview 


NG Radios 

Radio Operation with KL R off 

Operation is possible with the key off on the C53 and CD 53 radios. If the radio is turned 
on with KL R off, it will play at the last stored volume and settings for 16 minutes until the 
General Module sends the sleep command. No changes may be made to the radio unless 
KL R is switched back on. The radio can be turned on and off as many times desired. 

Diversity Antenna 

Antenna diversity has been adapted to the new generation of radios. When the radio is in 
operation, the diversity control unit is activated by the “RAD ON” signal. 


World Frequency Radio 

Radios on vehicles sold in the U.S. are world radios. Specific country settings can be made 
using the service mode. The settings are stored in an EEPROM. 

Car Memory 

If programmed, when locking the vehicle using the remote transmitter the: 

• last station 

• Volume setting 

• Last audio mode (Tape, FM, CD etc.) 

are stored according to the key number used. Unlocking the vehicle with the same 
transmitter will restore the settings. There is a maximum setting for volume which may be 
lower than the setting when the radio was last operated. 

Clock 

Time can also be displayed when KL R is off by pressing the clock button on the 
Radio/MID. 

Backlighting 

The LCM/LSZ produces two signals for the control of radio backlighting. 

• Hardwired KL 58g 

• Lights on/off over the K/l Bus. 

The radio contains a photo-cell for adjustment of backlighting to ambient conditions. 



E46 Driver Information 



Reset and Voltage Monitoring 

A radio reset is triggered by under voltage or the internal processor monitor. The reset 
function restarts the radio, similar to turning it off and back on again. Operating voltage is 
measured at the KL 30 input. The radio is switched off if the system voltage exceeds 17V 
to protect the radio, it will switch on when the voltage falls below 16V. 

GAL (Speed Dependent Volume) 

The speed signal from the IKE/KOMBI is available to the radio over the K/l Bus. GAL is not 
a feature on vehicles equipped with DSP. 

Bus Communication 

The radio communicates with other modules via the K bus or I Bus dependent on the 
model. The information shared over the bus line includes: 

• IKE/KOMBI - Terminal status (KL 15, KL R) 

• LCM/LSZ - Lights on 

• IKE/KOMBI link to TXD Diagnosis 

• MID or BMBT - button or rotary knob status. 

• GM - Key used to lock or unlock vehicle 

• MFL - audio controls status 

NG radios do not use anti-theft codes. Operation of the radio is only possible if 
connected to a bus line and the detection of at least one other component. 



E46 Driver Information 




Workshop Hints 

Service Mode for NG Radios 

A service mode is available as on previous radios as a diagnosis tool and for changing radio 
settings. Entering the service mode varies by the device used to control the radio. 

To enter the service mode: 

C53/CD53 with and without MID: 

• Turn on the radio. 

• Within 8 seconds, press and hold the “m” button for 8 seconds. 

• Scroll through functions using the “+” and keys or the station < > search buttons. 

• Turn off the radio to end the service mode. 

C53 MIR: 

• Turn on the radio. 

• Within 8 seconds, press and hold the “SEL” button for at least 8 seconds. 

• Scroll through functions using the station < > search buttons. 

• Turn off the radio to end the service mode. 

BM53 with board monitor: 

• Turn on the radio. 

• Press and hold the “RDS” button for at least 8 seconds. 

• Scroll through the functions using the station < > search buttons. 

• Turn off the radio to end the service mode. 

BM53 with Widescreen board monitor: 

• Turn on the radio. 

• Within 8 seconds, press the “INFO” button. 

• From the info screen select RDS 

• Press and hold the BM control knob for at least 8 seconds. 

• Scroll through functions using the station < > search buttons. 

• Turn off the radio to end the service mode 



E46 Driver Information 



Service Mode Functions 


1. Serial Number: Display of the radio serial number. 

2. Software version: Display of the radio software version. Displayed as (calender week, 
year, version) 

3. GAL: Speed-sensitive volume control. Can be adjusted from level 1 -6 using the 6 pre¬ 
set audio buttons. Vehicles equipped with DSP do not use this feature. 

4. Field strength and Quality (F/Q): The station currently displayed can be assessed for 
field strength and quality. An “F” (i.e. FI 5) number is used to indicate the strength of the 
signal being received by the radio. This is a good test of the antenna system, station sig¬ 
nal, and the radio itself. A “Q” (i.e. Q-00) number is used to determine the quality of the 
radio station including both the audio and RDS signal if applicable. 

5. DSP: This function provides information about whether the vehicle is fitted with DSP. 
The value is displayed as a one (fitted) or zero (not fitted) and is communicated by the DSP 
amplifier via the l/K bus. 

6. TP Volume: Provides adjustment for traffic report minimum volume. Not used in the 
US. 

7. AF: Alternative Frequency tracking setting. Not used in the US. 

8. Area: Used to select the appropriate market setting (USA, Canada, Europe, Japan and 
Oceania). Adjust using the pre-set buttons. 

9.lndex: Display of the revision index. 



E46 Driver Information 



To Remove Radio: 


• Remove center dash trim above glove 
box by prying off with a trim stick. 


• Remove center dash trim over radio by 
prying off with a trim stick. 

• Remove two screws at the top of radio 
assembly. 

• Slide radio forward and out of the plas¬ 
tic carrier. 

• Remove main radio connector by lifting 
connector lock to the upper most posi¬ 
tion, away from top of radio, using a 
screwdriver as show on connector. 

• Remove the antenna connection. 

• Install in the reverse order. 


T 




E46 Driver information 





E46 MARK II NAVIGATION SYSTEM 


COMPONENT OVERVIEW 


The E46 Mark II Navigation System is similar to E38/E39 Mark II. All of the E38/E39 Mark 
II system components are carried over with the exception of the BMBT: 


E46 Specific Board Monitor (BMBT): 


• 5 inch display (320 X 234 pixel resolution) 

• Uses on screen soft keys for telephone send/end functions. E38/E39 uses buttons. 

• Does not include auxiliary ventilation function (not a function of E46 BC/IHKA). 

• Provides display and control functions for the Audio System (radio, cassette and CD). 

• Provides display and control functions for systems in the menu display. 


TAPE PROGRAM AND 
EJECT BUTTONS 


DOLBY NR 
SELECTION 


MODE = Selection between PHOTOCELL SENSOR 
Radio, Tape or CD Functions (ADJUST BACKLIGHTING) 


5 INCH 
DISPLAY 


RADIO 

BROADCAST 
DATA SYSTEM 

SEARCH 
BUTTONS ” 

PROGRAM 



RADIO CONTROL KNOB 
(INCREMENTAL SENSOR) 

RADIO STATUS INDICATOR 
(SIGNAL FROM RADIO VIA k BUS) 


BMBT CONTROL KNOB 
(INCREMENTAL SENSOR) 


1 - 6 BUTTONS - Correspond to stored 
radio stations and audio CD selections 


MENU BUTTON LOCATION - Recalls Main 
Menu in Board Monitor Display 


1999 MODEL YEAR RADIO CHANGES 


• The 1999 model year radios do not have the weatherband feature. 

• RDS = Radio Broadcast Data System. In the future, this button will put the vehicle 
occupants in touch with a wide variety of broadcast data including weather information. 

• PTY = Any unit having RDS will also have a separate button for the PTY feature. It 
stands for Program Type and will indicate the type of music being played. 


54 

E46 Driver Informaytion 


























































CC-GBlUJi 



GPS 
ANTENNA 


BACK UP LIGHTS ON 
12 VOLT INPUT SIGNAL 


ASC/DSC 
(processed 
left rear wheel 
speed signal) 


The BMBT communicates with interfacing control modules via the K Bus. As with all pre¬ 
vious Original Equipment Navigation Systems, the radio electronics are installed in the 
trunk. The BMBT sends and receives operation instructions to the radio via bus communi¬ 
cation. The Mark II Nav computer continues to provide the RGB output signals to the 
BMBT for system function display. 

55 


E46 Driver Information 





















































































































































E46 BOARD MONITOR & NAVIGATION SERVICE MODE DISPLAYS 


The Mark II system provides a service mode display function. These screens provide sys¬ 
tem hardware/software identification numbers and status of Board Monitor and Navigation 
specific functions for use as a diagnostic tool. The screens are accessed as follows: 

• From the Main Menu select “Set”. 

• Once in the Set function, press and hold the menu button for 8 seconds. 

• The next screen to appear is the SERVICE MODE menu. 


The first accessible function is “On-board monitor”. Pressing this selection calls up the ver¬ 
sion screen which provides identification of hardware/ software specific index versions for the 
installed system. 


Pressing the func¬ 
tions key at the 
bottom continues 
into additional 
screens including 
the Key Functions 
and Brightness 
controls. 



|On-board monitor 

NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 

Video module 


GPS 


Sensor check 


Telematics 


02/05/99 Wednesday 

7:05 PM 


Key Functions tests the key input on the BMBT. 
Input status (1 -25) will display in the window. 


SW level: 

HW level 
DIAG index: 
BUS index: 
Encoding Index 
Supplier: 


Version 


|| Key Functions 

Brightness 



If no keys are 
pressed the sta¬ 
tus will be dis¬ 
played as “FF”. 

Rotating the left 
or right rotary 
knob displays hex 
code input status. 


Rotated slowly, the display changes with each incre¬ 
ment. The display eventually stops at “1F” in the left 
rotated direction and “EO” to the right. 

The key function test terminates automatically if no keys 
or knobs are moved after a short duration (“00”). 



Functions 

J 

02/05/99 Wednesday 

7:05 PM 


SW level: 

HW level 
DIAG index: 
BUS index: 
Encoding Index 
Supplier: 


02/05/99 Wednesday 



jFunctions 


7:05 PM 


Key 

0BM increm. sensor 
Radio increment sensor 



iraiT 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


jFunctions 


7:05 PM 





Slider 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


Functions 


7:05 PM 


56 

E46 Driver Informaytion 







































The next accessi¬ 
ble function is the 
NAVI/GRAPHIC 
ELEMENT. 

This screen iden¬ 
tifies hardware/ 
software specific 
index versions for 
the installed sys¬ 
tem. 


On-board monitor 

NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 

Video module 

GPS 

Sensor check 
Telematics 


02/05/99 Wednesday 7:05 PM 




SW level: 

HW level 
DIAG index: 
BUS index: 
Encoding Index 
Supplier: 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 


The Video module selection is not functional since the US version Mark II nav sys¬ 
tem does not utilize the video module. 


The next avail¬ 
able selection 
from the service 
mode menu is 
“GPS”. 

This display pro¬ 
vides the GPS 
receiver module 
hardware version 
number and 
date of programmed software. 


On-board monitor 

NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 

Video module 


GPS 

Sensor check 
Telematics 


A 


Receiver Version 
Receiver SW Date: 



7.51 

10 

1.1.99 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 02/05/99 Wednesday 


Functions 


7:05 PM 


Receiver Version 
Receiver SW Date: 


GPS Versii n 
GPS status 
GPS tracking info 




Pressing the 
functions button 
in the lower right 
corner of this 
screen provides 
a sub-selection 
menu. 

GPS Status pro¬ 
vides information 
on the exact 

coordinates of the vehicle based on the calculations 
of the GPS receiver module. 

GPS Tracking provides information about the indi¬ 
vidual satellites currently sending signals to the GPS 



02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


Functions 


7:05 PM 






Ch PRN 

S/N 

Ch PRN 

S/N 

1 P 


5 HH 






02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 


57 


E46 Driver Information 

























































The next selection available from the SERVICE MODE menu is “Sensor check” which provides: 


• Wheel 
speed input 
(only one 
wheel speed 
signal, dis¬ 
played). 

• Number of 
satellites 
detected. 


On-board monitor 

NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 

Video module 

GPS 


Sensor check 


Telematics 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 



02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 


• What mode the GPS receiver module is currently in; (ie: Search) 


• The Gyro status provides the millivoltage value the Nav computer is utilizing for the cur¬ 
rent vehicle position. This area also includes an icon representing what direction the 
vehicle is heading in. 

• The direction status indicates what gear is selected (forward or reverse). 

The Sensor check display is intended to be used while test driving the vehicle. Use the leg¬ 
end below to compare with the display status. 


STATUS DISPLAY 

WHAT SHOULD BE DISPLAYED 

WHAT TO DO IF NOT OK 

Wheel Sensors: 

As the vehicle is driven, the 
number should increase with an 
increase in vehicle speed. 

Check fault codes in 
ASC/DSC system. If 
necessary carry out wheel 
speed sensor test. 

GPS Satellites: 

With unobstructed upward view 
of sky the display should be > 3 

Check for interference of 
signals to GPS antenna, 
Check integrity of circuit 
from GPS receiver module 
and Nav computer 

GPS Status: 

“See Legend on next page” 


Gyro: 

Direction icon moves with vehicle 
turning movement. 

Milli voltage display value should 
be approx 2500 mV (+/- 400mV) 
when the vehicle is stationary or 
driven straight ahead. 

When the vehicle is turning, the 
value must rise or fall which 
indicates the gyro sensor is 
detecting yaw. 

Replace Navigation 
computer. 

Direction: 

Reverse is displayed when range 
selector is in reverse. Forward in 
anv other ranae. 

Check back up light 
signal input. 


58 

E46 Driver Informaytion 






























GPS Status Text Display 

Description 

1. “GPS fault” 

Problem with GPS system. Swap GPS receiver module 
and or antenna from know good vehicle after checking 

GPS status display information described on page 153 . 

2. “Reception Interference” 

Problem with GPS system. Same as above. 

3. “No Almanac” 

No Data yet stored from satellites. The GPS almanac is a 
memory account of received satellite signals. If the vehicle 
battery has been disconnected or after replacing a GPS 
receiver module it has an empty memory and requires 
satellite signals to become functional. After the receiver 
module receives battery voltage and ground, it must be left 
outside with an unobstructed sky above with the ignition 
switched to KL R for approximatly 15 minutes. 

4. “Satellite search” 

GPS is currently searching for satellite signals. 

5. “Satellite contact” 

At least one satellite is found 

6. “Position known” 

Vehicle’s Latitude and Longitude known. Navigation is 
possible. 


The last selection available is the Telematics entry display. This replaces the “VIN” selection 
from the E38/E39 Mark II systems. The only requirement of this entry screen is that the VIN 
is entered at the VPC when prepped prior to distribution. 


This is neces¬ 
sary for the 
Emergency pro¬ 
gram if needed 
when calling the 
Cross Country 
Group Roadside 
Assistance 
Program. 



Additionally, if the vehicle is equipped with a Phase V phone the system will automatically uti¬ 
lize the entered VIN as per E38/E39 Mark II systems. 


The VIN is entered at the VPC for all vehicles (with or without a Phase V phone). If the VIN 
has been incorrectly entered it can be changed by turning and pressing the rotary knob 
when the correct letter or digit of the last seven character of the VIN is displayed. 

The balance of the data displayed below the VIN entry is not currently used in the US mar¬ 
ket. 



E46 Driver Information 






































MARK II NAVIGATION SYSTEM CALIBRATION 


The calibration procedure of the Mark I system is not required with the Mark II system. This 
system self calibrates automatically as the vehicle is driven after following the steps below. 

• System must be fully functional with no faults present in fault memory. 

• Correct Map data base CD installed for your. 

• Vehicle outside with an unobstructed overhead view. Switch ignition on and allow sys¬ 
tem adequate time to receive a minimum of three GPS signals. This is confirmed by the 
green GPS indicator in the map display. 

• Set the map display to the 400’ scale and drive the vehicle on digitized roads. Make fre¬ 
quent turns at intersections where possible. 

While driving, the system utilizes the map CD, the received GPS coordinates, the Gyro sen¬ 
sor to determine turn activity and the wheel speed sensor input. It compares all of these 
variables and automatically pinpoints the vehicle position. 

MARK II NAVIGATION SYSTEM DIAGNOSIS 

The Nav computer does not communicate with the DIS/MoDiC. 

Diagnosis of the Nav Computer is performed with conventional proce¬ 
dures and by utilizing the Status displays on the previous pages. 

Refer to the DIS for RGB output signal oscilloscope displays for visual 
confirmation of signal integrity. 

The Board monitor (BMBT) does however communicate with the 
DIS/MoDiC. Follow the fault symptom path of the DIS Diagnosis 
Program for detailed diagnostic procedures. 



60 

E46 Driver Informaytion 




Mk-3 NAVIGATION SYSTEM 

Models: E38, E39, E46, E52, E53 

Production Date: E46 from 6/00, all others from 9/00 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the changes to Mk-3 from the previous Mk-2 navigation system. 

• Identify the components used in the system. 

• Review the operating fundamentals of GPS navigation. 

• Describe how to properly code and program the Mk-3 computer. 


61 

Mk-3 Navigation 




Purpose of the System 


The Mk-3 navigation system is a factory installed navigation system that replaces the 
previous Mk-2 version. The purpose of the system remains the same as previous 
navigation systems: To provide the driver with navigation instructions to an entered 
destination based on the vehicles current position and the roads available selected from 
a digitized road map. 


The principle differences of the Mk-3 system over the previous Mk-2 are: 

• GPS receiver is integrated into the MK-3 computer. 

• Optimized memory and faster processor resulting in faster start-up and operation. 

• New split screen and magnifying feature when equipped with wide screen monitor, 
(software feature) 

• Same navigation computer used for color board monitor or monochrome MIR display 
units. 


62 

Mk-3 Navigation 



System Components 


Mk-3 Navigation Computer 

The Mk-3 navigation computer is located in 
the left side of the vehicles trunk or cargo area. 
(In the case of the Z8 it is installed in the stor¬ 
age box behind the passenger seat.) 

The navigation computer housing contains: 

• Map CD drive 

• Hardware for navigation function 

• GPS receiver 

• Gyro sensor 

• Output for audio interface 

• Output for visual display 

• Cooling fan for unit 



There are two different hardware versions available dependent on the angle of installation 
in the vehicle (horizontal or vertical). The Mk-3 is compatible with both board monitor or 
MIR display units. (See workshop hints for configuration instructions) 


Identification of the Mk-3 computer over the previous versions is easy due to a change in 
the face plate design and the elimination of the “CD-IN” LED. 


Mk-3 Navigation 
Computer 




Mk-1 and Mk-2 
Navigation Computer 


63 

Mk-3 navigation 










































Mk-3 computer 



GPS antenna 
connection 


18 pin ELO 
connectors: 

XI313: Violet 
XI312: Blue 


Integrated GPS receiver and Gyro (rotation) sensor 


GPS (Global Positioning System) Receiver 

The GPS receiver module of the previous Mk-2 system is integrated into the housing of the 
Mk-3 computer, further reducing the complexity and the number of components used in 
the system. The receiver is not serviceable. 

The GPS receiver is responsible for receiving the satellite signals and providing the vehicle’s 
position information to the navigation computer. 

Information provided by the GPS receiver to the navigation computer can be displayed in 
the service mode (see workshop hints) but is not typically used in diagnosis. 


Gyro (Rotation) Sensor 

The navigation computer contains the electronic (piezo) Gyro sensor that detects rotation 
(yaw) of the vehicle as a confirmation that the vehicle is turning. The signal provided by the 
gyro is a mili-voltage that changes as the vehicle rotates. The navigation computer uses 
the input to track the vehicle along the digitized map and display the exact vehicle position. 

The signal is available in the sensor test page of the service mode for diagnosis. The 
sensor is not a separately serviceable item and does not require calibration. 


64 

Mk-3 Navigation 













GPS Antenna 

The GPS antenna is directly connected to the navigation computer via a coaxial cable. 
Locations of the antenna in the vehicles are as follows: 


E38: 

E39 sedan: 

E39 Sport Wagon: 
E46 sedan/coupe: 
E46 Sport Wagon: 
E46 Convertible: 
E52: 

E53: 


Under the rear parcel shelf. 

Under the rear parcel shelf. 

Behind the dashboard on the left side. 
Under the rear parcel shelf. 

Above the rear glass under the spoiler. 
Behind the instrument cluster. 

Left front corner behind the dashboard. 
Above the rear glass under the spoiler. 


Display Units 

Based on the particular model, the factory installed Mk-3 system is displayed using a color 
board monitor or on a smaller monochromatic screen (MIR). 


E52 MIR (Multi Information Radio) 




E46/E53 Color Board Monitor 


E38/E39 Wide Screen Color Board Monitor 
(phased in for E53 1/01, E46 9/01) 



65 

Mk-3 navigation 















































Navigation System Interface 


K-I1U 



GPS 

ANTENNA 


Example of E38/E39 with Mk-3 navigation 


66 

Mk-3 Navigation 

































































































































Information/body bus Interface 

The navigation computer is integrated into the vehicle bus system as it’s main communica¬ 
tion link with the vehicle. 


Communication occurs with the following modules: 

• BMBT - Control inputs 

• Radio - Display data 

• GM - Door open 

• IKE/Kombi - On-board computer data 

• Telephone PSE Box - Monitor display data, mayday function 

• DISplus - Coding data 


PSE = Portable Support Electronics 


Video/Audio Signals 


Board Monitor (Top Navigation) 

The RGB video signal for all display functions of the board monitor are produced by the 
navigation computer graphics stage via three output signals. The Red-Green-Blue signals 
are direct inputs to the board monitor. The audio signals for navigation instructions to the 
radio are sent via two separate lines. 


GPS ANTENNA 



* 



VIDEO 

GYRO ' 

GPS 






MIR (Radio Navigation) 

Since a color display is not used for the MIR, the navigation information for the display is 
sent via a NAV bus. The NAV bus is a single dedicated line between the Mk-3 computer 
and the MIR. Audio signals for navigation instructions are sent to the radio via two 
separate lines. 



AUDIO SIGNALS 


NAV BUS 



E52 MIR 


Mk3 NAV. 


67 

Mk-3 navigation 


















































































Speed Signals 

A speed signal is provided to the navigation computer for detection of distance traveled and 
vehicle speed to calculate the vehicles position on the digital map. The input is a processed 
signal provided by the vehicles DSC control unit. 

• E46: The speed signal used is from the left rear wheel. 

• E38/E39/E52/E53: The speed signal used is from the left front wheel. 

Reverse Gear Input 

The reverse gear input is used by the navigation computer to distinguish between the 
vehicle backing up or turning around. 

• E38/E39/E52/E53: The reverse input is a high signal produced by the LCM III. 



• E46: The reverse input is a high signal supplied by a splice from the back-up lights. 


Automatic Transmission KL15 KL30 



Reversing 
Light Relay 
K6325 


68 

Mk-3 Navigation 












Principle of Operation 


The Global Positioning System is a satellite based system developed by the US Department 
of Defense that provides both military and civilian users accurate information about 
location. 


The GPS system uses 24 satellites in six 
orbits 12,550 miles above the Earth mov¬ 
ing at 1.7mi per second. Usually 7 to 10 
satellites are in view over any one point on 
the earth. 

The GPS satellites are basically extremely 
accurate clocks that broadcast a coded 
signal representing time. The GPS receiver 
determines it’s distance from the satellite 
by measuring the time it takes between 
satellite transmission of the signal and 
reception to the receiver. The receiver 
does this with at least 2 other satellites and 
uses the information to determine the vehi¬ 
cles latitude, longitude, and altitude. The 
accuracy of the system for civilian use is 
within 100m (300ft). 



The vehicle must have an unobstructed view of the sky to receive the maximum amount of 
satellite signals. Trees, large buildings and excessive cloud cover can block the reception 
of the satellites’ transmissions. 




SATELLITE A 


SATELLITE B 


SATELLITE C 



IF SATELITE "A" IS THERE, 

"B" IS THERE AND "C IS THERE, 
MY CALCULATIONS TELL ME THAT 
I AM AT THESE COORDINATES: 



GPS 
RECEIVER 
DEVICE 


GPS SIGNALS 
NCLUDE: 

• EXACT TIME OF SIGNAL 

• CURRENT 
SATELLITE 
COORDINATES 


69 

Mk-3 Navigation 
























The GPS antenna passes the signal to the GPS receiver incorporated in the navigation 
computer. A CD with map data is loaded in the CD drive of the navigation computer. The 
navigation computer combines the vehicle position calculated by the GPS with this map 
data. 

The current position of the vehicle can be shown on the on-board monitor by selecting 
“Emergency” from the main menu. 

The driver can enter a destination. The navigation computer calculates a route from the 
current location to this destination based on selectable criteria (main use of highways, 
shortest distance, etc.). The calculated route is shown in the route display. 

The navigation computer generates the RGB color video signal for all on-board monitor 
displays. These three signals are sent over separate shielded wires to the on-board mon¬ 
itor. 

In the case of the E52 MIR (also referred as radio navigation) which does not have a color 
display, the visual display data is sent via one wire called the navigation bus. On both sys¬ 
tems, color and monochrome display, the audio output from the navigation computer for 
voice directions is sent over two separate wires. 

The driver has the choice of displays that utilize a color map with an icon of the vehicle 
being traced on the map or the use of arrow indicators and distance data shown on the 
on-board monitor display. Vehicles equipped with the wide screen board monitor have a 
split screen option that includes both display methods. The MIR only makes use of the 
arrows and distance display. With the assistance of voice prompts, the navigation 
computer indicates how and where to get into the correct lane or turn off. 

The navigation computer calculates the distance traveled from the wheel speed signal 
delivered by the DSC control unit. 

The gyro incorporated into the navigation computer housing informs the navigation com¬ 
puter when the vehicle is turning. An alternative route is re-calculated automatically if the 
driver does not follow the original route instructions. 

Once the driver has reached their destination, the navigation computer is ready for 
another destination input. 

Refer to the on-board monitor owners manual for instructions on using the navigation system 
software. 


70 

Mk-3 Navigation 



Workshop Hints 


Replacing the Mk-3 navigation computer 

When replacing the Mk-3 navigation computer be aware that there are two hardware 
variants depending on the installation position (vertical or horizontal). 

The ignition should be in position 0 during removal and replacement of the computer. After 
installing, close all doors, hood and trunk. A bus line reset will be carried out within two 
minutes. Resetting allows the gyro to perform a calibration run. Do not move the car 
during this reset period. 

The coding sequence for the Mk-3 navigation computer has been changed from the 
previous Mk-2. There is now an additional step (configuration) that must be done before 
the software can be loaded. 


After resetting, a configuration signal is needed to allow the computer to load the correct 
software for use with a board monitor or MIR. This is performed using the DIS coding pro¬ 
gram (CD 22.0 onward) and the Navigation System operating software (CD VI 5.0 onward). 

Note: Vehicles using the wide screen BM require CD VI6.1 onward. 


1. From the DIS/MoDiC Coding /Programming 
select “1 ZCS Coding” 

2. Select the appropriate series 
(E46, E39, E38, E52, E53) 

3. Select “4 Conversion” 

4. Select “3 IKE?Kombi” 

5. Select “2 language” 

6. At the prompt “is the CD ROM present?” 
select yes , but do not install the operating 
software CD ROM yet. 

7. First select the main language and then an 
additional language, (i.e. English-spanish) 

8. Select the gender of the navigation audio 
voice. 

9. Select “automatic coding-yes” 




71 

Mk-3 navigation 



































































10. After coding is done the DIS/MoDiC 
instructs you to follow the instructions on 
the monitor for the installation of the 
Navigation System CD ROM. 

11. Place the navigation system software in the 
navigation computer CD drive. 


12. Once loading has been completed, remove the 
CD and then confirm completion by pressing 
the rotary push-button on the monitor. 



Important: Do not switch the ignition off during the 
software loading procedure. Do not use any soft¬ 
ware for the Mk-3 earlier than CD VI5.0. 


13. Turn off the key for 10 seconds, then turn it 
back on and conduct a functional check. 

14. After this step has been finished, encode the 
navigation computer using the “Recoding” path 
in ZCS Coding. The coding process involves 
coding vehicle specific data: VIN, Model, 
Telematics data etc. 



The software status can be confirmed from the 
“Set” screen for Mk-3 systems. 

• 3 = Third generation system Mk-3. 

• 1 = Device variant (1 =Color screen, 2= MIR 

monochrome screen). 

• 20 = Software version of the graphic 

component (Version 2.0). 



After the navigation computer has been successfully programmed and coded the vehicle 
should be left in an area with a clear view of the sky with the key in KL R for at least 15 min¬ 
utes to complete the calibration process. 


72 

Mk-3 Navigation 


































Service Mode 


Just as Mk-2, Mk-3 provides an on-screen service mode for diagnosis. The service mode 
provides five different test screens: 

• On-board monitor 

• Navigation/Graphic element 

• GPS 

• Sensor Check 

• Telematics 


To enter the Navigation Service Mode: 

• Turn the ignition key to position 1 (KL R). 

• From the Menu screen select “SET”. 

• Once in the Set screen, press and hold the “MENU” button for 8 seconds. 

• The Service Mode menu will appear on the display. 

• Select from the Service Mode menu for navigation specific tests. 




|FM A ** 1 


|WI8!SI3^^ 


v 







Press and hold for 8 seconds after entering Service Mode main menu display 

the “Set” mode 


Diagnosis 


Diagnosis is carried out using Test Modules in the Diagnosis Program as well as on-screen 
in the Service mode.The Sensor Check display is intended to be used while test driving the 
vehicle. The following pages contain charts with explanations of the Service Mode display. 





73 

Mk-3 navigation 

















































































































































STATUS DISPLAY 

WHAT SHOULD BE DISPLAYED 

WHAT TO DO IF NOT OK 

Wheel Sensors: 

As the vehicle is driven, the 
number should increase with an 
increase in vehicle speed. 

Check fault codes in DSC 
system. If necessary carry 
out wheel speed sensor 
test. 

GPS Satellites: 

With unobstructed upward view 
of sky the display should be > 3 

Check for interference of 
signals to GPS antenna, 
Check integrity of circuit 
from GPS antenna to nav 
computer. 

GPS Status: 

“See Legend below” 


Gyro: 

Direction icon moves with vehicle 
turning movement. 

Milli voltage display value should 
be approx 2500 mV (+/- 400mV) 
when the vehicle is stationary or 
driven straight ahead. 

When the vehicle is turning, the 
signal voltage should increase on 
right hand turns and decrease on 
left hand turns. 

Replace Navigation 
computer. 

Direction: 

Reverse is displayed when range 
selector is in reverse. Forward in 
any other range. 

Check back up light 
signal input. 


GPS Status Text Display 

Description 

1. “GPS fault” 

Problem with GPS system. Swap nav computer and or 
antenna from know good vehicle after checking GPS 
status display information 

2. “Reception Interference” 

Problem with GPS system. Same as above. 

3. “No Almanac” 

No Data yet stored from satellites. The GPS almanac is a 
memory account of received satellite signals. If the vehicle 
battery has been disconnected or after replacing a nav 
computer it has an empty memory and requires satellite 
signals to become functional. After the nav computer 
receives battery voltage and ground, it must be left outside 
with an unobstructed sky above with the ignition switched 
to KL R for approximatly 15 minutes. 

4. “Satellite search” 

GPS is currently searching for satellite signals. 

5. “Satellite contact” 

At least one satellite is found 

6. “Position known” 

Vehicle’s Latitude and Longitude known. Navigation is 
possible. 


74 

Mk-3 Navigation 




Menu 

Display 

Explanation 

G PS/Status 

G-speed 

Relative speed over the ground 


Heading 

Direction of travel 


Rec status 

Search/track/position receiver status 


Pos-src 

Number of satellites available for analysis 


PDOP 

Accuracy of the calculated location 


HDOP 

<8=sufficient determinations of location 


VDOP 

<4=very good determinations of location 

GPS/Tracking 

CH 

Channel 

info 

PRN 

Satellite detection 


S/N 

Better reception as the value increases 


Visible Sat 

Number of visible satellites, receivable 

Signals, depending on time of 
day/configuration 


Almanac 

Satellite database, loaded automatically after 
15 minutes 

Telematics 

VIN 

VIN (Automatically assigned during coding) 


Color 

Color code or text 


GSM 

Telephone network/contract number 


BMW info 

Customer specific info 


Emergency call out 

On/off status 


Initialization 

Telematics services on/off status 


Logging off 

Logging off telematics services 


PDOP Position Dilution of Precision 

HDOP Horizontal Dilution of Precision 

VDOP Vertical Dilution of Precision 

S/N Signal/noise relationship 

Gyro Piezo gyro sensor (in navigation computer) 

Dir Direction of travel 


75 

Mk-3 navigation 













PARK DISTANCE CONTROL 


INTRODUCTION 


Park Distance Control is a safety/convenience system that is an option on the E46. The sys¬ 
tem is carried over from the E39 and features the ultra-sonic sensors on the rear bumper 
only. 


The sensors detect the close proximity to other objects when maneuvering the vehicle in 
tight spaces (such as parallel parking or parking in narrow garages spaces). 


The driver is warned, through an audible tone 
(beeping), when the vehicle comes close to anoth¬ 
er object. As the distance to the object decreas¬ 
es, the beeping frequency increases until a steady 
tone is produced. As the distance to the object 
increases, the steady tone will return to a beep 
and stop when the vehicle moves away from the 
object. 

The PDC is automatically switched ON when the 
ignition is switched on, however it does not 
become active until the vehicle is shifted into 
reverse. 



4 ULTRA-SONIC SENSORS 
IN REAR BUMPER TRIM 




E46 Driver Information 




















































































































PDC COMPONENTS 


The PDC consists of the following components: 


PDC CONTROL MODULE - Mounted in the trunk on the right side above the battery. 

The PDC control module activates the ultrasonic sensors mounted in the rear bumper 
cover. After activation, the module monitors the signals coming back through the sensors. 
Through this signal, the control module is able to determine the distance to any object close 
to the bumpers of the vehicle. As the vehicle comes close to an object, the control module 
will activate the acoustic warning through the right rear audio system speaker. 


FOUR ULTRASONIC SENSORS - Mounted in the rear bumper. The sensors are small trans¬ 
mitter/receiver modules that are specifically designed for automotive use. The sensors are 
limited to the following angles of monitoring: 

• 90° on the horizontal plane 

• 60° on the vertical plane 



E46 Driver information 



TRANSMITTING MODE 


The control module sends a 40 Khz signal to the sensor and each sensor is then activated 
in a specific sequence (firing order). The ceramic element of the sensor vibrates and pro¬ 
duces an ultrasonic sound wave that is sent out from the bumper. 


DIAPHRAGM 




PROCESSOR 


PIEZO-CERAMIC 

ELEMENT 


RECEIVING MODE 

If the sound wave contacts an object, the wave is bounced back to the sensor. The return¬ 
ing wave causes the ceramic element to vibrate creating an electrical signal as feedback to 
the control module. 

The control module determines the distance to the object by the time difference between 
the sent signal and the received ultrasonic wave signals. 



E46 Driver Information 





























































SYSTEM OPERATION 


When KL 15 is switched ON, the PDC system is switched "ON", in the standby mode. The 
system performs a self-check of the ultrasonic sensors and control electronics. 

When the vehicle is shifted into reverse, the system is activated and the sensors are acti¬ 
vated in the predetermined order. 

If an object is detected within the operating range of one the sensors, a signal is sent to the 
PDC control module and the acoustic warning is generated. At the same time the control 
module checks the signals from the adjacent sensors to help determine the actual distance 
to the object. 

As the distance to the object decreases, to approximately 1 1/2 feet, the output acoustic fre¬ 
quency increases until a steady tone is generated. 

As the distance to the object increases the frequency will decrease until the object is out of 
the monitoring range of the sensor. 




E46 Driver information 































E46 Driver Information 



















































































































































Review Questions 


1. What is the principle Bus line used on the E46? List the modules that are located 
on this bus. 



2. Describe how the Instrument Cluster receives the speed signal from the ASC/DSC 
control unit. 


3. What information does the cluster use to determine the Service Interval? Where can 
the Coded Consumption Limit be found?_ 



4. Discuss how the Instrument Cluster and the LSZ share data storage. What would 
happen if a cluster from another vehicle is installed? Why does this happen? 



5. If the LSZ module were to fail, what lights would remain functional? 

6. Explain the possible testing/troubleshooting procedures for an E46 equipped with 

Xenon lights._ 


7. Which module is responsible for the automatic head light adjustments? What type of 
sensors are used in this system and where are they located? 


8. Where is the Diversity Antenna Amplifier located on an E46 Touring? 

9. Describe how to enter the Radio service mode on a vehicle with a Board Monitor. 


81 


E46 Driver information 











10. List the most significant changes made to the Mk-3 navigation computer over the 
previous Mk-2. 


12. How can the signal provided by the gyro sensor to the navigation computer be 
checked? 


13. What step is necessary before loading the navigation computer operating software CD 
on a newly replaced Mk-3 navigation computer? Where can the software status be 
confirmed after it has been loaded? 


14. How is PDC switched on? What diagnosis is possible on the system? 



E46 Driver information 





