Table of Contents 


CVM AND CONVERTIBLE TOP 

Subject Page 

Introduction . 3 

System Components 

Top and Frame. 4 

CVM . 5 

Hydraulic Unit. 6 

Hydraulic Cylinders. 7 

Hydraulic Solenoids. 9 

Storage Cover Motor. 10 

Windshield Frame Lock Assembly. 11 

Top Switch. 12 

Hall Sensors. 13 

Angle Hall Sensors. 19 

Compartment Floor Micro Switch. 20 

IPO 22 

System Operation. 23 

Emergency Operation. 28 

Comfort Operation. 29 

Diagnosis . 30 

Hard Top . 33 

Workshop Hints. 35 

CVM Worksheets. 39 

Review Questions. 41 


Initial Print Date: 02/2000 Revision Date: 1/22/01 
























CVM AND CONVERTIBLE TOP 
Model: E46 Convertible 
Production Date: 01/00 

Objectives: 

After completing this module, you should be able to: 

• Describe the lowering and raising sequence of the Convertible soft top in details. 

• Name all the sensors and their functions that are used to open or close the soft top. 

• Identify and describe electro-hydraulic components used in the Convertible top. 

• Describe the information that is exchanged between the CVM II and the GM V. 

• Describe the operation of the Storage Compartment Cover Lock Motor. 

• Identify all the hall sensors, angle hall sensors and micro-switches used in the soft top. 

• Explain all of the pre-conditions for Convertible soft top operation. 

• Describe the wiring of the Hard Top Locks on the left and right. 

• Diagnosis a Faulted CVM System. 

• Describe the locking / unlocking procedure for the manual soft top. 


2 

CVM and Convertible Top 





INTRODUCTION 


Purpose of the System: 

The E46 Convertible-top is a fully automatic electro-hydraulic system that completely opens 
and closes the soft-top using hydraulic cylinders and electric motors. It consist of the con¬ 
vertible module (CVM II) which controls and monitors the complete operation of the system. 
The CVM II interacts with the General Module which controls the operation the convertible- 
top storage compartment cover and window operation when lowering or raising the soft- 
top. 

Convertible top features: 

• Electro-hydraulic operation. 

• Comfort opening using FZV key or door lock cylinder. 

• Comfort closing using only the door lock cylinder (No anti-trap protection). 

• Glass window 

• Top operation monitored using hall sensors and hall angle sensors. 


Convertible Top 
Module 



Hydraulic Unit 
w/ Solenoids 



■Top and Frame 


ART-E46ICBODY 


3 

CVM and Convertible Top 





Components of the System: 

Top and Frame 

The top frame is similar to the E36iC with modifications for the adoption of the hydraulic 
cylinders used for raising/lowering the top. The unlock motor and gear drive assemblies are 
attached to the front of the top frame as on the E36iC. 

The convertible top consists of three layers: 

• The outer layer is fabric with a non-replaceable glass rear window. 

• A middle fleece liner is installed between the fabric and inner liner for sound and 
weather insulating purposes. 

• The inner liner is similar to the E36iC and is attached to the top frame so that it 
stretches tight when the top is closed. 



4 

CVM and Convertible Top 


% 











Convertible-Top Module (CVM II) 


The convertible-top module (CVM II) is installed in the left rear quarter panel behind the inte¬ 
rior trim panel. It contains the processing, controlling and monitoring electronics for the 
complete top operation. The CVM II communicates with the GM over the K-Bus for opera¬ 
tion of the top storage cover and windows. 

Operation of the hydraulic cylinders is controlled via final stages and solenoids mounted on 
the hydraulic unit and top frame. 

The CVM is fully diagnoseable and contains a fault memory for storage of monitored faults. 
Diagnosis is carried out over the K-Bus with the DIS or MoDiC. 




5 

CVM and Convertible Top 







Hydraulic Unit 

The hydraulic unit is mounted in the trunk on the left side behind the trim cover. It is mount¬ 
ed on a rubber bushing and covered by sound insulation for noise reduction during pump 
operation. The hydraulic unit consists of: 

• Motor, 

• Pump, 

• Storage Cover Solenoid Valve/ Drain Solenoid Valve 

• Reservoir. 

• Temperature Sensor - hydraulic fluid 


The hydraulic unit provides an operating pressure of up to 200 bar for the tops operation. 
A temperature sensor on the hydraulic unit will signal the top module to cease operation if 
the fluid temperature exceeds 95° C. Any function started will be completed before the sys¬ 
tem is switched off. If the temperature exceeds 105°C, the system is immediately switched 
off and the emergency closing procedure will be required for closing the top. 


When the temperature drops below 95°, the operation of the top can be resumed. 



Filling or checking the hydraulic fluid is only carried out when the top is lowered in the stor¬ 
age compartment. The recommended fluid is “ARAL VITAMOL” PN 54 34 8 410 000 (Refer 
to the repair manual for filling procedures) 


6 

CVM and Convertible Top 







Hydraulic Cylinders 


Top Storage Compartment Cover 

Two hydraulic cylinders are positioned on the left and right sides in the trunk for opening 
and closing the top storage compartment cover. A Hall sensor is positioned on the left 
cylinder to detect the full opened position of the cover. 

Cylinder Removed Cylinder Installed 



Tensioning Bow (Clamping Bracket) 

Two hydraulic cylinders are positioned on the left and right sides of the tensioning bow, on 
the top frame linkage for raising and lowering the bow. An angle hall sensor is installed on 
the left tensioning bow linkage to detect the positioning of the bow. The hydraulic lines for 
the right side tensioning bow cylinder are routed under the top fabric along the tensioning 
bow. 



7 


CVM and Convertible Top 














Main Pillar 


Two hydraulic cylinders are positioned on the left and right sides of the top frame linkage 
for raising and lowering the soft top frame. An angle hall sensor is used to detect the posi¬ 
tioning of the main top linkage. The hydraulic lines for the right side main pillar cylinder are 
routed under the top fabric along the tension bow. 



A gas filled piston strut is mounted on the right side frame linkage, next to the hydraulic 
cylinder, to dampen the raising and lowering of the top frame. 



8 

CVM and Convertible Top 
















Hydraulic Solenoids 


Two hydraulic solenoids are mounted on the hydraulic 
unit: 

• One solenoid valve (VI : 101043 convertible top 
cover) controls the opening and closing of the 
storage compartment cover 

• The second solenoid valve (V5: 101061, pressure 
deactivation) is the drain solenoid for relieving 
pressure in the hydraulic cylinders when the key is 
switched off. The drain solenoid also holds system 
pressure when the top switch is released during 
operation. 



Three hydraulic solenoids are mounted on the valve 
block on the left side of the top frame. 

• Solenoid valve (V2:101027, extend main pillar) 

controls the operation of the main pillar hydraulic 
cylinder. 

• Solenoid valve (V3:101028, extend tensioning bow) 

controls the tension bow hydraulic cylinders for 
lowering. 

• Solenoid valve (V4:101029, retract tensioning bow) 

controls the tension bow hydraulic cylinders for 
raising. 



9 

CVM and Convertible Top 










Top Storage Compartment Cover Lock Motor 

The top storage compartment cover lock motor is located on the drive shaft tunnel under 
the rear seat. It consists of the motor with a hall sensor (S700), gear linkage assembly and 
two bowden cables. Two locks are located on the right and left sides for locking the stor¬ 
age compartment cover. The lock motor hall sensor (S700) detects the locked/unlocked 
position of the storage cover. 

During the soft top operation, when the tensioning bow is raised or when the top is in the 
storage compartment, the CVM signals the GM over the K-Bus to unlock the storage com¬ 
partment cover. The GM activates the lock motor and the motor turns 180 degrees to 
unlock the cover latches. The motor always turns in the same direction to unlock/lock the 
cover. 

Once the motor has turned 180 degrees, the hall sensor (S700) input signal will cause the 
GM to switch off the motor. At the same time, the GM will signal the CVM to continue top 
operation. 






Converti 
Top Cover 
Drive Switch 
S700 


10 

CVM and Convertible Top 
















Windshield Frame Lock Assembly 

The windshield frame lock assembly consists of the top lock motor positioned in the cen¬ 
ter of the top frame and two lock drive mechanisms positioned on the left and right sides 
of the top frame. The operation of the lock motor and drive mechanisms is similar to the 
E36 fully automatic top system. The drive mechanisms have been redesigned for smoother 
operation, however they still are responsible for unlocking the top from the windshield and 
raising the front of the top past the tension point. Flexible drive shafts are used activate 
the lock assemblies and drive the tension linkage rods to raise the top past the tension 
position. 



Two hall sensor switches located on the left lock drive assembly are used to detect the 
position of the top against the windshield frame. 


11 

CVM and Convertible Top 
































Convertible Top Switch 

The convertible-top switchs are located in the Center Console Switching Center (SZM). 
There are two push button switches, one for each direction of travel, that provide a ground 
input signal to the CVM for top operation. 

Two LEDs are positioned in the center of the switch. The top LED will flash whenever the 
top is in operation and not locked to the windshield frame or stored completely in the 
compartment. The lower LED will illuminate, if the top switch is pressed and the storage 
compartment floor is in the “UP” position. 


CLOSE ROOF OPEN ROOF 



54E46covswitch0100 


TOP SWITCH 



12 

CVM and Convertible Top 


























































Sensors and Switches 


The hall sensors, hall angle sensors and micro switches provide feedback status to the 
CVM and GM for soft top positioning and top sequencing during operation. 

Hall sensors: 

• Locking Hook Closed (cowl locked) hall sensor: SI 42 

• Locking Hook Open (cowl released) hall sensor: SI 45 

• Two Top Storage Compartment Cover Locks hall sensors: SI 61 and SI 58 

• Top Storage Compartment Cover hall sensor: SI 88 

• Top Storage Compartment Cover Motor hall sensor: S700 

• Hard Top Lock hall sensor: SI 64 


Angle Hall sensors: 

• Tension Bow (clamping bracket) hall angle sensor: 101026 

• Main Pillar hall angle sensor: 101025 


Micro Switch 

• Top Storage Compartment Floor micro switch: S239 


Component 

Locations 


Hall Sensors 
SI 42 
SI 45 


Hall Angle Sensor: 
101026 



Hall Angle Sensor: 
101025 


Hydraulic Unit 


Hydraulic Solenoid 
Valve Block 


Hall Sensor: SI 61 



E46ICTOPUP. 


13 

CVM and Convertible Top 



































































































































































Windshield Frame Lock Drive Hall Sensors 


Two hall sensor switches are installed on the left side top lock drive assembly. Both sen¬ 
sors receive power and ground from the CVM. One switch is the soft top locked to the 
windshield frame (SI42 cowl locked/locking hook closed). The second switch is the 
locking hooks of the convertible top open (SI 45 cowl released/Locking hook open). As 
the slide assembly on the worm gear moves, it covers and uncovers the hall sensors to 
cause the high/low switching to take place. 

The “Locking hook closed” (SI 42) input provides a high signal when the top frame is locked 
and a low signal when it is unlocked from the windshield (LED in the soft top switch will start 
to flash). 


The “Locking hook open” (SI45) input provides a high signal when the top frame is raised 
past the tension point. 



SI 42, Cowl Locked 
(Locking Hook Closed) 

HALLSENSOR _ 


HALLSENSOR 


SI 45, Cowl Released 
(Locking Hook Released) 


12V 


T CVM 

12V 


ART-E46ICCVMHALL2X 


Note: The Diagnosis Requests list in Control Unit Functions refers to a “CONVERTIBLE TOP LOCKED” switch 
input (SI 41). That display is a redundant signal from switch SI42. Production E46 Convertibles are not fit¬ 
ted with SI 41. 


14 

CVM and Convertible Top 






























Storage Compartment Cover Lock Hall Sensors 

There are two storage compartment cover lock hall sensor switches (S161: right, S158: 
left) one mounted on each storage cover lock. The sensors receive power and ground from 
the CVM. Each sensor input provides a high signal when the cover is unlocked and the 
cover is raised by the hydraulic cylinders far enough to clear the latches. 

When the storage cover is completely lowered by the hydraulic cylinders, the hall sensors 
send a signal to the CVM. The CVM then signals the GM to re-lock the storage cover. 




ART-TPCVRLCK.CVM 


15 

CVM and Convertible Top 







































Storage Compartment Cover Hall Sensor (SI 88 Convertible Top Open) 


The storage cover hall sensor switch (SI 88) is mounted on the left side storage cover 
hydraulic cylinder in the trunk. It receives power and ground from the CVM. The switch 
provides a high signal input when the top storage cover is fully open. 


The CVM uses the signal from the switch for top storage cover positioning and switching 
operation during soft top lowering and raising. The CVM uses this input signal as a switch¬ 
ing point for activating the tensioning bow solenoid (V3) during top lowering or activation of 
the main pillar solenoid during top raising. 


Trunk-Left Side 



SI 88: 
Open 


(Convertible Top 
sensor) 



16 

CVM and Convertible Top 















Storage Compartment Cover Motor Hall Sensor (S700 Switch, Convertible Top 
Cover drive) 

The storage cover motor hall sensor (S700) is mounted on the gear drive assembly of the 
motor. It receives voltage from the General Module. 

The GM uses this input to switch the unlock motor “OFF”. Additionally, the GM will electri¬ 
cally lockout the trunk any time the storage cover is unlocked. The CVM receives a signal 
over the K-bus of the unlock/lock status of the storage compartment cover. 



S700 

Convertible Top 
Cover Drive Ser 


Sensor 


ART-COVERLOCK 




E46ICGM12V. 

17 

CVM and Convertible Top 















Hard Top Lock Hall Sensor (SI 64 Switch, Hard Top Recognition) 


The hard top recognition hall sensor is positioned on the left hard top lock. It receives 
power and ground from the CVM and provides a high signal input when the hard top is 
installed on the vehicle. The connector on the top of the lock is used as the power and 
ground supply for the rear window defroster of the hard top. 


The CVM uses the input signal of the hall sensor to lock out soft top operation while the 
hard top is installed. 




18 

CVM and Convertible Top 


































Tensioning Bow (Clamping Bracket) - Hall Angle Sensor 
(101026 Position Switch, Tensioning Bow) 

The angle sensor for the Tensioning Bow is mounted on the left side of the top linkage by 
the Tensioning Bow hydraulic cylinder. The angle sensor receives power (5 volts) and 
ground from the CVM. It provides a linear voltage signal input from approximately 0.5 to 
3.5 volts as the Tensioning Bow moves from a vertical to horizontal position. 

The CVM uses the signal from the Tensioning Bow angle sensor to determine positioning 
of the tensioning bow and switching operation during soft top lowering and raising. 



CVM 



ART-E46ICTENBOW. 


19 

CVM and Convertible Top 

































Hall Angle Sensor - Main Pillar 
(101025 Position Switch, Main Pillar) 

The angle sensor for the Main Pillar is mounted on the left side top linkage by the left main 
pillar hydraulic cylinder. The angle sensor receives power (5 volts) and ground from the 
CVM. It provides a linear voltage signal input from approximately 0.5 to 3.5 volts as the top 
frame is lowered into and raised out of the storage compartment. 

The CVM uses the input signal from the Main Pillar angle sensor for top frame positioning 



CVM 



E46ICMAINPILL 


20 

CVM and Convertible Top 




























Storage Compartment Floor Micro-Switch 
(S239 Switch, Convertible Top Compartment Floor) 

The Storage Compartment Floor micro-switch is installed on the hinge of the compartment 
floor on the right side. It provides a high/low input signal to the CVM based on the posi¬ 
tion of the compartment floor. 

When the floor is in the raised position, the soft top operation is locked out. 



S239 Convertible Top Compartment 
floor Switch 



21 

CVM and Convertible Top 
















CVM IPO 


TRUNK LOCK ACTUATOF 



ART-E46ICEHYDD.EPS 


22 

CVM and Convertible Top 










































































































































































































System Operation 


Pre-Conditions for Soft Top Operation 

• Ignition key in position “R” - (Except for comfort operation) 

• Road speed <2.5 MPH 

• Hydraulic unit temperature < 95 degrees 

• Trunk lid closed 

• Top storage compartment floor in lower position with top raised 

• No hard top installed with top lowered 


In addition, there must be no faults present at 

any of the switch inputs or outputs. 

Top Lowering Sequence 

Top Switch Pressed “Open” 

• CVM activates the top lock motor and the 
top is unlocked and raised past the tension 
point (LED switch flashing). 

• At the same time, the CVM signals the GM 
to lower the windows (if closed) for 
approximately 1.5 seconds. 

• Top lock motor is switched OFF - signal from cowl released hall sensor (SI 45). 



23 

CVM and Convertible Top 






CVM activates hydraulic pump and switches the tension bow solenoid (V4) to raise the 
tension bow. 


Tension bow is raised to its vertical position - signal from tensioning bow angle hall 
sensor. 

CVM signals GM to unlock storage compartment cover. 

Storage compartment cover unlocked - signal from motor hall sensor (S700) - storage 
cover lock motor is switched off. 


CVM receives status of cover lock from GM over K-bus - switches storage cover 
solenoid (VI). 


Storage cover raised to its open position - 
signal from cover hall sensor (SI 88). 

CVM switches to the lowering solenoid for the 
tension bow (V3) - top starts lowering into 
storage compartment. 

CVM switches the main pillar solenoid (v2) - 
top is fully lowered into storage 
compartment. 




24 

CVM and Convertible Top 





• CVM switches solenoid for top cover (VI) - cover is lowered - signal from storage cover 
lock hall sensors (SI 61 and SI 58). 

• CVM signals GM to lock storage compartment cover. 

• GM activates cover lock motor - cover is pulled closed by lock assemblies. 

• GM switches off lock motor - signal from motor hall sensor (S700). 

• CVM switches off hydraulics and LED. 



Top Raising Sequence 

Top Switch Pressed - “Closed” 

• Windows are lowered (if closed) - CVM to GM 

• Storage compartment cover is unlocked - CVM to GM 

• Storage cover is opened 

• Top is raised out of storage compartment 

• Tension bow is raised 

• Storage cover is closed 

• Storage cover is locked - CVM to GM 

• Tension bow is lowered 

• Top is lowered and locked to cowl - Top locked, is confirmed by SI 42 and Tensioning 
bow angle sensor (Tensioning bow horizontal) 

• Windows are closed - if switch is held 


25 

CVM and Convertible Top 




Hydraulic System Operation 


The pump in the hydraulic unit is energized by the CVM and supplies hydraulic fluid under 
pressure to the solenoids mounted on the pump and solenoid valve block. The solenoids 
are energized by the CVM and the pressure is supplied to the hydraulic cylinders, based on 
the input signals from the angle hall sensors and hall switches. The hydraulic operation of 
the solenoids and cylinders is as follows: 


• The storage cover cylinders receive hydraulic pressure on the lowering side of the piston 
ram when the hydraulic pump is energized. When the solenoid is energized, hydraulic pres¬ 
sure is applied to the raising side of the ram. The cover is opened because the greater rais¬ 
ing pressure overcomes the pressure on the small side of the ram. When the cover is low¬ 
ered, the solenoid switches to drain and the lowering pressure closes the cover. 

• The main pillar cylinders receive hydraulic pressure on both sides of the ram when the 
pump is switched on. The main pillar solenoid is switched to drain to lower the top frame 
into the storage compartment. The solenoid is switched to pressure to raise the top frame 
out of the storage compartment. The greater pressure on the raise side of the piston will 
overcome the lowering pressure to raise the frame. 

• The raise tension bow solenoid is energized to apply pressure to the tension bow cylin¬ 
ders and raise the tension bow. The tension bow lower solenoid is switched to drain. 

• The lower tension bow solenoid is energized to supply pressure to the tension bow cylin¬ 
ders to lower the tension bow. The tension bow raise solenoid is switched to drain. 

• The drain solenoid is energized whenever the pump is switched on. It holds pressure in 
the system when any of the cylinder solenoids are not energized. It also holds pressure in 
the system if the top switch is released during operation. 

The drain solenoid is switched when the hydraulic pump is switched off as the top reach¬ 
es one of its end positions. This allows the pressure in the cylinders to be relieved and 
drained back to the reservoir. 

The drain solenoid switches off as the key is switched off. This will cause the pressure to 
drain slowly in steps. 


26 

CVM and Convertible Top 



Hydraulic System Operation 


MAIN PILLAR 


TENSION BOW 


STORAGE COVER 



SOLENOID BLOCK 


I 
I 
I 

Hf 

I 
I 
I 

HYDRAULIC UNIT 



1 


ART-E46ICCVM.EPS 



HYDRAULIC UNIT 
WITH SOLENOIDS 
AND RESERVOIR 


ART-E46IC E HYD.EPS 


27 

CVM and Convertible Top 























































































































































Emergency Operation 


Emergency locking/unlocking of the top stor¬ 
age cover is carried out at the motor assembly. 
The motor assembly is accessed by removing 
the center arm rest and lifting the seat uphol¬ 
stery below the ski bag. 


Pressing the button on the motor assembly will 
release the motor from the gear linkage. 


The linkage assembly can then be turned, 
through the access hole in the motor assembly 
cover, using the hand crank stored on the 
assembly cover. This will unlock/lock the stor¬ 
age cover locks for manually raising the top. 


28 

CVM and Convertible Top 












Comfort Closing/Opening 

Comfort closing/opening of the top is possible at the driver’s door lock cylinder. If the key 
is held in the locking position the top will be raised and the windows closed in the raising 
sequence. 

If the Variable Storage Compartment floor is in the raised position only the windows will be 
lowered during the convenience opening sequence. 

Residual Closing/Opening 

It is possible to finish raising or lowering the top at speeds > 2 MPH if: 

• The signal from the main pillar angle sensor indicates that the top is fully extended out 
of the storage compartment. 

• The signal from the main pillar angle sensor indicates that the top is fully lowered in the 
storage compartment. 

Safety in the Intermediate Positions 

All movements of the top stop once the switch is released. The hydraulics hold the position 
of the top and remain under pressure for approximately 20 minutes if the ignition key is left 
in the ON position. 

If the ignition is switched OFF, in the intermediate position, the pressure will be released in 
steps after approximately 10 seconds until all pressure is drained from the cylinders. This 
allows the top to be manually moved for servicing procedures. 


NOTE: Depending on the position, the top may collapse into the storage compartment if 
the ignition is switched off with the top in the partially raised position. 


29 

CVM and Convertible Top 



Fault Memory 


The fault memory of the CVM is stored in an NVRAM which can store up to a maximum of 
16 faults. The fault are stored in the order of occurrence and a distinction is made between 

permanent and sporadic faults. 

Operation in the Event of Faults 

If a fault occurs during raising or lowering the top, all movement will cease and the fault will 
be stored in the fault memory. The emergency closing procedure must be used to close the 
top and the vehicle taken to the dealership for repair. 

Depending on the location and type of fault, it may be possible to raise or lower the top fully 
by pressing the switch in the opposite direction from which the fault occurred. 

If the top switch is held > 20 seconds after completing a raising/lowering procedure, a fault 
will set in the CVM. The control module assumes a fault to ground in the switch or lead. The 
ignition switch must be cycled to clear the fault before the top will again function. The fault 
will remain in the module until cleared with the Tester or MoDiC. 

All sequenced movements of the top have time out limits set in the control module. If a time 
out occurs before the end position is reached, the specific movement will be switched off 
to prevent damage to any of the top components. 


30 

CVM and Convertible Top 



E46iC MANUAL TOP 


The E46iC - 323/325 models are equipped with a manual top as standard equipment. 
Raising or lowering the top frame assembly is carried out by hand. However, the manual 
top features an electrically operated storage cover lock system. The unlocking/locking of 
the storage cover is a function of the general module. 

The frame of the manual top is similar to the fully automatic system, with two piston 
dampers mounted on the assembly to aid in its operation. The front of the top frame fea¬ 
tures a manual handle that is used to operate the cowl locks on the left and right sides. 

MANUAL TOP STORAGE COVER OPERATION 

The storage cover locking assembly consists of the following components: 

• General Module 

• Switch assembly 

• Storage Cover Motor assembly - with hall sensor and bowden cables 

• Two Storage Cover Locks - with a hall sensor 

• Variable Top Storage Compartment Floor - micro switch 

When the button is pressed to unlock the storage cover, the GM will lower the windows and 
activate the relay to unlock the storage cover. After raising the tension bow, the storage 
cover is raised manually and the top is lowered into the storage compartment. The storage 
cover is then lowered onto the locks and the signals from the storage cover hall sensors 
will signal the GM to relock the cover. 

The signal from the variable storage compartment floor micro switch will prevent the stor¬ 
age cover from opening when the floor is in the open position. 

The GM will lock out the operation of the storage cover lock motor whenever the trunk is 
opened. 


31 

CVM and Convertible Top 



Manual Top Storage Cover Operation Diagram 


Compartment Floor Micro Switch 



61460014 


32 

CVM and Convertible Top 











































































Hard Top 


An accessory hard top is available for the E46iC. It is constructed from aluminum with a 
finished fabric upholstery on the inside. Roof rack mounting points are integrated into the 
top on the left and right sides. 



The hard top attaches to the vehicle at four places: 

• Two hard top locks on the left and right sides in the rear. 

• Two cowl locks at the front. 



33 

CVM and Convertible Top 






















The hard top locks on the left and right, in the rear, have integrated wiring connectors for 
power and ground supplies to the rear window defogger and interior lights. 



The connector on the left side contains two 
separate strips, one for power supply to the rear 
defogger and the other for power supply to the 
interior lights 


The connector on the right side contains two 
separate strips, one for the ground connection 
for the rear defogger and the other for 


ART-HARDTOPLOCKLER 



ART-HARDTOP2 ART-HARDTOP2 


34 

CVM and Convertible Top 










Workshop Hints: 

Convertible Removal/lnstallation Top 


This section of the handout will cover highlights of soft top removal and installation. The 
“REPAIR MANUAL” should always be referenced for the complete procedure on top 
removal/installation and adjustments. Removal of the soft top assembly requires removing 
the rear seat and interior trim panels to gain access to the fastening points and wiring con¬ 
nections. 



The top storage cover should be removed prior 
to removing the top assembly. The hard top 
lock post and storage cover locks must be 
removed from the top frame assembly. The 
cover locks are connected to the unlock motor 
through a bowden cable that must be discon¬ 
nected when removing the lock assemblies. 


The top and frame assembly is bolted to the 
main top bracket at four points. The top must 
be raised with the tension bow in the vertical 
position to access three of the nuts. 



Fastening Points 


The fourth mounting point for the top frame 
assembly is on the front of the top mounting 
bracket. This should be loosened after the top 
is lowered into the storage compartment. 


35 

CVM and Convertible Top 






The supply and drain lines from the hydraulic 
unit to the solenoid block on the top frame are 
connected through quick disconnect couplings 
located on the left side of the top storage com¬ 
partment. Care should be taken when discon¬ 
necting the lines not to drip the hydraulic fluid 
onto the top fabric. 



ART-HYDLINES 


Ensure that all wiring is disconnected from the top frame before removing the top assem¬ 
bly. There are three connectors on each side of the top assembly in front of the top stor¬ 
age compartment. The main wiring harness (18 Pin ELO) from the CVM to the top frame 
must also be disconnected. 

THE TOP FRAME IS UNBOLTED FROM THE FRAME MOUNTING BRACKETS, MOUNT¬ 
ED IN THE STORAGE COMPARTMENT. THESE BRACKETS ARE PRE-SET AND 
ADJUSTED FOR TOP ALIGNMENT AT THE FACTORY AND MUST NOT BE REMOVED OR 
ADJUSTED WHEN CARRYING OUT SERVICE WORK ON THE TOP. 













Service Adjustments 


The convertible top storage compartment cover is made of magnesium, a spacer plate 
must be used when installing the cover to the mounting brackets, the brackets have elon¬ 
gated holes for adjustment of the cover to the body. 



The height of the rear of the storage compartment cover is adjusted at the mounting brack¬ 
ets for the hydraulic cylinders located in the trunk. This adjustment must be carried out by 
removing the rear tail light assemblies due to the lock out of the trunk lid and storage cover. 


37 

CVM and Convertible Top 





The front of the storage compartment cover is adjusted at two places. The latch brackets 
are mounted through elongated holes for alignment of the brackets to the cover latches. 



The front of the storage compartment cover’s height is adjusted by adjusting the bowden 
cable length at the storage cover lock motor. The cover should close flush with the body. 



38 

CVM and Convertible Top 







NAME OF SIGNAL OR FUNCTION: Hall sensor inputs to the CVM 


Vehicle: E46iC M Y: 2000 System: Convertible Top - CVM 

#1. Cowl Lock/Tension Point Hall Sensors: 


The Cowl Lock input to the CVM is at pin#_and pin#_. 

The signal from the cowl lock sensor is_volts with the top locked to the 

cowl. 

The signal from the cowl lock sensor is_volts when the top is unlocked from 

the cowl. 

The status display on the DIS shows_when the top is locked to the 

cowl and_when the top is unlocked. 

The Tension Point input to the CVM is at pin#_and pin#_. 

The signal from the tension point sensor is_volts with the top locked to the 

cowl. 

The signal from the tension point sensor is_volts when the top lock motor 

switches off. 

The status display on the DIS shows_when the top is locked to the 

cowl and_when the top lock motor switches off. 

#2. Storage Cover Lock Hall Sensors: 

The storage cover lock inputs to the CVM are at: pin#_and pin#_LEFT 

pin#_ and pin#_RIGHT 

The signal from the storage cover lock sensor is_volts when the cover is closed 

and locked. 

The signal from the storage cover sensor lock is_volts when the cover is 

unlocked. 

The status display on the DIS shows_when the cover is closed and 

locked and when the cover is unlocked. 


#3. Storage Cover Hall Sensor: 

The storage cover input to the CVM is at pin#_and pin #_. 

The signal from the storage cover sensor is_volts when the cover is closed. 

The signal from the storage cover sensor is_volts when the cover is open. 

The status display on the DIS shows_when the cover is closed 

and_when the cover is open. 


39 

CVM and Convertible Top 



NAME OF SIGNAL OR FUNCTION: Angle Hall Sensor inputs to CVM 


Vehicle: E46iC M Y: 2000 System: Convertible Top - CVM 

#1. Main Pillar Angle Hall Sensor: 

The power supply for the main pillar angle hall sensor is_volts at pin #_of 

the CVM and ground at pin #_of the CVM. 

The input signal to the CVM from the main pillar sensor is_volts with the top fully 

raised and_volts with the top lowered into the storage compartment. 

The status display on the DIS of the main pillar sensor input is_ 

with the top fully raised and_with the top lowered into the 

storage compartment. 

#2. Tension Bow Angle Hall Sensor (Clamping Bracket): 

The power supply for the tension bow angle hall sensor is_volts at pin #_ 

of the CVM and ground at pin #_of the CVM. 

The input signal to the CVM from the tension bow sensor is: 

_volts with the top locked to the cowl. 

_volts with the tension bow in the vertical position. 

_volts with the tension bow lowered into the storage compartment. 

The status display on the DIS of the tension bow input is: 

_with the top locked to the cowl. 

_with the tension bow in the vertical position. 

_with the tension bow lowered into the storage compartment. 


40 

CVM and Convertible Top 



Review Questions 

1. What are the major changes to the E46iC fully automatic top operation compared to the 
E36iC? 


2. How many hydraulic solenoids are used in the operation of the E46iC top? 


3. The locking/unlocking function of the storage compartment cover is controlled by which 
module? 


4. Which hall sensors control the flashing of the LED in the top switch? 


5. What happens to the soft top/frame if the ignition is switched off during its operation? 


6. Describe the emergency closing procedure for the soft top: 


7. What type of input is provided by the angle hall sensors for top operation? 


8. The only micro switch used in the operation of the soft top is? 


9. What indication is shown if the variable compartment floor is open when the top switch 
is pressed? 


41 

CVM and Convertible Top 









