Table of Contents 

E46 CLIMATE CONTROL 

Subject Page 

E46 IHKA.4 

Control Panel.4 

Fresh Air Micro Filter..5 

Temperature Regulation - Heating.6 

Temperature Regulation - Cooling.7 

Compressor Control.8 

Stepper Motor M-Bus Control.9 

Convertible Rear Window Defroster..10 

IHKA Personalization.12 

System Operation.13 

Diagnosis and Troubleshooting.13 

E46 IHKA I.PO.14 

Solar Sensor. 15 

Purpose of the System.16 

Solar Radiation.17 

Solar Sensor..17 

Components.18 

System Operation.20 


Initial Print Date: 10/30/00 Revision Date: 12/05/00 





















Subject Page 

Control Curves 

Blower Intervention.21 

Temperature Intervention.22 

Ventilation Intervention.23 

Diagnosis.24 

Workshop Hints.25 

E46 IHKR.26 

Purpose of the System.27 

System Components.28 

IHKR I.P.0.29 

IHKR Control Unit.30 

IHKR Housing.30 

Principle of operation.31 

Blower adjustment.31 

Air Distribution.31 

Temperature Control.32 

Engine Map Cooling.33 

Service Station Feature.33 

Air Conditioning Control.34 

Air Intake.35 

Ram Effect Air Compensation.35 

Rear Window Defroster..36 

Workshop Hints.37 


Review Questions 


39 


























E46 IHKA 
Model: E46 

Production Date: From 6/98 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Know how to replace the Fresh Air Micro Filter. 

• Describe the climate control functions performed by the IHKA control unit. 

• Explain the compressor activation circuit. 

• Recognize Car and Key Memory programming possibilities. 


3 


E46 Climate Control 




E46 IHKA Climate Control 

The IHKA heater/air conditioner in the E46 is similar to the system previously installed in the 
E36. Design and component changes were made to improve the overall performance and 
operation of the system. This module will deal with the changes and highlights of the E46 
IHKA system. Features of the IHKA system include: 

• Control Panel/Module 

• Single heater core for temperature regulation 

• M-Bus Control of all stepper motors 

• Fresh air micro filter 

• Regulated A/C compressor 

• Regulated auxiliary fan operation 

• Heater Control Personalization 



CONTROL PANEL 

All heating and air conditioning functions are carried out at the control panel. The panel is 

constructed as follows: 

• The three manual air distribution buttons are located on the left side of the panel for 
upface vent and footwell distribution. 

• The automatic air distribution button is located on the bottom of the panel along with 
the temperature control - blower speed control and recirculation control buttons. 

• The defrost, air conditions request and rear window defogger buttons are located on 
the right side of the panel. 

• The LCD matrix displays the requested temperature setting and blower speeds as on 
the previous system. There is now only one setting for temperature control. 

• The interior temperature sensor and blower fan are located on the left side of the LCD 
matrix. 


4 


E46 Climate Control 











































FRESH AIR MICRO FILTER 


The fresh air micro filter is installed in the fresh air inlet of the engine compartment. The fil¬ 
ter can be serviced quickly by removing the plastic cover and removing the filter. 



5 


E46 Climate Control 


TEMPERATURE REGULATION-HEATING 


The E46 uses one water valve/heater core as part of interior temperature regulation. The 
water valve is pulsed to control the flow of coolant through the heater core as on other sys¬ 
tems. 

Temperature regulation is based on the inputs from: 

• Temperature control switch 

• Interior temperature sensor 

• Ambient temperature signal 

• Heater core sensor 

• Evaporator temperature signal 

• "Y" factor 

The rocker switch is used to select the desired cabin temperature which is displayed in the 
matrix of the control panel. The range for temperature display is from 60 to 90 ° F. 



\ 

WATER 

MB 


WATeq 

VALVE 


OUTLET 

A 




SERVICE STATION FEATURE - The "Service Station" feature introduced with the E38 IHKA 
is integrated into the E46 IHKA. This prevents the heater core from being flooded with hot 
coolant when refueling the vehicle. 

6 


E46 Climate Control 
















TEMPERATURE REGULATION - COOLING 


Air conditioning control on the E46 is similar to the E39 IHKA system. The system uses the 
variable displacement compressor. The swash plate of the compressor is hinged so that is 
can vary the piston travel based on the output requirements of the system. 


SWASH PLATE 



CONTROL 

VALVE 





PRESSURE 

SENSOR 



AUX. FAN 




7 


E46 Climate Control 

























































































































COMPRESSOR CONTROL 


Control of the A/C compressor is a function of the Engine Control Module as in the E36. 
However, the control has changed to include the regulated auxiliary fan operation. 

Pressing the snowflake button is a request for A/C activation. As long as the evaporator 
temperature is Above 36° F, the IHKA will signal the DME control module to activate the 
compressor. 

The IHKA control module sends the following signals to the DME over the K-Bus and CAN 
Bus via the instrument cluster: 


• Request for A/C activation (signal KO) 

• Load torque for switching the compressor on 

• Requested auxiliary fan speed 

The IHKA determines the load torque for compressor activation and required auxiliary fan 
speed from the pressure sensor mounted on the receiver/dryer. 

The pressure sensor provides a linear voltage input signal (0 - 5 volts) to the IHKA control 
module. The IHKA processes this signal and determines the load torque of the system (0 
to 30 Nm with a variable displacement compressor). The higher the pressure in the system, 
the higher the voltage input signal to the IHKA. 

The output signal to the DME will enable the engine control module to modify the idle 
speed, timing and fuel injection amount based on the load that will be imposed when the 
compressor is activated. 

The auxiliary fan is now a variable speed fan (15 stages) based on the system load. The 
DME will activate the fan through a pulse modulated final stage control. 


8 


E46 Climate Control 



STEPPER MOTOR M-BUS CONTROL 


The E46 uses the M-Bus for stepper motor control. All five stepper motors of the IHKA 
are bus controlled including: 

• Two fresh air/recirc-air flap motors 

• Face vent flap motor 

• Footwell flap motor 

• Defrost flap motor 

Due to the requirement for a fast acting motor for the fresh/recirc flaps, two different step¬ 
per motors (slow/fast) are used in the system. 



M- 

-FACE VENT 


9 


E46 Climate Control 
























































CONVERTIBLE REAR WINDOW DEFROSTER 

Purpose of the System: 

A two relay system was designed for the E46iC that supplies power to either rear window 
defogger grid. The two relay system will also communicates with the audio system amplifi¬ 
er to change the dynamics of the sound for either top up/hard top installed or top down 
driving 

Components of the System: 


Two relays, located on the right side rear quarter panel behind the interior trim cover, are 
used for rear defroster operation. 


• Relay K-13 receives KL 30 and the activa 
tion signal from the IHKA control module. 
The output from the relay will switch the 
rear defroster ON if the hard top is installed. 


• Relay K-99 receives KL 30 from relay K-13 
and it supplies the rear defogger grid in the 
soft top glass window when the top is 
raised. 




E46 Climate Control 







System Operation 


The rear defroster operation is a function of the IHKA system, with the control module 
responsible for switching the system ON/OFF. Two rear defrosted grids are used, one 
installed in the soft top rear glass and the other in the optional hard top rear glass. 


When the button is pressed on the IHKA control panel, Relay K-13 is energized. If the hard 
top is installed, power is supplied to the grid through the connector strip on the hard top 
lock. 


CVM 

Top Closed and 
locked to frame. 
12V 

Open and 
unlocked. 

OV 


K-99 

Rear window 
defogger relay. 



KL 31 


Relay K-13 also supplies KL 30 to relay K-99 when the button is pressed on the IHKA con¬ 
trol panel. Relay K-99 is energized when KL R is switched ON and the soft top is closed 
and locked to the windshield frame. This allows the grid in the soft top window to be heat¬ 
ed. When the soft top is lowered, KL R to relay K-99 is interrupted by the CVM to prevent 
the grid from heating when the top is lowered into the storage compartment. 



E46 Climate Control 






IHKA PERSONALIZATION 


The features of Car/Key Memory allow various functions/features of the IHKA control to be 
tailored to the individual owner's/driver's wishes. 

The functions of the IHKA that can be programmed to the owner's/driver's wishes include: 

• Automatic activation of recirc when the vehicle is started 

• Adjustment (raising/lowering) of the blower speed 

• Automatic opening of the ventilation flaps with warm coolant 

• Automatic closing of the footwell flap with A/C activation 

• Automatic closing of the defroster flaps with A/C activation 

• Correction of the set temperature (raise/lower) 

• Automatic activation of the compressor control when the ignition is switched on 

• Auto program for the blower control when the ignition is switched on 

These features are programmed using the coding/programming function of the DIS/MoDiC. 


MoDiC 



Units Display Change 


D-BUS 





20 PIN 

DIAGNOSTIC 

CONNECTION 


• Recirc 
Air Memory 


IHKA 



E46 Climate Control 






















































































































SYSTEM OPERATION 


The balance of the E46 IHKA system's features and operation carry over from the E36 
including: 

• Maximum defrost operation 

• Rear window defogger operation 

• Final stage blower control 

• Road speed dependent fresh air flap operation 

• Air distribution control 

• Stepper motor calibration run 

• Cold start interlock 


DIAGNOSIS AND TROUBLESHOOTING 

The "self diagnostics" of the IHKA control module monitors the status of inputs and outputs 
of the system. If a fault is detected, it is initially entered in RAM and than in the EEPROM 
when the ignition is switched off. If available, a replacement value will be activated when 
various sensor faults are detected as with previous systems. A maximum of six faults can 
be stored in the EEPROM when the ignition is switched off. 

The E46 IHKA is connected to the diagnostic link via the K -Bus/instrument cluster. The 
system uses the E46 "Fault Symptom Troubleshooting " procedures for troubleshooting 
problems and faults with the system. 


When troubleshooting problems with the E46 IHKA, it is important to note that because the 
Car/Key Memory feature can change the functionality of the system, a review of the set¬ 
ting should be performed prior to condemning a component as faulty. 



E46 Climate Control 



E46 IHKA I.P.O 

As introduced. 


KL 31 


KL 30 



KL 15 



70 F 



“O' 

1 Tin 9 


MAX DEFROST 



A/C COMPRESSOR 


RECIRCULATION 




REAR DEFROST 




DEFROST VENT 



FACE VENT 


FOOTWELL VENT 


[ 1 


AUTOMATIC PROGRAM 



FAN SPEED 
REQUEST 


INTERIOR AIR TEMP 


PHOTO TRANSISTOR 


3 O 



EVAPORATOR 

TEMPERATURE 


HEATER CORE TEMPERATURE SENSORS 



PRESSURE SENSOR 
o- 



ENGINE SPEED 
SIGNAL 


\d- 


K-BUS 


E46 IHKA 
CONTROL 
PANEL/ 
MODULE 


14 



Coolant temp 
Outside Air Temp 
Vehicle speed 


WATER 

VALVE 


- KL R 

- Diagnosis 


§ 

\ 

1 

if 

]i 






+ 


BLOWER MOTOR 
OUTPUT STAGE 


M-BUS 

FIVE STEPPER 
MOTORS 

- FACE VENT FLAP 

- DEFROST 

- FOOTWELL 

- RECIRCULATION 

- FRESH AIR 

AC SYSTEM STATUS (SIGNAL BUS SIGNAL) 




REAR 

WINDOW 

DEFOGER 

RELAY 


+ 


+ 



INTERIOR TEMP 
SENSOR FAN 



+ 


DIAGNOSIS AND CODING 



E46 Climate Control 

























































































































































































SOLAR SENSOR 
Model: E38, E39, E46 

Production Date: E38 3/99, E46 9/99, E39 9/00 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Describe the operation of the solar sensor as it applies to the IHKA systems. 

• List the output functions effected by the solar sensor input. 

• Describe how the solar sensor affects the various output functions. 



E46 Climate Control 




Purpose of the System: 


The purpose of the solar sensor is to compensate the climate control system’s output for 
the radiant heating effect of the sun. This will aid the IHKA in maintaining a constant com¬ 
fort level, in the vehicle’s interior, during all driving conditions. 


The function of heating and air conditioning systems in BMW vehicles is to provide the dri¬ 
ver and passengers a comfortable atmosphere regardless of conditions outside of the vehi¬ 
cle. Based on the temperature signal inputs, blower setting, flaps portioning, program set¬ 
tings in the control module and influencing variables, the IHKA control module is able to 
process these inputs to achieve the desired comfort level. 


The following input variables 
processed by the IHKA module: 

• Interior temperature 

• Heat exchanger temperature 

• Ventilation temperature (E38) 

• Evaporator temperature 

• Air volume setting 

• Engine temperature and RPM 

• Exterior temperature 


are 



The processed variable “Y-factor” is determined by using the above inputs. The Y-factor 
then represents how much adjustment is necessary by the IHKA module to achieve the set 
temperature. 



E46 Climate Control 





Solar Radiation 


Solar radiation, from the sun, passes through the earths atmosphere in the form of light 
(both visible and non-visible) and heat (sunshine). To date, the influence of solar radiation 
on the climate control system in the vehicle has only been compensated for by an average 
value stored in the control module and based on control settings and outside temperature 
values. 

Solar Sensor 

The solar sensor can detect the amount of solar radiation that is influencing the tempera¬ 
ture and climate in the vehicles interior. The IHKA control module monitors the input from 
the solar sensor and adds the value to its processing factors. The settings of the climate 
control system are changed to compensate for this additional influence. 

The settings of the following IHKA components are adjusted to compensate for changes 
in solar radiation: 



fA 

)— 

[ SOLAR 


1 SENSOR 




O 



CO 




CO 

H 


CO 


\— 

3 


CO 


3 

CL 


LU 


CL 



O 


H 

— 


O 


3 



DC 


o 



□L 










^- 

7 


BLOWER 



FAN 



y - 

7 


VENT 



FLAPS 

7 


^- 

7 


MIXING 



FLAPS 



• Blower - The blower curve is changed 

• Stratification (mixing flaps) - The stratification outlet air temperature is changed (not E46) 

• Ventilation - The opening angles of the ventilation flaps are changed. 



E46 Climate Control 
















































Components: 

In the E38, The solar sensor is integrated in the housing of the anti-theft warning system 
LED. The warning indicator LED is installed on the outlet grille in the top center of the 
instrument panel where solar radiation can directly reach the solar sensor. 

The DWA LED with solar sensor is an additional wiring harness with a 4-pin plug connec¬ 
tor. 


DWA LED with integrated solar sensor 



DWA LED/SOLAR SENSOR MODULE 4-pin solar sensor plug connector 



E46 Climate Control 









The solar sensor consists of two photoresistors, which are integrated on the left and right 
sides of the DWA housing next to the DWA LED. The photoresistors sense the different 
intensity levels of the solar radiation. 



DWA LED dismantled; housing and pc-board with LED and solar sensor housing 

1 The photoresistor on the right is fitted under 
the plastic cover 

2 The photoresistor on the left is fitted under the 
plastic cover 

3 PC-board, DWA LED and solar sensor 

4 DWA LED housing 


The E46 solar sensor is located in the right 
defroster outlet at the base of the windshield. 
The E46 sensor contains one photoresistor for 
sensing solar radiation. 




E46 Climate Control 




System Operation 

The solar sensor receives power (5 volts) and ground from the IHKA control module. The 
module then reads the voltage drop across the photoresistor and determines the degree of 
solar heating based on the change in voltage. The voltage drop across the photoresistor 
increases as solar radiation increases. The IHKA control module monitoring voltage will 
decrease indicating an increase in solar heating. The module processes the input every 10 
seconds and checks it for plausibility based on a limit value monitoring function. 

Values outside the limit indicate a malfunction and the signal from the sensor is ignored by 
the module. 

As solar radiation levels increase, the control curves, stored in the IHKA module, for the 
blower fan, mixing flaps and ventilation (face vent) flaps are shifted to compensate for the 
additional heat. 


The solar sensor inputs to the IHKA control module can influence the settings on the rele¬ 
vant side (driver/front passenger) on the E38 and E39. No separate regulation is possible 
on the E46. 

When driving at night, during cloudy periods or through tunnels, the control maps are shift¬ 
ed back to their base settings. 



E46 Climate Control 




CONTROL CURVES OPERATION 


Blower Intervention 

The graph below illustrates the solar influence on the blower fan with a constant Y factor 
and the solar influence changing from 0 th 100%. 


Blower power P in % 


Blower stage 
E38 E46 



8 

7 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 


Blower power curves 

The middle curve illustrates a blower curve without any solar influence. At a constant Y fac¬ 
tor of 20%, the solar influence on the IHKA control module will cause the blower curve to 
shift as the radiation increases from 0 to 100%. 

With a solar influence of 0%, curve “B” is used, providing 25% power to the blower. 

As the solar influence increases, the curve shifts upward until the solar influence reaches 
100%. At this point, curve “A” is used providing 36% power to the blower. 

During heating, the blower power decreases as solar influence increases. 

While cooling, the blower power will increase as solar influence increases. 



E46 Climate Control 




























Stratification (Temperature Intervention) E38 only 


The mixing flaps will open less in the direction of heat for blending air as the solar influence 
increases. The graph below represents the influence of the solar sensor on the stratification 
flap settings 


Ventilation Temperature °F 


Mixing Flap Position 



100% 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 

30 

20 

0 


warm 


To illustrate the influence of the solar sensor on the mixing flap position, the Y factor remains 
constant at 20%. 

With a solar influence of 0% curve “A” is adopted for the various outside temperatures. As 
the outside temperature decreases, the mixing flap is moved toward the warmer setting 
blending more heat. 

With a solar influence of 100% curve “B” is adopted for the various outside temperatures. 
As the outside temperature decreases, the mixing flap is still moved toward the warmer set¬ 
ting but it does not move as far. The solar influence is compensating to provide the same 
comfort level. 

With the mixing flap thumbwheel at 100 or 0% (full hot or cold), the flaps are in the default 
position and there will be no solar influence. 

The left and right mixing flaps are controlled independently based on the individual settings 
and left and right solar sensor inputs. 



E46 Climate Control 









































Ventilation Intervention (Center Vent Air Distribution) 

The influence of the solar sensor on the ventilation flaps is shown in the graph below. 


Ventilation flap in % 



The normal curve “B” applies when there is no solar sensor influence 0%, or if the sensor 
is defective. 

The maximum curve “A” applies when the solar influence is 100%. 

The ventilation flaps will close less as the solar influence increases. This allows more cool 
air from the center vents as the solar radiation increases. 

This adjustment is also independently adjustable on the E38 based on the left/right solar 
sensor inputs. 



E46 Climate Control 



























DIAGNOSIS 


Troubleshooting of the solar sensor (left/right) is carried out through the IHKA diagnostic 
program using the DIS or MoDiC. 

Status displays for the solar sensor input are available in percentages. The status displays 
can be checked while applying a light or heat source to the solar sensor to view the change 
in value. 


The E46 diagnostic program for the IHKA 
system contains a test module B6450- 
00011 for testing the operation of the solar 
sensor. 


M GI@pD@©0® T©©G Bmtamafc] 

JEffafreEHj 1 




IMjrT^ngmrmi c°iae(giTi^ 

A s part of climate control, the solar sensor taKes into confederation kernel 
light and heal sources thal influence the climate in the vehicle interior. The 
solar sensor consists of two photo resistors that measure 1 he varying intensity 
of solar radiatton. At high levels of solar radiation, the selling of the air 
conditioning system is correspondingly adapted to requirements 

The following settings are varied: 

Blower - The blower curve rs changed 
Stratification - The stratification air temperature is changed 
Ventilation flaps - Tne angles of the ventilation flaps are changed 
The signal of the solar sensor is generated m tne solar sensor module The 
senscr signal is output in a voltage range of 0.. ,5V. A vaJue outside (he limits 
indicates a malfunction and tne Influence of the sensor is completely 






Did (the value off the solar sensor vary when 
changing the lighting conditions and is the 
value plausible? 



The IHKA control module monitors the solar sensor and will set a fault code for: 

• Shorts to B+ or ground 

• Open circuits 

The IHKA control module will function as a system without solar influence correction if the 
sensor is defective. 

Recognition of the solar sensor and its influencing capabilities is enabled via ZCS coding. 
Remember to adopt the code whenever possible to avoid loosing car/key memory function 
changes. Also the IHKA control module must be disconnected from B+ before coding can 
become permanent. 



E46 Climate Control 










Workshop Hints 


E38 vehicles 

To remove the solar sensor from an E38, refer to TIS - RM 6422161, removal of the center 
outlet grille at the top of the dash. After removal of the grille, disconnect the plug connec¬ 
tor of the DWA indicator and solar sensor and pull the sensor from the grille. 



E46 vehicles 

Removal of the E46 solar sensor requires removal of the instrument panel. However, for 
testing purposes, the connector is located in-line, attached to the harness for connector 
X610. 



25 


E46 Climate Control 















E46 IHKR 

Model: E46 (325i/it/Ci/Cic, M3) 

Production Date: From 9/00 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the climate control functions performed by the IHKR system. 

• Identify the changes compared to the E46 IHKA system. 

• Understand the method of temperature control used by the IHKR. 

• Describe how the A/C compressor is controlled. 



E46 Climate Control 




Purpose of the system 

Beginning M.Y. 2001, the 325i/it/Ci/Cic and M3 are fitted with IHKR as standard 
equipment. The IHKA system is available as an option on these models. 

IHKR is a semi-automatically regulated heating 
and air-conditioning system, similar to the 
IHKR introduced for the 2001 E39 and E53. 


The purpose of the system is to allow the 
vehicle occupants to select the desired 
temperature, air outlet distribution and volume 
manually. 


The system then automatically regulates the 
temperature of the cabin based on the manual 



settings. 


The functions provided by the E46 IHKR are: 

• Control of the blower. 

• Air distribution control. 

• Stratification flap controlled by a bowden cable 

• Temperature Control 

• Service Station feature 

• Air conditioning request to DME 

• Recirculation air 

• Ram effect air compensation 

• Rear window defroster 



E46 Climate Control 





















System Components 

The E46 IHKR consists of the following components: 

• IHKR control unit with operating controls 

• IHKR integrated heater and air conditioning case 

• Heater core temperature sensor 

• Evaporator temperature sensor 

• Refrigerant circuit pressure sensor 

• Double cage blower motor and final stage 

• Water valve 

• Air distribution micro-switch 

• M-bus with 3 smart stepper motors: 

- Air distribution 

- Fresh air/re-circulation left (high speed motor) 

- Fresh air/re-circulation right (high speed motor) 

• Compressor relay (DME controlled) 

• Auxiliary fan (DME controlled) 

• Rear window defroster relay 

• K-bus interface 

The following signals are transmitted and received over the K-bus: 

- Vehicle speed 

- Engine speed 

- Coolant temperature 

- Outside temperature 

- Terminal 15, 61,50,58G (panel lighting) 

- Compressor load 

- Diagnosis and coding 

- Compressor request 

• Fresh air Micro-filter 



E46 Climate Control 




E46 IHKR I.P.O 


KL31 



KL30 




FAN SPEED 


A/C REQUEST 



RE-CIRCULATION 



REAR DEFROST 



TEMPERATURE 

CONTROL 




(< 


AIR DISTRIBUTION 
POTENTIOMETER 



EVAPORATOR 

TEMPERATURE 


REFRIGERANT PRESSURE 

Sh -► 


o o 


AIR DISTRIBUTION 
MICRO-SWITCH 



HEATER CORE 
TEMPERATURE 


LSZ 


PANEL 

ILLUMINATION 58G 


E46 

IHKR 


BLOWER MOTOR OUTPUT STAGE 



WATER VALVE 


KL30 


5 ^ 


M-BUS 

- FRESH AIR/RECIRC LEFT 

- FRESH AIR/RECIRC RIGHT 

- AIR DISTRIBUTION 



REAR WINDOW DEFROST RELAY 
KL 15 KL 30 


I I 



COMPRESSOR CONTROL 


KL30 


u 

p 


, 

/ 


KO REL 

DME 



KL30 


T 



M 


AUXILIARY FAN CONTROL 


K-BUS 




E46 Climate Control 













































































































































































IHKR control unit with operating controls 

The IHKR control unit is incorporated into the control panel. The control panel consists of 
three buttons and three rotary dials. The control unit communicates over the K bus. 


1. Blower control potentiometer 

2. Recirculation button 

3. Temperature control potentiometer 

4. Air distribution potentiometer 


5. Air conditioning request button 

6. Rear window defroster button 


X608 X610 



3 pin M-bus 6 pin 



IHKR Case 

The E46 IHKR case is similar in design to the E46 IHKA heating and A/C case. 


4. 

5. 



Evaporator 
Double Cage 




1. Heater Core Temp. 

Sensor 

2. Heater core 

3. Evaporator Temp 
Sensor 




E46 Climate Control 















Principle of operation 

Blower adjustment 

The blower rotary dial potentiometer has four settings. Each progressive step represents a 
25% increase in blower volume. The control unit determines the desired blower setting by 
the signal from the potentiometer and then sends a voltage signal to the final stage unit. 
The voltage signal to the final stage unit ranges from 1,8V to a maximum of 7.1 V (Normal 
blower power in Key Memory). 

The final stage unit then regulates blower motor voltage to control the blower volume. 
There is no automatic influence on the blower setting. 

The blower control potentiometer is the master on/off switch for the IHKR system. The 
water valve is closed (energized) in the blower zero (off) position. The LEDs for re-circulat¬ 
ed air and air conditioning are switched off and the compressor is switched off. The rear 
defroster operation is not affected by the system being switched off. 

Air distribution 

The selection of air distribution is carried out using the rotary dial potentiometer (42 steps). 
Each step of the potentiometer represents a percentage. The percentage indicates the 
desired air distribution setting. 

Movement of the stratification flap for face ven¬ 
tilation is carried out by rotating a thumb wheel 
between the face vent discharge nozzles. The 
thumb wheel is connected to a bowden cable 
that moves the flap. 

The air distribution for defrost, ventilation and 
footwell is performed by a single air distribution 
stepper motor that is connected to the M-bus 
and controlled by the IHKR control unit. 




E46 Climate Control 




The stepper motor drives a cam/lever assembly (1) that articulates all three air distribution 
flaps. The position of the cam is confirmed by the air distribution micro-switch (2). 


The air distribution micro-switch is provided 
5V by the IHKR control unit. The micro 
switch is closed by the rotating cam lobe in 
two positions: 

• Full defrost 97% to 0% 

• Mixed face vent/footwell 37% 

(quick confirmation) 

When the switch is closed the signal at the 
control unit goes low, informing the control 
unit that it has reached that particular 
position. The display in diagnosis recog¬ 
nizes this position as “off”. 



Located on the right side of the IHKR case 


A reference run is initiated the first time KL30 is switched on to the IHKR control unit. The 
reference run is required to determine the position of the cam disc. The cam disc is 
rotated until the micro-switch sends a signal to the control unit. After the reference run is 
completed, the control unit recognizes what position the cam disc is in and thus the 
position of all three air distribution flaps. 


If the air distribution micro-switch is not able to produce a signal at the correct position, the 
control unit will continue to operate the stepper motor at an estimated position. Eventually 
the air distribution setting will not match the actual output. The air distribution micro-switch 
circuit is fault monitored. 


Temperature control 

The desired interior temperature is set with the rotary dial potentiometer (34 steps). The 
face of the dial itself has no marked temperatures, just a blue, white and red line that rep¬ 
resents a comfort zone. 

All of the air flowing into the IHKR housing must pass through the evaporator first before 
being re-heated by the heater core. This is the principle used by all IHKR and IHKA sys¬ 
tems. 

The IHKR maintains the temperature of the discharge air by cycling the water valve to reg¬ 
ulate the temperature of the heater core. The duty cycle applied to the water valve is based 
on the “Y-factor” (correcting variable) and other variables. 



E46 Climate Control 




The Y-factor of the E46 IHKR is determined by: 

• Setting of the temperature control dial 

• Outside temperature (from Kombi via the K-bus) 

• Heater core temperature 

Automatic temperature control is switched off when the temperature control dial is turned 
all the way to the left (blue: water valve closed) or right (red: water valve full open) stop. 

Each step of the potentiometer represents a temperature from max. cold (10°C) to max. 
warm (49.5°C). This temperature value is combined with the outside temperature to form 
a calculated set-point. The E46 IHKR does not use an interior temperature sensor. 

The Y-factor is then determined by comparing the calculated set-point to the actual value 
of the heater core sensor which is in the stream of air to the outlet ducts. 

In addition to the Y-factor, the control unit evaluates coolant temperature and engine RPM 
to determine water valve opening time. The valve opening times are: 

• 0 ms at max. COLD 

• 3600 ms at max. WARM 

Engine map cooling 

Map cooling is used by the DME MS 43.0 for the M54 engines. This can create very high 
coolant temperatures which could be damaging to the climate control system. If the heater 
core temperature exceeds 80°C, the water valve is closed until the temperature drops 
below 80°C. 

If the temperature at the heater core increases above 93°C (i.e. water valve faulty), the IHKR 
will signal the DME (via K-bus/Kombi/CAN) to energized the map cooling thermostat. 


Service Station Feature 

The service station feature prevents the vehicle occupants from getting a blast of hot air 
after the vehicle is restarted following a short stop. The water valve is powered closed by 
the IHKR control unit for three minutes after shut-off. This prevents the heater core from 
being flooded with hot coolant. 



E46 Climate Control 



Air Conditioning control 

The air conditioning system is switched on by pressing the snow flake button and having 
the blower dial on position 1 or greater. The LED in the button signals that the A/C is in 
stand-by. 

The IHKR control module sends the following signals to the DME over the K-bus-Kombi- 
CAN -bus connection: 


• IHKR on stand-by (signal AC) 

• Request for A/C activation (signal KO) 

• Calculated compressor load 

• Request for auxiliary fan 

The IHKR determines the load torque for compressor activation and required auxiliary fan 
speed from the pressure sensor mounted on the high side line next to the receiver dryer. 

The refrigerant pressure sensor provides a voltage input signal (0-5 volts) to the IHKR. The 
voltage value increases as pressure in the high side refrigerant circuit increases. The IHKR 
processes this signal to determine the calculated load that will be placed on the engine 
when the compressor is switched on. Pressure values that are too high or too low will 
cause the compressor to be switched off. 


Once all of the criteria for compressor operation have been met, the DME control module 
will activate the compressor relay to energize the compressor magnetic clutch. 


Control of the evaporator temperature is carried out by the IHKR signalling the DME to shut 
off the compressor when the evaporator reaches the freezing point. 

The IHKR cycles the compressor 
at 1 °C if the outside temperature 
kombi is above 68°F. The compressor 
is cycled at 3°C if the outside 
temperature is below 68°F. 


IHKR 



K-Bus: Signal AC/KO 



) CAN-Bus 


Iff* ' 

-■ ,J 

Evaporator Temp 



Refrigerant 

Pressure 


OUTPUT 

STAGE 


K19 relay 


Auxiliary 

Fan 


© 



Compressor 


34 


E46 Climate Control 









































Air Intake 


The fresh air/re-circulation flaps are controlled 
by a separate stepper motor for the left and 
right side. 

The stepper motors are controlled by the M- 
bus and are located on the left and right sides 
of the housing inside the passenger compart¬ 
ment. 

The fresh air flaps are closed and the re-circ 
doors are opened when the re-circ. button is 
pressed with the system switched on. 



When the key is turned off with re-circulation on, the fresh air flaps will open. Re-circula- 
tion memory in the IHKR control unit is 15 minutes. If the vehicle is started within 15 min¬ 
utes the re-circulation setting will be restored. 

If the system is shut off with the blower switch, the re-circulation function will have to be re¬ 
enabled. 


Ram effect air compensation 

Similar to IHKA, when the fresh air flaps are open their position is affected by vehicle road 
speed. This is to prevent an increase in air volume to the cabin with increasing vehicle 
speed. 

The IHKR receives the vehicle speed input every 2 seconds over the K-bus from the Kombi. 
At a speed of 36mph the fresh air flaps will close progressively until the vehicle reaches 
96mph, at which time the opening of the flaps will be 20%. 

100 % 


60% 

40 % - 
30 % - 
20 % - 


0 36 62 96 

ROAD SPEED (MPH)-—► 

35 



E46 Climate Control 














Rear window defroster operation (All models) 

The rear window defroster is controlled via a request from the button on the panel. After 
switching on for the first time, the rear window is heated for 17 minutes. Output voltage to 
the window is provided by the K13 rear defogger relay. 

After automatic switch off, if the button is pressed once again the control unit will provide 
another 17 minutes of operation. If the vehicle voltage drops below 11,4V during this sec¬ 
ond heating operation the function is stopped, however the LED on the button will not be 
extinguished. If voltage increases past 12.2V for at least one second, operation will 
resume. The control circuit of the convertible varies slightly due to the folding top. 


Defroster operation specific to Convertibles 



When the button is pressed on the IHKR control panel, relay K13 is energized. K13 sup¬ 
plies KL 30 to defroster relay K99. Relay K99 is energized when the KLR is switched on 
and the soft top is closed and locked to the windshield frame. This completes the circuit 
and allows the rear window to be heated. 

If the soft top is lowered during defroster operation, voltage to relay K99 is interrupted by 
the CVM to prevent the rear window grid from heating when the top is lowered into the stor¬ 
age compartment. 



E46 Climate Control 

































































Workshop Hints 

Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the E46 IHKR system is carried out using the DISplus or MoDiC. The IHKR is 
connected to the diagnostic bus via the K-bus/Kombi connection. The system uses the 
E46 test module driven diagnostic concept for troubleshooting faults with the system. 


Control Unit Functions: 

Expert mode diagnosis available at 
any time during troubleshooting. To 
enter: press the Control Unit 
Functions button at the lower right 
corner of the screen. 

The contents are: 

• Identification 

• Clear Fault Memory 

• Read Fault Memory 

• Component Activation 

• Status Requests 




Service Functions: 

Provides access to special¬ 
ized test modules used as 
post repair procedures. To 
enter: 

• Function selection 

• Service Functions 

• Body 

• Heater- A/C control 

Deactivate transport-lock 
function 


Test Modules: Faults with the E46 IHKR can be diagnosed using fault or symptom driven test 
modules. To begin diagnosis: 

• Perform the Short Test 

• Select a vehicle symptom from the Symptom Selection page 

• Select a test module from the Test Plan page 

• Press the Test Schedule button 

Test module are written in the E46 Diagnostic Concept. 



E46 Climate Control 








































































































Coding 

Coding must be performed if the IHKR control unit is replaced. ZCS coding is found in the 
Coding and Programming selection from the start screen or when pressing the Change 
button. Follow on-screen instructions to remove KL 30 power to the IHKR control unit. 
This step is necessary to complete the coding process. 


Car and Key Memory 

When troubleshooting complaints with the E46 IHKR it is important to note that because 
the Car/Key Memory feature can change the operation of the system, a review of the set¬ 
tings should be made prior to beginning troubleshooting. 



Only Key Memory selections are possible for the E46 IHKR. The selections are: 

• Set Blower Power (Raise, Normal, Lower) 

• Correction Set Temperature (raise/lower) 

• A/C on at key on (Automatic activation of the compressor control when the ignition is 
switched on.) 



E46 Climate Control 


































































Review Questions 


1. Where is the interior temperature sensor located in a vehicle equipped with IHKA? What 
is this input used for?_ 



2. How does the IHKA control the auxiliary fan? What inputs are used by the IHKA to 
determine the fan speed?_ 



4. A customer complains that every time he enters his car the AC compressor is switched 
on automatically. What could be causing his complaint?_ 



5. Describe briefly how the influence of Solar radiation affects the IHKA settings. 



6. How can a technicaian test for the correct operation of the Solar Sensor? 



7. What is the purpose for the RPM input to the IHKA? 



39 


E46 Climate Control 







Review Questions 


8. What is the Voltage range of the control signal from the IHKR to the blower final stage? 


9. Which components are responsible for the movement of the air distribution flaps? What 
role does the air distribution micro-switch play? (IHKR system)_ 



10. How does the IHKR determine a Y-factor if the system does not use an interior 
temperature sensor?_ 



11. How does the IHKR signal the DME when compressor activation is requested? Discuss 
what information is exchanged._ 



12. What three stepper motors are located on the IHKR M-Bus? What is an M-Bus? 



13. Which additional component is used in the rear defrost circuit of a convertible E46, as 
compared to a hard top?_ 


40 


E46 Climate Control 







