Table of Contents 

E71 Introduction Workbook 

Subject Page 

The All-New X6 .3 

Body.4 

Technical Comparison (E70 vs E71).5 

Bodyshell Construction .6 

Passive Safety .7 

Structure.7 

Pedestrian Protection.8 

Front End Design .8 

Interior.9 

Accents and Features.9 

Dashboard .9 

Door Trim .9 

Front Seats.10 

Active Seat Ventilation.10 

Rear Seats .11 

Individual Rear Seats.11 

Seat Belt Height Adjustment.11 

Glove Compartment.12 

Center Storage Compartments .12 

Knee Pads .12 

Luggage Compartment.13 

Tailgate .14 

Manual Tailgate.14 

Automatic Tailgate (HKL) .15 

Automatic Tailgate Operation .15 

Bus System Overview.17 

Initial Print Date: 04/08 Revision Date: 5/08 




























2 

E71 Introduction Workbook 

Introduction 

Model: E71 

Production: From Start of Production 



Identify the features of the E71 X6 










The All-New X6 


“Dynamic Elegance”, “The first of its kind”, are some of the phras¬ 
es and accolades that BMW and the media have employed when 
speaking about the new BMW X6. Just two days after its world¬ 
wide debut, the BMW X6 Sports Activity Coupe was named “Best 
Production Truck” at the Eyes On Design Awards at the North 
American International Auto Show (NAIAS). 

The X6 is a totally new concept due to arrive in the US in March of 
2008. BMW has combined the practicality and convenience of the 
Sport Activity Vehicle (SAV) with the styling and features of a sport 
coupe. This new concept is being referred to as a (SAC) or Sport 
Activity Coupe. 

The stylish lines of theX6 are combined with a sleek and sporty 
wide stance which is signature of all BMW coupes. The X6 slop¬ 
ping roofline continues all the way to the newly designed tailgate. 
The passenger compartment accommodates four occupants in a 
higher sitting position, while offering all the same options and 
amenities available on current E70 Vehicles. With the rear split 
seats lowered, the X6 delivers the largest cargo room in its class. 


Built on the E70 platform, the X6 also employs xDrive (BMW all¬ 
wheel-drive technology with electronic control for variable distribu¬ 
tion of drive power between the front and rear axles), only to be 
taken to another level with the use of Dynamic Performance 
Control (DPC). 

The typical E70 xDrive system is now coupled with a totally new 
QMVH differential and a new system referred to as Integrated 
Chassis Management (ICM) system. This new system allows the 
distribution of the drive torque from front to rear as well as from left 
to right at the rear axle. xDrive with QMVH continually adjusts to 
any driving condition and performs well in all situations. 

The X6 will be available in two models, differentiated mainly by their 
power plant. The xDrive35i will sport the already familiar N54 
engine with its 3.0 liter twin turbo, direct injection, 300 hp and 
300lb-ft torque six cylinder. The xDrive50i gets the N63, a new 4.4 
liter, 400 hp, 450 Ib-ft torque V8 engine with direct injection and 
twin turbochargers (neatly tucked into the engine valley). 



Anatomy of the X6 


mo* 








Cj-I-v Jit'l'r*-- 


CotftTL /Akk-rs SAV 


Wwtt vu&bSMMa. cttftnpL o 


ir4-H& fc rtMft tWJo 


E71 Introduction Workbook 

3 











4 

E71 Introduction Workbook 


Body 


The E71 will be launched in early 2008 and will be available in the 
following models: 

• X6 xDrive50i with N63B44O0 engine 

• X6 xDrive35i with N54B3000 engine 





To further reinforce the sports-oriented character of the E71, com¬ 
pared to the E70, the conventional chassis has been set lower by 
10 mm. 

The ride height has remained the same as on the E70 for the 
chassis and suspension system with adaptive drive. 

Compared to the E70, the dimensions and weight of the E71 
are as follows: 


Specification 

E71 

E70 

Unladen weight (kg) 

2,145 

2,125 

Length (mm) 

4,884 

4,854 

Width (mm) 

2,195 

2,197 

Height (mm) 

1,690 

1,766 

Wheelbase (mm) 

2,933 

2,933 

Track width, front (mm) 

1,644 

1,644 

Track width, rear (mm) 

1,706 

1,650 































1766 


Technical Comparison (E70 vs E71) 





1933 


► 


4884 



1644 

-► 


1706 

-M -► 


2195 


1983 


E70 X5 Body Dimensions 


E71 X6 Body Dimensions 


E71 Introduction Workbook 

5 


























































































































































































































































































































































































































































6 

E71 Introduction Workbook 


Bodyshell Construction 

• In the E71, demanding functional requirements have been 
achieved by the consistent implementation of innovative light¬ 
weight construction while adopting many components from 
the E70 sub-frame. 

• The E71 features hot-formed BTR materials in tailor rolled 
blanks (TRB) as well as micro-alloyed dual-phase steels. 

• Torsional rigidity is comparable to the E70. 

The design layout of the body structure was primarily based on 
optimum interaction of passive safety measures for the purpose of 
achieving maximum safety for all vehicle occupants. 

A large number of body reinforcements were used in the safety-rel¬ 
evant areas of the front end, B-pillar and rear end while using new 
steel grades to provide a greater load bearing capacity compared to 
conventional steel. As a result, impact deformation is kept as low as 
possible while interacting with the restraint systems to ensure max¬ 
imum safety for all occupants. Impact energy that occurs during a 
collision is absorbed by the structure and correspondingly directed 
along load paths. 

The structure of the E71 was designed to conform to the US 
Lateral Impact New Car Assessment Program (LINCAP) at 64 
km/h/40mph with crabbed barrier, to US Insurance Institute for 
Highway Safety (IIHS) new side impact test at 50 km/h/31 mph at 
90° as well as to US high speed rear end impact 80 km/h/50mph 
with 70% offset. 

With the aim of providing the highest possible level of occupant 
protection in connection with the safety passenger compartment, 
all conceivable situations, going beyond legal requirements, were 
considered in the simulations. 

The body structure remains intact at an impact of up to 15 km/h 
(lateral 40% offset at front and rear) at an impact angle of 10°. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Other steels 

7 

CR420X, CR950DL 

2 

DC04 - DX54D, DX56D 

8 

HD680C 

3 

HC180BD - HC180YD 

9 

22MnB5 (BTR165) 

4 

HC260BD, HC240LAD 

10 

Plastic 

5 

HC300BD 

11 

AIMg3Mn - AISilOMgMn, 
AIMg04, 5Mn04 

6 

HC380LAD 










































Passive Safety 

A complex, perfectly coordinated system, consisting of various 
safety components ensures the greatest possible passenger pro¬ 
tection in the event of an accident occurring while reinforcing the 
concept of "The Ultimate Driving Machine". This system consists 
of the seat belt, airbag and steering assembly maximizes passen¬ 
ger safety. 

The integrated safety electronics has the important task of trigger¬ 
ing the right airbag at the right safety level and right time corre¬ 
sponding to the type and severity of collision . The intelligent sys¬ 
tem does not deploy any airbags that are not required, thus ensur¬ 
ing that they are still available to protect the vehicle occupants in 
the event of secondary impacts. This system achieves the US Top 
Safety Picks in the IIHS crash test. 

Structure 

The greatest possible degree of safety at the lowest possible 
weight was achieved through intensive co-operation between 
development engineers and safety experts as part of the develop¬ 
ment of the E71 body: 

• Optimum design layout and utilization of deformation zones 
for generating intelligent and coordinated vehicle characteris¬ 
tics. 


• Minimizing of deformation depth and intrusion speeds during 
side impacts through reinforced side structures in the B-pillar 
and sill/rockers, high-strength door reinforcement, sturdy seat 
cross member and a cross beam in the underbody assembly. 

• Even in the event of a severe impact, the passenger compart¬ 
ment effectively safeguards the occupants thanks to the heav¬ 
ily reinforced pillars and roof members. 

The energy-absorption characteristics are achieved by maintaining 
the passenger compartment structure and the successful adapta¬ 
tion of restraint systems. 

It was possible to significantly improve the rigidity of the body by 
using a closed torsion ring around the D-pillarand by optimum 
node design layout. Another feature used to increase the torsional 
strength is the load-sharing, wedged tailgate. By applying tension 
to the hatch between the D-pillars, the hatch shell, with its profiles, 
increases the rigidity. 

E71 Torsion Ring 


• Extremely rigid passenger compartments. 

• High-strength, large volume carrier structures with specific 
use of high and super high strength steel grades in the front 
section, roof and side frame as well as in the rear section. 

• The implementation of tried-and-tested design elements in 
frontal impacts with complete or minimum offset for effective 
transmission and dissipation of forces. 



E71 Introduction Workbook 

7 



8 

E71 Introduction Workbook 


Pedestrian Protection 

This system was adopted from the E70: 

• The aluminum hood 

• The hood hinges have a disengaging mechanism 
in the direction of impact 

• The brackets for the hood latches collapse 

• The plastic side panel module 

The bodyshell structure has been lowered and the resulting space 
filled in with a plastic carrier structure (module carrier) with a plastic 
fender. This separates the "soft" requirements of design and 
pedestrian protection from the "hard" requirements of rigidity, 
stability, high and low-speed crash performance. 

The front lower wheel arch carrier support creates a space which 
is filled with a plastic module carrier. 



Front End Design 

The fenders are made from a plastic, of the same material as the 
bumper panels. This makes it possible to use the same painting 
process (painting temperature should be 85°C/185°F) for both 
components. 

In simulated pedestrian protection tests, a test object (3.5 kg/7.7 lb) 
is shot against the side panel at a speed of 35-40 km/h or 25mph. 



E71 Front Section Components 

In most cases, the deformation proved to be reversible (no splinter¬ 
ing and no breakage of component, including the paintwork). As a 
passive system, the module carrier of the side panel module effec¬ 
tively contributes to complying with pedestrian protection require¬ 
ments. With its ribbed structure, the module carrier essentially acts 
as a spring element. 


E71 Side Panel Module 



Interior 


Accents and Features 

For the purpose of differentiating the top engine models, the 
BMW X6 exhibits the following design features. 

• Badges on front fenders differentiate engine models 

xDrive35i 

xDrive50i 

• Sporty coupe appearance 

• Chrome trim accentuates windows 

• The already expressive kidney is further accentuated and the 
sports-orientated character of the vehicle is emphasized. 

• An E60 style sunroof is used with Panaroma glass sunroof 
option not available for E71. 

Continuous chrome strip in area of 'Hofmeister' kink, no joint as 
on other models. 

Dashboard 

The leather-grain surface material of the dashboard is made from 
an in mould coating (IMC) slush skin with the following properties: 

Maximum performance over the entire service life of the vehicle, 
light resistant, provides protection against scratching and soiling, 
complies with technical and legal requirements, excellent appear¬ 
ance as well as touch and feel properties. 

The leather-coated dashboard option provides optimum appear¬ 
ance and feel. Special non-woven upholstery padding under the 
leather makes it feel soft and flexible. The leather therefore has 
ample give when touched. The scent of real leather conveys an 
air of exclusivity in the vehicle interior. 


The seams additionally contribute to the high-grade visual appear¬ 
ance of the dashboard and door shoulder. 

DoorTrim 

• 2-part decor strip for high-quality appearance. 

• Leather trim pull handle (available in Nevada leather, Alcantara 
and Saddle exclusive leather), basic: soft paint; Handle brack¬ 
et in 2-component technology. 

• Ambient lighting in the door handle and in the door pocket 
(option). 

• Recessed handle for driver's door. 

The new recessed handle in the driver's door improved ergonom¬ 
ics. While new ambient lighting (option) conveys a better impres¬ 
sion of space at night. 



Front door trim, Rear door trim 

front passenger side 


E71 Introduction Workbook 

9 









E71 


Front Seats 

The following seat variants are offered for the E70: 

• Fully electric basic seat 

• Multifunction seat 

• Sports seat 

In addition to the functions of the fully electrically operated basic 
seat, the multifunction seat also has: 

• Electric backrest-head adjustment 

• Pneumatic lumbar support depth and height adjustment 

• Electric head restraint height adjustment 

• Luxury head restraint with manual lateral adjustment 
("rest head restraint") 

• Electric seat back width adjustment 

• Electric depth adjustment of the seat 

• Memory functions for driver and front passenger 



Workbook 



Possible options (driver and front passenger): 

• Four-circuit seat heating 

• Active seat 

• Active seat ventilation including seat heating 

Active Seat Ventilation 

The improved cushion and cover design and active ventilation of 
the seats increases the climate and physiological well-being of the 
passengers. 

The system is operated by means of a button on the climate con¬ 
trol panel. A blue LCD indicates that the system is active. The set¬ 
ting (3-stage) is shown in the control display. 

This option is only available in conjunction with the electrically 
adjustable front luxury option and the seat heating option for driver 
and front passenger. 

Active seat ventilation is split into the following components: 

• Perforated cover in Nevada leather 

• Seat heating 

• Interlay knitted fabric for optimum 
air distribution 

• Nine axial-flow fans (four in the 
backrest, five in the seat cushion) 

Note: Crash sensitive head 
restraints are standard 
equipment. 









Rear Seats 

The vehicle offers ample knee room in the rear while the range of 
options makes it possible to individualize. There are two individual 
sports style seats in the rear, demonstrating the E71’s coupe char¬ 
acter while creating an exclusive atmosphere. Additional storage 
space is provided on either side between the rear seats and door 
trim panel. 

Two large drink holders and a storage compartment or alternatively 
an ashtray and cigarette lighter are integrated in the rear console 
located between the two individual seats. This unit is closed off by 
two roller covers, concealing a large, open and divided storage 
compartment. 



Note: The ISOFIX system is accessed through a slit 
in the seat cover. 


Individual Rear Seats 

The seats are designed as full foam folding split seats with sepa¬ 
rate backrest and seat cushion and a torso angle of 26°. The split 
ratio is 60/40. The backrest is unlocked by means of a handle on 
the backrest. The integrated head restraints and the individual 
seats with molded side sections underscore the high-performance 
coupe character of the rear seat system. The special design layout 
of the headliner ensures optimum headroom without having to 
forego a folding center armrest and a ski bag (option). 

Rear seat heating (three-stage switch, heating output as on E70); 
is only in conjunction with front seat heating. 

Seat Belt Height Adjustment 

In terms of passive safety, due to the geometry of the area sur¬ 
rounding the seats, there is no need for a seat belt height adjust¬ 
ment feature. In the E71, the seat belt system has been ergonomi¬ 
cally tailored to the rear passengers while taking the various physi¬ 
cal sizes into account. This system complies with stringent passen¬ 
ger safety requirements and corresponding legal stipulations. 



E71 Introduction Workbook 

11 




















12 

E71 Introduction Workbook 


Glove Compartment 


Center Storage Compartments 


The E71 glove compartment was inspired by the E70 design. It 
locks automatically when the vehicle is locked. The volume of the 
glove box is bigger, as the airbag has been moved closer to the 
windshield. The new position makes it easier to look into and 
access stored items. 

Both lids are opened by means of a button on the left, next to the 
glove compartment. This is located under the center grill, integrat¬ 
ed into the right side end of the lower accent strip. The lids are 
coupled with each other; in a way that they automatically move 
together upwards or downward at the push of a button. 

A 6-disc DVD multimedia changer is offered as an option, with 
CCC cars only. It is located in the glove box and will also be avail¬ 
able on the E70. This option allows video media to be played on 
the front CID providing the vehicle speed is 0 mph. 



The console storage compart¬ 
ment is located on the center 
console, the two lids can be 
opened separately at the push of 
a button. The buttons are located 
on the front of the console, each 
directly to the right or left 
beneath the lids. The lids may be 
operated individually. They open 
automatically with a spring and 
are closed manually. 

Drinks holders and extra storage 
tray, are located in the front section of the center console, where 
the compartment tray is covered by sliding roller doors. These 
meet in the middle and can be opened to the front or back with 
two small handles. In the front area, there is a storage tray or, 
optionally, an ashtray with a cigarette lighter. In the rear section 
there are two large drinks holders. 

Knee Pads 

Knee pads made from high- 
quality glass fiber reinforced 
plastic, characterized by out¬ 
standing stability and lightweight 
construction. The knee pads are 
coated with leather as standard. 

The knee pads can be coated 
with all types of leather depend¬ 
ing on the selected leather 
option. The Alcantara leather 
combination is considered the 
exclusive leather option. 












Luggage Compartment 


• A large luggage compartment volume at 1540 liters 
compared to large coupe and SUVs. 

• Delivers ample functionality. 

• Extensive additional storage options. 

• Folding luggage compartment cover can be stowed away 
under luggage compartment floor. 

• Stainless steel loading step/sill. 

• Storage package with two lashing rails (option). 

The design layout and size of the luggage compartment are note¬ 
worthy when compared to vehicle of this class. 

Due to the run-flat tires standard on this vehicle a spare tire is no 
longer required. Though a space saver tire is standard equipment in 
the US. 



The luggage compartment floor is opened with the help of gas- 
pressurized prop piston. The optional storage package includes 
useful items such as two lashing rails with four adjustable lashing 
eyes, stowage nets, bag hooks, a light for the storage compartment 
and a 12 Volt connection in the center console. 

The luggage compartment floor is lockable as standard. The lug¬ 
gage compartment cover is easy to remove and install and coated 
with a high quality textile material. Due to its Z-folding design, the 
cover can be folded and stored under the luggage compartment 
floor provided the space-saver wheel option was not ordered. 

An fastening system is optionally offered, which is available only 
together with the storage package. With this option, the luggage 
compartment can be divided allowing smaller items of luggage to 
be secured. 


The stainless steel loading step/sill gives the vehicle an individual 
and high quality appearance. 



E71 Introduction Workbook 

13 








14 

E71 Introduction Workbook 


Tailgate 


There is two different tailgates options offered on the E71 X6: 

• Manual Tailgate with dual height adjustment 

• Automatic Tailgate (HKL) 


Note: The adjustment can only be performed when the 
tailgate is in the fully “open up” position. 


Manual Tailgate 

The system operates with the use of two hydraulic shocks that pro¬ 
vide the lifting of the tailgate. To set the maximum tailgate opening 
height, these hydraulic shocks can be manually adjusted to 2 sepa¬ 
rate positions. The adjustment is made by rotating the hydraulic 
shock/covers on the right and left lifting cylinders, which are appro¬ 
priately, marked 1 and 2. 

When set to the #1 position, the tailgate opens up to its low set¬ 
ting. When the #2 position is selected, the tailgate is raised to its 
maximum setting. To fully open the tailgate when the adjustment is 
in position (1), the tailgate must be first lowered approximately 12” 
and then raised all the way up, before position #2 is selected. 


Manual Tailgate adjustment on 
the hydraulic lifting shocks 



Position #1 corre¬ 
sponds to the lowest 
tailgate height setting. 

(Lowest Setting) 



Position #2 corre¬ 
sponds to the highest 
tailgate height setting. 

(Highest Setting) 









Automatic Tailgate (HKL) 

In terms of its functionality, the automatic tailgate operation is iden¬ 
tical to that of the E70 X5 HKL. It differs only by minor changes 
made to the mechanical and electrical systems.The automatic tail¬ 
gate operating system has been adapted to the body of the X6 and 
only the changes/modifications are outlined. 

The tailgate of the E71 X6 is a one-piece component. 

Automatic opening of the tailgate may be done by remote control 
or push button. Closing the tailgate is only possible with the use of 
the push button. The push button on the inside of the tailgate no 
longer connects to the junction box but rather directly to the HKL 
module. 

An anti-trap system is provided and integrated into the screw 
drives units. The HKL monitors position and current of the screw 
drive units. 

Since there is no lower tailgate, there is no need for the lower tail¬ 
gate contact. The fact that no signal is sent is ignored by the con¬ 
trol unit (JB). 

Automatic Tailgate Operation 

The tailgate lift (3) controls and monitors the opening or closing of 
the tailgate. This can be triggered by the tailgate push buttons (8, 

11 and 14). The controller (5) can be used to adjust the maximum 
opening angle for the tailgate on Central Information Display (4). 

The signals from outside temperature sensor (1) and the vehicle 
speed (6) are evaluated in the decision as to whether the tailgate 
may be opened or closed in response to pushing the button. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Outside temperature sensor 

8 

Interior tailgate push button 

2 

Instrument cluster 

9 

Drive unit for automatic 
soft-close function 

3 

Automatic tailgate operation 
control unit 

10 

Tailgate lock 

4 

Central information display 

11 

Exterior tailgate push button 

5 

Controller 

12 

Not applicable 

6 

Dynamic stability control 

13 

Car Access System 3 

7 

Tailgate screw drive 

14 

Interior tailgate push button 


E71 Introduction Workbook 

15 




























































E71 Automatic Tailgate Operation System Circuit Diagram 


16 

E71 Introduction Workbook 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Car Access System 3 (CAS3) 

14 

Interior tailgate push button 

2 

Integrated automatic heating and 
air-conditioning system (IHKA) 

15 

Interior tailgate push button 
illumination 

3 

Tailgate push button in the center 
console switch cluster (SZM) 

16 

Not applicable 

4 

Tailgate lift (HKL) 

17 

Hall sensor, left 

5 

Spindle drive motor, right 

18 

Hall sensor, left 

6 

Hall sensor, right 

19 

Spindle drive motor, left 

7 

Hall sensor, right 

20 

Remote control receiver in 
diversity module 

8 

Connections to the junction-box 
(ECU) 

21 

Remote control aerial in the 
rear window 

9 

Rear hatch contact 

K- 

CAN 

Body CAN 

10 

Upper tailgate lock motor 

KI.30 

Terminal 30 

11 

Exterior tailgate push button 

Kl. 

30g 

Terminal 30 switched 

12 

Contact for drive of automatic 
soft-close function 

Rel.S 

CA 

Connection to the automatic 
soft-close relay 

13 

Automatic soft-close for tailgate 
























































































































<s> 

10x/13x 


RLSS 


TPM_SEN 

4x/5x 


SVFA 


SBFA 


ASP 

2x 

.i 




SMC 

2x 





• • ® o 


( 1 ) 


EDCSHL 


Jl 


EDCSHR 


E71 Introduction Workbook 

17 




















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































18 

E71 Introduction Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Vehicle Walk Around 


Using this training manual, inspect the overall vehicle exterior 
and answer the questions below: 

Fill in the chart below regarding the external body materials. 


Body Component 

Material 

Hood 


Fenders 


Doors 



Fill in the blank below with the correct answer regarding the overall 
dimensions on the E71: 

The overall length the E71 is_ mm,_than the 

E70. 

The unladen weight of the E71 is_ kg,_ than 

the E70. 

The wheelbase of the E71 is_ mm,_than 

the E70. 

The overall height of the E71 is_ mm,_than 

the E70. 

Observe the wheels and tires on the E71. 

Are run-flat tires standard or optional on the E71 ? 


Measure the front and rear hubs and record your findings below. 



What is the purpose of this feature on the E71? 


What precaution must be taken while mounting the available space 
saver spare tire in these vehicles? 


Will E70 wheels fit on an E71 vehicle properly? 


What’s the obvious difference between the front and rear wheels? 


















































































Workshop Exercise - Vehicle Walk Around 


Open the tailgate and note its operation. 


In comparison to the E70, how does the E71 tailgate differ? 


Take note of the tailgate height when fully opened. 

Is the maximum opening height of the E71 HKL tailgate 
adjustable? 


How is the maximum opening height of the E71 HKL tailgate 
adjusted? 



E70 Deck Lid 


Locate and note the position/operation of the emergency 
tailgate release. 


Where is the emergency tailgate release located? 



E71 Deck Lid 


Is there an anti-trap system for the HKL tailgate operation? 


What tool, if any, is needed to gain access and operate the emer- Where is the anti-trap device located? 
gency tailgate release? 


E71 Introduction Workbook 

19 
















20 

E71 Introduction Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Vehicle Walk Around 


Look over the vehicle interior of the E71. 


How do these procedures differ from the E70? 



What is the passenger capacity of the E71 ? 


Locate the vehicle tool kit and note contents. 

In the tool kit, there is a red “hammer like” tool, what are the two 
uses for this tool? 

1 . 


Find the following components and note locations: 


Component 

Location 

Battery 


DSC control Module 


Spare Tire 


SDARS 


HiFi Amplifier 


TCU 


Fuel Pump Module (EKP) 


ICM Module 


Rear Power Distribution Box 


QMVH Module 


Vertical Dynamics Module (VDM) 


Cooling pump for turbos (N63) 


Cooling pump for intercoolers (N63) 












































Workshop Exercise - Vehicle Walk Around 


Examine underhood components and note the following items: 

□ Engine Oil Fill 

□ Dipstick (N54 and N63) □ Oil Level Sensor(N54 and N63) 

□ Washer Fluid Fill 

□ Power Steering Fill 

□ Brake Fluid Fill (Master Cylinder) 

□ E-Box Access 

□ A/C High and Low Pressure Ports 

□ Micro filter Access 

□ A/C Ambient (Outside) Temp Sensor 

□ Air Filter Replacement 

□ Fender Adjustment Points 

□ Headlight Bulb Access 

□ DME Control Module Location 

□ Battery Junction Locations 

□ Coolant Reservoir Fill (N54 and N63) 

□ Coolant Reservoir Fill for intercoolers on N63 



Examine the N63 engine bay and list the components that need 
to be removed in order to gain access and replace the air filters. 


E71 Introduction Workbook 

21 






















22 

E71 Introduction Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - E71 X6 Cooling Module 


Remove the bumper cover, cooler module brace struts, plastic grill frame and top radiator cover. 


Examine the components of the E71 Cooling module and note their location. 


Label each cooler/radiator using the graphics and arrows shown on the next page. 










































Workshop Exercise - 
E71 X6 Cooling Module 




E71 Introduction Workbook 




















































































































E71 


Workshop Exercise - Walk Around Quiz 

1) How is the rear track increased on the E71? 

Check the best possible answer. 

□ With the use of the QMVH system 

□ With the use of the rear rim off-set 

□ With the use of wider rear tires 

□ With the use of rear hub spacers 

2) How many motors are used in the HKL system? 

Check the best possible answer. 

□ Two 

□ Three 

□ Four 

3) What signal typically going to the JBE on (early) E70 is no 
longer used on late E70 and E71 HKL? 

Check the best possible answer. 

□ Anti-trap signal 

□ Tailgate open signal 

□ Tailgate closed signal 

□ Lower tailgate contact signal 



24 

Introduction Workbook 

4) Study the E71 Bus System Overview and list the 3 major 
changes below, compared to the E70 Bus System? 


1 . 


2. 


3. 


5) What is the tool in the illustration used for in the E71 ? 

Check the best possible answer. 

□ Emergency open for the tailgate 

□ Emergency Brake and shifter release 

□ Emergency Brake release only 

□ This tool is not used in E71 

6) Which statement is true about the 6 disc multimedia changer? 

Check the best possible answer. 

□ It can now play DVD/videos on the front CID. 

□ It now can to play up to 6 DVDs on the rear display. 

□ The driver can now view a video in the front CID while driving. 

□ It now can play DVD/videos on the front CID on Non CCC cars. 

7) A Panorama Glass roof is available as an option for the E71. 

Check the best possible answer. 

□ TRUE 

□ FALSE 








Walk Around Summary 

After the vehicle walk around and overview of topics in the section. 

Check and make sure you can answer the following questions: 

□ What are the basic dimensional on the E71 ? 

□ What are the materials used on the hood and fenders etc.? 

□ Do you understand the E71 HKL tailgate operation? 

□ What are the components/systems involved in the “Pedestrian 
Protection System? 

□ Do you understand the difference between the front and rear 
wheels on the E71? 

□ Do you understand the E71 seat options, functions and con¬ 
figuration? 

□ Do you understand the different models offered of the E71 ? 

□ How is the E71 EMF released in the event of an emergency? 

□ Can you locate the vehicles fuses (front and rear)? 

□ What is new about the 6 disk changer? 

□ How is the JB accessed? 

□ Can you identify and locate all of the changes to the 
Bus System? 

□ How are the front headlight bulbs accessed? 

□ Can you identify and locate the individual coolers that make up 
the E71 cooling module? 


E71 Introduction Workbook 

25 


