Table of Contents 

Subject Page 

Body - Interior Features .2 

Objectives of The Module. 2 

Interior Features .3 

Center Console.3 

Seats .4 

Doors .5 

Secure Storage .6 

Instrument Cluster.7 

Test Functions.16 

Workshop Hints.17 

IHKS-Air Conditioning .19 

Review Questions .29 















Interior Features 

Model: E52 

Production Date: 03/00 To Present 


Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Perform proper removal of a door panel. 

• Describe the Instrument Cluster and IKE functionality. 

• Understand gauge functions. 

• Perform instrument cluster self test. 

• Understand the IHKS control panel operation. 

• Describe the differences of the Z8 IHKS compared to previous IHKS systems. 


2 


Interior Features/E52 


Center Console 


Purpose of the System 

The center console provides layout for various control switches. It can be accessed by 
removing the parking brake lever cover boot and carefully prying up on the console. 

System Components 

• Sport Switch - When pressed, the indicator light is on and signals the ECM for a 

sport throttle operation mode (same as M5). If not selected, a com 
fort throttle mode will be in operation (reset back to this position 
each time the ignition switch is cycled). 

• Hazard Switch - Activates the hazard lights, also used to reset the hazards after 

an impact. 

• Central Lock - When the doors are closed, pressing the button activates the 

door locks (single lock), pressing the button again, or pulling the 
interior door handle twice will open the door(s). 

• Convertible Top Switch - Lowers and raises the soft top. 



DWS: 

Tire pressure 
Warning 


DSC III 



The two position Seat Heater Switches 
are located on the left and right sides of 
the center console as shown above. 


3 

Interior Features/E52 





Seats 


The seats are power operated (driver and pas¬ 
senger) for base raising, forward/backward, 
and recline positions. The Z8 seats do not have 
“seat memory”. 

The headrest can be manually raised, but there 
is a remote release (rightside headrest cushion) 
to lower the headrest. 



To access the navigation cd or compact 
disc changer compartments, pull the 
release strap to fold the seat forward. 




4 


Interior Features/E52 














Doors 



The doors panels are fitted with storage “pockets” 

The passenger door is fitted with a manual locking knob (indicated on the left) which can 
lock the door if the vehicle battery were to fail. 

Simply slide the knob downward and close the door. It can not be opened from the out¬ 
side. 

In this position, the door can be opened from the inside by pulling the inside door handle 
twice. 

The driver’s door can then be locked with the key . 



To remove the door panels, an addition¬ 
al torx screw at the rear of each panel 
(arrow in the left diagram) needs to be 
removed in addition to the traditional fas¬ 
teners. 


5 


Interior Features/E52 










Secure Storage 


Secure lockable storage com¬ 
partments are provided behind 
each seat. 

These compartments are manu¬ 
ally locked with a master key 
(indicated by arrows on the right 
and lower right). 

Shown to the right is the 
Navigation cd unit with fuse box 
and manual trunklid release. 



Shown to the right is the sound 
system CD Changer with the 
flash light and charging socket 
which is located behind the dri¬ 
ver’s seat. 



6 

Interior Features/E52 





Instrument Cluster 

Purpose of the System 

The instrument cluster displays status information about different operating systems in the 
vehicle. The information is received using Dial gauges, LCD display, Warning LEDs and 
Gong tones. 


• Z8 instrument cluster is based on the E39 technology (base version). Due to the 
limited space available in the Z8, the indicator instruments have been separated from 
the electronics. The resulting indicator modules are connected with the electronic 
control (instrument cluster module) through a separate wiring harness. 

• The instrument cluster consists of 7 modules, 4 modules with pointer instruments 
(stepper motor driven) and 3 modules with displays and control. The instrument 
cluster control module (IKE) contains the necessary electronics to control the modules. 


• The IKE is connected to the vehicle wiring harness and contains the three bus 
interfaces - Diagnosis bus, K-bus, and Can-Bus. 



7 


Interior Features/E52 
















































































System Components 



1. Fuel gauge with reserve light 

2. Speedometer with indicator 
and EML7DSC warning lights 

3. Dimmer control for instrument 
cluster lighting 

4. Tachometer with indicator and 
warning lights: charging system, 
convertible top, DWS, ABS, 
handbrake/brake fluid/CBC, 
service engine soon, engine 

oil pressure and level 

5. Coolant temperature gauge 
with over heat light 


6. Direction and rear fog light indicator 

7. Analog clock 

8. Clock and trip odometer reset knob 

9. Seat belt, high beam, and SRS 
warning lights 

10. Odometer, trip odometer, and 
Service Interval digital display 

11. Directional and brake lining 
indicators 


8 

Interior Features/E52 













The instrument cluster is divided into module components, shown below is the rear view of 
the instruments. 

• To remove the instrument cluster: carefully pry out the dash side panels (driver’s and 
passenger’s), and remove the four corner screws. 



• The instrument cluster assembly is hard wired to the IKE module which is located 
behind the glove box. 



9 

Interior Features/E52 







Instruments, Indicators and Displays 

Speedometer 

The speedometer module is equipped with different indicators corresponding to the coun¬ 
try-specific variant. The distance pulse for indicating the road speed comes from the DSC 
control module. The input to the DSC III originates from the rear left wheel speed sensor. 

Tachometer 

The tachometer is controlled by the IKE (rpm signal supplied by the ECM). The engine 
speed information is made available to the other control units via the K-bus. 

Clock 

The time is indicated by a classic looking analog clock (refer to control knob for setting). 

Fuel Gauge 

The level in the fuel tank is measured with a lever-type sensor that is connected to the IKE 
using a dedicated ground terminal and sensor circuit. The level sensor does contain a 
reserve contact. The fuel reserve warning light is activated by the IKE based on the low level 
of the sensor. The "fuel reserve" signal is additionally output as information for the engine 
management. The level sensor is designed for the shape of the tank by the resistance char¬ 
acteristic curve and IKE coding data. 

Coolant Temperature Gauge 

The coolant temperature is measured in the Engine Control Module (ECM) and is sent via 
the CAN-bus to the IKE for the instrument modules. The coolant temperature informatiois 
also provided to other systems on the K-bus. The IKE also determines the coolant tem¬ 
perature with a separate NTC sensor. This temperature is indicated in the coolant temper¬ 
ature gauge during the initialization phase of the CAN-bus. To prevent “heat surge” from 
affecting the gauge after a hot engine restart, the IKE buffers this circuit. If the IKE detects 
a higher temperature on restart compared to when the engine was switched off, the value 
stored at “engine off” is indicated. The current value will be displayed approximately 20 sec¬ 
onds after restart. 

Coolant Overheat Warning 

The IKE activates on the coolant overheat warning light for 2 seconds when the igni¬ 
tion is switched on (pre-drive check). It is then controlled by the engine control module via 
the CAN-bus. If the coolant overheat warning light is activated by the engine control mod¬ 
ule, this CAN message is made available to other modules on the K-bus. The IKE receives 
the value via the CAN-bus and If the maximum value is reached, the gauge needle is moved 
in the center of the red warning zone. 


10 

Interior Features/E52 



Service Interval Display (SIA4) 

The Service Interval Display (SIA4) is a consumption-dependent distance-based inspection 
display with the ability to indicate remaining distance. It serves the driver and the workshop 
as an indication showing when an engine oil service or distance based inspection is due. 
The current Service Interval status is indicated as from ignition "terminal 15 ON" for up tolO 
seconds after reaching a minimum engine speed of 400 rpm. The SIA4 data is also stored 
in the light check module (LCM). The SIA4 can be reset like current BMW models. Each 
reset can be carried out independent of each other, oil service or distance inspection reset. 

Total Distance and Trip Odometer 

The current trip odometer reading is shown in the display from ignition terminal R "ON". 
When terminal R is switched "OFF" the odometer reading (total mileage) can be displayed 
for approx. 25 seconds by pressing the trip odometer reset button and then releasing it. 
The total distance is made available on the K-bus which is stored in the IKE and in the LCM. 

Ambient Temperature 

The IKE determines the current outside temperature based on the outside temperature sen¬ 
sor (NTC resistor). The outside temperature sensor has a dedicated ground and sensor cir¬ 
cuit to the IKE. The "outside temperature" information is transferred from the instrument 
cluster on the bus and is displayed by the multifunction radio (MIR). When the ignition is 
switched off, the outside temperature sensor is read in timed minute intervals by the IKE. 
For this purpose, the IKE is activated for a short time, it makes available the "outside tem¬ 
perature" information and then switches off again (sleep mode). 

Instrument Light Dimming 

The instrument lights and the digital display lighting are dimmed in different ways. The pulse 
width modulated signal (58g) from the LCM is used for instrument light dimming. With the 
lights switched off, the brightness information from the phototransistor (integrated in the 
speedometer) is used for the purpose of controlling and adapting the lighting of the digital 
display to the ambient conditions. With the lights switched on, the lighting intensity can be 
additionally varied with the dimmer within a limited range. In this case, the ambient light 
information provided by the phototransitors has priority in controlling the intensity of the 
lights. 


11 


Interior Fetures/E52 



Warning and Indicator Lights 

General information: light emitting didoes (LEDs) are used to backlight all warning light 
symbols. Two-colored LEDs are used for symbols that can light up red or yellow. 

General Brake Warning Light 

Illuminated red when: 

• Parking brake applied with ignition switched on. 

• Brake fluid low level warning via bus signal from the LCM. 

• Malfunction signal on CAN-bus from DSC to the IKE. 

• Electronic brake pressure distribution (EBV) failure warning from DSC control unit. 
Illuminated yellow when: 

• Malfunction warning on CAN-bus brake assistant from DSC control unit. 

During the pre-drive check, the warning light is illuminated red and yellow for 1 second pro¬ 
vided the function for the brake assistant is coded, otherwise the warning light will be illu¬ 
minated only in red for 2 seconds. If the parking brake is applied, only the red warning light 
will be illuminated. 

The warning light can light up yellow only when there is no warning for red. The DSC 
switches on the yellow warning light via the CAN-bus if the DSC detects a mal¬ 
function in the brake assist. 

Seat Belt Indicator Light 

The seat belt indicator light is activated when ignition terminal 15 is switched "ON". The 
LCM sends a K-bus signal until the seat belt is latched (contact is opened). 

Indicator Lights 

Direction indicator, high beam, and the rear fog light indicator lights are switched by means 
of a corresponding bus message from the LCM to the IKE. 

Charge Indicator Light 

The warning light is activated by the compact alternator when there is no charging output 
to the IKE. 


12 


Interior Features/E52 



Oil Light 

The red warning light is activated by the oil pressure switch. 

The yellow warning light is activated by a K-bus message from the LCM to the IKE. The 
engine control module (ECM) evaluates the signal from the oil level sensor in the engine and 
sends a CAN message to the IKE. 

The IKE converts the message and passes it on to the LCM via the K-bus. The LCM com¬ 
pares the signal to coded data and sends a K-bus message to the IKE. The IKE activates 
the oil level warning with priority given to the oil pressure warning. 

The oil indicator light is illuminated yellow under following conditions: 

Oil level sensor defective: The oil level sensor is monitored by the ECM, and if a defect is 
detected, a message is sent to the LCM that is stored in fault memory. The LCM switches 
on the oil indicator light (yellow for oil level warning) for 30 seconds via the K-bus. This fault 
is set with ignition "ON", engine speed and oil pressure must have been detected. 

Low oil level detected: Low oil level is detected by the ECM only when the engine is run¬ 
ning and a message is sent to the LCM. This information is stored in the LCM and activates 
the yellow oil level indicator light for approximately 30 seconds after the ignition has been 
switched off. 

Oil loss recognized: Oil loss is detected by the ECM only when the engine is running. 
Consequently, the LCM immediately switches on the yellow oil level indicator light. 

ABS Indicator Light 

The warning light is activated by the ABS/DSC system. The warning light must also be 
activated if a signal line is interrupted. 

The circuit logic is: 

• Low signal (ground) = warning light off. 

• High signal (system voltage) = warning light on. 

• High signal (high resistance, break) = warning lamp on, recognizes a break or interruption 
in the signal line. 

SRS Indicator Light 

The SRS warning light is activated by a ground signal from the SRS control module for 
pre-drive check as well as system faults. 


13 

Interior Features/E52 



Service Engine Soon Light 


The "Service Engine Soon" warning light is activated by the ECM via the CAN bus. The light 
is illuminated for pre-drive checks as well as emission related faults. 

Warning Light for Automatic Stability Control (DSC) 

The "ASC" warning light is switched by the DSC system via the CAN-bus. As a function 
check after switching on the ignition, the DSC switches on the warning light for a limited 
period of time (pre-drive check). 

Warning Light for Tire Pressure Warning (DWS) 

The tire failure warning light is switched by a corresponding bus message from the tire pres¬ 
sure warning system (DWS) to the IKE. As a function check, the warning light is activated 
for 2 seconds (pre-drive check). 

The "EML" warning light is activated by the ECM via the CAN bus. If EML message is not 
received on the CAN-bus from the ECM to the IKE, the warning light is switched on for 1.5 
seconds after switching on the ignition (emergency running value). 

Brake Lining Warning Light (BBV) 

The brake lining warning light is located in the left direction indicator and is activated by 
the IKE. As a function check, the warning light is switched on for approx. 2 seconds after 
the ignition is switched on (pre-drive check). The sensors consist of a circuit loop in the rear 
right and front left brake pads (connected in series). When the brake pad is worn, the cir¬ 
cuit loop is interrupted (recognized by the IKE) and the warning light is activated. The warn¬ 
ing is cancelled if the interruption is not detected for 30 seconds after ignition "ON" with the 
engine not running. 

Convertible Top Warning Light 

The convertible top warning light is activated by the Convertible Top Module (CVM III) via a 
circuit line. The warning light illuminates when the convertible top is operated, and flashes 
if the convertible top is not locked in either end position. 

Lights On Warning 

The audible warning for the lights “ON” and the indicator clock is installed in the qoeedome- 
ter module. The "lights ON" warning sounds for 8 cycles (one cycle = 500 ms "ON" / 500 
ms "OFF) when the ignition is switched off, the driver's door is opened for the first time and 
the instrument lights are switched on. The message to trigger the "lights ON" warning is 
read via the K-bus and is controlled by the IKE. 


14 


Interior Features/E52 



Ignition Key Warning 


The "ignition key warning" function is activated by the IKE. Based on a K-bus message, the 
LCM triggers the audible warning. The ignition key warning is triggered when the ignition is 
switched off and the driver's door is opened. The warning is immediately cancelled if the 
IKE receives a message from the LCM. 

Acoustic Cycle for Direction Indicators 

The acoustic generator for the direction indicators and the lights “ON” warning is installed 
in the speedometer module. The IKE activates the acoustic relay synchronously with the 
left and right direction indicator lights as well as the direction indicators. The "direction indi¬ 
cator" information comes from the LCM via the K-bus that also controls the synchroniza¬ 
tion. If a bulb failure is detected in a direction indicator, the IKE is informed by a K-bus mes¬ 
sage. Both indicator lamps are activated at twice the normal cycle frequency. 

Gong 

The IKE controls the tone 3 (T3) in the gong. An acoustic warning is output for the seat belt 
warning, ignition key warning, hand brake warning, tire pressure warning and speed 
warning. Depending on the type of warning, a short tone 3 (T3) is output repeatedly or only 
once. 

Acoustic seat belt warning: an acoustic seat belt warning is possible only in 
conjunction with a driver's seat belt buckle contact. The warning is activated by the LCM 
via the K-bus. When the belt contact is opened, the IKE activates the gong tone 3 (T3) 
intermittently for a maximum of 6 seconds after switching on the ignition. The gong is 
deactivated if the seat belt is buckled before this period of time has elapsed. 

Acoustic ignition lock warning: the ignition key warning is triggered for a maximum of 60 
seconds if the driver's door is opened with the ignition switched off. 

Acoustic speed warning: a speed warning is triggered by the IKE. If the speed threshold is 
exceeded, a short tone 3 (T3) sounds in the gong. If the speed drops below this threshold 
by more than 5 km/h, the tone will be triggered again upon exceeding the threshold. 

Acoustic parking brake warning: a parking brake warning is triggered at the gong as soon 
as the handbrake is applied and a road speed of more than 3 km/h is 
detected. The intermittent tone sounds for as long as the warning condition is applied or 
maximum 20 seconds. 

Acoustic tire pressure warning: the tire failure warning light is activated via the K-bus from 
the tire pressure warning system to the IKE. An acoustic warning in the form of the single 
tone 3 gong is triggered provided theignition is switched on. 


15 

Interior Features/E52 



System Operation 

Test Functions 

To access the test functions, the key must be in the accessory position. After the ignition 
switch is placed in the accessory position (terminal R), the odometer reset button must be 
pressed within 5 seconds and held in until the test functions appear. 


Test No. 

Function 

1 . 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Identification of control unit for instrument modules (sub tests 1.1-1.7) 

System test (2 sweeps) 

SIA data 

Current consumption values in 1/100 km and l/h 

Not used 

Fuel tank contents value 

Coolant temperature, outside temperature, current engine speed, current road speed. 
ADC values (system voltage, lever-type sensor voltage, left and right, phototransistor 
voltage and BVA, voltage terminal 30 in Volt. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

0 . 

System voltage terminal 30 in Volt. 

Read out country code. 

Read out units (AM / PM or mm.dd/dd.mm) etc. 

Not used 

Trigger acoustic signals 

Read out error bytes (self-diagnosis) 

Display of I/O port statuses 

Dimmer value (lights on) 

Internal clock 

Not Used 

Lock and release test functions 

Not Used 

Reset instrument cluster (software reset) 

End of test, test mode can be exited via this function 


16 

Interior Features/E52 





Workshop Hints 

Replacing the IKE 

The four examples described in the following section outline the procedure, conditions, and 

measures to ensure trouble-free repair of the instrument cluster. 

Example 1: the IKE is defective and the LCM is OK. 

• Replace the IKE (new part). 

• The manipulation dot is set with the ignition switched on. 

• The manipulation dot is set as the vehicle identification number in the LCM differs 
from the vehicle identification number in the IKE. 

• Re-encode the IKE. 

• Encode the IKE in accordance with the central encoding code. 

• Encode the vehicle identification number in the IKE. If the vehicle identification 
number is not encoded in the IKE, the total distance will not be recorded either in 
the IKE or in the LCM. 

• Switch the ignition off and on again. The manipulation point goes out, the 
IKE adopts the total mileage and the SIA4 data from the LCM. The infor 
mation exchange between the IKE and the LCM for joint data storage (SIA 
data, total mileage, vehicle identification number) is taken over. 

Example 2: the IKE is OK and the LCM is defective. 

• Replace the LCM (new part). 

• The manipulation dot is set with the ignition switched on. 

• The manipulation dot is set if the vehicle identification number in the LCM differs from 
the vehicle identification number in the IKE. 

• Re-encode the LCM in accordance with the central encoding code. 

• Encode the vehicle identification number in the LCM, the total distance will not 
be recorded in the LCM as long as the vehicle identification number is not 
encoded in the LCM. 

• Switch ignition off and on again. The manipulation dot goes out, the LCM adopts the 
total mileage and the SIA4 data from the IKE. The information exchange between 
the IKE and the LCM for joint data storage (SIA data, total 

mileage, vehicle identification number) is taken over. 


17 


Interior Features/E52 



Example 3: the IKE and the LCM need to be replaced. 

Note: Replace both control modules at the same time only when necessary (total mileage 

recording will be irretrievably lost). 

• Replace the IKE and LCM with the battery disconnected (new parts). 

• When the ignition is switched on, the manipulation dot is set and the total mileage 
is set to zero. The previous total mileage is irretrievably lost. 

• Encode the IKE and LCM in accordance with the central encoding code. 

• Encode the vehicle identification number in the IKE and in the LCM. 

• Switch ignition off and on again. The manipulation dot goes out, the LCM adopts the 
total mileage and the SIA4 data from the IKE. The information exchange 
between the IKE and the LCM for joint data storage (SIA4 data, total mileage, 
vehicle identification number) is taken over. 

Example 4: the IKE or the LCM is to be replaced as a “diagnostic test”. 

Note: Although, in principle, replacing one of the two control units as a test is possible, it 

should be avoided. 

• The IKE or the LCM from another vehicle is installed for testing purposes. 

• When the ignition is switched on, the manipulation dot is set and the IKE 
continues to record the total mileage. The total mileage is only recorded in the 
IKE as long as the vehicle identification number differs. There is no total 
mileage transfer to the LCM. 


18 

Interior Features/E52 



IHKS - Heating and Air Conditioning 

Purpose of the System 

An integrated heating/air conditioning control system (IHKS) is used in the Z8 to provide 
the driver and passanger a comfortable atmosphere regardless of conditions outside 
the vehicle. The heater/air conditioner is designed as an air-based control. 6 actuator are 
used to distribute the air and control the temperature. 






■T" -- lA . 
■y. i 




£ 


p 




m vim*'; 

i,._^ ^ ‘ !y>- . 



... ,7 

L. 


System Components 

The IHKS consists of the following main components: 

• Electronic Control panel/module with integrated fresh air grille 

• Heater/air conditioner unit 

• Five actuator (bus stepper motors) for controlling the recirculated air, tempera 
ture mixing, defroster, face vent and foot-well flaps 

• One actuator (high speed stepper motor) for controlling the fresh air flap 

• Electric shut-off water valve 

• Electric auxiliary water pump 

• Refrigerant pressure sensor 

• Evaporator temperature sensor 

• Rear window defogger relay 

• Series resistors for blower motor 


19 

Interior Features/E52 






IHKS Control Panel 

The interior temperature, fan speed, and air distribution are set with classic rotary knobs 
and push buttons. The setting request are processed by the integrated electronics. 



Number 

Description 

1 . 

Blower setting (5-stage rotary switch, including off) 

2. 

Defrost button 

3. 

Temperature setting (potentiometer) 

4. 

Air Distributor (potentiometer) 

5. 

Rear window defragger button (if hardtop fitted) 

6. 

A/C Program selector switch (potentiometer) 

7. 

Air flow control 

8. 

Fresh air grille 


20 

Interior Features/E52 
























Control Panel - Connections 


A total of 3 plug connections 
are integrated in the IHKS 
control module. 

The forth is a separate con¬ 
nection to the blower switch. 



The IHKS control module 
is located on the back of 
the control panel. 

The Z8 IHKS can be coded and 
diagnosed via the DIS/MoDIC. 



Blower Setting 

The blower control is designed as a 5-stage switch (including off). When the blower switch 
is set to the zero position all flaps are closed and the refrigerant circuit is switched off 
automatically. 

The IHKS features “ram” air compensation in which the fresh air flap is increasingly closed 
as the vehicle speed increases thus making it dependent on the type of top used (hardtop 
or soft top). The fresh air flap is operated by a high speed stepper motor. The IHKS receives 
information (via the K-bus) as to whether the soft top is open or closed. 


21 


Interior Features/E52/ST038/5/3/00 











System Operation 


Functions: 

• Blower control 

• Temperature control 

• Recirculated air/fresh air mode 

• Air conditioner mode 

• Defroster function 

• Air distribution 

• Rear window defogger 


Note: If the IHKS control module Is 
replaced, it must be recoded. 



Air Distribution 

The air flow is adjusted by a 360° potentiometer. The 
flaps are controlled by 3 stepper motors (bus) that oper¬ 
ate the defroster, face vent and footwell flaps. Flap 
control is dependent on the position of the air distribu¬ 
tion knob as well as the position of the temperature 
knob. 

Different characteristic curves are used for the maxi¬ 
mum warm setting and the maximum cold setting. If the 
temperature control knob is anywhere between these 
two settings, the new flap position is set. 


Full 



22 


Interior Features/E52 












Flap setting 

The stepper motors for flap operation execute a position run after ignition terminal 15 has 
been switched off. The fresh air and defroster flaps are completely opened, and all other 
flaps are closed. 

The temperature setting flap is the only flap that remains unchanged. This procedure 
lasts approximately 15 seconds. 

The IHKS performs a calibration run after every 20th time the ignition is switched off or 
after an interruption in memory power. The flap end positions serve as reference points. 

A total of five (200 Hz) stepper motors with M-bus activation and one (500 Hz) high 
speed fresh air motor are used. 


IHKS Off (KL 15 on) 

Defroster function 

IHKS OFF (KL 15 off) 

Fresh air 

Closed 

Open 

Open 

Recirculation 

Closed 

Closed 

Closed 

Defrosting 

Closed 

Open 

Open 

Ventilation 

Closed 

Closed 

Closed 

Footwell 

Closed 

Closed 

Closed 

Temperature 

Unchanged 

Maximum 

Unchanged 


Auxiliary Water Pump 

An auxiliary water pump is installed to ensure the necessary water flow rate at low engine 
rpm. 

The auxiliary water pump is switched on when the following conditions are fulfilled: 

• Water valve is opened (de-energized) 

• Engine rpm < 2000 rpm 

• Engine temperature > 32 °F 

• Start procedure completed (terminal 50) 

The auxiliary water pump is switched off when, apart from the engine speed that must 
exceed 2500 rpm, at least one of the above conditions is not fulfilled. 


23 

Interrior Features/E52 





Temperature Control 

The rotary knob locks in both end positions. The temperature is set by means of a mixing 
flap that is operated by a stepper motor (bus). The temperature control potentiometer 
can be turned through an angle of 240°. 

The water valve is closed when the control knob is set in the minimum position. From the 
10 o'clock position (potentiometer value) on, the water valve is opened and the auxiliary 
water pump switched on. 

Air Conditioning 

The air conditioning is requested by a combination switch. The IHKS activates the A/C 
compressor magnetic clutch, and cool air flows from the evaporator. With the aid of 
a temperature mixing flap, this air is blended with warm air from the heater core. 

To prevent the evaporator surface from icing up, the evaporator temperature sensor sig¬ 
nals the IHKS to deactivate the compressor clutch. The switching threshold is 
set at approximately 1 °C (34 degrees F). 

Idle Speed Compensation 

The Engine Control Module (ECM) compensates the idle speed to ensure smooth opera¬ 
tion of the engine at idle. 

The IHKS will signal the ECM for idle speed compensation when at least one of the 
following conditions occurs: 

• Rear window defogger switched on (hardtop fitted) 

• Blower set to max. position 

• Air conditioning switched on 


Filling Station Effect 

The filling station effect corresponds to the heater core “hot soak”, because the water 
valve is sprung open with out power. In order to avoid this effect, after ignition 
terminal 15 is switched off, power is still applied to the water valve for 5 minutes. 


24 


Interior Features/E52 



Characteristic Map Cooling 

Characteristic map cooling is not used in the Z8 with the S62 B50 engine. 


Defroster Function 

The defroster function has priority over other functions. It has the task of defrosting the 
windshield as fast as possible. 

The following functions are activated for this purpose: 

• The temperature is set to maximum warm. 

• The blower speed is set to the highest stage. 

• Defroster flaps fully open. 

• All other air distribution flaps are closed. 

• The fresh air flap is fully opened (recirculated air closed). 

• The water valve is opened. 

• The auxiliary water pump is switched on. 


Rear Window Defogger 

This function is active only in conjunction with the hardtop. During the defrost phase the 
heating is fully powered for 17 minutes. 

If the defrost phase is not sufficient to completely defrost the rear window the 
heating can be activated for a further 5 minutes by pressing the rear window 
defogger button again. 

If the heating is switched off for any reason the timer is stopped so that defrosting can 
continue from exactly this point when switched on again. 

The rear window defogger is completely deactivated when the unloader function is active 
(starting the vehicle). 


25 

Interior Features/E52 




Program Selector Switch for Recirculated Air, Outside Air, A/C Functions 

The functions are selected by a rotary knob with 4 settings. Each setting 
corresponds to a program. 



Setting 

Function 

i 

Recirculating air with air conditioning 

2 

Outside air with air conditioning 

3 

Outside air 

4 

Recirculating air 


The recirculation air control flap is operated by a stepper motor (bus). 


Filters 

The micro-filters are located under the hood. 

To service the micro-filters, simply remove the four 
torx screws and remove the cover panel. 



26 

Interior Features/E52 












Auxiliary Fan 


The auxiliary fan stage (speed) is determined from the refrigerant pressure sensor signal. 
The IHKS signals the ECM via the K-bus, and the ECM will activate the auxiliary fan. The 
fan stage (speed) is generally set to 0 at vehicle speeds above 50 mph (ram air). 



K-bus Interface 

This interface transmits data such as the vehicle speed, engine speed and diagnosis 
between the IHKS control unit and the IKE. 

The K-bus is also used to transmit compressor load values as well as auxiliary fan request 
from the IHKS through the IKE then over the can line to the ECM. 


27 


Interior Features/E52 



Heater/Air Conditioner Housing 

The heater/air conditioner housing design is based on the E36/7. To compliment the 
lightweight and compact design, stepper motors are used to operate the flaps. 



FootWell 


Recirculation 


Open Vent 


Mixing 


Fresh Air 


Diagnosis 

All inputs and outputs are monitored by the IHKS control module. Faults are stored in the 
EEPROM after terminal 15 has been switched off. Faults that occur sporadically can be 
deleted by the IHKS control module after successful self-repair. However, the entry "spo¬ 
radic fault" is retained. 

Unlike previous IHKS systems, the Z8 version is diagnoseable via DIS/MoDIC. 


28 

Interior Features/E52 










Review Questions 


1. How do you lower the head rests? 


2. Are the Navigation and CD storage compartments electrically or manually locked? 


3. What module is used for instrument cluster (IKE) data back up storage? 


4 . What is unique about the Z8 IHKS system as compared to previous IHKS system? 


5. What test step allows unlocking the IKE to perform all of the cluster self diagnostics? 


29 

Interior Features/E52 




