TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Subject Page 

Central Body Electronics. 1 

Objectives of the Module . 2 

Vehicle Electrical System .3 

Control Unit Locations .4 

Power and Fuse Layouts .5 

ZKE V.7 

Central Locking System .8 

Windshield Wiping/Washing System .14 

Antitheft Warning System.18 

Interior Lights.27 

Outside Mirror Adjustments .32 

Remote RF (Keyless) Entry.33 

Power Windows.37 

Electronic Steering Lock (ELV).40 

Multiple Restrain System (MRS III) .47 

Light Technology .53 

Multiple Information Radio System (MIR) .65 


Review Questions 


67 





















CENTRAL BODY ELECTRONICS 


Model: E52 

Production Date: 03/00 to Present 


Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Describe the functions of the ZKE sub systems. 

• Locate the various fuse boxes. 

• Name the bus systems used on the Z8. 

• Identify the locations of the control modules. 

• Describe 3 ways to open the trunk. 

• Describe SDR operation. 

• Understand Neon Lights Technology. 

• Identify the ELV components and their locations 


2 

Central Body Electronics/E52 





Vehicle Electrical System 

Purpose of the System 

The state of the art Z8 electrical system satisfies all of today's demanding requirements. 
The Z8 electrical system is developed from the E46 concept. 



The Z8 electrical system concept with its stringent power and weight requirements that 
BMW places on all sports cars was considered in wiring harness production. 

The wiring harness is divided into three sections: 

(Telephone provisions can be provided optionally) 

1. Main wiring harness (repair kits for left front, right front and right rear) 

2. Audio/navigation (left rear, no repair kit) 


3 

Central Body Electronics/E52 


















































































Control Unit Locations 


Description 


Flectronic Vehicle Immobibatio 
Flectronic Steering I or.k 
F-FSnx 

Convertible Top Mnrli lie_ 

Dynamic Stability Control 
Digital Motor Electronics 

Diagnosis Connector _ 

Convertible Tod Module 
CD Changer _ 

Electronic Steering Lock 

Audio Amnlifier _ 

Antenna Amplifier _ 

Radio Central I poking_ 

General Module; _ 

Main Fuses _ 

Air Conditioning _ 

Instrument Cluster Module 
Instrument Cluster Display 

I ioht Check Module _ 

Steering Column Module 
Fleadlinht Vertical Arm Contro 

Airbag Control Unit_ 

Navigation Computer _ 

Tilt Sensor_ 





















































Power and Fuse Layouts 


The vehicle battery is located 
in the trunk floor along with the 
tool kit. 

The B+ cable is equipped 
with the familiar BST 
(see 1 997 New Model 
Update Handout for 
additional information). 

The “high amp” fuses are 
located next to the vehicle bat¬ 
tery (shown to the right). 



The glove box mounted fuse 
panel is located behind an 
access panel cover in the 
glovebox. 

The fuse ID is also located on 
this cover (shown opened on 
the right). 



5 

Central Body Electronics/E52 



T 



65520002 


There are additional vehicle fuses located in the Navigation cd storage compartment. 



The E box is shown above containing the traditional engine fuses. 


6 

Central Body Electronics/E52 






















ZKE V 


Purpose of the System 

The ZKE V system is a new variant Central Body Electronics system unique to the Z8. 
Many of it’s features and functions operate similarly to previous BMW ZKE systems with 
minor changes, added features, and refinements. 

The following functions are directly controlled by the General Module V (GM V): 

• Windshield wiping/washing and headlight washing 

• Central locking with power trunk/fuel filler door release 

• FZV Keyless Entry 

• Power window control 

• Anti-theft warning (DWA) 

The following functions are included as body electrical systems but are not 
directly controlled by the GM V: 

• Driver and Passenger seat electrical adjustment (no control module - switch con¬ 
trolled) 

• Side Mirror - adjustment/heating (also includes windshield washer jet heating) 

• Electrochromic rearview mirror 

• MRS III 

ZKE V introduces the following changes and new features: 

• Similar to the E46 GM V, the Z8 GM V controls it’s respective peripheral 
components directly (no P-Bus). It communicates with other pertinent 
control modules via the K-bus as does the E38/E39 GM V. 

• The GM V is responsible for the Car/Key Memory feature. Key memory provides 
the added convenience of identifying users of the vehicle. Whenever the vehicle 

is locked or unlocked via the FZV keyless entry system, a unique key identification 
signal (key number) is transmitted to the General Module. 


7 

Central Body Electronics/E52 



System Diagram 

Central Locking System 


GM V FZV 



8 

Central Locking/E52 






The Central Locking system of ZKE V controls the door lock, trunk lock, fuel filler flap, 
glove box, telephone storage compartment, and DWA. 

The familiar single/double locking strategy is maintained from previous systems with 
the introduction of a new style door lock mechanism combined with dual actuator 
motors (similar to E46). 

The new style actuators are sealed, self contained units with no replaceable parts. 


The door lock actuator use hall effect sensors in place of pin contacts and microswitches 
to provide: 

• Door lock key position (driver’s door only), 

• Door open/closed status (replaces door jamb switch). 


The passenger door is fitted with a manual locking knob which can lock the door if the 
vehicle battery were to fail. Simply slide the knob downward and close the door. It can 
not be opened from the outside. In this position, the door can be opened from the inside 
by pulling the inside door handle (2x). 


The Driver’s door lock location is the only 
point outside of the vehicle where the key 
can mechanically control all of the central 
locking system functions. 

Shown to the right is the lock cylinder is 
protected by a spring loaded cover. 



The central locking switch is located in 
the center console. 

Locking the vehicle from the central switch 
(indicated by the arrow on the right) “single 
locks” the vehicle except for the fuel filler flap, 
glove box, and telephone storage com¬ 
partment. 



9 

Central Locking/E52 




• The Z8 can be locked with the top down. When the vehicle is locked with the 
exterior mechanical key or FZV, the doors, glove box and telephone storage 
compartment are locked. Locking the glovebox with a “master Key” will also lock 
out the trunk and telephone storage compartment. The Navigation and cd changer 
storage compartments can be mechanically locked with a “master key”. 



• The trunk can be unlocked remotely with the key (FZV) but does not lock/unlock the 
entire vehicle. The trunk can be opened by depressing the trunk button in the left kick 
panel. The mechanical release is located in the Navigation storage compartment. 

• GM V and EWS 3.3 interface via the K bus to monitor double lock status and to initiate 
double lock override. This feature allows the doors to be opened from the inside if an 
accepted EWS key is switched on in the ignition when double locked. 

• The selective unlocking feature of the E38/E39 is maintained on the ZKE V. 
A single unlock request from the driver’s door with the key or via the remote 
transmitter unlocks the driver’s door only. A second unlock request unlocks the 
passenger door. 

• Car/Key memory coding allows the “single” locking to be activated after the vehicle is 
driven off. 

• The Multiple Restraint System (MRS III) control module provides a switched 
signal to the GM in the event of an accident. The signal is an output function of the 
MRS control module and becomes active when MRS determines a crash has 
occurred. When active, the GM unlocks the door lock actuator, switches on the 
interior lights and signals the LCM via the K bus to activate the hazard warning 
flasher. Once the crash signal is active, the GM will not respond to lock requests 
from the system until the ignition switch is cycled or a front door is opened. 

• Continuous locking/unlocking will initiate a timed arrest of the locking system. The GM 
counts each time the locks are actuated. After approximately 12 cycles, the timed 
arrest is active. The timed arrest is deactivated one actuator cycle for every 8 seconds until 
the counter is reset to 0. The timed arrest is overridden if a crash signal is received from 
the MRS III. 


10 

Central Locking/E52 


The driver’s door lock provides the following familiar signals to the General Module: 


• Lock / Unlock 

• DWA arm/disarm 

• Convenience closing and opening signals 

• Provides a mechanical link to manually lock/unlock 
the actuator in the event of a failure. 

• The GM monitors these key positions over two wires. 
The signals are generated by two hall effect sensors 
(Hall Sensor 1 & 2) located in the actuator. 



Hall sensor 1 & 2 is not included in the 
passenger door actuator. 



When the key is turned, a plastic cylinder in the lock actuator is simultaneously 
rotated by the lock tumbler extension rod. An asymmetrical shaped magnet is 
incorporated in the plastic cylinder, which when rotated changes the magnetic 
influence on the hall sensors. The presence of a magnet in close proximity to the 
sensing surface of either hall sensor creates a coded input over the two wires that the 
GM uses to determine the key position. 

• Magnet in front of sensor, current flow through the sensor is <5 mA (0). 

• Magnet rotated away from sensor, current flow through the sensor is >12 mA (1). 

Hall effect sensors improve the actuator reliability since they are impervious to moisture and 
there are no wear contacts. 


• Key in the neutral position, both sensors are simultaneously influenced by the 
magnet - 0 / 0 . 

• Key turned to the unlock position from neutral, hall sensor #1 magnet segment moves 
away from hall sensor - 1/0. 




Key turned to lock position from neutral, hall sensor #2 magnet segment moves away 
form hall sensor - 0 / 1 . 


11 

Central Locking/E52 



There are two motors incorporated in each actuator that provide two separate 
functions: 


• Single lock/unlock function. Also known as central lock, this motor controls the 
mechanical lock mechanism when the central lock button is pressed to single 
lock the vehicle. The lock mechanism is fully locked at this point but can still by 
opened from the interior by pulling an interior door handle twice or by pressing 
the central lock button again. When single lock function is activated, the 
fuel filler flap actuator, glove box, and telephone storage compartment is not 
locked. 

• Double lock/unlock function. Also known as central arrest, this motor is 
activated only when the vehicle is locked from the outside at the driver’s door lock 
with a key or when the GM receives a lock request from the FZV system. In this case 
the double lock motor is activated simultaneously with the single lock motor. The 
function of the double lock motor is to mechanically offset an internal rod 
disabling it from unlocking the vehicle from the interior. This prevents the doors 
from being unlocked by any means except from an unlock request at the driver’s 
door or via the FZVremote key. 



Note: This component has been disassembled to provide functional understand¬ 
ing. This component does not contain any replaceable parts and will void it’s war¬ 
ranty if disassembled. 


12 

Central Locking/E52 



Door Contact Hall Sensor 

Also included in the drivers door actuator is a third hall effect sensor. This sensor signals 
the door open/closed status to the GM. This sensor replaces the door jamb mechanical 
switch of previous systems. The rotary latch plate position activates the door contact hall 
sensor. 

• When the door latch is closed, current flow through the sensor is <5 mA ( 0 ). 

• When the door is open, current flow through the sensor is >12 mA (1). 

The passenger side door actuator only includes this hall effect sensor (hall sensor 3). Hall 
sensors 1 & 2 are not required. 


Fuel Filler Flap Remote Unlock 

The fuel filler flap can be opened from inside the vehicle by pressing the remote 
button (combined with the trunk button) when the vehicle is unlocked or single locked 
from the central lock button. 


The remote fuel filler flap button is locked out when the GM detects a vehicle speed signal 
> 4 MPH via the K-bus. 



Trunk Remote Unlock 


The trunk can be opened from inside the 
vehicle by pressing the remote trunk button 
when the vehicle is unlocked or single locked 
from the central lock button. The trunk can also 
be opened from the remote key (FZV). 

The remote trunk button is locked out 
when the glove box is locked in the 
hotel setting and/or when the GM detects 
a vehicle speed signal > 4 MPH via the 
K-bus. 



13 

Central Locking/E52 
















Windshield Wiping/Washing System 

Model: E52 

Production Date: 03/00 to Present 


Purpose of the System 

The Z8 windshield wiping/washing system is very traditional in operation, however 
aggressive sport “look” has been given to the wiper arm mounting and 
articulation. The wiper arm mounting posts are positioned outboard on 
the windshield cowling. 


The windshield wiping/washing 
system is similar to the E38/E39 
system. 


All wiping/washing functions 
are controlled by the GM V. 


Output control of the wiper motor 
is through a windshield wiper dou¬ 
ble contact relay, which is located 
under the carpet below the glove- 
box. 

The system has four wiping 
stages with interval wiping The 
wiping stage inputs are coded 
signals through a two wire link with 
a combination of high/low inputs 
as on previous systems. 



14 

Wipe Wash/E52 










The wiping stages include 

Single: Holding the wiper switch down in the single position provides a ground 
signal to activate the slow speed circuit providing wiper operation until the switch is 
released. 

Intermittent: The intermittent wiping is activated by placing the switch in the first “up” 
position. Switching off the ignition in this position raises the wipers to the “service 
position”. 

• The intermittent wiping intervals are dependent on the road speed. 

• As road speed increases, the wiping interval delay is decreased. 

Slow (I) and Fast (II): The stage I and stage II wiping speeds are also affected by road 
speed. The factory encoded settings are the same as previous systems: 

• Stage I automatically switches to intermittent when the vehicle is stopped, and 
resumes stage I when vehicle speed is present. 

• Stage II automatically switches to stage I when the vehicle is stopped, and 
resumes stage II when vehicle speed is present. 



15 

Wipe Wash/E52 







Windshield/Headlight Washing 

Windshield Washing: Pulling the Windshield Wiper Switch rearward closes the “wind¬ 
shield wash” contacts and provides a switched ground input to the GM. The GM acti¬ 
vates the windshield washer pump directly via a power output final stage transistor. The 
wiper motor is also activated to wipe the glass clean. 

Windshield/Headlight Washing: Pushing the windshield wiper switch forward requests 
windshield/headlight washing, regardless of the headlights being switched on or off. The 
signal activates the headlight washer relay which powers the headlight washer pump 
(nozzles are pressure opened) for 2 cycles. A time “arrest” (3 min.) will prevent unneces¬ 
sary washing (which can be overridden by cycling the ignition). This system uses a com¬ 
mon reservoir, located in the rear of the right front fender (5.3 L). 




16 

Wipe Wash/E52 



System Diagram 

Wipe/Wash 



Head Light Washer Pump Windshield Washer Pump 


17 

Wipe Wash/E52 




Antitheft Warning System 


Purpose of the System 

The Z8 is equipped with the familiar DWA that has traditionally protected BMWs with 
Antitheft Warning. In addition, DWA offers a superior protection package because 
the system uses pre-existing ZKE components. 

The General Module utilizes existing components and/or circuits as part of the DWA 
system: 

• Door Lock Hall Effect Sensor Contacts (door open/closed). 

• Trunk Actuator Switch Contact (monitored for closed trunk). 

• Trunk Open Request (FZV key) this signal prevents DWA from activating if armed 
when the trunk is opened with the key. 

• Hood Switch. 

• DWA Satus LED (part of rear view mirror). 

• Tilt Sensor. 

• DWA Siren. 


18 


DWA/E52 




PASSiNOER'5 n(TDR 
ACTUATOR (FT) 























Door Contacts 


As mentioned in the Central Locking Section, the door lock contact hall effect 
sensors provide status of door open/closed. 

• When the door latch is closed, current flow through the sensor is <5 mA (0). 

• When the door is open, current flow through the sensor is >12 mA (1). 

The GM will activate the siren if a door open signal becomes active when the DWA is 
armed. 


Trunk Actuator Switch Contacts 

The trunk switch contact is located in the trunk lock 
actuator assembly. When closed, the trunk contact 
provides a ground signal to the GM signifying a 
"closed trunk". The GM will activate the siren if 
the trunk switch contact ground signal opens 
when the DWA is armed (except when using 
FZV). 


Hood Contact Switch 

Located on the left side engine compartment, the hood contact switch provides a ground 
signal to the GM signifying an open hood. 

The plunger of this switch can be pulled up past a detente causing the switch 
contact to open (service position). This feature can be used to simulate a closed hood 
with the hood open when diagnosing the DWA system. 



DWA LED 

As on other BMWs, the DWA indicator is located in 
the rear view mirror. The LED is provided with 
constant battery voltage (KL 30). The GM provides 
a switched ground signal providing the various 
blinking signals used to convey DWA status to the 
vehicle operator (covered further on). 



20 

DWA/E52 




Tilt Sensor 

Located in the Navigation storage compartment, the tilt sensor is an electronic 
sensing device with the sole purpose of monitoring the vehicle's parked angle when 
DWA is armed. This sensor is a new, one third smaller, solid state version (E46 similar). 



The sensor requires three signal wires to perform its function: 

• KL 30 - Constant battery voltage 

• Signal "STDWA"; switched ground input signal provided by the GM indicating DWA 
armed/disarmed status. The tilt sensor is used as a splice location for the STDWA 
signal to the Siren and FIS interior protection sensor. 

• Signal "NG"; switched ground output signal provided to the GM. 

The signal is used for two purposes: 

1. As a momentary acknowledgment that the tilt sensor received STDWA and is 
currently monitoring the vehicle angle. 

2 . If the tilt sensor detects a change in the vehicle's angle when DWA is armed, 
signal NG is switched to inform the GM to activate the siren. 

When the tilt sensor receives the STDWA signal from the GM it memorizes the 
vehicle's parked angle. The angle of the vehicle is monitored by the solid state 
electronics. Once armed, if the angle changes, the tilt sensor provides a switched ground 
signal to the GM to activate DWA. 


21 


DWA/E52 



Alarm Siren 

• The DWA siren is installed in the vehicle cowl under the micro-filters. This location pro 
vides a secure position with loud acoustic output. 

• The siren contains electronic circuitry for producing the warning tone when the alarm 
is triggered. The siren also contains a rechargeable battery that is used to power the 
siren when the alarm is triggered. 

• The rechargeable battery will allow the siren to sound if it or the vehicle’s battery is 
disconnected. The siren battery is recharged, from the vehicle’s battery when DWA is 
not in the armed state. 

• The siren has four wires connecting it to the system; KL 30, KL 31, Signal 
STDWA (arm/disarm signal from GM), and Signal A/G(activate siren output signal to 
the GM) 

• The arm/disarm output signal from the GM (STDWA) is provided to the Tilt sensor, 
SDR module and the siren simultaneously. The arm/disarm signal is a switched 
ground that signals the components of DWA armed/disarmed status. 

• The activate siren signal (NG is high whether DWA is armed or disarmed). If a 
monitored input activates the alarm, the high signal to the siren is switched to a 50% 
duty cycle at the GM. The control circuitry in the siren activates the siren driver. 

If the DWA is armed and the battery is disconnected the siren 
recognizes the normally high “NG” signal as suddenly going low, the siren is also 
activated. 


DWA Arming/Disarming 

• The DWA is armed every time the vehicle is locked from the outside with the door 
lock cylinder or FZV key. 

• The LED in the rear view mirror flashes as an acknowledgment along with the exterior 
lights and a momentary chirp from the siren. 

• The GM monitors all required input signals for closed status (door closed, trunk 
closed, etc.) The inputs must be in a closed status for a minimum of 3 seconds for 
the GM to include them as an activation component. Change of status remonitors the 
inputs. 

Example: Hood being left open, then closed after the alarm has been set on. 

• If the DWA is armed a second time within 10 seconds, the tilt sensor and 
interior protection (SDR) are also excluded as alarm activation components. This 
function is useful if the vehicle is transported on a train or flat bed truck to 
prevent false alarm activations. 


22 


DWA/E52 



While armed the trunk can be opened with out the alarm being triggered as follows: 

• If opened with the trunk remote button via the FZV, the GM prevents the alarm from 
activating. When the trunk is returned to the closed position, it is no longer considered 
as an activation signal. 

Panic Mode Operation: When the trunk button is pressed and held, the GM is 
signaled to activate the siren for the Panic Mode. The panic mode is function with either 
an armed or disarmed DWA system. 


Emergency Disarming 

Emergency disarming occurs automatically if a key is used to turn the ignition switch on 
and the EWS III accepts it. The EWS III signals the GM to unlock the doors and deactivate 
the DWA. 


Alarm Indication 

When the alarm is triggered, the siren will sound for 30 seconds. At the same time the 
parking and high beam lights will flash for 5 minutes. The GM signals the the LCM via the 
K bus to flash the lights. 

Following an alarm trigger, the system will reset and trigger again if further 
tampering is done to the vehicle. 



23 

DWA/E52 









DWA LED Status 



DWA STATUS 

DWA LED CONDITION 

Disarmed 

Off 

Armed 

Continual slow flash 

Armed with one or more monitored 
inputs not in closed position 
(ie: trunk not fully closed, etc.) 

Rapid flash for 10 seconds, 
then continual slow flash. 

Alarm activated 

Rapid flash for 5 minutes 
then continual slow flash. 

Rearmed in less then 10 seconds. 

On for 1 second 

Disarmed after activated alarm 

Rapid flash for 10 seconds, 
then OFF. 


24 


DWA/E52 












Interior Lights 


Purpose of the System 

The GM controls the interior lighting automatically with the status change of several 
monitored inputs. The lighting can also be manually controlled using the interior light 
switch. 


25 

Interior Lights/E52 



System Components 

Door Contacts 

As mentioned in the Central Locking Section, the door lock actuator contain a hall effect 
sensor for the purpose of monitoring door open/closed status (hall sensor 3 in the dri¬ 
ver's door actuator). The hall effect sensor is located directly behind the rotary latch plate 
encased in the actuator. The sensor is activated by the rotary latch plate's position. 

A change in current flow informs the General module when a door is opened or closed. 



26 

Interior Lights/E52 





Interior/Map Light Unit 

The overhead interior/map lights are contained in the rear view mirror, consisting of 2 lights. 
The lights are controlled by the GM automatically or by momentarily “twisting” the inte¬ 
rior light switch (DWA indicator) located on the rear view mirror. 



The switch provides a momentary ground signal that the GM recognizes as a request to 
either turn the lights on (if off) or turn the lights off (if on). 

If the switch (DWA indicator) is held for more than 3 seconds, the GM interprets the 
continuous ground signal as a request to turn the interior light circuit off (workshop mode) 
as on previous systems. 

The workshop mode is stored in memory and will not come back on even if the GM 
is removed from it's power supply and reconnected. The switch must be activated 
to turn the lights back on. 

The lights can be used individually as reading/map lights. Each light is mechanically 
controlled by depressing it's corresponding on/off switch. 

The power supply for the map lights is supplied by the GM through the Consumer Cut Off 
circuit. 


27 

Interior Lights/E52 










Front Footwell Lights 

In each front footwell, there is also a courtesy light. These lights are only operated when 
the GM provides power to the interior lighting circuit. 


Rear Compartment Lights 

Lights are installed behind the seats to allow 
visibility for the Navigation/cd changer compart¬ 
ments. 


Door Lighting 

The doors are equipped with exit access lighting, 
as well as “red” safety lights when the doors are 
opened. 

The inside door handles are back lit with an led. 


Night Lights 

The night lights are are located above the rear view mirror on the windshield frame. They 
provide a subtle illumination of the center console when the headlights are switched 
on. 

Load Cutout Lights 

The remaining lights can be switched on regardless of the ignition position: 

• Reading lights 

• Glovebox light 

• Engine compartment lights 

• Luggage compartment lights 

The B+ power supply is provided by the GM V. To ensure against battery draw if the 
lights are left on, the GM V will deactivate the circuit 16 minutes after the ignition ter¬ 
minal “R” is switched off. The lights will be switched on again when ignition terminal “R” 
or “15” is switched on in addition to an input to the GM V - opening a door, hood, 
unlocking the door. 




28 


Interior Lights/E52 




Automatic Control Function 


The GM provides 12 volts (linear application providing soft on feature) to the interior 
lighting circuit when the one of the following input signal statuses change: 

• Interior light switch 

• Door contact hall sensor active (door opened) 

• An Unlock request from the driver's door key lock hall sensors are received. 

This only occurs if the ignition switch is off. 

• An Unlock request is from the FZV keyless entry system is received via the K bus. 

This only occurs if the ignition switch is off as well. 

• The ignition switch is switched off (within 32 seconds) and the vehicle exterior lights 
(LCM) have been on for a minimum of 2 minutes prior. This information is provided 
to the GM via the K bus. 

• Active crash signal from the MRS III control module. 

• Lock button of FZV key is pressed with the vehicle is already locked (interior search 
function). 


The GM gradually reduces the full 12 volt power supply (linear reduction providing soft off) 

until the lights are off when the following input signal statuses change: 

• Interior light switch 

• Immediately after the ignition switch is turned to KL R with the driver's door hall 
sensor door contact closed. 

• When the vehicle is locked (single or double) with the door contacts closed. 

• When the vehicle door contacts are closed. The lights remain on for 20 seconds 
and then go to soft off. 

• After the interior search function is activated, the lights will automatically turn off 
(soft off) after 8 seconds. 

• After 16 minutes with a door contact active (open door) and the key off, the lights are 
switched off (consumer cutoff function). 


29 

Interior Lights/E52 



Outside Mirror Adjustments 


Purpose of the System 

The outside mirrors can be electrically adjusted to a desired position. The Mirror 
adjust/window combination switch allows the driver to adjust the mirrors 
(up/down - left/right). This switch contains a slide switch that will “toggle” control from the 
left to right mirror. 

The mirrors contain 2 motors and traditional heating elements . The Z8 does not 
have mirror memory, and the reverse gear input has no affect on the right mirror. 


KL-15 



30 

Outside Mirrors/E52 
































Remote RF (Keyless) Entry 


Purpose of the System 

The Z8 keyless entry system’s operation is carried over from the E38/E39. A minor 
change ocuured with the location of the FZV receiver module location. 

• The receiver is located in the interior rear view mirror. 

• The receiver produces a digital signal based on the transmitter command and sends it 
to the GM for processing. 

• The GM then carries out all remote lock features, window convenience 
opening feature and DWA arming/disarming functions. 

• The frequency at which the key transmits the radio signal to the receiver is 
315 MHz. 

• The system is also used to convey the key being used to lock/unlock the vehicle. 



31 

Remote Entry/E52 

















System Components 

FZV Key 

• New appearance with blue and white BMW roundel. 

• New button arrangement (larger buttons) with sequential operation (enhanced 
operating convenience) 

• Rechargeable battery replaces replaceable batteries. Charged by EWS ring antenna. 

• The key housing is encapsulated and can not be opened. 

• The LED has been omitted. 

• Key is used in Z8, E46, E38 and E39 vehicles. 


Features of the keyless entry system include: 


1. ARROW 

Press once 
•unlock driver’s door 
•DWA disarmed 
•interior lights on 


Press twice 
•total unlocking 

Hold 

•convenience opening 
2. ROUNDEL 

Press once 
•locking 
•DWA arming 
•interior lights on 
when vehicle 
locked pj~ 

Press twice 

within 10s FI 

•deactivate 
SDR and 
tilt monitoring 


m 


3. TRUNK 

Momentarlv pres 
•trunk lid opens 


Press and hold 
•panic mode alarm 


• Up to 4 radio-control keys can be 
operated in conjunction with one vehicle. 

• Locking/unlocking of doors, trunk, fuel 
filler lid. 

• Selective unlocking of driver’s door 
(as with key in lock). 

• Arming/dis-arming of DWA alarm system. 

• Remote unlocking of the trunk only. 

• Comfort opening of windows 

• Interior lighting activation (search mode). 

• Panic mode alarm activation. 

•Automatic correction for up to 1000 
erroneous activation signals. 

• Low transmitter battery fault code 
storage in the GM. 

• An EEPROM is used to store the key 
data. The data is no longer lost when the bat 
tery is replaced and initialization is not 
required. 

• Keys delivered with a four color label 
sheet containing four different colored 
labels for each of the four possible FZV keys. 


32 

Remote Entry/E52 





FZV Key Rechargable Battery 


From KL R, the battery inside the key head is charged inductively by the EWS ring 
antenna via a coil antenna integrated in the key. The charging process is 
controlled by electronic circuitry integrated in the key. 

• The service life of a radio-control key used under normal conditions corresponds to the 
vehicle lifespan. 

• If the FZV keys are not used (ie: stored in a drawer), the battery will be 
dicharged after approx. 1.5 years. 

• The time required to fully charge a discharged battery is approx. 30 hours. 

• The remote control can be operated about 15 times after a charging period of 
approx. 30 minutes (driving time). 

The key data is stored in a transponder chip. The transponder chip is a wireless read and 
write EEPROM. It is powered via the ring coil at the steering lock. Power is applied 
electromagnetically when the key is in the ignition switch from KL R. 

The power supply is used both for data transfer as well as for charging the battery. This 
has been made possible by new development of the transponder chip. 

As with previous systems, every press of an FZV key also provides the battery charge 
condition. When the FZV electronics receives a low power condition message 
three successive times, the GM sets a fault indicating a low battery within a specific 
key. 

If the battery is recharged (used operate car), the fault will be automatically deleted when 
five successive messages are received indicating a charged battery condition. 
The new battery has no affect on the EWS III communication function! 


33 

Remote Entry/E52 



Remote Key Initialization 


The initialization of the FZV keys is required to establish the Lock/Unlock signal 
synchronization with the GM. The initialization procedure provides the GM with a key 
identification number and a “rolling code” for each key. If the initialization is not 
performed, the GM will not respond to the key signals. 

Up to 4 remote keys can be initialized. They must be initialized at the same time. 
Key initialization is only possible with the vehicle unlocked. 


Procedure: 



1. Close all doors and have all keys available. 

2. Using key number 1, turn the ignition switch to KLR, 
then switch off within 5 seconds and remove the first key. 

3 . Within 30 seconds of turning the ignition switch to “off” 
press and hold the arrow button. 

4 . While holding the arrow button, press and release 
“tap”) the roundel button three times within 10 seconds. 

5. Release both buttons. The GM will immediately lock 
and unlock the doors signaling a successful initialization. 

6. If additional keys need to be initialized repeat steps 3 - 5 
within 30 seconds. 

7. Switching the ignition to KL R completes the 
initialization. 


SERVICE NOTE: 

The key memory function of the GM responds to the key identification number of each 
key. If the keys are not initialized in the same order prior to initialization, the key memory 
functions activated by the keys will not be assigned correctly. Always initialize the keys in 
the same order. 


34 

Remote Entry/E52 



Power Windows 


Purpose of the System 

The Z8 power window is very unique. Features of the system operation includes: 

• Control of the window motors is carried out directly by the GM. 

• One-touch window operation in both directions (passenger side down only). 

• Window lowering/raising when the doors are opened and closed. 

• Cable type window regulators. 

• Driver’s side combination window/power mirror switch 

• Convenience closing/opening of the windows from the driver's lock cylinder or 
convenience opening only from the FZV remote key 

• Window operation with the ignition switched off until a door is opened or 16 
minutes has elapsed after the key is switched off 

• Window load switching is through relays integral of the GM. The GM V monitors 
the current draw for end limit position. The maximum run time for the window 
motors is limited to 8 seconds. This allows the motors to be switched off if the 
end limit load sensing fails. 


35 


Power Windows/E52 



Slide Switch Window Switch 


New Style Window Switches 

The Z8 power window switch design is a new rocker type switch. The switch 

provides the GM V with the familiar coded ground signaling strategy as previous two wire 

switches. 

Pushing a switch to the first detent and holding provides a single ground signal on one 
wire requesting the GM to operate the window motor in the down direction. When 
released, the ground signal is removed and the window motor stops. 

Momentarily pushing the switch to the second detent and releasing provides an 
additional ground signal on the second wire requesting the “one touch mode”, operating 
the window motor automatically. The motor runs the window down until it reaches it's 
end stop. 

The switch functions in the same manner for the upward run of the window motor (driver 
side only)but the ground signal sequencing is reversed. 

The drivers side switch block contains a slide switch for the mirrors, this also affects the 
windows. If the slide switch is set to the left, the left window will be controlled. If the slide 
switch is set to the right, the right window will be controlled. If the slide switch is set to 
the middle position, both windows will be controlled from the driver’s window switch. 


36 

Power Windows/E52 




General 

Module 


Mirror adjustment 

Switch 

1) Mirror adjustment/ 
window actuation, 
driver’s door. 

2) Mirror adjustment 
Window actuation 
Passenger’s door. 

3) Window actuation 
Both doors 




ML 


Switch block 
Driver’s door 
0) Off 

1) Open 

2) Convient open 

3) Close 

4) Convient close 


-i 


rU" 


Driver’s Window 
Motor 


Power Window Motors 


The window motors are mounted on the cable regulators. The window motor control cir¬ 
cuit consists of two wires for operating the motor in both directions. 

The motors are activated by relays in the GM. The relays provide either power or ground 
depending on the direction of window travel. 

The GM controls the polarity of the based on a request to run the window (window 
switch, Convenience Opening/Closing). 

The windows are run to their limit stops which is detected by an amperage increase in 
the control circuit. Additionally, the window run cycle is limited to an 8 second duration if 
in case the amperage increase is not detected or there is a malfunction with the regula¬ 
tor. 


Window Motor Limit Stop Function 

If the repetitive window activation (up/down) exceeds one minute, the GM deactivates the 
internal relays and disregards any further input requests. The GM provides motor activa¬ 
tion after a short duration but not for the full one minute monitoring cycle. 

Over time, the GM slowly reverses the stored count of activation until the stored number 
equals 0. 

37 


Power Window/E52 




Electronic Steering Lock (ELV) 


Purpose of the System 

On historical cars and race cars the starter has a remote button separate from the igni¬ 
tion switch. 

In the Z8, this operating concept has been enhanced by the latest technology in the form 
of the electronic steering lock system (ELV). 

The advantages of this system are that the steering lock and ignition switch can be 
relocated in a safe location (security), the starter button is located in an ergonomical¬ 
ly optimum position for the driver, and the steering column lock is released by EWS 
recognition. 



38 

ELV/E52 



System Components 


The ELV unit is mounted on the steering 
column as shown to the right. It is 
secured with sheer bolts, and is not ser¬ 
viceable. The ELV must be replaced as a 
unit 

The ELV assembly contains the control 
module and steering lock mechanism. 

The steering lock consist of the mechani¬ 
cal locking motor to engage or release 
the locking plate, and the safety release 
actuator (solenoid) to maintain the locking 
plate position in the event of power loss 
during operation. 




Steering 

Safety 

Release 

Actuator 


Mechanical 

Locking 

Motor 


12520004 


41 


ELV/E52 



System Components 


The ignition switch assembly 
shown on the right allows for 
“remote” mounting of the switch 
which is a further deterent for 
tampering. 



The ignition switch consist of a 
“turn catch” actuator (solenoid) 
which prevents turning of the igni¬ 
tion switch unless EWS recogni- 
ton has taken place. 

The rotating plate in the switch is 
monitored by a Hall sensor (rota¬ 
tion recognition). This input is 
used by the ELV for a plausibility 
check in conjunction with KL R 
and KL 15. 



40 

ELV/E52 


12520003 





System Operation 


To unlock/start: 

• Key check conducted by EWS via K-bus 

• Steering release aided by an actuator (key 
near antenna ring) 

• Mechanical locking (locking motor) 

• Rotary lock released (in ignition switch) 

• Start enable signal to EWS 

To lock: 

• Terminal 15, R, and ignition switch rotation recognition check 

• Speed signal check (from left rear wheel - must not be present) 

• Interrupt relay is deactivated 


Special functions: 

• Emergency functions in the event of 
K-bus defect 

• Overload cutout for actuator 

• Sleep mode 

• Crash mode (lock released) 


Diaqnosis/encodinq: 

• Coding function after replacement of ELV unit 

• Fault code memory 

• Status check of all outputs and inputs 

• Diagnosis 


43 

ELV/E52 



System Diagram 

ELV Block Diagram 


EW 3 Antenna Ring Ignition Switch 



42 


ELV/E52 















































































Electrically Adjustable Steering Column 


The steering column can be adjusted for telescopic (inward/outward) postion. 


This is accomplished electrically as previously 
seen on other BMW models. 

The electric column in the Z8 does not have a 
memory feature. 

The telescopic column rocker switch is located 
on the underside of the steering column. 




Flexible 
Drive Shafl 


44 


ELV/E52 





Multiple Restrain System - MRS III 


Purpose of the System 

The Z8 is equipped with the Multiple Restraint System (MRS III) which employs the use 
of “SMART” technology. Smart technology refers to the control module’s programming 
which allows for the deployment of the airbags, in stages, depending on the severity of 
the impact. Two stage airbags are used for both the driver and passenger which allows 
for a softer cushioning effect when the bags are triggered at lighter impacts. 

MRS III control modules are manufactured by either Bosch or Temic. While the functional 
operation of both modules are the same. The control modules are not interchangeable 
from a replacement standpoint. Always refer to the EPC parts system to ensure that the 
proper module is installed in the vehicle. 


In addition to the use of two stage airbags for the driver and passenger, the 
following features are also included in the MRS III system: 

• The MRS III control module is linked to the K-Bus for coding and diagnosis. 

• The MRS III includes a fuel pump cut off feature in the event of an airbag deployment. 

• Inert gas generators are now used for all air bags and seat belt tensioners. 

• The inert gas is a mixture of hydrogen (13.5%) and oxygen (86.5%). 


45 

Multiple Restrain System/E52 



System Component 

MRS III Control Module 

The control module is mounted in the center console area on the driveshaft tunnel. 

The control module contains the processing electronics (Smart Technology) for 
triggering of all air bags and pyrotechnic devices installed in the vehicle. 

Two electronic deceleration sensors are installed in the module for crash or impact 
detection. 



Satelite Sensors 

The satellite sensors are mounted behind the driver’s and passenger’s seats underneath 
the Navigation and cd storage compartments. The function of the sensors is to detect 
the severity of side impacts and signal the MRS III control module, through a pulse mod¬ 
ulated signal, in the event of a crash. The control module uses this input signal along with 
its internal impact sensor signal to determine the deployment of the side/head airbags. 

As with the control modules, the satellite sensors are manufacturer specific. The Temic 
sensors have a three wire connector which will not interchange with the Bosch sensors. 
Only two of the wires are used for the satellite sensor’s operation. The signal for deploy¬ 
ment of the bags is carried over the power wire of the sensor. 



46 

Multiple Restrain System/E52 


Driver’s Front Air Bag 

With the MRS III system, the driver’s front airbag becomes a two stage bag similar to the 
passenger’s front side bag, introduced on the 1999 model E38/E39S. The complete 
assembly is mounted beneath the cover in the center of the steering wheel as with 
previous airbags. The assembly now contains the inert gas generator chamber and 
two ignition stages (ignitors). 

The airbag consists of: 

• Accumulator/gas generator 

• Two ignition capsules 

• Propellant gas - 13.5% hydrogen 

86.5% oxygen 


To remove the airbag - compress the spring latches 
through the two access holes (at the bag base, next 
to the steering wheel spokes). 



Passenger’s Front Air Bag 

The passenger’s front airbag is the same unit as installed on E38/E39 vehicles as of 9/98 
production. 


The passenger’s airbag consists of: 



• Pressure accumulator/gas generator 

• Two ignition capsules - for two stage activation 

• Propellant gas of - 13.5% hydrogen 

86.5% oxygen 


Side Air Bags (Thorax) 


The side airbags continue to be mounted in the door 
panels on the doors. Deployment of the side airbags 
is dependent on the triggering thresholds pro 
grammed in the MRS III control module, based on the 
inputs from the satellite sensors and internal crash sensor. 
The side airbags use the same cold gas inflation method 
as the driver’s and passenger’s front bags. 


47 

Multiple Restrain System/E52 





System Operation 


As with previous systems, the triggering thresholds are programmed in the MRS III 

control module. These thresholds are determined by BMW through crash and vehicle 

testing during the design and development of the vehicle. These thresholds will vary 

depending on the vehicle size and design. 

There are several different thresholds for airbag and safety restraint deployment including: 

• Belt pre-tensioner threshold for activation of the seat belt tensioners. 

• Airbag threshold #1 - the first level of activation for the two stage front 
airbags, always deployed first when the front triggering threshold is reached. 

• Airbag threshold #2 - the second level of the two stage front airbags, can 
be deployed simultaneously or after a time delay, depending on the severity of 
the impact. 

• Rear crash threshold - for activation of the seatbelt tensioners with a rear impact. 

• Battery safety terminal threshold - for activation of the BST with airbag deployment. 

• Side airbag threshold - for deployment of the side (thorax) airbags. 


Triggering Thresholds - Two Stage Air Bags 

The programming of the MRS III includes four triggering thresholds for the two stage front 
airbags. The triggering of the front airbags is also dependent on whether the seat belts 
are connected and if the front passenger seat is occupied. 


Threshold 

No Seat Belt 

Belted 

1 

Ignition Stage 1 

No Activation 

2 

Ignition Stage 1&2 

Ignition Stage 1 

3 

Ignition Stage 1&2 

Ignition Stage 1&2 

4 

Ignition Stage 1&2 
Simultaneously 

Ignition Stage 1&2 
Simultaneously 


48 

Multiple Restrain System/E52 




• If the signal from the SBE is defective on triggering, the MRS III will deploy as if the 
seat is occupied. 

• If the signal from the seat belt contacts are defective, the MRS III will deploy as if the 
belts were not buckled. 


Triggering Threshold - Side Air Bags 

The triggering thresholds for the side airbags is dependent on the signals from the satel¬ 
lite sensors and the crash sensor in the MRS III control module. The triggering thresholds 
are independent of the belt tensioners. 


Triggering Threshold - Belt Tensioner 

The triggering of the belt tensioners is dependent on the signal from the seat belt contact 
and the severity of the impact as detected by the control module. 


Triggering Threshold - Battery Safety Terminal 

The BST will deploy in a frontal impact at threshold 2 or greater. The threshold for BST 
activation with a side impact is programmed separately in the side deployment criteria. 
The BST will also be deployed when the rear impact threshold is exceeded. 


Triggering Threshold - Fuel Pump Shut Down 

New to the MRS III system is the link via the K-Bus/CAN Bus to the Engine Control Module 
for deactivation of the fuel pump. The MRS III will signal the DME over the K-Bus through 
the IKE and CAN Bus to shut off the fuel pump in the event that any crash threshold is 
exceeded. 


49 

Multiple Restrain System/E52 



System Diagram 



DRIVER'S SEATBELT 
SWITCH 




PASS. SEATBELT 
SWITCH 




PASSENGER 
SEAT OCCUPIED 
(YES/NO) 

n n n 


SBE 


DRIVER'S SIDE 
IMPACT 
SENSOR 


PASS. SIDE 
IMPACT 
SENSOR 


MRS III 


ELECTRONIC 

ACCELERATION 

SENSOR 


TRIGGER 

LOGIC 

* 

m 

o 

* 

OO 

* 

O 

OP 

OO 

m 

ETC..., 



CRASH SIGNAL 


Diagnosis 

Diagnosis and troubleshooting of the MRS III system is fault driven and can be accessed 
using the DIS Tester or MoDiC. The control module performs a self test of the system 
every time the ignition is switched on (this includes the satellite sensors and seat 
occupancy sensor). Any faults with the system will cause the warning lamp in the 
instrument cluster to remain illuminated after the engine is started. 

Installation of a new or replacement control module requires ZCS coding also using the 
DIS or MoDiC. 

When servicing or replacing any MRS III components, always follow precautionary 
measures outlined in the repair manual of TIS. this includes disconnecting the 
battery prior to any repair or maintenance work being performed. 

All airbag components are part number specific by model and require verification in the 
EPC to ensure the correct component is being installed. 


50 

Multiple Restrain System/E52 















































































Light Technology 


Purpose of The System 

As a technical innovation in addition to the classic appearance, neon light technology is 
used in the Z8 for the external light systems. Neon light technology is used for the 
direction indicator, brake light and reversing light functions. 

Neon tubes are used in the tail lights and direction indicator lights instead of light bulbs. 
The neon tubes are activated by means of special ignition control units controlled by 
the LCM. 

Fiber optic technology is used for the side indicator lamps (same principle as E38 
entrance area lighting). 

The remaining vehicle light systems in the Z8 use the xenon light for the low beam head¬ 
light and halogen light for the high beam headlight. 

As on other new BMW models, all light functions are controlled by a central light con¬ 
trol unit (LCM). Car memory allows Day time and “follow me home” lighting (pull the high 
beam stalk back briefly). 

Operating Data 


TYPE POWER VOLTAGE CURRENT FREQUENCY IGNITION 


Front Direction 
Indicator 

45W 

1000V 

Rear Direction 
Indicator 

25W 

1000V 

Central Brake 
Light 

8W 

620V 

Brake Light 

20W 

750V 

Backup Light 

2W (power-reduced brake light) 


50mA 

14.5kHz 

10,000 V 

50 mA 

14.5kHz 

10,000V 

12 mA 

22.0kHz 

1,800V 

24 mA 

33.0 kHz 

6,000V 


53 

Light Technology/E52 







System Components 

Front Direction Indicator Lights 

Used as side markers, the direction indicator lights are continuously operated with 
5 W (watts) when the lights are switched on (including parking light). When active, the 
direction indicator lights are alternately powered 5 W and 45 W. 



Parking Light (Halogen bulb) 


Low Beam Headlight (xenon light) 


Direction Indicator (neon light) 


High Beam Headlight 


52 

Light Technology/E52 




I &T03S-6D 

Side direction indicator light (fiber optics technology) 



Central brake light (neon) 


Direction indicator 
light (neon) 


Brake light (neon) 
Side marker (USA) 
Passive reflector 

Rear fog light Backup light (illuminates white when activated) 


Rear Direction Indicators 

These lights are red. They have the dual function of direction indicators and stop lights. 
The outer brake lights also have the dual function of direction indicators and stop 
lights. 

The dual function is used when braking with the direction indicators active. 

• Direction indicator and hazard lights have priority over brake lights. 

• The light monitoring (LCM) has been extended to incorporate the outer brake lights. 

Note: Neon light fault codes can be read out from the LCM via the DIS/MoDIC. 


53 

Light Technology/E52 



Neon Technology 


Background 

Neon (symbol Ne) produces a glow in a vacuum electric-discharge tube and is used 
extensively in the familiar advertising displays. 

A neon light is a glass bulb or tube containing neon (gasseous element) at low pressure, 
and two metallic electrodes. To make a neon light, the tube is bent while warmed, to the 
desired shape and sealed at both ends. During the sealing process, electrodes are 
added at each end. An access port is left near one end and a vacuum is applied to the 
interior of the tube. After the air and humidity has been removed, the neon gas is added 
under low pressure and the tube is sealed. 

The light produces a reddish-orange glow when an electric current (applied across the 
electrodes) is raised in voltage to the point at which it ionizes the gas in the tube. The 
voltage at which the light glows varies with the design of the tube. When the glass tube is 
ionized, the voltage drop across the tube is constant, regardless of the amount of current 
flowing through the tube. The neon glows with an even intensity throughout the length of 
the tube. 

A variant of this is the glass tube containing ionized neon at very low pressure. The tube 
shines with a brilliant red glow if a high-voltage alternating current is applied to the elec¬ 
trodes sealed in the ends of the tube. 

With chemistry and electrical changes, neon lights can produce an amber color. This 
allows the application for front turning/parking lights. 


Neon Light Assembly 
Cut Away 



1 



12 volt & 

15 kV 


Ground 

Output 

ST038-77 


54 

Light Technology/E52 







Neon Technology 

Neon Benefits 

The use of neon lighting provides several advantages to automobile manufacturers and 

consumers: 

* Light failures caused by shock and vibration are minimized, because neon operates 
without a filament. 

* The average life of the light is considerably higher as compared to incandescent bulbs. 

* Styling of the light includes a more uniform distribution of light across the lense, and 
neon tubes can be bent to conform to the contour of the vehicle. 

* Amber neon allows the use of a clear lense (for vehicle color schemes). 

* Neon enhances safety because of the extremely fast ignition time of the light (instant¬ 
aneous braking signal), allowing other drivers more time to react. 



The neon lights are activated directly by the LCM. The neon tubes have ignition control units 
on each housing. 

Note: Due to extremely high internal voltage, internal testing is not permitted. Please refer 
to the repair information before testing or servicing. 


55 

Light Technology/E52 




Side Direction Indicator - Fiber Optics 

The side directional indicator lighting is provided by halogen bulb light sources in each 
base of the “A” pillars, and fiber optic tubing. The light sources are controlled directly by 
the LCM, when the directional signal is activated. 

Light Source Modules: Mounted in each “A” pillar base, behind the lower dash trim, are 
the light source modules. The light source modules are made up of the housing, halogen 
bulb and reflector. 



The reflector holds the bulb and focus the bulbs light into the housing. The bulbs are are 
available for individual replacement (P/N 63 31 8 371 610). 

Fiber Optic Light Conductor Cable: The fiber optic cables carry the light to their respective 
light housing in each front fender (through the engine compartment bulkhead). 



Side Direction Indicator Light (Fiber Optic Technology 

Installation note: the bending radius of the fiber optic cable should be less than 20mm when 
installing. 


56 

Light Technology/E52 























Light Control Module - LCM 


The neon and fiber optic lights are directly activated by the LCM. 

The LCM is located behind the carpet and protection plate on the passenger’s side, 
below the glovebox. 

The LCM is diagnoseable via DIS/MoDIC, and requires coding when replaced (refer to 
IKE section). 



57 

Light Technology/E52 






Xenon Lights 


• The automotive industry/press often identify xenon lighting systems as HID (high 
intensity discharge) systems. Xenon headlight technology was first introduced to the 
US market exclusively on the E32 750iL in 1993. BMW xenon headlight systems have 
evolved and their availability as optional equipment has spread through out the model 
lineup. 

• Blue/White in color and using ellipsoidal technology Xenon headlights pro 
vide improved night time visibility in all driving conditions compared with traditional 
Halogen bulb headlights. 



Xenon High Intensity Discharge Bulbs 

• Xenon bulbs are identified as D2S(D=Discharge). Xenon bulbs illuminate when an arc 
of electrical current is established between two electrodes in the bulb. 

• The xenon gas sealed in the bulb reacts to the electrical excitation and 
heat generated by the current flow. The distinct bluish/white brilliant light is the 
result of the xenon gas reacting to the controlled current flow. 


58 

Light Technology/E52 



Phases of Bulb Operation 

Starting Phase: The bulb requires an initial high voltage starting pulse of 18-25kV to 
establish the arc. 

Warm Up Phase: Once the arc is established the power supply to the bulb is regulated to 
2.6A generating a lamp output of 75 watts. This is the period of operation where the 
xenon gas begins to brightly illuminate. The warm up phase stabilizes the environment in 
the bulb ensuring continual current flow across the electrodes. 

Continuous Phase: Once the warm up phase is completed, the system switches to a 
continuous mode of operation. The supply voltage for the bulb is reduced and the 
operating power required for continual bulb illumination is reduced to 35 watts which is 
less than a conventional halogen bulb. 


Functional Description 

• To regulate the power supply to the bulbs, additional components are required. The 
xenon control modules (1 per light) receive operating power from the lighting control 
module (LCM) when the headlights are switched on. The xenon control modules 
provide the regulated power supply to illuminate the bulbs through their phases 
of operation. 

• The igniters establish the electric arcs. Integral coils generate the initial high voltage 
starting pulses from the control module provided starting voltage. Thereafter 
they provide a closed circuit for the regulated power output from the control modules. 



59 

Light Technology/E52 





Xenon Bulb Monitoring 

• Xenon bulb function is monitored by the Lighting Control Module (LCM). The 
bulbs are only “hot” monitored. Cold monitoring is not possible since the lighting 
control module is not in direct control of the xenon bulb. For this reason cold moni 
taring for low beam headlights is encoded off in the lighting control module for 
Xenon headlight equipped vehicle. 

• The lighting control module detects xenon bulb failure via a reduction in current flow 
to the xenon control module. When a bulb fails, the xenon control module’s current 
consumption drops to 60mA indicating unsuccessful xenon bulb illumination. The 
lighting control module then posts the appropriate display message. 


Diagnosis 

• Xenon control modules are not connected to the diagnostic link. Fiowever, the vehicle 
specific Lighting Control Module (LCM) does incorporate xenon headlight specific 
diagnosis up to the xenon control module. 


Xenon Headlight Testing 

Warning: Xenon headlight control systems generate high output voltage. Prior to headlight 
removal or testing observe the vehicle warning labels and be cautious by following 
safeguards to prevent accidental injury. 

Refer to SI 04 33 96 for detailed adapter introductory information. 


60 

Light Technology/E52/ST038 



Headlight Beam Throw Control - LRA 


• LRA automatically adjusts the vertical positioning of the headlights to maintain 
optimum headlight beam positioning for maximum driving visibility and to prevent 
undue glare for oncoming motorists. The system compensates for vehicle load angle 
changes (ie: diminishing reserve of gasoline in fuel tank during a long journey, over 
loaded cargo weight, etc.) 

• LRA has been available on BMW vehicles (refered to as LWR) in other markets for 
quite some time. Starting with the 1999 model year all US market vehicles with Xenon 
Lights incorporate LWR as standard equipment, now included in the new Z8 (refer to 
1999 Model Update for specifics). 

• LRA monitors the vehicle’s loaded angle via two hall effect sensors mounted to the 
front and rear suspension members. When an adjustment is necessary, LRA 
simultaneously activates two stepper motors (one in each headlight assembly). 

• The stepper motors drive a threaded rod that moves the lower edge of the 
headlight carrier plate forward and backward (depending on driven direction). 

The upper edge of the headlight carrier plate is fixed on a pivot. The pivoting 
movement adjusts the vertical position of the headlight beam. 

Control Module 

The LRA control module is located behind the glovebox. The control module connects to 

a single, harness connector. The control module has diagnostic capabilities and commu¬ 
nicates with the DIS/MoDiC via the K bus - IKE gateway to the D bus. 



61 

Light Technology/E52 




62 

Light Technology/E52 














































Multi-lnformration Radio System (MIR) 


Purpose of the System 

This audio set is the first of the New Generation Radio family. The multi-information radio 
will be installed for the first time in the Z8. The standard equipment includes a CD 
changer together with a Harman Kardon HiFi system. The MIR in the Z8 does not have 
cassette player. 

Audio mixing makes it possible to simultaneously listen to music and obtain 
navigation information. 

The outside temperature display (warning) is the only BC function that can be called up in 
the MIR of the Z8. Country-specific variants are set by coding. Please review aftersales 
publications for details and operation. 




MK2 Monochrome 

MIR as radio naviga^^p tion Computer 



GPS Receiver 
With Antenna 


63 

MIR/E52 




























System Components 

Block diagram of rear bumper antenna 


MIR Antenna Amplifier Antenna 




The antenna amplifier located on the 
trunk floor 



64 

MIR/E52 



Review Questions 


1. What features of the power windows can the FZV operate? 


2. The IKE shares “backup” information with what other module? 


3. Can you name the different buses in the Z8? 


4. If the battery is dead, how can the trunk be opened? 


5. Where does the “door closed” signal come from? 


6. What controls the “red” doorlights and when do they illuminate? 


7. If the hazard lights are activated what light illuminates when the brakes are applied? 


8. What control module is the diagnostic gateway to the ZKE? 


9. Identity the ELV’s components and their locations. 


65 

MIR/E52 



