Reference Manual 


BMW 

Technical Training 


www.bmwcenternet.com 



The Ultimate 
Driving Machine® 


Chassis Dynamics 



BMW of North America, LLC 

Technical Training 
ST1115 


8 / 1/12 




































Information Status: August 01,2012 

Course Code: ST1115 Chassis Dynamics 

The information contained in the training course materials is solely intended for partici¬ 
pants in this training course conducted by BMW Group Technical Training Centers, or 
BMW Group Contract Training Facilities. 

This training manual or any attached publication is not intended to be a complete and all 
inclusive source for repair and maintenance data. It is only part of a training information 
system designed to assure that uniform procedures and information are presented to all 
participants. 

For changes/additions to the technical data, repair procedures, please refer to the current 
information issued by BMW of North America, LLC, Technical Service Department. 

This information is available by accessing TIS atwww.bmwcenternet.com. 


© 2012 BMW of North America, LLC. The BMW name and logo are registered trademarks. All rights reserved. 



Table of Contents 


Wheels and Tires 

Subject Page 

Introduction .5 

TREAD Act.6 

System Identification and Terminology.7 

Flat Tire Monitoring Systems.8 

FTM System Overview.9 

FTM System Operation.10 

Spare Tire .11 

System Functions.12 

Self Test.12 

System Reset.12 

Detects Drop in Tire Pressure.12 

Visual and Acoustic Warning .12 

Signal Output .12 

Special Conditions for System Function.13 

Old or Worn Tires .13 

System Reset.14 

TPM Systems (up to 2003 production) .15 

TPM System Components.16 

RDC Control Unit.16 

Receiving Antennas.17 

Wheel Transmitter Modules.18 

TPM System Operation.19 

Autumn Warning.19 

Tire Failure Warning.19 

System Reset.20 


Initial Print Date: 08/12 


Revision Date: 




























Subject Page 

TPM Systems (from 9/05) .21 

TPM System Overview .22 

TPM System Components.23 

TPM (RDC) Control Unit.24 

Central Receiving Antenna.24 

Trigger Transmitter Modules.25 

Wheel Transmitter Module.26 

Control Display.27 

Instrument Cluster.28 

System Operation.29 

Wheel Management .30 

Control Display Screens.31 

One Tire with Reduced Pressure.31 

Several Tires with Reduced Pressure .32 

Workshop Hints.33 

System Reset (Initialization) .33 

Reset Procedure.35 

Vehicles with RPA Button.35 

Vehicles with BC Button (on-board computer function) .35 

Vehicles with Central Information Display .35 

Preconditions for Activation.35 

Flat Tire Indication .35 

TPM Systems (from 3/11) .36 

Operating Principle.36 

Resetting the Tire Pressure Values .36 

Teach-in Process.36 

Service Information.42 

Teach-in Process.42 

Service Life of Batteries for Wheel Electronics .42 

Remove / Install Wheel Electronics.42 

Runflat Tire Technology.43 

RFT Operation.43 

RFT Design .43 

Tire Manufacturer Information .43 





































Subject Page 

Basic Tire Balancing .46 

Static Imbalance .47 

Dynamic Imbalance.48 

Residual Imbalance.49 

Balance Weights.49 

Weight Conversion.50 

Runout.51 

Wheel Runout.51 

Lateral Runout (Rim) .52 

Tire Runout.53 

Radial Runout (Tire).53 

Lateral (Axial) Runout.54 

Component Runout.54 

Radial Force Variation.55 

Vibration Diagnosis.57 

Harmonics .59 

First Order Harmonics .59 

Second Order Harmonics.60 

Tips on using the GSP9700 Wheel Balancer.61 






















Wheels and Tires 


Model: All with TPMS 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify BMW Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 


• Locate and Identify Components of TPM Systems 


• Diagnose and Repair TPM Systems 


4 

Wheels and Tires 



Introduction 


According to numerous studies and statistical analysis, many vehicles on the roads 
today are driving with under-inflated tires. First and foremost, this a safety issue which 
could ultimately result in catastrophic tire failure (a.k.a. “blowout”). Many "blow-outs" 
can be traced back to preliminary damage from puncture or a slow loss in tire pressure. 



In addition to safety issues, under-inflated tires can cause a reduction in fuel economy 
and overall tire life. Studies by tire manufacturers have shown that tire life can be 
reduced by 50% when the tires are under-inflated by as little as 20%. 

Therefore the overall consequences of improperly inflated tires include: 

• Increased tire wear resulting in decreased tire service life 

• Impaired vehicle handling 

• Reduction in safety for the vehicle occupants 

• Reduced fuel economy 

Since most tire pressure loss occurs gradually, the driver does not usually perceive the 
reduced tire pressure. Therefore various systems have been developed to aid the driver 
by monitoring tire pressure loss and report this information to the driver. 

The intent of this training module is to include all systems which monitor tire pressure 
loss. The first U.S. model BMW to utilize this technology was the E39 M5. Various 
systems have been in use since that time on some models. 

Recent government legislation now mandates that all light vehicles sold in the U.S. 
must have a “Tire Pressure Monitoring System” or TPMS. 


5 

Wheels and Tires 





TREAD Act 


In 2000, there was much media attention surrounding tire safety issues. The leading 
tire manufacturers were involved with many law suits regarding catastrophic tire failures. 
These well publicized incidents involved injury and fatalities. 

In response to these issues, the U.S. Congress enacted legislation entitled the 
“Transportation Recall Enhancement, Accountability and Documentation (TREAD) 

Act in November of 2000. 

The TREAD Act encompasses many aspects of tire industry issues. The act includes 
items such as tire labeling reguirements, tire testing standards, information on tire safety 
related recalls etc. There are also provisions for issues on child safety restraints. 

However, the focus of this training module is to train technicians about Tire Pressure 
Monitoring Systems (TPMS). TPM systems are also one of the primary components 
of the TREAD Act. TPM systems allow early detection of tire pressure loss which is 
not usually detected by the driver until vehicle handling and safety is affected. 

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) is the government agency 
responsible for the creation and enforcement of the mandates of the TREAD Act. 

Initially, NHTSA approved the installation of “Indirect” TPM systems. 

Indirect TPM systems monitor tire pressure “indirectly” by monitoring the rotational 
speed of the tire via the wheel speed sensors. The ABS/DSC system can then detect 
pressure loss by comparing wheel speed information between all 4 tires. Any loss in 
tire pressure would result in a change in tire diameter and therefore a change in 
rotational speed. 

The guidelines of the TREAD Act found that “Indirect” TPM systems are ineffective 
in detecting tire pressure loss until the tire was under-inflated to an unsafe level. 
Therefore, NHTSA mandated that auto manufacturers install “Direct” TPM systems 
on all vehicles. 

Direct TPM systems monitor tire pressure directly by using pressure sensors at each 
wheel which report tire pressure and temperature information to relevant vehicle sys¬ 
tems. Tire pressure loss is then reported to the driver via an illuminated warning symbol. 
Direct TPM systems also offer the capability of monitoring tire pressure when the vehicle 
is at a standstill. Indirect systems must be driven in order to collect sufficient data to 
detect tire pressure loss. 

As per NHTSA guidelines, passenger cars and light trucks must have the “Direct” TPM 
systems installed via a specific timeline from 2005. By 2007, all auto manufacturers 
must be in 100% compliance. 

Aside from the obvious safety benefits, Direct TPM systems will also assist the driver 
by maintaining fuel economy and extending tire life. 

This training module will help the technician to diagnose and repair both “Indirect” and 
“Direct” TPM systems. The first step in the diagnosis the these systems is identifica¬ 
tion. The following text shows some tips on identifying these systems. 

6 

Wheels and Tires 



System Identification and Terminology 

In order to accurately diagnose TPM systems, the system must be properly identified. 
These systems have had numerous acronyms which are used to describe the various 
systems. For the purposes of this training module, the systems will be broken down 
into two basic configurations. These are as follows: 

• Systems which monitor wheel speed - These “lndirect”systems will be 
referred to as Flat Tire Monitoring systems or FTM. FTM systems take advantage 
of components already installed in the vehicle. The wheel speed sensors, which are 
already an input to the DSC control unit, are used to monitor wheel speed. When a 
tire starts to deflate, the overall diameter changes. This affects the rotational speed, 
which is picked up by the DSC module. The DSC module contains software for the 
purpose of calculating the speed changes and reporting the pressure loss to the dri¬ 
ver via an illuminated indicator or symbol. The only additional components which 
are installed is the switch for system initialization. Early generation systems used 

a module which received wheel speed input from the DSC module. 

• Systems which monitor actual tire pressure - These “Direct” systems will be 
referred to as Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems or TPM systems. TPM systems 
use wireless sensors which are part of the tire valve stem. These sensors monitor 
actual tire pressure and send this information to a module via multiple antennas. 
These systems are preferred due to the fact that the actual tire pressure is 
monitored rather than by variations in tire rotational speeds. 

There is a simple way to identify the difference between the two systems. On systems 
which monitor actual tire pressure, the tire valve stem is threaded and has a “hex head” 
on the valve stem. The systems which monitor wheel speed have conventional rubber 
valve stems. 


TPM System FTM System 



“Threaded” Valve Stem on Vehicles, “Rubber” Valve Stem on Vehicles, 

which Monitor Actual Tire Pressure. which Monitor Wheel Speed. 


7 

Wheels and Tires 



Flat Tire Monitoring Systems 


FTM systems are “indirect” systems which were first used on U.S. models with the 
introduction of the E39 M5 in 2000. Since that time, FTM systems have been 
included on most other models including the 7 Series. 

There have been numerous abbreviations and terminology used to describe 
FTM systems in the past. Flowever, FTM will be used from this point forward 
to describe those systems which “indirectly” monitor tire pressure loss through 
wheel speed detection. 

Some of the past abbreviations include: 

• RDW - is derived from the German term “Reifen Druck Warnung” which means 
Tire Pressure Warning. This term was used to describe some of the early systems 
used on the E39 M5 and E46 M3. 

• RPA - comes from the German words “Reifen Pannen Anzeige” which translates 
to Tire Failure (Puncture) Indicator. This abbreviation is most closely associated 
with the E85, E60 and E46 (from 2001). 

• DDS - This an english based abbreviation for Deflation Detection System. 

This term is occasionally found when using the diagnostic equipment such 
as the DISplus/GT-1. 

• DWS - This is also an english abbreviation for the system used on the Z8 (E52) 
and it stands for Dunlop Warning System. 

Regardless of the terminology used, the most important concept to understand 
is the difference between the Direct and Indirect systems. 



8 

Wheels and Tires 

































FTM System Overview 


FTM Systems (Indirect monitoring systems) 

Series 

Chassis 

Option/Date 

System Design 

Deflation 

Warning 

System Reset 
(initialization) 

3 Series 

E46 

Option from 9/03 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 

gong 

RPA Reset Button 

3 Series 

E46 M3 

Standard from SOP 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 

gong 

RPA Reset Button 

3 Series 

E46 (ix) 

Option from 9/01 

System uses 
separate control unit. 

Yellow telltale + 

gong 

RPA Reset Button 

3 Series 

E90/E91 

Standard from SOP 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 

gong 

RPA Reset via Stalk 
Switch or Controller 

5 Series 

E39 (M5) 

Standard 

System uses 
separate control unit. 

Yellow telltale + 

gong 

RPA Reset Button 

5 Series 

E60/E61 

Standard 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong and 

CC Message 

Soft Key Reset via 
CID Menu and 

Controller 

6 Series 

E63/E64 

Standard 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong and 

CC Message 

Soft Key Reset via 
CID Menu and 

Controller 

7 Series 

E65/E66 

Optional from 9/02 
Standard from 12/03 

System integrated 
into CIM 

Yellow telltale + 
gong and 

CC Message 

Soft Key Reset via 
CID Menu and 

Controller 

Z4 

E85 

Standard 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 

gong 

RPA Reset Button 

SAV 

E53 

Standard from 4/04 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 

gong 

RPA Reset Button 

SAV 

E83 

Standard 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 

gong 

RPA Reset Button 


9 

Wheels and Tires 














































































FTM System Operation 

The FTM system is designed to inform the driver of a loss in tire pressure. Rather than 
monitor actual tire pressure (as direct systems do), the rolling circumference is calculated 
from the wheel speed signals. When a tire loses pressure, the circumference decreases 
which corresponds to an increase in wheel speed. The wheel speeds are compared 
with one another for the purpose of determining rotational irregularities. 

A difference in wheel speed is recognized as a pressure loss. The FTM system can 
inform the driver after a short drive if there is a possible under-inflated tire. Depending 
upon the vehicle, the driver is warned via an indicator light in the cluster or by a check 
control message. A gong will sometimes accompany the warning light as an additional 
method of alerting the driver. 

When pressure loss from the tire is gradual, the driver may not perceive a problem until 
the vehicle handling is compromised. The condition is made difficult to visually detect 
when “Run Flat” tires are used. This is due to the additional sidewall stiffness which can 
“mask” an under-inflation situation. The FTM system can alert the driver in advance of 
any pressure loss in the tires. 

The FTM system will detect a drop in pressure below about 30 % ± 10 % of the initial 
value. The FTM indicator and warning light indicates a drop in tire pressure. The FTM 
system will indicate this after just a short distance. Usually, after a few minutes, from 
a certain minimum speed (e.g. 25 km/h) up to the permissible top speed. 


</> 

a> 

+-> 

3 

C 

I 

C 


w 

CO 

c 

O) 

'55 

■a 

CD 

a) 

a 

</) 


-Q 

co 

CD 

(/) 

3 


o 

a> 5 


i 5 

I- 


CD 

> 

+3 

jO 

3 

E 

3 

O 


20 — 


o 15 - 


= 2 10 — 


4 — 


TIRE PRESSURE FAILURE WARNING RANGE 






62 


81 


100 


118 


155 


Miles per Hour 


10 

Wheels and Tires 











During the reset process, the set tire pressure is taken as the initial value for the 
current set of tires. If all 4 tires lose pressure at the same rate, the wheel speeds 
will also change at the same rate. The RPA is unable to detect a uniform drop in 
pressure in all tires (e.g. due to diffusion = natural loss of air from all 4 tires) 








Tit* 1 



vy / 

f J 

/ / 1 / 

0 

Tire Pressure 
Placard Location 


As per BMW guidelines, the tire pressure should be checked regularly. The owner’s 
manual states at least twice a month and prior to any long trips. Tire pressure informa¬ 
tion can be found on the tire pressure placard on the b-pillar. There are also tire pres¬ 
sure charts in the owner’s manual as well. 



The overall responsibility for the maintenance of correct 
tire pressure resides with the driver at all times. 


Spare Tire 

When using the “space saver” type spare tire, be aware that the FTM system will not 
operate properly due to the reduced overall diameter of the spare tire. Have the tire 
repaired as soon as possible to ensure a high level of driving safety. 


11 

Wheels and Tires 



System Functions 

The Run Flat Indicator (RPA) comprises the following functions: 

• Self-test 

• Reset (Initialization) 

• Detects drop in tire pressure 

• Visual and acoustic warning 

Self Test 

The RPA performs a self-test when terminal 15 is switched ON. A fault in the RPA is 
indicated by the RPA indicator and warning light and by a symbol in the LC display. 

System Reset 

Reset is started manually (e.g. by pressing the RPA button). Then (after the journey has 
started), Initialization will run as a fully automatic calibration seguence. In other words, 
the circumference of individual tires are recorded and evaluated. 

To allow a drop in tire pressure to be detected, the system considers different speed 
ranges and driving situations. Taking account of the driving situation means that the 
system has to be primed for each speed range individually. 

From 09/2004, these speed ranges and driving situations have been combined into 
3 calibration ranges. This means greater clarity for output via the BMW diagnostic 
eguipment. 

The reset (initialization) phase lasts approximately 5 to 15 minutes for the individual 
speed ranges. The end of the reset phase is not indicated. 

Detects Drop in Tire Pressure 

The RPA records the wheel speeds using the wheel-speed sensors from the DSC. 

The RPA compares the speeds of the individual wheels and computes an average 
speed. In this way the RPA is able to detect a loss of tire pressure. (In the event of 
a tire losing pressure, the tire rolling circumference of the affected tire is also reduced.) 

Visual and Acoustic Warning 

A drop in pressure in one tire of approximately. 30 % ± 10 % from the initial value is 
indicated by the RPA indicator and warning light. In addition, an acoustic signal sounds. 

Signal Output 

Depending on the model concerned, either via the instrument cluster, M-ASK or CCC. 

In the event of a DSC malfunction, the FTM system will also register 
a malfunction. This is due to the fact that the wheel speed sensors 
are monitored by both the DSC and FTM systems. 


12 

Wheels and Tires 


Special Conditions for System Function 

The following operating conditions may cause a delay in the warning being given in the 
event of a drop in tire pressure: 

• Heavy braking. 

• Rapid acceleration. 

• High rate of lateral acceleration. 

• Cornering (in a tight corner). 

• Vehicle speed dropping below a minimum speed (the RPA only responds when 
a certain minimum speed has been reached). 

• Large difference in slip (between axles or between wheel on one side of vehicle). 

• Initialization not being completed in current speed range (see "Controls"). 

• Winter conditions. 

The following operating conditions may cause a delay in the warning being given 
in the event of a drop in tire pressure: 

• Driving with snow chains fitted. 

Driving with snow chains may impair the correct function of the RPA. The system will 
work as normal again after the snow chains have been removed and the vehicle is driven 
for a few minutes. (The reset process will not need to be repeated) 



Do not perform reset (initialization) when snow chains are fitted. 
The reset process will be affected by the irregularities caused 
by the snow chains. 


Old or Worn Tires 

Only install tires with the same tread depth. Avoid fitting tires with greatly different tread 
depth (from approximately. 2 millimeters) on one axle. The different diameters mean that 
the correct operation of the FTM system is no longer guaranteed. 

In the following cases, the system will not emit a warning despite a drop in tire pressure 
being detected: 

• The same amount of pressure is lost in 2 or more tires. 

• Drops in tire pressures caused by diffusion and affecting all 4 tires egually. 

• If a tire is damaged with a sudden loss of all pressure 
(tire blowout, warning is given too late). 


13 

Wheels and Tires 



System Reset 

The FTM system is reset using the following control elements depending upon vehicle 
and optional eguipment: 

• FTM button (all early vehicles w/o CCC or E9X). 

• On-board computer button on turn-signal/main-beam 
switch (E90/91/E92 w/o CCC). 

• With Drive in the Central Information Display (CID) 
with the controller (all with CCC/NAV). 



It is important to always perform a system reset immediately after 
correcting the tire pressure, especially if a tire is changed or the 
wheels are interchanged. Only check tire pressures when the 
tires are cold. 


Set the tires to the correct pressure before performing Initialization. During Initialization, 
the set tire pressure is taken as the initial value for the current set of wheels. 

Correct the tire pressures when the tires are cold to prevent the data recorded 
from being affected by temperature. 



The maintenance of tire pressure is the responsibility of the driver. 


Check tire pressures regularly, at least twice a month and before embarking on lengthy 
journeys. During reset, the set tire pressure is taken as the initial value for the current 
set of tires. 

The FTM should be reset during the following scenarios: 

• If tire pressure is changed (tire pressure is corrected or reset). 

• If the position of the tires is changed (change of axles, wheels), 
even if the tire pressure is not changed. 

• If a tire is changed or the wheels are interchanged 

(e.g. old tires for new tires, summer tires for winter tires, etc.). 


14 

Wheels and Tires 


TPM Systems (up to 2003 production) 


TPM systems are “direct”systems which monitor actual tire pressure. The first BMW 
to use the “direct” system was the early production E65/E66. The system was then 
referred to as Tire Pressure Control or RDC. The E46 also received an optional 
version of the RDC type system which was available up to 8/03 production. 

The system is capable of monitoring actual tire pressure when the vehicle is stationary 
or when being driven. There are transmitters which are part of the valve stem assem¬ 
bly. These transmitters send signals to the RDC control unit via antennas mounted 
in the wheel well area. 

When the system detects pressure loss, the driver is warned via a Check Control 
message and an acoustic warning (gong). 




The TPM system on these pages were installed on the E65/E66 
and E46 vehicles as options until 2003 production. The newer 
(NHTSA mandated) TPM systems from 3/2006 are covered on 
pages 32 through 47. 


15 

Wheels and Tires 























TPM System Components 


Components of the TPM system differ from the FTM systems. 
These components include: 

• RDC Control Unit 

• Receiving Antennas 

• Wheel Transmitter Module 

• Warning Indicator Lamp 

• Control Display (E6X vehicles) 


RDC Control Unit 

The RDC control unit is located behind 
the glove box on both the E65/E66 and 
the E46. The control unit is connected 
to the K-CAN bus on the E65/E66 and 
the K-Bus on the E46. 

The RDC control unit receives input 
signals from the 4 antennas and monitors 
the signals for individual pressure and 
temperature information. 

If the inflation pressure of one of the 
tires (including the spare) falls below 
the predetermined threshold, the RDC 
generates a CC warning telegram on 
the K-CAN (or K-bus on E46). 



Operating Frequency 


The RDC module is designed to operate 
on a specific operating frequency. It must 
be matched to the frequency of the 
4 antennas. The systems will operate 
on two possible frequencies - 315 MHz 
and 433 Mhz. 

The label on the RDC module contains 
information about the operating frequen¬ 
cy. All components including the RDC 
module, antennas (4) and the 4 wheel 
transmitter modules must have the 
same frequency rating in order for 
the system to operate properly. 



RDC Module Location on E46 


16 

Wheels and Tires 























Receiving Antennas 

The system uses 4 antennas located in each 
of the 4 wheel well areas behind the splash 
trim. The purpose of the four antennas is to 
receive the signals from the wheel mounted 
transmitters and transfer this information to 
the RDC control unit. 

There are two possible types of antennas 
used. The 433 Mhz antenna which is black 
(dark gray) in color and the 315 Mhz antenna 
which is light gray in color. 



Antenna Location in Wheel Well 


433 Mhz Antenna 



315 Mhz Antenna 



17 

Wheels and Tires 






Wheel Transmitter Modules 

The wheel transmitter modules are located inside 
the tire and attached to the valve stem. The mod¬ 
ules contain sensors which monitor pressure as well 
as temperature. There is also a 3.6 volt, long-life 
lithium battery which is used to power up the sensor 
electronics as the internal transmitter circuitry. 

The transmitter modules are active in an energy 
saving mode even when they are sitting as spare 
parts on the shelf. 

Each transmitter module has it’s own unique ID 
code. The ID code is assigned to a position on the 
vehicle (LR,RR etc.) after a successful initialization 
has been completed. 

The radio signal transmitted by the wheel modules is 
received when the tire passes close to the antenna. 

The transmitter module measures internal tire air 
pressure every minute. If the air pressure increases 
by 0.5 bar between measurements, the transmission 
rate increases to every 0.8 seconds. 

If the increase in air pressure is detected for approximately 216 seconds, the complete 
functionality of the transmitter is activated. If the higher pressure continues, the module 
remains permanently active and measures the air pressure and temperature every 0.3 
seconds and transmits the information by radio signal every 55 seconds. 

At temperatures over 120 degrees Celsius, the transmitter modules are switched off. 
Once the transmitter module cools below 100 degrees Celsius, operation resumes. 

The wheel electronics modules must match the frequency of the antenna and RDC 
module. If any of these system components are mis-matched, the system will not 
function correctly. 


The valve stem of the spare tire should be pointed to the right rear 
wheel well. The spare tire is monitored by the RDC module, but not 
displayed on the screen of the control display. Also, special care 
should be taking when mounting and dismounting tires from the 
rims. Damage to the wheel electronics could occur. 


18 

Wheels and Tires 






TPM System Operation 

During monitoring, the RDC control module takes the measured temperature and 
pressure readings to determine a target pressure value. 

If the tire being monitored falls below the required level by 0.2 bar for more than 8 
minutes, a Check Control Message appears in the instrument cluster after the car 
is started. The driver is prompted to check tire pressure. 

Autumn Warning 

If the tire temperature is 20 degrees Celsius lower for 14 days than the previously 
measured temperature during the last initialization, the RDC system will also prompt 
the driver to check tire pressures. 


Check Control Message displayed in the 
Cluster 

Message displayed in Control Display 

Check 1 

CL) 

issures! 

“Check tire pressure!” Check tire inflation pres¬ 
sure; refer to owner’s manual or inflation chart. 


When the RDC menu on the control display is activated, the car is shown with the 
tires highlighted in yellow. The tire pressures must be adjusted and an initialization 
carried out. 

Tire Failure Warning 

After the temperature calculation, if the monitored tire falls below the specified pressure 
of 0.4 bar, a CC message will appear on the instrument cluster with an audible warning 
tone. These warnings will also be set if the monitored tire pressure falls by more than 
16%. A corresponding CC message will also be shown on the Control Display. 


Check Control Message displayed in the 
Cluster 

Message displayed in Control Display 

Flat tire! Stop vehicle carefully. 

Left front tire is flat, refer to owner’s manual or 
contact BMW roadside assistance. 


When the RDC menu on the control display is activated, the car is shown with the 
defective tire in red. In the case of a spare tire failure, all of the tires are shown in red. 

Once the tire pressures are restored to the setpoint in the RDC control unit, the tires 
will return to green in the control display. The CC message is also withdrawn. 


19 

Wheels and Tires 









System Reset 

After the tires are replaced, rotated or if their inflation pressures are adjusted, then the 
wheel transmitter modules must be initialized (reset) using the RDC function in the 
“Settings” menu of the Control Display. 

During initialization the following processes are performed: 

• Individual wheel recognition (Identification of wheel transmitter modules). 

• Wheel position assignment. 

• Plausibility check (setpoint pressures checked). 

• Adoption of setpoint pressures as specified pressures. 

The RDC (TPM) system then learns the wheel transmitter module position. 

The minimum air pressure accepted by the TPM system on during reset is 1.7 bar 
(or 24.7psi). If the tire pressures deviate more than 0.4 bar (6 psi) per axle the reset 
process is rejected after a plausibility check. 

1.3 bar is the lowest pressure detected by the wheel transmitter module. At that point, 
a tire failure warning will always be issued. 

Complete reset procedure can take up to 30 minutes. Only the actual driving time over 
6 km/h is taken into account. During initialization, the CC message “Initializing RDC” 
is displayed on the Instrument Cluster. 

When the initialization from the Control Display is activated, the wheels appear black 
and the pressures are not shown. Once initialization is complete, the tires of the car 
on the graphic turn green and pressure values are shown for each tire. 




■ib]D "£JL£CG/W HWC 


2,3 bar 


2,1 bar 

initTausieren 


2,1 bar 



2,0 bar 


20,0°C K AUTO 


703.4 7 | AUTOfA 20 r 0°C 


20 

Wheels and Tires 




TPM Systems (from 9/05) 


As per the TREAD act guidelines, future tire pressure monitoring systems on BMW 
vehicles will be of the “direct” type. However, there will be some design changes from 
the first generation “direct” systems. This new system can also be referred to as the 
“trigger” type system. This is due to the use of trigger transmitter modules which will 
be explained in more detail later in this section. 

The first models to receive the new systems will be the 5, 6 and 7 series from March 
of 2006. The X3 will also have the new TPM system from March. The 3 series 
(E90,91,92) as well as the M5 and M6 will be eguipped with the direct system as well. 
The Z4 will balance out the module line in October. To be in compliance with the new 
NHTSA regulations, all new models produced from September of 2007 will use the 
new system. 



The main function of the system is to monitor the tire pressure during vehicle operation. 
The most important auxiliary function of the system is the option of independently 
detecting the wheels (vehicle's wheels) mounted on the vehicle and their position. 

The control unit obtains the radio telegrams from the electronic wheel electronic 
modules which are controlled via the trigger transmitters. The system recognizes 
the vehicle's own wheels and the mounting position of the wheels by evaluating the 
trigger location as well as statistical evaluation of the received information. The control 
unit checks the individual system components. 

The spare wheel is not monitored as the electronic wheel module does not transmit 
telegrams when stationary (except for the specified post-run phase). 


21 

Wheels and Tires 





TPM System Overview 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wheel Electronics 

2 

Trigger Transmitter 

3 

TPM Control Module 

4 

Instrument Cluster Display 

5 

Reset (initialization) Button 
(or via controller with CCC) 

6 

Central Receiving Antenna 


22 

Wheels and Tires 



















TPM System Components 

Components of the new TPM system differ somewhat from the early TPM system. 
The TPM components include: 

• TPM (RDC) Control Unit 

• Central (Digital) Receiving Antenna (1) 

• Trigger Transmitter Modules (4) 

• Wheel Electronics Modules (4 +1 for spare - optional) 

• Control Display (E6X vehicles) 

• Instrument Cluster 


4 Vn TPM ► 


Reset 



| / 


1 

® \ 

Status: TPM active 


1 

87.5 FM TP 




23 

Wheels and Tires 




TPM (RDC) Control Unit 

The TPM control unit processes the information received from the central receiving 
antenna and compares to the previously learned tire pressure data. When the tire 
pressure deviates from the specified values, 
the TPM control unit sends a fault telegram 
which is indicated in the cluster with a corre¬ 
sponding message in check control. 

The location of the control unit varies 
depending upon the vehicle application. 

Refer to the most current ETM for exact 
location. 


The new RDC (TPM) module is 
not compatible with earlier TPM 
systems made prior to March 
2006. 




Central Receiving Antenna 

The central receiving antenna is a digital antenna which operates on the 433 MHz 
freguency. The antenna is responsible for receiving the tire pressure information 
from the wheel electronics modules. This information is then sent to the TPM 
control module via the LIN interface. 

Antenna location is model dependent. The antenna is waterproof which allows external 
mounting, usually near the center of the vehicle. The LIN bus arrangement ensures that 
there is no RAF wiring inside the vehicle. This eliminates any potential interference from 
any other systems such as CAS/EWS communication. 

The antenna contains a receiving antenna, RAF receiver, a LIN bus interface and 
a microprocessor for demodulating and decoding. 



24 

Wheels and Tires 




Trigger Transmitter Modules 

The trigger transmitter modules are located behind the inner wheel well trim. There is 
one transmitter at each wheel. The trigger is responsible for sending command signals 
to the wheel electronics modules. 

The trigger transmitter communicates with the wheel electronics in the 125 KHz range. 
In order to communicate with the TPM (RDC) module, the trigger transmitters are 
connected to the LIN bus. 

The trigger transmitter is supplied with B+ and ground. The third connection is for the 
LIN bus. 



25 

Wheels and Tires 




Wheel Transmitter Module 

The wheel transmitter modules are mounted in the tire and wheel assemblies. The 
module is fitted to the tire valve assembly as on past models. The module is capable 
of measuring the tire pressure and the temperature. Acceleration is also measured 
as a means of determining wheel movement for various operating modes. 

The wheel transmitter module transmits information to the central antenna in the 433 
MHz range. However, the module receives information and commands from the trigger 
modules in the 125 KHz range. Therefore, the wheel transmitter module contains the 
necessary electronics for these two frequency ranges. 



Electronic assignment of the wheel electronic modules is not carried out until movement 
is detected. This is to avoid any signals from vehicles in close proximity. Especially 
vehicles which are equipped with similar TPM systems. 

Data is transmitted to the central receiving antenna via a transmit stage in the wheel 
transmitter module. The module at each wheel has an individual identifier (ID) which 
is also transmitted every time data is transmitted. The RAF transmission takes place 
in the 433 MHz range. 

Each electronic wheel module transmits at regular intervals (approximately 30 seconds). 
Also, when there is a trigger request, the measured values are sent. In addition, the tire 
temperature is measured at regular intervals. 

When the tire pressure loss exceeds 0.2 bar, the wheel transmitter module will go into a 
“rapid-transmit mode” immediately. In this case, the wheel transmitter module measures 
and sends the information from the tire at shorter intervals. 

The measured data are sent from the wheel via a transmit stage in the electronic wheel 
module. A system with relatively few measured data transmission operations is sufficient 
for tire pressure monitoring if it additionally features an option for detecting fast pressure 
loss. The electronic module in the wheel can therefore be designed for minimum current 
consumption and can be battery operated. 

26 

Wheels and Tires 


Control Display 

On vehicle equipped with a control display, the tire status is indicated in the TPM menu. 
The tire pressure status is indicated by the color of the tires in the graphic. The colors 
are as follows: 

• Green - Tire pressure is OK and matches the learned tire pressure. 

• Yellow - There is a flat tire or a major drop in tire pressure has been detected. 

• All wheels yellow - There is a flat tire or major tire pressure loss in several tires. 

• Gray - The system cannot detect a flat tire due to a system malfunction or the 

system is currently in reset mode. Also, any RAF interference from other 
devices can cause this situation. 

The system reset is also performed using the controller. 


« i PM ► 



Status: TPM active 
87.5 FM TP 


27 

Wheels and Tires 



Instrument Cluster 

The TPM indicator is located in the instrument cluster. The indicator 
is yellow and alerts the driver to the CC message in the control display. 
Also, any system malfunction is indicated by a flashing yellow indicator 
followed by a continuous illumination. 

When this occurs, the tires in the control display will be shown in gray. 






111-dvrr.nr ■.•jI 
Knilfllluilib, , rliln I „ii i writ 

Verier r , ri. i'i Ti 


Eafis;tll j 


I j\.-i 

w**. 


rthrif'.i: 


nwiv^ivli* 




0 



» Cll£<k-COAIr4l MAldJ^AA ► i 

• 

A 

RnirpniiHiinnl 'Jcrwihliij nulu Itari 





TFiMr m'V** 1!m| 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

TPM warning indicator (yellow) 

3 

CC Message 

2 

Vehicle setting menu 




28 

Wheels and Tires 


















System Operation 

The primary responsibility of the new TPM system is to monitor tire pressure and warn 
the driver of impending flat tire situations. This new TPM system is referred to as the 
“trigger type” system due to the trigger transmitters installed at all four wheel well areas. 

This system differs from the past “direct” systems in a few areas. There is only one 
centrally located digital receiving antenna. This antenna receives input from all 4 of the 
wheel electronics modules (5 if the vehicle has a full size spare) located in each tire and 
wheel assembly. The central digital receiving antenna is connected to the TPM control 
unit via the LIN bus. 

The wheel electronics modules will transmit information when prompted by signals from 
the trigger transmitters. The trigger transmitters communicate to the wheel electronics 
over the 125 KHz frequency. 

In contrast to the past wheel electronics module, the new design has the capability of 
bi-directional communication. In other words, the wheel electronics not only transmit 
information but receive information and commands from the trigger transmitter modules. 


TPM Control 


Module 



1Z5 kHz 
TrpqEr Trjns-TiiTer 

sends command bo 
Wise Electronics 

Mpdirfe ti,' fftf'd 
IniaTnartion. 




The wheel electronics from the previous system 
will not workon the new system. 


29 

Wheels and Tires 









Wheel Management 

One of the important functions of the TPM system is the ability to manage wheel 
locations and properly report the correct wheel location. When the vehicle is NOT 
in motion, the system has the capability to determine where the wheel electronics 
are located on the vehicle. Each one of the wheel electronics module has it’s own 
unique electronic ID number which is sent to the central receiving antenna. 

When an electronic wheel module receives at least 2 telegrams in response to 
a trigger signal, this electronic wheel module is marked as the system wheel. 

The wheel position assignment of an wheel electronics module is also based on 
the response to the trigger signal. Once the assignment has been determined, 
the positions are stored in an non-volatile memory (NVRAM). 

Based on the information of the acceleration sensor in the electronic wheel module, 
a distinction is made between the spare wheel and the remaining road wheels in the 
road wheel detection module for the purpose of assisting wheel position assignment. 

In order to avoid any signal conflict from adjacent vehicles (with similar TPM systems), 
the "learning" procedure is performed only while the vehicle is driving. 

The wheel management function uses a “confirmation phase” to establish whether 
the previous wheel assignment order is still correct or whether any new wheels have 
been installed or rotated for service. The confirmation phase is necessary so that 
the system can automatically detect changes in the mounted wheel order. 

The check takes place during vehicle operation (while driving), in order to rule out 
any potential signal interference from adjacent vehicles. 


30 

Wheels and Tires 



Control Display Screens 


One Tire with Reduced Pressure 

The yellow indicator lamp in the instrument cluster is switched on permanently and an 
audible indication (gong) is additionally sounded as soon as a tire undershoots one of 
the previously specified warning limits. If the vehicle is equipped with the corresponding 
option, the test "Low Tire" is additionally shown together with the position in the cluster. 
If the vehicle is equipped with an control display (MMI), the affected tire is indicated in 
yellow. The unaffected wheels retain their green color. 

The "Low Tire" status means that driving safety is no longer ensured. The driver is 
requested to stop and check the condition of the tire. It is the responsibility of the 
driver to decide whether he can continue the journey at low speed to the next repair 
workshop or whether an on-site repair is necessary. 



Status: Right front tire low! 


87.5 FM TP 


31 

Wheels and Tires 




Several Tires with Reduced Pressure 

The yellow indicator lamp in the cluster is immediately switched on permanently and 
an audible indication (gong) additionally sounds as soon as several tires undershoot 
the previously specified warning limits. If the vehicle is equipped with the corresponding 
option the text "Low Tire" is additionally indicated without the position in the instrument 
cluster. All wheels are now shown in yellow in the MMI. 

If a warning is already in effect, on the occurrence of the second warning event, 
a position-specific warning is replaced by the nonspecific warning. Each tire 
failure event is signalled audibly. 



32 

Wheels and Tires 




Workshop Hints 


System Reset (Initialization) 

The TPM system should be reset whenever any changes are made to the tire and 
wheel assemblies. For example, if a tire is replaced or if the tires are rotated for service. 
Also, the system should be reset whenever any repairs are made to the TPM system. 

The driver of the vehicle is solely responsible for maintaining the correct tire pressure 
when in use. As per BMW recommendations, the tire pressure should be checked 
2 times per month. 

Before system reset (initialization), the technician (or driver) should set the tire 
pressure to the specified pressure (as dictated by the tire pressure placard in 
the b-pillar). These pressures are a cold specification and should be set as such. 

Depending on the vehicle, the system reset can be carried out via a button or via the 
controller (on vehicles with a control display i.e 5, 6 and 7 series). 



Once the reset mode is initiated, the vehicle must be driven in order to complete the 
process. This is to ensure that there is no RAF interference or erroneous signals from 
other vehicles which use similar TPM system components. 

During this period, the control display will show the message “Status: Resetting 
TPM”. The tires on the control display will be gray in color until the process in 
complete. This should take only a few minutes. 

When the reset is complete, the yellow TPM indicator will go out. The tire pressure 
and temperature values are stored in conjunction with the ID of the wheel electronics. 
Therefore, the wheel position is stored in the TPM control unit. 


33 

Wheels and Tires 




^ vS TPM ► 

Reset 

) 

Status: Resetting TPM.., 

875 FM TP 



In order for the reset procedure to be completed, the tires must be at the minimum 
allowable pressure which is approximately 1.4 bar (20 psi) to 1.6 bar (23 psi). If the tire 
pressure is too low, the system will not complete the reset procedure. When complete, 
the control display will switch to “Status” TPM active” and the tires will switch to green. 


i VS TPM ► 


Reset 



Status: TPM active 
875 FM TP 



New target pressures are adopted solely by way of Initialization. 
If a wheel is exchanged and the system is not re-initialized, the 
newly mounted wheels will be “taught-in” and monitored to 
the previous target pressures. 


34 

Wheels and Tires 



Reset Procedure 

The reset procedure is performed with KL15 ON. The engine can be OFF or ON, 
but do not drive off. Depending on the vehicle, the FTM is reset as follows: 

Vehicles with RPA Button 

Press and hold the RPA button until the RPA indicator and warning light lights up 
yellow for a few seconds. Then drive the vehicle through various speed ranges for 
at least 15 minutes. 

Vehicles with BC Button (on-board computer function) 

In the on-board computer function select "RPA" and "INIT" (LC display) with the 
rocker switch on the turn-signal/main-beam switch. Press the BC button to confirm. 

Press and hold the BC button for approximately. 5 seconds, until a box with a tick 
appears behind the "INIT" display. Then drive the vehicle through various speed 
ranges for at least 15 minutes. 

Vehicles with Central Information Display 

Initialization is performed via the Central Information Display (CID) and controller. 

• Select "RPA/FTM" in the "Settings" menu and confirm. 

• Select "Set" and confirm. 

• Then drive the vehicle through various speed ranges for at least 15 minutes. 
The end of the Initialization phase is not indicated. 

Preconditions for Activation 

The flat tire indicator is automatically activated when terminal 15 is switched ON. 
The FTM cannot be switched off manually. 

Flat Tire Indication 

A flat tire is indicated as follows: 

• E53, E83, E85 - Yellow FTM indicator and warning light without acoustic signal. 

• E60, E61, E63, E64, E65, E66, E90, E91 - Yellow FTM indicator and warning 
light with acoustic signal. 

An FTM system failure is indicated by a yellow FTM indicator and warning light 
without an acoustic signal. 


35 

Wheels and Tires 



TPM Systems (from 3/11) 


The latest generation of BMW tire pressure monitoring systems was introduced to the 
US market with the launch of the F25 and it is installed on all our current vehicles. 

Operating Principle 

The direct measuring system consists of the TPM control unit with integrated 
reception antenna and four wheel electronics. It was possible to reduce the number 
of components and cost of the system by integrating the reception antenna in the 
TPM control unit. 

The four wheel electronics transmit the tire pressure and temperature to the TPM 
control unit via radio communication (433 MHz). Once the wheel electronics have 
been woken up, (vehicle speed > 20 km/h/12mph), a total of 25 telegrams are transmit¬ 
ted once at two second intervals. Providing the pressure has not dropped, individual 
telegrams are then sent every 18 seconds from the wheel electronics to the TPM 
control unit. As a prereguisite for the wheel electronics to go to sleep, the wheel 
must be at a standstill for more than five minutes. 

Resetting the Tire Pressure Values 

The tire pressure values are reset via the instrument panel or Central Information 
Display CID. The TPM text message appears, or the permanent TPM indicator light 
lights up, in the instrument panel when the teach-in process starts. 

Teach-in Process 

During the teach-in process, the wheel electronics identification numbers (ID) are trans¬ 
mitted to the TPM control unit. The TPM control unit can identify the wheel position of 
the corresponding wheel electronics via the identification numbers once the teach-in 
process is complete. 

Two acceleration sensors are installed in each of the wheel electronics in order to be 
able to determine their positions. The acceleration sensors determine the wheel's 
direction of rotation. This means that right/left differentiation of the wheel electronics 
positions at the vehicle is possible. 

The high freguency signals received are evaluated in order to determine whether the 
wheel electronics are at the front or rear axle. The TPM control unit with integrated 
receiver is mounted in the outer area of the luggage compartment well above the rear 
axle. The level of the signals received by the TPM control unit from the wheels on the 
rear axle is higher than the level of signals sent by the wheel electronics on the front 
axle. This means it is possible to determine whether the wheel electronics are at the 
front or rear of the vehicle. 


36 

Wheels and Tires 




The entire teach-in process takes between roughly one and twelve minutes at the most. 
The following factors influence the duration: 

• The current mode of the wheel electronics (awake/gone to sleep). 

• The condition of the road (e.g. cobbles.) 

• The TPM control unit already knows what the IDs of the wheel electronics are. 



F25 TPM, Teach-in Process Complete 


Once the teach-in process is complete, the TPM text message or solid TPM indicator 
light are cancelled. The green tire symbols subseguently appear in the CID. 



F25 TPM Pressure Drop 

Once the teach-in process is complete, the wheel electronics send the pressure, 
temperature and also the identification numbers of the tires to the TPM control 
unit at regular intervals when driving. 

If a pressure change of > 20 kPa (0.2 bar, 2.9 psi) is identified within two successive 
pressure measurements, the wheel electronics for the relevant wheel immediately 
assumes a fast transmitting mode. It then sends information to the control unit at 
one-second intervals. If the pressure drop is higher than 25%, the TPM text message 
"Tire Low" appears. 

37 

Wheels and Tires 







F25 System Overview of TPMS 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wheel electronics (battery-operated sensor with transmitter unit 433MHz) 

2 

Instrument panel (KOMBI) 

3 

Control unit with integrated reception antenna 


38 

Wheels and Tires 



















F25 Wheel Electronics, TPM 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Data Matrix Code 

2 

BMW part number 

3 

FCC ID = approval for wireless operation 

4 

Wheel electronics ID 

5 

Transmission frequency (433MHz) 

6 

Pressure sensor 

7 

Production date of wheel electronics 

8 

Tightening torque 

9 

Width across flats of union nut 



39 

Wheels and Tires 




































F25 System Wiring Diagram, TPMS 



40 

Wheels and Tires 





































Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wheel electronics, front left 

2 

Wheel electronics, front right 

3 

Power distribution box, luggage compartment 

4 

Wheel electronics, rear right 

5 

Tire pressure monitoring control (TPM) 

6 

Wheel electronics, rear left 

7 

Central gateway module ZGM 

8 

Instrument panel (KOMBI) 

9 

Central Information Display (CID) 

10 

Headunit 

11 

Central operating element 

KI.30B 

Terminal 30, time-dependent 


41 

Wheels and Tires 



























Service Information 


Teach-in Process 

The wheel electronics must be taught in under the following circumstances: 

• The tire pressure has been changed 

• A tire has been changed 

• Wheels are replaced axle-wise 

The driver can start the teach-in process via the Central Information Display CID 
and the controller. For more information, refer to the vehicle Owner's manual. 

Service Life of Batteries for Wheel Electronics 

The service life of the batteries installed in the wheel electronics is roughly 7.5 years. 
The current value of the service life counter in the batteries of the wheel electronics 
can be read out via the diagnosis system. 

If the battery is fully discharged or defective, an TPM fault message is displayed. 

Remove / Install Wheel Electronics 

The following points must be observed when removing/installing the wheel electronics 
of the tire pressure control (TPM): 

• Do not use high pressure cleaners to clean wheel rim with the wheel electronics 

installed when the tire has been removed. 

• Replace the wheel electronics if tire sealant has been used. 

• Clean the valve and valve seat thoroughly before installing the wheel electronics. 

• Do not apply solvents or cleaning agents to the wheel electronics, or clean them 
with compressed air. 

• To clean the wheel electronics, simply wipe down with a clean cloth. 


42 

Wheels and Tires 



Runflat Tire Technology 


Run Flat Tire (RFT) technology has been in development by the tire industry for many 
years. An RFT tire allows the driver to continue safely in the event of a tire puncture or 
complete loss or tire pressure. The sidewalls on an RFT tire a specially reinforced to 
support the vehicle with zero air pressure. 

The RFT tire design maximizes safety and allows the driver to maintain vehicle control 
in the event of sudden or slow air pressure loss. This also eliminates the need for the 
driver to changes tires in unsafe situations. Therefore, the spare tire and jacking equip¬ 
ment can be deleted from some vehicle. 

The first U.S. model BMW to be equipped with RFT technology was the E52 (Z8). 

The Z4, which has standard RFT, takes advantage of the reduced space requirement. 
Many current model BMW vehicles have standard RFT or they are available as an 
option. 

RFT Operation 

If a slow or sudden pressure loss occurs in a RFT, mobility is maintained due to the 
additional high temperature rubber reinforcements that strengthen the side wall. 

These reinforcements prevent side wall damage when the tire is deflated and also 
provide support during extreme loads. In addition, the special wheel for the RFT 
tires “grips” the tire to maintain sufficient steering, braking and accelerating power. 

RFT Design 

In the illustration to the right shows a comparison 
between a standard tire and one equipped with RFT self 
supporting technology. 

Both tires have zero pressure. The non-RFT design (1) 
shows that the sidewalls will be completely collapsed 
providing no support. 

The RFT design (2), shows that the side walls will main¬ 
tain limited support for the vehicle to allow the driver to 
get to a safe area for a tire replacement or repair. 

Tire Manufacturer Information 

All “Runflat” tires, regardless of brand must carry 
a specific designation to indicate that the tire is 
a “Runflat” system component. Therefore, the 
tires will have an “RSC” icon on the sidewall. 



43 

Wheels and Tires 








Most of todays BMW models are fitted with the Run Flat System Component (RSC) 
package on as standard equipment. 

The BMW Group has put together a safety package with the aim of avoiding tire related 
accidents and the risk involved with changing a tire in dangerous situations (e.g. by the 
side of the road, at night, in wet conditions, tunnels or road construction sites). 

The BMW runflat safety system: 

• Warns the driver in good time of imminent tire pressure loss so that countermea¬ 

sures can be taken 

• Allows the journey to be continued for a defined distance even in the event 

of complete loss of tire pressure 

• Keeps the tire safely on the rim even in the event of sudden tire pressure 

loss at high speed. 

The system consists of the RSC tires, rims with EH2+ contour and the electronic 
tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS). 

These "self-supporting tires" incorporate reinforced side walls, additional strip inserts 
and heat resistant rubber compounds. This design makes it possible to continue the 
journey (even when completely depressurized) for a limited distance at a maximum 
speed of 50 mph. 

When driving with a run flat tire with no pressure, the standard VDC automatically 
distributes the vehicle weight over the remaining wheels so as to relieve the load 
on the depressurized tire with the aim of achieving the highest possible range for 
continued operation. 



Refer to the owners manual for the maximum driving range after 
puncture or deflation occurs. ABS, ASC and DSC remain fully 
operational even in the event of complete tire pressure loss. 



Due to the characteristics of the self-supporting tire design, 
a tire which is under inflated may not appear to be low on air 
pressure. Therefore, always verify actual air pressure with 
a tire gauge. Do not assume that the tire is properly inflated. 
Check the tire inflation placard in the driver’s side doorjamb 
area for correct inflation pressures. 


44 

Wheels and Tires 


The chart below is a breakdown of the various internal designations from the individual 
tire manufacturers: 


Tire Manufacturer 

Abbreviation/Acronym 

Definition 

Bridgestone 

RFT 

Run Flat Tire 

Continental 

SSR 

Self Supporting Runflat 

Dunlop 

DSST 

Dunlop Self Supporting Technology 

Goodyear 

EMT 

Extended Mobility Technology 

Michelin 

ZP 

Zero Pressure 

Pirelli 

PTM 

Pirelli Total Mobility 


Wheel Construction 


The wheel design must compatible with the RFT 
system. A self-supporting tire must be capable of 
gripping the rim to keep the tire beads intact. The 
wheels used must be of the “double-hump” design. 

The “double-hump” design features 2 raised areas 
on the rim to help retain the tire bead. 

These are referred to as EH2 wheels as opposed to 
the previous “H2” wheels. Standard H2 wheels will 
accept RFT designed tires but may not retain the 
tire properly in the event of a failure. This would 
render the safety features of the RFT system use¬ 
less. 



When the Runflat tire is at zero pres¬ 
sure. The vehicle can be driven up to 
100 miles at a maximum speed of 50 
miles per hour. Always refer to the 
vehicle Owner’s Manual for specific 
guidelines. 



45 

Wheels and Tires 


“EH2” Wheel 














Basic Tire Balancing 


Every BMW vehicle is well known for it’s superior handling and ride quality. So, when 
this ride quality is compromised by vibration, an accurate diagnosis and timely repair 
is the primary goal. 

To improve fuel economy and reduce emissions, many of the vehicle components have 
been weight optimized. Some of these weight reduction techniques involve suspension 
components such as strut housings and control arms. These components are now 
made from aluminum rather than steel or cast iron. The aluminum components work 
well for reducing weight, but they do not have the same dampening properties as the 
iron or steel components. 

Therefore, procedures such as wheel balancing have become much more important 
in recent years. The GSP97BMW wheel balancer features “Road Force Measurement” 
technology which allows the tire and wheel assembly to measured while “loaded”. 

This allows “radial force” variations to be measured and corrected. 

This training module is designed to help the technicians understand the potential 
causes of vehicle vibration as well as the best methods to correct these concerns. 



46 

Wheels and Tires 



















Static Imbalance 


“Static Imbalance”, as the name implies , indicates that the tire and wheel assembly is in 
a state of imbalance when standing still. Therefore, there is a “heavy spot” which would 
cause the tire to come to rest in the same position. Many years ago, tires were balanced 
using a “bubble balancer” and weight was added to restore the tire to a “statically 
balanced” condition. 

When a tire and wheel assembly is statically imbalanced, the tire and wheel assembly will 
tend to travel in an “up and down” motion. This causes the tire and wheel to “bounce” 
on the pavement when the vehicle is moving. In extreme cases the wheel assembly can 
leave the road surface. This causes a vibration which is transferred to the driver via the 
chassis and suspension components. Also, the tire will wear and create a “cupping” 
pattern on the tire tread surface. 

As far as balancing is concerned, static balancing procedures are no longer the accepted 
method for balancing tire and wheel assemblies. Static balancing can only correct for 
imbalances on one plane. This is only effective if the imbalance were only near 
the centerline. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

40 gram static imbalance 

2 

20gram (x2) balance weight for correction 


47 

Wheels and Tires 









Dynamic Imbalance 

As compared to static imbalance, dynamic imbalances pertain to situations present 
during vehicle movement. Also, two planes of weight correction are considered. 
When mass (weight) is unevenly distributed across two planes, the resulting force 
tends to cause the tire and wheel assembly to “wobble”. This motion is in a lateral 
direction which causes a steering wheel “shimmy”. 

Aside from the obvious potential customer complaint, the “shimmy” caused by 
a dynamic imbalance can cause wear and tear on the tires and suspension 
components including wheel bearings and steering linkage. 

If a wheel and tire assembly with a dynamic imbalance is installed on the front 
of the vehicle, the effect is usually noticed right away. When installed on the rear 
of the vehicle, the vibration is somewhat dampened by the rigidity of the rear axle. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

25 gram dynamic imbalance 

3 

30 gram dynamic imbalance 

2 

25 gram balance weight for correction 

4 

30 gram balance weight for correction 


48 

Wheels and Tires 











Residual Imbalance 


For technical reasons, a tire and wheel assembly cannot be “perfectly” balanced. 
Therefore, there is a maximum allowable residual imbalance which is acceptable 
for smooth running performance. The maximum values are as follows: 

• Less than 15 grams (1/2 ounce) for residual static imbalance 

• Less than 7.5 grams (1/4 ounce) per plane for residual dynamic imbalance 

These values are usually the default values programmed into most wheel balancers. 
Depending upon the type of wheel balancing equipment used, these values can be 
altered (low or high). This is usually not recommended unless reguired due to 
a specific concern. 

Balance Weights 

In order to correct imbalances, balance weights must be used. Today there are many 
types of balance weights used doe to the different wheel rim styles in use. Most wheel 
weights are made from lead, but due to recent legislation regarding lead safety, many 
wheel weights available through the BMW parts system are be made from zinc. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

One-piece clip-on (hammer-on) balance weight 

2 

Clip (clamp) 

3 

2-piece wheel weight for use with above clip (#2) 

4 

Adhesive Weight 

5 

Adhesive Weight 


49 

Wheels and Tires 










When installing wheel weights, be aware that there are various mounting procedures for 
different weights. Do not try to install incorrect wheel weights, cosmetic damage to the 
wheel may occur. Also, the weights may come loose and cause an unnecessary return 
visit. 

For example, wheels which have a smooth rim flange should only use adhesive weights. 
Depending on the rim style and offset, the adhesive weights can be installed on the inner 
and/or outer area of the rim. 

Clip on weights can only we used on steel wheels or aluminum wheels which have the 
necessary flange configuration. Two-pieces weight need to be installed with a special 
tool to prevent rim damage. 

Weight Conversion 

Wheel weights available from BMW are marked in grams and range in size from 5 to 60 
grams. For the purposes of weight conversion, 1000 grams is equal to 2.2 pounds (or 
approximately 35 ounces). The chart below represents some conversion values. 


Weight in Grams 

Actual Weight Conversion 
(decimal ounces) 

Comparable Wheel Weight 
Fractional Ounces (rounded off) 

5 grams 

0.176 ounces 

1/4 ounce 

7.5 grams 

0.2645 ounces 

1/4 ounce 

10 grams 

0.3527 ounces 

1/4 ounce 

12.5 grams 

0.4409 ounces 

1/2 ounce 

15 grams 

0.5291 ounces 

1/2 ounce 

17.5 grams 

0.6172 ounces 

1/2 ounce 

20 grams 

0.7054 ounces 

3/4 ounce 

22.5 grams 

0.7936 ounces 

3/4 ounce 

25.0 grams 

0.8818 ounces 

3/4 ounce 

27.5 grams 

0.970 ounces 

1 ounce 

30 grams 

1.058 ounces 

1 ounce 

32.5 grams 

1.146 ounces 

1 ounce 

35 grams 

1.234 ounces 

1 1/4 ounce 

40 grams 

1.410 ounces 

1 1/2 ounce 

45 grams 

1.587 ounces 

1 1/2 ounce 

50 grams 

1.763 ounces 

1 3/4 ounce 

55 grams 

1.940 ounces 

2 ounces 

60 grams 

2.116 ounces 

2 ounces 


50 

Wheels and Tires 





























































Runout 


Another method for checking tire and wheel irregularities is by checking runout. Runout 
is an indication of an out-of-round condition or a variation in the projected movement 
of an object. 

Runout can be checked using a dial indicator or the GSP97BMW Road Force Wheel 
Balancer. As far as wheel and tire assemblies are concerned, radial and lateral runout 
can be checked on the wheel and tire individually or as an assembly. 

In order for the tire and wheel assembly to be optimized for smooth running, it is very 
important that the wheel (rim) is within specification. Once the tire is mounted to the 
rim, the tire will conform to the shape of the wheel. In other words, if the wheel is 
“egg-shaped”, then the tire will be egg-shaped. 

The wheel can be checked for lateral and radial runout using a dial-indicator. 

Wheel Runout 

When checking for radial runout on awheel rim, the maximum specification is 1.1 mm for 
one-piece aluminum wheels. The radial runout should be checked on both bead seating 
areas. The most accurate method for checking radial runout on a wheel is to dismount 
the tire. Flowever, if the wheel has a sufficient flange area, the radial runout can be 
measured as shown below. 



Always check the runout specifications in WebTIS or ISTA 
for the most accurate specification. 



31 36 DD4 U 


51 

Wheels and Tires 






Excessive radial runout can caused conditions similar to a static imbalance. Radial force 
variations are also affected. 

Lateral Runout (Rim) 

The maximum lateral (axial) runout on a one-piece aluminum wheel is 1.3 mm. This can 
also be checked using a dial indicator as shown below. Refer to Technical Data and 
Repair Instructions in Group 36 for more information on checking wheel and tire runout. 



52 

Wheels and Tires 




Tire Runout 


Once the tire has been mounted to the wheel, tire runout can be checked radially and 
laterally (axially). This is an “unloaded” measurement which does not take into account 
radial force variation (or lateral force variation). Radial force variations can only be 
measured when the tire is loaded which is only possible using the GSP97BMW wheel 
balancer. 

Radial Runout (Tire) 

On a tire mounted on a one-piece aluminum wheel, the maximum radial runout is 
1.1 mm. The tire and wheel assembly should be mounted on a “spin-type” balancer 
or on the vehicle. Be aware that any wheel bearing or hub irregularities may affect 
this measurement. Be sure the check for wheel bearing play or hub runout. 



Refer to Technical Data and Repair Instructions in Group 36 
for more information on checking wheel and tire runout. 



53 

Wheels and Tires 





















Lateral (Axial) Runout 

Lateral runout measurements are an indication of possible broken belts in the tire. 
Aside from possible vibration issues, excessive lateral runout can cause a pull to 
one side. The maximum allowable lateral (axial) runout is 1.3 mm. 



Refer to Technical Data and Repair Instructions in Group 36 
for more information on checking wheel and tire runout. 



Component Runout 

In addition to tires and wheels, there are other components which can contribute to 
vibration issues. Wheel bearings, hub assemblies and rotors should be checked for 
excessive play and runout. 



54 

Wheels and Tires 







Radial Force Variation 


Radial force variations are caused by non-uniform stiffness in the tire sidewall. This vari¬ 
ation can be best illustrated by imagining a series of springs around the circumference 
of the tire sidewall, if these “springs” were of equal force, the tire would roll evenly 
across the road surface when under load. However, if one or more of these springs 
were “stiffer” than the rest, the tire would not roll evenly. This would cause 
a noticeable vibration. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

“Soft spots” in the tire sidewall 

2 

“Hard spots” in the tire sidewall 


The causes of radial force fluctuation lie in the manufacturing and processing of the 
many different components in the tire. Components such as casing plies, belt plies 
and contact surfaces, etc. are combined in a tire press to make the tire blank. 

Manufacturing and assembly differences arise during this process. If the differences 
are too large, harder and softer spots occur along the tire periphery. As a result, the 
tire does not flex evenly around the entire circumference. 

When radial force fluctuations occur, this will have the same effect as a static imbalance. 
However, tire irregularities not only cause steering wheel wobble and vibrations, they 
also contribute to noises such as drumming, rumbling and jolting. 


55 

Wheels and Tires 







Radial force variations cannot be detected by standard wheel balancing equipment. 

This is due to the fact that standard wheel balancing equipment only measures the tire 
and wheel assembly in an “unloaded” state. When a tire and wheel assembly is dynami¬ 
cally balanced, this does not mean the radial force variation is within specification. 



Also, checking the radial runout of the tire (when unloaded) does not give and indication 
of radial force fluctuations. The only method to accurately check for radial force varia¬ 
tions is to use the GSP97BMW wheel balancer. 


The GSP97BMW wheel balancer uses a load roller assembly to apply pressure to 
the tire and wheel assembly to simulate “on the road” conditions. The radial force 
variation is calculated during this process. 



Lateral as well as radial force fluctuations occur. These can be traced through the 
sideways wobble of the wheel. Lateral means sideways. Lateral force fluctuations 
have less of an effect on harmonics than radial force fluctuations. 

Tire which have excessive radial force variations must be replaced. However, tires 
which have small amounts of radial force fluctuations can be optimized by using the 
Hunter GSP97BMW Road Force Wheel Balancer. (This will be covered in more 
detail later in this training course). 

56 

Wheels and Tires 














Vibration Diagnosis 

Vibration, by definition is a recurring motion which is referenced to a central position. 

In the case of a tire and wheel assembly, a wheel with excessive radial runout rotates 
around a fixed central point (wheel bearing). If the wheel is somewhat “egg-shaped”, 
the tire will conform to this shape. When traveling on the road, the tire assembly will 
cause a vibration at a frequency proportional to road speed. For example, the 
vibration frequency will increase with road speed. 

In automotive applications, vibrations can be classified into two basic categories: 

• Forced Vibrations - A forced vibration is caused by an object which is rotating. 

An example of forced vibration is any engine driven component, the wheel and 
tire assemblies or any electric motors. 

• Free Vibration - This is usually caused by an irregularity in the road surface. 

A pothole, crack or expansion joint in the roadway can cause a momentary jolt 
which stimulates an oscillation. This oscillation can affect suspension components, 
sheet metal in the body, exhaust system components or the steering wheel. 

The notable characteristic of this type of vibration is that the vibration (or noise) 
dissipates quickly. This type of vibration is not a common as a forced vibration. 

When diagnosing forced vibrations, there are some helpful terms which pertain to how 
to classify the frequency or intensity of the vibration. These terms include: 

• Cycle - A cycle is an event or disturbance. Using an example of a static imbalance, 
every time the imbalance creates a vibration, this is considered one cycle. 

• Frequency - The common unit of measurement for frequency is Hertz (Hz). Hertz 
indicates how many cycles per second an event occurs. Therefore, an event that 
occurs at a rate of 50 cycles per second is otherwise known as 50 Hertz. 

• Amplitude - The intensity or harshness level of a vibration. 

• Natural Frequency - This is the frequency at which a given object will vibrate 
most easily. For example, a tuning fork will vibrate when struck at a certain 
frequency. This will be very consistent. A vehicle chassis can vibrate at a rate 
of 10 to 50 Hz. Some of the factors that contribute to the natural frequency 
are the type of suspension, the tires and the weight of the vehicle. 


57 

Wheels and Tires 



When diagnosing vibration complaints, there are three basic components of a vibration 
which should be considered. Not all vibrations are caused by imbalanced wheel and tire 
assemblies. Some of these vibrations could originate from engine, flywheel or driveline 
irregularities. 

The three components of a vibration are as follows: 

• Source - The vibration source, usually pertains to the rotating component. 

This includes tire and wheel assemblies, engines or engine driven accessories. 
Sometimes, the source is not the root cause of the complaint. For example, 
some engine have characteristic vibrations which should be dampened by the 
engine mounts. Therefore, a defective engine mount can be the root cause, 
not the engine itself. 

• Transfer Path - Transfer path is the pathway between the source and the 
responding component. For example, the engine mount can be considered, 
the transfer path. As given in the example above, the transfer path must be 
considered during the diagnosis of a “rough” running engine. Other examples 
of transfer paths include; the center support bearing on the driveshaft, the strut 
assemblies, transmission mount or the steering column. 

• Responding Component - The responding component is the item that the driver 
notices. For example, a dynamic imbalance on one of the front wheels would cause 
a steering wheel vibration. So, in this case, the steering wheel is the responding 
component. 




Vibration Source - Wheel with dynamic imbalance 


Transfer Path - 

Through steering linkage, 
rack and pinion unit to 
steering column 


Responding Component 

Steering wheel exhibits 
“shimmy” condition. 


58 

Wheels and Tires 



Harmonics 

Harmonics refers to the number of occurrences per revolution. They are classified 
as First Order (R1H)), Second Order (R2H) and Third Order (R3H) harmonics. 

The complete spectrum of harmonics can be measured from R1H through R15H, 
however this requires special equipment. For the purposes of vibration diagnosis 
in a workshop environment, the GSP97BMW Road Force Wheel balancer is only 
capable of R1H through R4H. The major source of concerns regarding vibration 
occur in R1H through R3H range. 

First Order Harmonics 

Harmonics in the first order occur once per revolution. An example of this would be 
a wheel with a static imbalance or excessive radial force variation. Imagine a tire with 
a “hard spot” rotating on a vehicle. The hard spot would have an effect only once 
per revolution. A tire or wheel with an excessive “unloaded” radial runout can also 
influence first order harmonics. 


IMBALANCE 


RADIAL RUNOUT 



RADIAL 



UPWARD 

FORCE 


1 






59 

Wheels and Tires 
























Second Order Harmonics 

Second Order vibrations occur twice per revolution. For example, a tire which is “egg- 
shaped” would have two occurrences per revolution. This can be caused by tire and/or 
wheels which excessive radial runout. Also, loaded tires with excessive radial force 
variation (RFV) can cause 2nd order harmonics. 




Third Order Harmonics 

Flarmonics in the third order occurs 3 times per revolution. Damaged wheels with 
excessive radial runout (triangular shaped) can cause this condition. Tires which are 
“flat-spotted” in multiple locations can show up during the Road Force balancing 
procedures. Usually, 3rd order harmonics are caused by damaged wheel assemblies. 


RADIAL RUNOUT 


OUT-OF-ROUND 


TIRE 

2 



OUT-OF-ROUND 


RIM 

2 



60 

Wheels and Tires 
























Tips on using the GSP9700 Wheel Balancer 

The GSP 9700 BMW Road Force Wheel Balancer is capable of solving many vibration 
issues related to tire and wheel assemblies. However, certain concerns must be 
observed to get the most out of this equipment. 

The following is a list of hints and tips to ensure accurate results: 

• Tires should be warmed up to remove temporary flat spots prior to balancing. 

For example, of a vehicle is left overnight for testing, it is possible to have 
temporary flat spots on the tire. This would show up as excessive radial force 
variation. Always warm up the tires by road testing for a least 5-10 minutes at 
highway speed. 

• Verify that the wheel is mounted on the wheel balancer properly. The balancer 
has a “centering check” feature if needed. 

• Use the proper mounting hardware for the balancer. Use only the specified 
cones and adapters provided by the manufacturer. 

• BMW wheels are “hub-centric”. This means that the primary reference for 
the wheel centering is the hub. Use of the improper wheel with excessive 
hub tolerance can result in an vibration which is not correctable. 

• Tire and wheel assembly must be free of debris. Mud and rocks should be 
removed from the tire tread before balancing. 

• If it is not possible to measure the runout on the bead seating area of a wheel 
due to wheel design, then the tire should be removed from the rim. 

• Do not replace a tire based on the radial force measurements alone. Use the Force 
Matching and Matchmaker features of the GSP97BMW Wheel balancer to optimize 
the tire and wheel assemblies and reduce vibration. There is no set specification 
for Road Force which will condemn the tire. 

• Always be sure to check for correct tire mounting. If the bead of the tire in not 
seated correctly, the Road Force measurements may be affected. When mounting 
the tire to the wheel, be sure to use sufficient lubrication. Do not use silicone, this 
could cause the tire and wheel to slip on the rim during hard braking. 

• Make sure that the tire is inflated to the correct specification as per manufacturers 
guidelines. Check the b-pillar inflation placard for exact tire pressure. 

• Bure sure to keep the wheel balancer maintained in proper working order. 

Clean cones, adapters and balancer shaft according to maintenance schedule. 
Replace any damaged accessories with Hunter approved components. 

• Periodically perform calibration checks on the wheel balancer to achieve 
the most accurate and consistent results. 


61 

Wheels and Tires 




