Table of Contents 


Subject Page 


Fuel Management 24 

Principle of Operation.33 

Workshop Hints.39 

Tools and Equipment.45 

Ignition Management 47 

Principle of Operation.53 

Workshop Hints.57 

Tools and Equipment.61 











Fuel Management 



Fuel Tank: The fuel tank is made of 
high density polyethylene (reduced 
weight) which is manufactured to 
meet safety reguirements. The baffling 
has been modified for the E46 M3 fuel 
pump pickup in the right hand side of 
the fuel tank to maintain fuel supply 
during aggressive cornering. 


A "saddle” type tank is used which 
provides a tunnel for the driveshaft but 
creates two separate low spots in the 
tank. A Syphon jet is required with this 
type of tank to transfer fuel from the 
left side, linked to the fuel return line. 


As fuel moves through the return, the 
siphon jet creates a low pressure (suc¬ 
tion) to pick up fuel from the left side 
of the tank and transfer it to the right 
side at the fuel pick up. 

The Z3 uses a conventional type fuel 
tank that is mounted between the 
seats and the luggage compartment. 
The Z3 has a single sending unit that 
(with the fuel pump) is accessed from 
behind the passenger seat. 


Fuel Pressure 

Regulator Hump 


Return 

Line 




H Syphon 


Transfer Pipe 








mm 


13410084.eps 



VV- J 


LW 


24 

MS S54 Fuel Management 



















































































































Fuel Pump: The electric fuel pump supplies constant 
fuel volume to the injection system. This system uses a 
single submersible (in the fuel tank) high volume pump. 
The inlet is protected by a mesh screen. 

When the fuel pump is powered, the armature will 
rotate the impeller disc creating low pressure at the 
inlet. The fuel will be drawn into the inlet and passed 
through the fuel pump housing (around the armature). 
The fuel lubricates and cools the internals of the pump 
motor. 

The fuel will exit through a non-return check valve to 
supply the injection system. The non-return check 
valve is opened by fuel exiting the pump and will close 
when the pump is deactivated. This maintains a 
"prime" of fuel in the filter, lines, hoses and fuel rail. 



13410085 .eps 


The pump contains an internal overpressure relief valve 
that will open (reducing internal pressure) if there is a 
restriction in the fuel supply hardware. 


Fuel Supply: The fuel is supplied through a 
Non Return Fuel Rail System. This system is 
used on the S54 for LEV compliancy. 

The fuel supply pressure is controlled by the 5 
Bar fuel pressure regulator integrated in the fuel 
filter assembly. The regulator is influenced by 
engine vacuum via a hose connected to the idle 
air distribution pipe. The fuel exits the fuel pres¬ 
sure regulator supplying the fuel rail and the 
injectors. The fuel filter assembly is located 
under the left front floor area (next to the frame 
rail). 



11410045.tiff 


The fuel return line is located on the filter/regu¬ 
lator assembly which directs the unused fuel 
back to the fuel tank. The fuel tank hydrocar¬ 
bons are reduced by returning the fuel from this 
point instead of from the fuel rail. 

11410045.tiff 



25 

MS S54 Fuel Management 





Fuel Pressure Regulator: The Fuel Pressure Regul¬ 
ator maintains a constant "pressure differential" for the 
fuel injectors. 

The fuel pressure is set to 5.0 Bar (+/- 0.2) by internal 
spring tension on the restriction valve. 

The vacuum chamber is sealed off by a diaphragm 
which is connected by a hose to the idle air distribution 
pipe (vacuum). Intake manifold vacuum regulates the fuel 
pressure by assisting to compress the spring (lowering fuel 
pressure). 

When the restriction valve opens, unused fuel returns 
back to the fuel tank. 



CU L' ~ 


R-&s!r*Dtir?n 
VgjVp 

13410000.bmp |y gn ] Q \ 


Examples of "pressure differential" are: 

At low to part throttle, intake manifold vacuum is available at the tip of the fuel injectors 
to enhance fuel "flow through". Vacuum is also applied to the fuel pressure regulator vac¬ 
uum chamber, causing the diaphragm to compress the spring which opens the restriction 
valve. This lowers the fuel pressure available to the fuel injectors. 

Vacuum Compresses Spring 
Opening Restriction Valve 
(Lowering Fuel Pressure) 



26 

MS S54 Fuel Management 


























































Wide open throttle depletes intake manifold vacuum at the tip of the fuel injectors and 
in the fuel pressure regulator vacuum chamber. The spring closes the restriction valve 
to raise fuel pressure available to the fuel injectors. This maintains pressure differential 
(fuel flow through) for the fuel injectors. 


Spring 

Closes Restriction Valve 
(Raising Fuel Pressure) 



By maintaining constant Fuel Pressure Differential through vacuum sensing (engine load), 
the ECM can then regulate volume and mixture by the length of time the injectors are open 
(duration). 


The Fuel Pressure Regulator is mounted on the 
fuel filter assembly. 


1 . 

Vacuum Hose 

2. 

Retaining Ring 

3. 

5 Bar Fuel Pressure Regulator 



13410071-l.eps 


27 

MS S54 Fuel Management 
















































































1 . 


Bosch Fuel Injectors (4 Hole Plate Type): The Fuel 
Injectors are electronically controlled solenoid valves 
that provide precisely metered and atomized fuel into 
the engine intake ports. The Fuel Injector Valve con¬ 
sists of: 


1 . 

Fuel Strainer 

2. 

Electronic Connector 

3. 

Solenoid Winding 

4. 

Closing Spring 

5. 

Plate Valve 

6. 

Outlet Orifice 

7. 

4 Hole Channeling 


Fuel is supplied from the fuel rail to the injector body. 
The fuel is channeled through the injector body to the 
plate valve and seat. 

Without electrical current, the plate valve is sprung 
closed against the seat. 

The Fuel Injectors receive voltage from the Fuel Injector 
Relay. The ECM activates current flow through the 
injector solenoid creating a magnetic field that pulls the 
plate valve "up" off of its seat. 



The pressurized fuel flows through the outlet ori¬ 
fice into the channeling. The channel "fans out" 
the fuel spray into four angled spray patterns 
which helps to atomize the fuel. 

When the ECM deactivates current flow, the 
plate valve is sprung closed against the seat and 
fuel flow through the injector is stopped. 

The length of time that the ECM activates the 
injectors is very brief, the duration is in milli-sec- 
onds (ms). This affects the mount of fuel volume 
flowing through the Fuel Injectors. The ECM will 
vary the length of time (ms) to regulate the 
air/fuel ratio (mixture). 



11410046.tiff 


1 . 

BMW Number 

2. 

Fuel Injector Code 

3. 

Mfg Date (week 06 year 2000) 

4. 

B+ Voltage Connection 


28 

MS S54 Fuel Management 

































































The Fuel Injectors are mounted in rubber "o- 
rings" between the fuel rail and the intake mani¬ 
fold to insulate them from heat and vibration. 


This insulation also reduces the injector noise 
from being transmitted through the engine com¬ 
partment. 


The Fuel Injectors are held to the fuel rail by 
securing clips (arrow). 



13410002.bmp 


If a Fuel Injector is faulty (mechanical/electrical), it can produce the following complaints: 


1. 

"Engine EMISSION" Light 

4. 

Excessive Tailpipe Smoke (leaking) 

2. 

Long Crank Time (Leaking) 

5. 

Misfire/Rough Idle (leaking/blocked) 

3. 

Oxygen Sensor/Mixture/Injector 
Related Fault Codes 

6. 

Engine Hydrolock (leaking) 


Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor: This sensor provides the crankshaft position and 
engine speed (RPM) signal to the ECM for Fuel Pump and Injector operation. This is an 
inductive pulse type sensor mounted on the left side at the rear of the engine block. The 
impulse wheel is mounted on the crankshaft inside the crankcase, at the rear main bearing 
support. The impulse wheel contains 58 teeth with a gap of two missing teeth. The ECM 
provides the power supply to this component. 

The rotation of the impulse wheel generates an 
A/C voltage signal in the sensor where-by each 
tooth of the wheel produces one pulse. The 
ECM counts the pulses and determines engine 
rpm. 

The gap of two missing teeth provides a refer¬ 
ence point that the ECM recognizes as crank¬ 
shaft position. 

The crankshaft position sensor is monitored as 
part of OBD II reguirements for Misfire Det¬ 
ection. 


CRANKSHAFT 

POSITION 

SENSOR 


13410070.eps 



29 

MS S54 Fuel Management 





















Camshaft Position Sensors (Hall Effect): The ECM uses the signal from the camshaft 
sensors to set up the triggering of the ignition coils, correct timing of fully sequential fuel 
injection, and VANOS operation. The ECM Relay supplies voltage to the Hall elements and 
the ECM supplies the ground. The powerflow through the Hall elements is the basis forthe 
sensors output to the ECM. 


As the camshaft rotates, the leading edge of 
the impulse wheel approaches the sensor tip 
creating a magnetic field with the permanent 
magnet in the sensor. 

The attraction causes the magnetic field to 
penetrate through the Hall element. The mag¬ 
netic field affects the powerflow in the element 
causing the input signal to go high. As the 
impulse wheel passes by the sensor, the signal 
goes low. 

The repetitive high/low creates a square wave 
signal that the ECM uses to recognize the 
camshaft position. 

The "active" Hall sensors supply a signal repre¬ 
sentative of camshaft position even before the 
engine is running. The ECM determines an 
approximate location of the camshaft position 
(high or low signal) prior to engine start up opti¬ 
mizing cold start injection (reduced emissions). 

An impulse wheel is mounted on the end of 
each camshaft for position detection. The intake 
camshaft impulse wheel has 6 lugs and the 
exhaust camshaft impulse wheel has 7 lugs. 
The sensors are mounted on each side at the 
back of the cylinder head. 

If the ECM detects a fault with this type of sen¬ 
sor (shown on the right), the "Malfunction 
Indicator Light” will be illuminated and the sys¬ 
tem will maintain engine operation based on the 
Crankshaft Position/RP M Sensor. Torque reduc¬ 
tion will be noticed due to "default" VANOS 
position. 



1241 



UNIQUE SIGNAL 
AS SEEN IN 
Measurement 

SYSTEM 

OSCILLOSCOPE 



Exhayst 

Wheel 


Whe-el 


11410022.tiff 



30 

MS S54 Fuel Management 


11410072.tiff 










































































































Engine Coolant Temperature: The Engine Coolant Temperature is provided to the ECM 
from a Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) type sensor. The ECM determines the cor¬ 
rect fuel mixture and base ignition timing required for the engine temperature. 


The dual sensor (ECM/Temp Gage) is located in 
the coolant return pipe (arrow). 

The sensor decreases in resistance as the tem¬ 
perature rises and vice verse. The ECM moni¬ 
tors an applied voltage to the sensor (5v). This 
voltage will van/ (0-5v) as coolant temperature 
changes the resistance value. 

If the Coolant Temperature Sensor input is 
faulty, the "Malfunction Indicator Light" will be 
illuminated and the ECM will use the oil temper¬ 
ature sensor as an alternate. 



13410008.bmp 


Accelerator Pedal Position (PWG): 

As the accelerator pedal is actuated, the ECM 
will increase the volume of fuel injected into the 
engine. As the accelerator pedal is released, the 
ECM activates fuel shut off if the rpm is above 
idle speed (coasting). 

For details about the sensor, refer to the Air 
Management section. 



Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM): The air vol¬ 
ume input signal is used by the ECM to deter¬ 
mine the amount of fuel to be injected for cor¬ 
rect air/fuel ratio. 

For details about the sensor, refer to the Air 
M anagement section. 




MS S54 Fuel Management 
































































Air Temperature: This signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. For 
details about the sensor, refer to the Air M anagement section. 

The varying voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen 
found in cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust 
the amount of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on oxygen sens 
ing ratio. 

If a fault is present in this circuit, the ECM will operate on a substitute value. 


Notes: 




Principle of Operation 

Fuel Management delivers fuel from the tank to the intake ports of the engine. To accom¬ 
plish this, fuel supply must be available to the fuel injectors. Then the fuel must be inj¬ 
ected in the precise amount and at the correct time. The ECM does not directly monitor 
fuel supply, although it does control it. The ECM controls and monitors fuel injection. 



The Fuel Pump supplies fuel 
when it receives operating voltage 
from the Fuel Pump Module. The 
ECM Relay supplies voltage to the 
Fuel Pump Module (M3 -located in 
the trunk, above right wheel well). 

The ECM controls the activation of 
the fuel pump module. After the 
ignition is switched ON, the ECM 
provides voltage forthe fuel pump 
module and the voltage is main¬ 
tained (pulse width modulated) 
with the presence of the engine 
speed signal. 


I K BUS 



MKS III 
(3-99 PROD) 


1341007 5 .eps 



SENSOR 





A high output fuel pump is utilized to match the fuel supply demands of the S54 engine (5 
Bar). The ECM will cycle the voltage signal (0 - 120 Hz) to the fuel pump module. The fuel 
pump module will cycle the voltage to the pump (to reduce the speed). The fuel pump will 
operate at low speed during idle and part load. The pump will run at full speed during start¬ 
up (approx. 20 seconds) and full load. 


The powerto the fuel pump module will be switched off in the event of an airbag activation. 
The M R5 III control module will signal the ECM over K-bus and CAN bus forthis purpose. 


33 

MS S54 Fuel Management 













































































The Fuel Injectors will be opened by the ECM to inject pressurized fuel into the intake 
ports. The ECM Relay supplies voltage to the Fuel Injector Relay, the Fuel Injector Relay 
supplies operating voltage to the injectors. The ECM controls the opening by activating the 
ground circuit for the Solenoid Windings. The ECM will van/ the duration (in milli-seconds) 
of "opening" time to regulate the air/fuel ratio. 


The ECM has six Final Stage output transis¬ 
tors that switch ground to the six injector 
solenoids. The Injector "triggering" is first 
established from the Crankshaft Pos- 
ition/RPM Sensor. 

The ECM is programmed to activate the Final 
Stage output transistors once (per cylinder) 
for every working cycle of the engine (Full 
Sequential Injection). The ECM calculates the 
total milli-second time to open the injectors 
and triggers them independently. 

During start up, the ECM recognizes the 
Camshaft Position (Cylinder ID) inputs. The 
camshaft positions are referenced to the 
crankshaft position. This process "times" the 
injection closer to the intake valve opening 
for increased efficiency. 



When activated, each injector delivers the full 
fuel charge at separate times for each cylin¬ 
der working cycle. 

Cyl. 1 

The Camshaft Position input is monitored by CyL5 
the ECM during start up. There will be an 
effect on injector timing if this input is missing Cyl ' 3 
when the engine is started. Cyi.6 

Cyl. 2 

When KLI5 is switched "off", the ECM dis- 

Cvl 4 

continues voltage to the Fuel Injector Relay y ' 

and deactivates the six Final Stage transis- _ 

tors to discontinue fuel injection. 


Full Sequential Injection Timing 



0° 180° 360° 540° 720° 


= FUEL INJECTED 


= INTAKE VALVE(S) OPEN 


13410077.eps 


34 

MS S54 Fuel Management 


















































































The Injector “open" Time to maintain engine operation after it has been started is det¬ 
ermined by the ECM (programming). The ECM will calculate the injector timing based on 
a combination of the following inputs: 


1. Battery Voltage 

2. Accelerator Pedal Sensor 

3. Air Flow Volume / Mass 

4. Air Temperature 

5. Crankshaft Position / RPM 

6. Camshaft Position 
(Cylinder ID) 

7. E ngine C oolant Temperature 

8. Oxygen Sensor (details in 
Emissions Management) 



The injection ms value will be regulated based on batten/ voltage. When cranking, the volt¬ 
age is low and the ECM will increase the ms value to compensate for injector "lag time”. 
When the engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the 
injection ms value due to faster injector reaction time. 

Cold starting requires additional fuel to compensate for poor mixture and the loss of fuel as 
it condenses onto cold intake ports, valves and cylinder walls. The cold start fuel quantity 
is determined by the ECM based on the Engine Coolant Temperature Sensor input during 
start up. 

During cranking, additional fuel is injected for the first few crankshaft revolutions. The ECM 
recognizes the Camshaft Positions and precisely times the Full Sequential Injection. After 
the first few crankshaft revolutions, the injected quantity is metered down as the engine 
comes up to speed. 

When the engine is cold, optimum fuel metering is not possible due to poor air/fuel mixing 
and an enriched mixture is required. The Coolant Temperature input allows the ECM to 
adjust the injection ms value to compensate during warm up and minimize the the injected 
fuel at engine operating temperature. 


35 

MS S54 Fuel Management 




















































When the engine is at idle, minimum injection is required. Additional fuel will be added if the 
ECM observes low engine rpm and increasing throttle / air volume inputs (acceleration 
enrichment). As the accelerator pedal is actuated, the EC M monitors acceleration and rate 
of movement. The ECM will increase the volume of fuel injected into the engine by increas¬ 
ing the injection ms value. The "full throttle” position indicates maximum acceleration and 
the ECM will add more fuel (full load enrichment). 

As the accelerator pedal is released, the ECM decreases the injection ms value (fuel shut 
off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreases fuel consumption and 
lowers emissions. When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injection ms value is 
increased (cut-in) to prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon the 
engine temperature and the rate of deceleration. 

The HFM signal provides the measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by 
the ECM to determine the amount of fuel to be injected to "balance" the air / fuel ratio. 

The Air Temperature Signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The vary¬ 
ing voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found in 
cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the amount 
of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on oxygen sensing ratio (details 
in Emissions). 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECM to start injection as well as providing infor¬ 
mation about the engine operation. This input is used in combination with other inputs to 
determine engine load which increases / decreases the injection ms value. Without this in¬ 
put, the ECM will not activate the injectors. 

When KLI5 is switched "off", the ECM discontinues voltage to the Fuel Injector Relay and 
deactivates the six Final Stage transistors to cease fuel injection. 


Notes: 


36 

MS S54 Fuel Management 



Injection "Reduction" Time is required to control fuel economy, emissions, engine and 
vehicle speed limitation. The EC M will "trim” back or deactivate the fuel injection as neces¬ 
sary while maintaining optimum engine operation. 



CLOSED 

THROTTLE 

POSITION 



13410078.eps 




As the throttle is closed during deceleration, the ECM decreases the injection ms value (fuel 
shut off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreases fuel consumption 
and lowers emissions. 


When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injection ms value is increased (cut-in) to 
prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon the engine temperature 
and the rate of deceleration. 


The ECM will deactivate the injectors to control maxi¬ 
mum engine rpm (regardless of vehicle speed). When 
the engine speed reaches 8000 rpm, the injectors will 
be deactivated to protect the engine from over-rev. As 
the engine speed drops below 8000 rpm, injector acti¬ 
vation will be resumed. This feature does not protect 
the engine from a forced over-rev such as improperly 
downshifting a manual transmission equipped vehicle 
(driver ermr). 

Maximum vehicle speed is limited by the ECM reduc¬ 
ing the injection ms value (regardless of engine rpm). 
This limitation is based on the vehicle dimensions, 
specifications and installed tires (speed rating). 



13410075.tiff 


37 

MS S54 Fuel Management 

















The EC M will also protect the Catalytic Converters by deactivating the injectors. 


If the ECM detects a "Misfire" (ignition, injection or combustion), it will selectively deactivate 
the Final Stage output transistor for that cylinder(s). On the M S S54 system, there are six 
individual injector circuits resulting in deactivation of one or multiples. This will limit engine 
power, but protect the Catalytic Converters. 


13410088.eps 



CRANKSHAFT 

POSITION 

SENSOR 



Fuel Injection Control Monitoring is performed by the ECM for OBD II requirements. 
Faults with the fuel injectors and/or control circuits will be stored in memory This monitor¬ 
ing includes: 


Closed Loop Operation 

Oxygen Sensor Feedback 

These additional corrections are factored into 
the calculated injection time. If the correction 
factor exceeds set limits a fault will be stored in 
memory. 

When the criteria for OBD II monitoring is ach¬ 
ieved, the "Malfunction Indicator Light" will be 
illuminated. 



ENGINE LOAD -► 

13550010.eps 


38 

MS S54 Fuel Management 



































































Workshop Hints 


Before any service work is performed on any fuel system related component, 
always adhere to the following: 

Observe relevant safety legislation pertaining to your area. 

Ensure adequate ventilation 

Use exhaust extraction system where applicable (alleviate fumes). 

DO NOT OPERATE THE FUEL PUMP unless it is properly installed in the fuel tank 
and is submersed in the fuel (fuel lubricates the pump). 

DO NOT SMOKE while performing fuel system repairs. 

Always wear adequate protective clothing including eye protection. 

Use caution when working around a HOT engine compartment. 


BMW does not recommend any UNAUTHORIZED MODIFICATIONS to the fuel sys¬ 
tem. The fuel systems are designed to comply with strict federal safety and emissions 
regulations. In the concern of product liability, it is unauthorized to sell or perform modi¬ 
fications to customer vehicles, particularly in safety related areas. 


Always consult the REPAIR INSTRUCTIONS on the specific model you are working 
on before attempting a repair. 


Fuel 

Fuel quality should always be considered when diagnosing a driveability complaint. The 

type of fuel, proper AKI rating, impurities and moisture are not factored by the ECM. 

Please refer to the Owner's Manual and following Service Information Bulletins regarding 
fuel: 

Gasoline Fuel Quality S.l. #13 01 88 (1564) Gasoline Additive S.l. #13 04 88 (1591) 


39 

MS S54 Fuel Management 



Fuel Supply 

The fuel supply hardware should be visually inspected for damage that can affect pick- up, 
transfer, pressure and return. 

Please referto the Repair Instructions and Service Information Bulletins details on fuel sup¬ 
ply hardware. 


Fuel Pump and Sending Unit Access 

All BMW vehicles have access plates to service 
the fuel pump and sending umt(s) without 
removing the fuel tank. 

The E46 M3 access plates are located under 
the rear seat. 

The "saddle” type fuel tank (under rearseat) has 
two access plates. 




The passenger side allows access to the fuel 
pump / sending unit. 

The driver side accesses the sending unit / 
syphon jet. 



13550028.eps 


The M roadster and M coupe have a single access plate loc¬ 
ated behind the passenger seat. 



40 

MS S54 Fuel Management 


13550023.eps 















Draining the Fuel Tank 

In order to remove the fuel tank it must be drained first 
to avoid fuel spills and handling excessive weight. In 
some cases depending on the fuel tank dimensions 
(vehicle specific), it is also necessary to drain the fuel 
tank to replace the sending units and/or fuel pump. 



CAUTION: In some vehicles, the sending units/fuel 
pump is mounted lower than the top of the fuel tank. 

A fuel spill will be encountered if the fuel is not drained. 

NOTE: Consult the BMW Service Workshop Equip¬ 
ment for the proper evacuation equipment. The saddle 
type tank requires an additional step to drain the fuel 
from the driver side. The evacuation equipment should 
be attached to the tank compensating hose (arrow) to 
drain out the remaining fuel. 

Fuel Pump / Pressure Regulator - Testing 

The fuel pump should be tested for delivery pressure 
and volume. Caution when disconnecting fuel hoses 
because there is the possibility of residual fuel pressure! 
Install the fuel pressure adapter and DISplus pressure 
sensing lead to the fuel pressure fitting *DISplus starts 
with atmospheric pressure as the base. 

Remove the fuel pump relay/module (M roadster/ 
coupe located in the Electronics Box, E46 M3 located 
in the trunk, above right wheel well - see relay testing in 
the power supply section). Connect the Relay Bypass 
Switch to pin 87b and 30 of the relay socket. This will 
activate the fuel pump without running the engine. 



BMW Test system Multimeter 


4.55 bar 

Hold Screen 

Minimum 

Maximum 


system voltage 
Engine speed 


0.0 25.0 


Measurement 

function 


Voltage 

V 


Resistance 

Ohm 


Tempeature 

°C 




C urrent 


C urrent 


C urrent 

2A 


50A 


1000A 


Diode Test 


Pressure 

bar 


2nd 

neasurement 


Test connection 

MFK 1 


MFK 2 


Current 


Pressure 


Temperature 






1000A 


bar 


sensor 


Type of 
measurement 

— 

In- 


Effective value| 




IM 




Measuring range 

automatic 

0..25 bar j j ^ 

Stimulate 




If the 5 bar (*+ atmosphere DISplus base starting point) 
fuel pressure is not achieved or bleed off is more than 
0 5 bar, refer to 13 31 of the Repair instructions for 

further diagnosis. The Fuel Hose Clamp Tool can be 
used to isolate bleed off from the pump (non-return 
check valve) orthe pressure regulator (restriction valve). 
Also verify power supply to the fuel pump. 



13550017.eps 

41 

MS S54 Fuel Management 













































































































Fuel volume must be tested to verify: 


1. Fuel Pump Output 

2 . Restriction are not present in the 
pump, lines/hoses and fuel filter. 



Fuel Injectors 


When inspecting the fuel injectors, consider the 
following: 


1 . 

O-rings should be replaced, lubricate 


with Vaseline or SAE 90 gear oil for 


installation. 

2. 

Verify the code number. 

3. 

Color code injector housing 



11410046 tiff 


Fuel injectors can leak which bleeds off fuel 
pressure and increases emissions. The injectors 
can be tested using the Fuel Injector Leakage 
Tester. 

The fuel injectors can be cleaned, refer to 
Service Information Bulletin S.l. #04 07 86. 



42 

MS S54 Fuel Management 


13410007.bmp 





































The Fuel Injectors should also be tested using the DISplus/MoDIC for 



Positive 


13410093.eps 




































































































































































Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor 


This sensor should be tested using the 
DISplus/MoDIC for: 


1. 

Power Supply 

2. 

AC Voltage 

3. 

Status Display 

4. 

Oscilloscope Display Found Under 


Preset List "Rotation Speed Sensor 


Signal" 


Camshaft Position Sensor (Cylinder ID) 

This sensor should be tested using the DIS plus/ 
M oDic for: 


1. 

Power Supply 

2. 

DC Voltage 

3. 

Status Display 

4. 

Oscilloscope Display Found Under 
Preset List "Rotation 











Print 


Change 


End 


Services 



BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 
v 


A A 


KJU 


Memory 





■25 -15 -5 

-20 -10 


A 


IS 



5 15 

0 10 20 


ms 



J Function 

p r i 

; 

Document 


Test 

Module 


< 


>1 


zp 7 

Test 

System 












Engine Coolant Temperature 

This Sensor should be tested using: 


l. 

DISplus/Modic Status Page - 


Degrees C (dependent on engine 


temperature) 

2. 

DISplus/Modic Multimeter- 
Resistance 



CONTROL 

MODULE 


12410012.eps 


44 

MS S54 Fuel Management 

















































































































































































































































































































































































Tools and Equipment 


3 


The DIS plus/M odic as well as a reputable hand 
held multimeter can be used when testing 
inputs/components. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 




07410001 eps 


The correct Universal Adapter for the MS S54 
application should be used (#90 88 6 121 300). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 


When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located in the Electronics Box in the 
engine compartment), make sure the ignition is 
switched off. 


SKE BREAKOUT BOX SET 
P/N 90 88 6 121 300 


ENGINE CONTROL 
MODULE HARNESS 



F=3 



nn 

s 


€ 

z 

V 


©©©©© 

©©©©© 

©©©©© 

©©©©© 

©©©©© 

© 


26 

PIN 

BOX _ 

88 88 6 611 459 

13410063 .eps 



©s©®© 

©©©©© 

©©© 0 © 

©© 0 ®® 

©©©©© 

© 


26 
PIN 
BOX 
88 88 6 611 459 



The Fuel Hose Clamp Tool (#13 3 010) can be 
used for isolating pressure faults. In addition, 
fuel loss can be reduced when changing the fuel 
filter while loosening clamps (1 and 2). 

The Relay Bypass Switch (#61 3 050) must be 
used especially when fuel vapors are pre¬ 
sent! The switch eliminates the risk of electrical 
arcing. 



13410092.eps 


45 

MS S54 Fuel Management 

















































































































When testing fuel pressure, the DIS plus is 
equipped with a pressure measuring function, 
found in Measurement testing can be used. 


A threaded fitting provides a test point at the fuel 
pressure regulator. This threaded adapter fitting 
allows Adapter #13 5 220 to be coupled to the 
DI5 Pressure Adapter. 

Caution! Residual fuel pressure may be pre¬ 
sent. 




13410071-l.eps 


When testing the fuel injectors for leakage, use 
Special Tool #88 88 5 000 362. Leak testing the 
fuel injectors is one of the diagnostic steps list¬ 
ed in "Long Cranking Times" S.l. #13 08 90 
(3096). 

This tool pressurizes the injectors with air and 
the injector tips are submersed in water. If air 
bubbles are present, this indicates the leaking 
injector(s). 



13410007.bmp 


46 

MS S54 Fuel Management 
























Ignition Management 



Ignition Coils: The high voltage supply required to ignite the mixture in the combustion 
chambers is determined by the stored energy in the ignition coils. The stored energy con¬ 
tributes to the ignition duration, ignition current and rate of high voltage increase. The Coil 
circuit including primary and secondary components consists of: 



1 . 

Coil Assembly 

- Primary Winding 

- Secondary Winding 

2. 

Insulator Boot 

3. 

Spark Plug 

4. 

ECM Final Stage Transistor 

5. 

Secondary Coil Ground 


The Coil Assembly contains two copper windings insulated from each other. One winding 
is the primary winding, formed by a few turns of thick wire. The secondary winding is 
formed by a great many turns of thin wire. 

The primary winding receives batten/ voltage from the ECM Relay (Coil Terminal 15). The 
EC M provides a ground path forthe primary coil (Coil Terminal 1) by activating a Final Stage 
transistor. The length of time that current flows through the primary winding is the "dwell" 
which allows the coil to "saturate" or build up a magnetic field. After this storage process, 
the ECM will interrupt the primary circuit at the point of ignition by deactivating the Final 
Stage transistor. The magnetic field built up within the primary winding collapses and 
induces the ignition voltage in the secondary winding. 


47 

MS S54 Ignition Management 





























































































The high voltage generated in the secondary 
winding is discharged through Coil Terminal 4 
to the spark plug (insulated by the boot connec¬ 
tor). 


The primary and secondary windings are un¬ 
coupled, therefore, the secondary winding 
requires a ground supply (Coil Terminal 4a). 

There is an individual ignition circuit and coil for 
each cylinder on the MS S54 system. The S54 
uses "pencil type” ignition coils manufactured by 
Bremi. The six individual ignition coils are inte¬ 
grated with the insulated connector (boot). 

The coils are removed by lifting the swivel latch 
connector retainer to release the wiring harness, 
apply a slight twist and lift the assembly 
upwards. 


Insulating 




11410047.tiff 


The primary ignition cables are routed on the top 
of the cylinder head cover. A suppression 
capacitor is installed on the secondary ignition 
ground circuit (arrow). 



Spark Plugs: The spark plugs introduce the 
ignition energy into the combustion chamber. 
The high voltage "arcs” across the air gap in the 
spark plug from the positive electrode to the 
negative electrodes. This creates a spark which 
ignites the combustible air/fuel mixture. 

The spark plugs are located in the center of the 
combustion area (on the top of the cylinder 
head) which is the most suitable point for ignit¬ 
ing the compressed air/fuel mixture. 



The correct spark plugs for the S54 are NGK 13410009 .bmp 

DCPR8EKP dual electrode (non-adjustable 

gap). 


48 

MS S54 Ignition Management 


































Faults with the Ignition Output Components are monitored by the ECM. If there are 
faults with the ignition coil(s) output, and/or spark plugs, the following complaints could be 
encountered: 


1. 

“Service Engine Soon" Light with Mixture Related and / or Misfire Fault Codes 

2. 

Poor Engine Performance 

3. 

Engine Misfire 

4. 

No Start/Hard Starting 

5. 

Excessive Exhaust Emission/Black Smoke 


The Ignition Output Components must be individually tested (see Workshop Hints). 


The primary ignition circuits are 
monitored by the ECM . 

If a fault is present, the 
"Malfunction Indicator Light" will 
illuminate and the ECM will deac¬ 
tivate the corresponding fuel 
injector for that cylinder. Engine 
operation will still be possible. 


The secondary ignition is moni¬ 
tored by the ECM via the 
Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. 

If a Misfire fault is present, the 
"Malfunction Indicator Light" will 
illuminate and the ECM will deac¬ 
tivate the corresponding fuel 
injector for that cylinder. Engine 
operation will still be possible. 




CRANKSHAFT 

POSITION 

SENSOR 


13410088.eps 





49 

MS S54 Ignition Management 



































































Knock Sensors: are required to prevent detonation (pinging) from damaging the engine. 
The Knock Sensor is a piezoelectric conductor-sound microphone. The ECM will retard the 
ignition timing (cylinder selective) based on the input of these sensors. Detonation can 
occur due to: 


m 

High Compression Ratio 

4. 

Maximum Timing Advance Curve 

2 . 

Poor Quality Fuel (Octane Rating) 

5. 

High Intake Air and Engine Temperatures 

3. 

High Level of Cylinder Filling 

6. 

Carbon Build-Up (Combustion Chamber) 


The Knock Sensor consists of: 


1. 

Shielded Wire 

2. 

Cup Spring 

3. 

Seismic Mass 

4. 

Housing 

5. 

Inner Sleeve 

6. 

Piezo-Ceramic Element 



13400010.bmp 


A piezo-ceramic ring is clamped between a seismic mass and the sensor body. When the 
seismic mass senses vibration (flexing), it exerts a force on the piezo-ceramic element. 
Opposed electrical charges build up on the upper and lower ceramic surfaces which gen¬ 
erates a voltage signal. The acoustic vibrations are converted into electrical signals. These 
low voltage signals are transmitted to the ECM for processing. 


There are three Knock Sensors bolted to the 
engine block between cylinders 1 & 2, 3 & 4 and 
5 &6. If the signal value exceeds the threshold, 
the ECM identifies the "knock" and retards the 
ignition timing for that cylinder. 

If a fault is detected with the sensor(s), the ECM 
deactivates Knock Control and the "Malfunction 
Indicator Light" will be illuminated. The ignition 
timing will be set to a conservative basic setting 
based on intake air temperature and a fault will 
be stored. 



13410078.bmp 


50 

MS S54 Ignition Management 











Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor: This sen¬ 
sor provides the crankshaft position and engine 
speed (RP M) signal to the EC M for ignition acti¬ 
vation and correct timing. This input is also 
monitored for Misfire Detection. For details 
about the sensor, refer to the Fuel Management 
section. 

A fault with this input will produce the following 
complaints: 


1 . 

No Start 

2. 

Intermittent Misfire/Driveability 

3. 

Engine Stalling 




H 


E3 


SMOOTH RUNNING ENGINE 

(NOTE SQUARE WAVE SIGNAL) 13410070..epS 


Camshaft Position Sensor (Cylinder 
Identification): The camshaft sensors (Hall 
type) inputs allows the ECM to determine 
camshaft positions in relation to crankshaft 
position. It is used by the ECM to establish the 
"working cycle" of the engine for precise ignition 
timing. For details about the sensor, refer to the 
Fuel Management section. 

If the ECM detects a fault with the Camshaft 
Sensors, the "Malfunction Indicator Light” will 
be illuminated and the ignition will still operate 
based on the Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. 



1241 



UNIQUE SIGNAL 
AS SEEN IN 
MEASUREMENT 

SYSTEM 

OSCILLOSCOPE 


Engine Coolant Temperature: The ECM 

determines the correct ignition timing required 
for the engine temperature. For details about 
the sensor, refer to the Fuel Management sec¬ 
tion. This sensor is located in the coolant return 
pipe on the cylinder head (1). 

If the Coolant Temperature Sensor input is 
faulty, the "Malfunction Indicator Light" will be 
illuminated and the ECM will use the oil temper¬ 
ature sensor as an alternate. The ignition timing 
will be set to a conservative basic setting. 



13410008.bmp 


51 

MS S54 Ignition Management 














































































































































































Accelerator Pedal Position (PWG): As the 

accelerator pedal is actuated, the ECM will 
advance the ignition timing. The "full throttle” 
position indicates maximum acceleration to the 
ECM, the ignition will be advanced formaximum 
torque. 

For details about the sensor, refer to the Air 
Management section. 



Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM): The air vol¬ 
ume input signal is used by the ECM to deter¬ 
mine the amount of ignition timing advance. 

For details about the sensor, refer to the Air 
M anagement section. 



Air Temperature: This signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The sen¬ 
sor is located in the HFM . For details about the sensor, refer to the Air M anagement sec¬ 
tion. 


The ECM will adjust the ignition timing based on air temperature. If the intake air is hot the 
ECM retards the ignition timing to reduce the risk of detonation. If the intake air is cooler, 
the ignition timing will be advanced. 


If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the "M alfunction Indicator Light" w 
minate. The ignition timing will be set to a conservative basic setting. 



52 

MS S54 Ignition Management 





























































Principle of Operation 


Ignition Management provides ignition to the combustion chambers with the reguired volt¬ 
age at the correct time. Based on the combination of inputs, the ECM calculates and con¬ 
trols the ignition timing and secondary output voltage by regulating the activation and 
dwell of the primary ignition circuit. The ECM controls and monitors the primary ignition 
circuit as well as the secondary ignition output (M isfire Detection). 


12410013.eps 


CAMSHAFT 

POSITION 

SENSORS 



2X 


AIR MASS SIGNAL 
AIR TEMP SIGNAL 




TT 


repRi 


6X 

THROTTLE 

POSITION 



KNOCK 

SENSORS 




ENGINE COOLANT 

TEMPERATURE 



CRANKSHAFT 
POSITION 
SENSOR 


IGNITION 

MANAGEMENT 


IGNITION COILS CONTROL 


6X 


The ECM has a very "broad" range of ignition timing. This is possible by using a Direct 
Ignition System, or sometimes referred to as "Static Ignition System". Reliability is also 
increased by having separate individual ignition circuits. 


The Ignition Control is determined by the ECM (load dependent). The ECM will calculate 
the engine "load" based on a combination of the following inputs: 


1. Battery Voltage 

4. Accelerator Pedal Position 

7. Knock Sensor 

2. Air Temperature 

5. Engine Coolant 

8. Air Flow Volume 

3. Camshaft Position 
(Cylinder ID) 

6. Crankshaft Position/RPM 



The dwell time will be regulated based on battery voltage. When cranking, the voltage is 
low and the ECM will increase the dwell to compensate for saturation "lag time". When the 
engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the dwell due to 
a faster saturation time. 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECM to start ignition in firing order (1-5-3-6-2-4) 
as well as providing information about the engine operation. This input is used in combina¬ 
tion with other inputs to determine engine load which advances/retards the ignition timing. 
Without this input, the ECM will not activate the ignition. 


53 

MS S54 Ignition Management 

















































Cold start is determined by the ECM based on the engine coolant temperature and rpm 
during start up. A cold engine will crank over slower than a warm engine, the ignition tim¬ 
ing will range between top dead center to slightly retarded providing optimum starting. 

When starting a warm engine, the rpm is higher which results in slightly advanced timing. 
If the engine coolant and intake air temperature is hot, the ignition timing will not be ad¬ 
vanced reducing starter motor "load". 

During cranking, the ECM recognizes the Camshaft Position (compression stroke)and acti¬ 
vates a single ignition per cylinder. The ignition timing will be progressively advanced assist¬ 
ing the engine in coming up to speed. 

As the engine speed approaches 
idle rpm, the timing remains sligh¬ 
tly advanced to boost torque. 


When the engine is at idle speed, 
minimum timing advance is re¬ 
quired. This will allow fasterengine 
and catalyst warm up. 


The timing will be advanced when 
the ECM observes low engine rpm 
and increasing accelerator/air vol¬ 
ume inputs (acceleration torque). 

As the throttle is opened, the ECM 
advances the timing based on 
engine acceleration and at what 
rate. The ECM will fully advance 
timing for the "full throttle" position 
indicating maximum acceleration 
(torque). 

The Air Flow Volume signal provides the measured amount of intake air volume. This input 
is used by the ECM to determine the amount of timing advance to properly combust the 
air/fuel mixture. 

The Air Temperature Signal assists the ECM in reducing the risk of detonation (ping). If 
the intake air is hot the ECM retards the ignition timing. If the intake air is cooler, the igni¬ 
tion timing will be advanced. 


KL-15 


IF 





Crankshaft Position / RPM 



Camshaft Sensor 2x 


Air Volume Sensor & 

Air Temperature Sensor 





Knock Sensor 


3x 


Engine Temp Sensor 



Throttle Position 



ECM 



ECM Main Relay 

o o 


V V 


TV 


13410094.eps 


54 

MS S54 Ignition Management 











































As the throttle is closed, the ECM decreases the ignition timing if the rpm is above idle 
speed (coasting). This feature lowers the engine torgue for deceleration. When the engine 
rpm approaches idle speed, the timing is slightly advanced to prevent the engine from 
stalling. The amount of advance is dependent upon the engine temperature and the rate of 
deceleration. 


EMISSION OPTIMIZED - IGNITION KEY OFF 

"Emission Optimized Ignition Key Off" is a programmed feature of the MS 54 ECM. After 
the ECM detects KL 15 is switched "off", the ignition stays active (ECM Relay/voltage sup¬ 
ply) for two more individual coil firings. This means that just two cylinders are fired - not two 
revolutions. 


This feature allows residual fuel injected into the cylinders, as the ignition key is switched 
off, to be combusted as the engine runs down. 


EMISSION OPTIMIZED IGNITION KEYOFF 

M52 LEV 


I [ i 

T - - 


INJECTION 

IGNITION 


Already injected fuel 
before “key off” 


. 


L 


I *—r 

-► 


Start 


key off 






























S54 


rpm 




INJECTION 




IGNITION 


•- 

-► 



Start 


key off 


ignition off 


13410009.eps 

When KL15 is switched "off" the ECM operating 
voltage is removed. The ECM will maintain a 
ground to the Engine Control Module Relay fora 
few seconds to maintain ignition coil activation. 



12410002.eps 


55 

MS S54 Ignition Management 













































































Knock Control 


The use of Knock Control allows the EC M to further advance the ignition timing under load 
for increased torque. This system uses three Knock Sensors located between cylinders 1 
& 2, cylinders 3 & 4 and cylinders 5 & 6. 


Knock Control is only in affect when the engine temperature is greaterthan 35 S C and there 
is a load on the engine. This will disregard false signals while idling or from a cold engine. 


Based on the firing order, the ECM monitors the Knock Sensors after each ignition fora nor¬ 
mal (low) signal. 


If the signal value exceeds the threshold, the ECM identifies the "knock" and retards the 
ignition timing (3 2 ) for that cylinder the next time it is fired. 


This process is repeated in 3 2 increments until the knock ceases. The ignition timing will be 
advanced again in increments right up to the knock limit and maintain the timing at that 
point. 


If a fault is detected with the Knock Sensor(s) or circuits, the ECM deactivates Knock 
Control. The "Malfunction Indicator Light" will be illuminated, the ignition timing will be set 
to a conservative basic setting (to reduce the risk of detonation) and a fault will be stored. 



13410082.jpg 


56 

MS S54 Ignition Management 





































































































































































Workshop Hints 

Before any service work is performed on any ignition system related component, 
always adhere to the following: 

Observe relevant safety legislation pertaining to your area. 

Always wear adequate protective clothing including eye protection. 

Use caution when working around a HOT engine compartment. 

Always consult the REPAIR INSTRUCTIONS on the specific model you are working 
on before attempting a repair. 

Always switch off the ignition (KL15) before working on the ignition system. 

Use only BMW approved test leads. 

Never touch components conducting current with the engine running! 

Do not connect suppression devices or a "test light” to terminal 1 of the ignition coils. 
Terminal 1 of the ignition coil must not be connected to Ground or B+. 

Never run the engine with a secondary ignition component disconnected. 

HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER! 

Caution! Hazardous voltages occur at: 

Ignition Leads 
Spark Plug Connector 
Spark Plug 

Ignition Coil (High Voltage at terminal 4 is approximately 30 KV) 

Terminal 1 from the ignition coil to the ECM (High Voltage approximately 350 V) 


57 

MS S54 Ignition Management 



Ignition System Diagnosis 


A fault survey should first be performed using the DIS plus/M oDIC to determine if there is a 
fault in the primary ignition or secondary ignition. 


If there is a fault in the primary ignition, testing should include 


Power Supply at the Coil (KL15) 


Resistance of the harness and ignition coil primary winding (terminal 15 to 1 approx. 0.8 
ohms) - using the 134 Pin Adapter Set with the ECM disconnected. 


A. 

ECM Primary Circuit Final Stage Transistor 

B. 

Ignition Coil (one of four) 

C. 

Secondary Coil Ground 


ECM Final Stage transistor activation. This 
test function is found under the Oscilloscope 
Preset list - "Ignition Signal Primary” (normal 
Terminal 1 Signal shown on the right). 

Install the 134 Pin Adapter Set, Diagnostic 
cable, MFK 2 negative lead to ECM ground 
and MFK 2 positive lead to the ground activa¬ 
tion circuit for Terminal 1 of the ignition coil. 
This test is performed with the engine running. 


Primary Secondary 



13410015 .eps 



58 

MS S54 Ignition Management 









































If there is a fault in the secondary ignition, testing should include: 

Primary Ignition Evaluation of Secondary Oscilloscope Patterns 

The Repair Instructions should be consulted for additional Oscilloscope Patterns under 
various engine speeds. 

In Summary, 

If the Secondary Ignition Voltage is Too High (Excessive Resistance for Ignition): 

Spark Plug Gap is to Large (Worn or Burned) 

Incorrect Heat Range Spark Plug 
Compression is too High (Carbon, etc.) 

Lean Mixture (Vacuum Leak, etc.) 

Interruption in the Secondary Ignition Cable, Connector, or Resistive Adapter Boot 

If the Secondary Ignition Voltage is Too Low (Low Resistance for Ignition): 

Spark Plug Gap is Too Small (Mishandled on Installation) 

Incorrect Heat Range Spark Plug 
Compression is Too Low 

Voltage Leak in the Secondary Ignition Cable, Connector, or Resistive Boot to Ground 

Spark Plugs 

The Spark Plugs should be inspected for the proper type, gap and replaced at the speci¬ 
fied intervals. 

Refer to the Service Information Bulletin S.l. #12 01 99 for the proper type and a visual of 
the spark plug (showing effects of combustion, fouling, etc.) 

59 

MS S54 Ignition Management 



Knock Sensors 


The Knock Sensors should be tested using the 
DISplus/MoDIC for: 


1 . 

Fault Codes 

2. 

Status Display 


-Knock Control (active/not active) 

3. 

Oscilloscope Display 


(Low DC Voltage-mV Setting) 



When installing Knock Sensors: 


12410015.eps 


DO NOT MIX THE CONNECTORS: Engine Damage will result! - the connector is critical 
to sensor location. 


Do Not Over Tighten attaching bolt 1 - Piezo ceramic will be cracked. Torque to 20 nm. 

Do Not Under Tighten attaching bolt, a loose sensor can vibrate producing a similar sig¬ 
nal to a knock. 


60 

MS S54 Ignition Management 

















































































































Tools and Equipment 


The DISplus/M oDIC as well as a reputable hand 
held multimeter can be used when testing 
inputs/components. It is best to make the 
checks at the ECM connection, this method 
includes testing the wiring harness. 


The correct Universal Adapter for the MS S54 
application should be used (#90 88 6 121 300). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 


When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located in the Electronics Box in the 
engine compartment), make sure the ignition is 
switched off. 





SKE BREAKOUT BOX SET 
P/N 90 88 6 121 300 


ENGINE CONTROL 
MODULE HARNESS 



1=1 




©©©©© 

©©©©© 

©©©©© 

©©©©© 

©©©©© 

© 


26 
PIN 
BOX 
88 88 6 611 459 




n 

s 


e 

z 

i- 



©©©©© 

©©©s© 

©©© 0 © 

©©©©© 

©©©©© 

© 


26 
PIN 
BOX 
88 88 6 611 459 


When Testing the Secondary Ignition System, 13410063 .eps 
use the High Tension clip of the DISplus. Refer 
to the HELP button for additional (on screen) 
connections. 



Caution! Observe Safety Precautions, High 
Voltage is Present with the Engine Running 

The Spark Plugs should be properly installed 
and torqued using the following Special Tools: 

12 1 200 Torque Adapter (prevents over 
tightening) 

12 1 171 Spark Plug Socket 

NOTE: NEVER USE AIR TOOLS FOR 
REMOVAL OR INSTALLATION! 



13410012.bmp 


61 

MS S54 Ignition Management 













































































































