Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

MS S54 2 

Objectives of the M odule .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components .4 

Power Supply 6 

Principle of Operation.7 

Workshop Hints.8 

Tools and Equipment .9 

Air Management 10 

Principle of Operation.14 

Workshop Hints.21 

Tools and Equipment.23 















MS S54 


Model: E46 M3, E46 M3 Convertible, M roadster, M coupe 
Production Date: 01/2001 
Manufacturer: Siemens 

Pin Connector: 134 Pins - 5 Modular Connectors 

Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

Describe the Power Supply for the Fuel Injectors and Ignition Coils. 
Understand the EDR and Idle Air Actuator Operation. 

Name the Component Location of the Fuel Supply System. 

List the Inputs Required for Fuel Injector Operation. 

Describe Emission Optimized Function. 

Name the Two Types of Emissions the ECM Controls. 

Explain Why Two Sensors are used to Monitor Throttle Movement. 
Describe the Dual Input from the Accelerator Pedal. 

Locate the Diagnostic Socket. 


2 

MS S54 Engine Electronics 




MS S54 


Purpose of the System 


The MS S54 system manages the following functions: 





MS S54 



oil 


Jo 


1 


A A 


f 


A 4 


1 


Emissions: 


Performance Controls: 

• Secondary Air Injection 


• Sport Switch (Throttle Progression - M3 only) 

• Pre and Post Catalyst Oxygen Sensing 


• Dual VANOS 

• Oxygen Sensor Heating 


• Variable Engine Speed Warning 

• Misfire Detection 


• Output of Engine RPM forTachometer 

• Evaporative Purge Control/Leak Testing 


• Cruise Control 

• Malfunction Indicator Light 


• DSC III 

• A/C Compressor Control 

• EWS III 

• ECM Flash Programming 


3 

MS S54 Engine Electronics 




































System Components 

MS S54 Engine Control Module: The MS S54 ECM features a single printed circuit board 
with two 32-bit microprocessors. 


The task of the first processor is to control: 
Engine Load 

Electronic Throttle (EDR) 

Idle actuator 
Ignition 

Knock Control 

The task of the second processor is to control: 

Air/Fuel M ixture 
Emission Control 
M isfire Detection 
Evaporative Leak Detection 



12410000.tiff 



X60001 X60002 

9 - Pin 24 - Pin 


X60003 


52 - Pin 


X60004 
40 - Pin 


X60005 
9- Pin 


The 134 pin MS S54 Engine Control Module is manufactured by Siemens to BMW M spec¬ 
ifications. The ECM is the SKE (standard shell construction) housing and uses 5 modular 
connectors. For testing, use the Universal Adapter Set (break-out box) Special Tool: 


#90 88 6 121 300. 


4 

MS S54 Engine Electronics 


































MS S54ECM 


Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



5 

S S54 Engine Electronics 

























































































































































































































































Power Supply 



Power Supplies: The power supplies (KL15 
and ECM Relay) are fused to the MS S54 ECM. 
The fuses are housed in the Engine Fuse Block 
located in the Electronics Box. 

KL15 - Ignition Switch: When the ignition is 
switched "on” the ECM is informed that the eng- 
gine is about to be started. KLI5 (fused) supplies 
voltage to the Engine Control Module Relay and 
the Fuel Injector Relay. Switching KLI5 "off" 
removes the ECM operating voltage. 



u 


FI 14 
50A 


ECM 

Relay 


Ignition 

Switch 


n 



u 



Engine 

Control 

Module 



ECM Fuses 

61550004 




Engine Control Module Relay: The EC M Relay provides the operating voltage for: 


1 . 

ECM 

6. 

Ignition Coils 

2. 

Fuel Injector Relay 

7. 

DMTL 

3. 

Idle Air Actuator 

8. 

Camshaft Sensor 

4. 

Evaporative Emission Valve 

9. 

Hot Film Air Mass 

5. 

Fuel Pump Relay 

10. 

Oxygen Sensor Heaters 


Ground: M ultiple ground paths are necessary to complete current flow through the ECM. 
The ECM ground pin numbers are: 


Connector X60001 

Connector X60004 

Connector X60005 

Pin 4 - Ground for ECM 

Pin 5 - Ground for ECM 

Pin 5 - Ground for ECM 

Pin 5 - Ground for ECM 

Pin 6 - Ground for ECM 


6 

M S S54 Power Supply 


















































































































Principle of Operation 

Battery Voltage is monitored by the ECM for fluctuations. It will adjust the output func¬ 
tions to compensate fora lower (6v)and higher (14v) voltage value. Forexample, the ECM 
will: 

Modify pulse width duration of fuel injection. 

Modify dwell time of ignition. 


When KL15 is switched "on” the ECM is ready for engine management. The ECM will acti¬ 
vate ground to energize the Engine Control Module Relay. The Engine Control Module 
Relay supplies operating voltage to the ECM and the previously mentioned operating com¬ 
ponents. Five seconds after the ignition is switched on and the voltage at the KL15 input 
is >9 volts, the ECM compares the voltage to the ECM Relay supplied voltage. If the volt¬ 
age difference between the two terminals is greater than 3 volts, a fault code will be set. 


When KL15 is switched "off" the ECM operating voltage is removed. The ECM will main¬ 
tain a ground to the Engine Control Module Relay fora few seconds to maintain ignition coil 
activation (Emission Optimized - introduced in 2000 MY). 


Ground is required to complete the current path through the ECM. The ECM also: 


Internally links a constant ground (1) 
to the engine sensors. 

Switches ground (2) to activate 
components. 




61420002.eps 



7 

MS S54 Power Supply 



Workshop Hints 


Electronics Box - ECM and Fuses 


Power Supply - Testing 

Inadequate power and ground supp 
can result in: 



1. 

No Start 

2. 

Hard Starting (Long Crank Times) 

3. 

Inaccurate Diagnostic Status or 


ECM (Not Found) 

4. 

Intermittent / Constant 


"Malfunction Indicator Light" 

5. 

Intermittent/Constant Driveability 


Problems 




Power supply including fuses should be 
tested for: 


The ignition (KL15) must be switched off 12550006 .bmp 
when removing or installing the ECM 
connector to prevent voltage spikes (arc¬ 
ing) that can damage the Control 
Module! 


1 . 

Visual (1) Blown Fuse 

2. 

Available Voltage (2) 

3. 

Voltage Drop (Dynamic 


Resistance) (2) 

4. 

Resistance of Cables 


and Wires (2) 


The Engine Control Module Relay (locat¬ 
ed in the Electronics Box) should be test¬ 
ed for: 


1 . 

Battery Voltage and Switched 


Ground (1) 

2. 

Resistance (1) 

3. 

Battery Voltage and 


Voltage Drop (2) 



8 

M S S54 Power Supply 


12410005 .eps 












































Tools and Equipment 


Power Supply 

When testing power supply to an ECM, the 
DI5 plus/M oDIC multimeter function as well as a 
reputable hand held multimeter can be used. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the MS S54 
application should be used (#90 88 6 121 300). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 


SKE BREAKOUT BOX SET 
P/N 90 88 6 121 300 


ENGINE CONTROL 
MODULE HARNESS 



1=1 


J= 


©s©©© 

©©©©© 

©©©©© 

©©© 0 © 

©©© 0 © 

© 


26 
PIN 
BOX 
88 88 6 611 459 

13410063 .eps 


134 PIN 
SKE 


©©©©© 

©©©©© 

©©©©© 

©©© 0 © 

©©©©© 

© 


26 
PIN 
BOX 
88 88 6 611 459 


When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located in the Electronics Box in engine 
compartment), make sure the ignition is 
switched off. 



12410002.tiff 



The Engine Control Module Relay should be 
tested using the relay test kit (P/N 88 88 6 613 
010) shown on the right. 

This kit allows testing of relays from a remote 
position. 

Always consult the ETM for proper relay con¬ 
nections. 



12550001 bmp 


9 

MS S54 Power Supply 

























Air Management 



Throttle Valves: The mechanical throttle 
valves regulate the intake airflow and are 
operated by an Electronic Throttle 
Actuator (1 EDR). 

The throttle valves are an assembly of six 
individual throttle housings linked by a 
common shaft. The throttle opening 
depends on engine rpm and load (1000 
kg/h maximum air flow). 

Refer to the Repair Instructions for throt¬ 
tle adjustments. 

Accelerator Pedal Position (PWG): 

The accelerator pedal module (E46 M3) 
provides two variable voltage signals to 
the ECM that represents accelerator 
pedal position and rate of movement. 
The ECM will activate the EDR and Idle 
Air actuator based on the request. 

Dual Hall sensors are integral in the 
accelerator pedal module. The ECM 
compares the two values for plausibility. 

The M roadster and M coupe use a re¬ 
mote mounted PWG. This type uses twin 
potentiometers to produce the same in¬ 
put signals (voltage) as the Hall sensors. 



10 

MS S54 Air Management 
















































































































SIGNAL VOLTAGE WITHIN THE 
GRAY ZONES NOT PLAUSIBLE 


The ECM provides voltage (5v) and ground for 
the Hall sensors. As the accelerator pedal is 
moved from rest to full throttle, the sensors pro¬ 
duce a variable voltage signal. 

Hall sensor l(request) = 0.5 to 4.5 volts 
Hall sensor 2 (plausibility) = 0.5 to 2.0 volts 

If the signals are not plausible, the ECM will use 
the lower of the two signals as the request input. 
The throttle response will be slower and the 
maximum throttle response will be reduced. 



The potentiometer PWG produces the same 
voltage signals to the ECM. 


Electronic Throttle Actuator (EDR):The EDR 

is specifically designed for the 554 engine. This 
allows one actuator to operate all six throttles 
via a common linkage. 

The ECM provides the operating voltage and 
ground to the EDR for opening and closing the 
throttles. The ECM monitors a feedback poten¬ 
tiometer located on the actuator shaft (arrow) for 
actuator position/plausibility (closed 4.5v - full 
open 0.5v). 

There is a return spring fitted to the actuator 
lever end that assists in closing the throttles. 



13410069.tiff 


Throttle Valve Position: A potentiometer is fit 
ted to the end of the throttle shaft (arrow) that 
allows the ECM to monitor throttle position. 

This signal is used by the ECM for a position/ 
plausibility check (closed 0.5v - full open 4.5v). 



11 

MS S54 Air Management 


























Idle Air Actuator: The Idle Air Actuator is a 
two-coil rotary actuator (ZWD5). The 554 fea- 
ures a second air supply system that functions 
independent of the throttle valve control system 
(EDR). This actuator regulates air by-passing the 
throttle valves to control low engine speed. 

The valve is supplied with operating voltage 
from the ECM Relay. The ECM is equipped with 
two final stage transistors which will alternate 
positioning of the actuator. The final stages are 
"pulsed" simultaneously by the ECM which pro¬ 
vides ground paths for the actuator. The duty 
cycle of each circuit is varied to achieve the 
required idle RP M . 

The valve (2) regulates air flow through an exter¬ 
nal air distribution pipe to the individual throttle 
housings. The inducted air is shared between 
the idle actuator and throttle valves depending 
on the engine load. The maximum airflow of the 
idle air actuator (80 kg/h) permits emergency 
operation of the vehicle (limp-home mode). 

Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM): The air vol¬ 
ume input signal is produced electronically by 
the HFM which uses a heated metal film in the 
airflow stream. The HFM housing is integral with 
the air filter upper housing (one-piece). 

The ECM Relay provides the operating voltage. 
As airflows through the HFM, the film is cooled 
changing the resistance which affects current 
flow (voltage drop) through the circuit as the 
resistance changes. The ECM monitors this 
change regulating the amount of fuel injected. 

If these components/circuits are defective, a 
fault code will be set and the "Malfunction Indi¬ 
cator Light” will be illuminated when the OBD II 
criteria is achieved. 


13410071.tiff 



TWO WINDINGS 




12 

MS S54 Air Management 




























Air Temperature Signal: The 

HFM contains an integral air tem¬ 
perature sensor. This is a Negative 
Temperature Coefficient (NTC) 
type sensor. This signal is needed 
by the EC M to correct the air vol¬ 
ume input for changes in the 
intake air temperature (air density) 
affecting the amount of fuel inject¬ 
ed, ignition timing and Secondary 
Air Injection activation. 

The ECM provides the power 
supply to this component. The 
sensor decreases in resistance as 
the temperature rises and vice 
versa. The ECM monitors an 
applied voltage to the sensor that 
will vary as air temperature 
changes the resistance value. 



If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the "Malfunction Indicator Light” will be 
illuminated when the OBD II criteria is achieved. The ECM will operate the engine using the 
Engine Coolant Sensor input as a back up. 


Suction Jet Pump: The ECM regulates the 
Suction J et Pump (1) to provide sufficient vacu¬ 
um for the brake booster under all operating 
conditions. The ECM controls the Suction jet 
Pump Solenoid (2) to allow vacuum flow 
through. 

Additional vacuum compensation is applied to 
the brake booster when the circuit is "deactivat¬ 
ed" (solenoid sprung open). 

Vacuum enhancement is limited to the brake 
booster when the control circuit is "activated" 
(solenoid powered closed). 



13 

MS S54 Air Management 










Principle of Operation 


Airflow into the engine is regulated by the Throttle Valves and/or the Idle Air Actuator. Both 
ofthese air "passages” are necessary for smooth engine operation from idle to full load. On 
the MS S54 system, the Throttle Valve and the Idle Air Actuator are electrically controlled. 
All of the ECM monitoring, processing and output functions are a result of regulated airflow. 



The Accelerator Pedal Position (M3 PWG) is monitored by the ECM for pedal angle 
position and rate of movement. As the accelerator is moved, a rising voltage signal from 
the Hall sensors requests acceleration and at what rate. The ECM will increase the volume 
of fuel injected into the engine, advance the ignition timing and open the Throttle Valves 
and/or Idle Air Actuator. The "full throttle" position indicates maximum acceleration to the 
ECM, and in addition to the functions just mentioned, this will have an effect on the aircon- 
ditioning compressor (covered in Performance Controls). 

As the accelerator pedal is 
released (integral springs), a 
decrease in voltage signals the 
EC M to activate fuel shut off if the 
rpm is above idle speed (coast¬ 
ing). The Throttle Valves will be 
closed and Idle Air Actuator Valve 
will open to maintain idle speed. 


The ECM monitors the engine idle 
speed in addition to the accelera¬ 
tor pedal position and throttle 
position voltage. If the voltage val¬ 
ues have changed (mechanical 
wear of throttle plates or linkage), 
the ECM will adjust the Idle Air 
Actuator to maintain the correct 
idle speed. 

12410001.bmp 


cLft" 

f f \ ' ' ' "- 

_JB 

II II 

iffU 

nm 

■ i 

— | . 8 a 

■ fc 

FI #1 

■ k » 

H 

E 

u 

1 


- 1 - |r| -_ n _ 

U i- - -- 

-1 


■ 

IfH 

r a 

M 

. 

r in 

-33 

■ M 

IBLL 1 

mi 

■ 

F773-* 



'”"1 — 

E t V 


! 



1 1 
n 1 ; 

_i 


14 

MS S54 Air Management 














































































The pedal position sensorconsists of two separate Hall sensors with different voltage char¬ 
acteristics and independent ground and voltage supply. Sensing of the accelerator pedal 
position is redundant. The pedal position sensor is monitored by checking each individual 
sensor channel and comparing the two pedal values. Monitoring is active as soon as the 
sensors receive their voltage supply (KL15). The ECM decides what operating mode the 
pedal position sensor is to assume. 

Mode 0 = Pedal position sensor fully operable 

Mode 1 = Failure of one pedal position sensor (maximum engine speed is limited) 

Mode 2 = Failure of both pedal position sensors (engine speed limited to 1500 rpm) 

The potentiometers/Hall sensors are non-adjustable because the ECM "learns" the throttle 
angle voltage at idle speed. If the throttle housing/accelerator pedal module is replaced, the 

ADAPTATIONS MUST BE CLEARED and ADAPTATION PROCEDURE MUST BE 
PERFORMED using the DIS plus/M oDIC. If this is not performed, the vehicle will not 
start, or run in "fail-safe” mode. 

If this input is defective, a fault code will be stored and the "Malfunction Indicator and/or 
EM L" Light will be illuminated. Limited engine operation will be possible. 


The Idle Air Actuator is controlled by the ECM modulating the ground signals (PWM at 
100 Hz) to the valve. By varying the duty cycle applied to the windings, the valve can be 
progressively opened, or held steady to maintain the idle speed. The ECM controls the Idle 
Air Actuator to supply the necessary air to maintain idle speed. When acceleration is 
requested and the engine load is low (<15%), the actuator will also supply the required air. 

There are additional factors that influence the ECM in regulating idle speed: 

The RPM sensor input allows the ECM to monitor engine speed because of loads that 
cause idle fluctuations due to drag on the engine: power steering, thick oil (frictional 
forces), etc. 

Cold engine temperature (coolant NTC) provides higher idle speed to raise temperature 
sooner. 

Vehicle speed informs ECM when the vehicle is stationary and requires idle maintenance. 

A/C on request from the climate control system (arming the ECM) and compressor 
engage (stabilize idle speed) acknowledgment. 


15 

MS S54 Air Management 



The Electronic Throttle Actuator (EDR) is operated by the EC M for opening and clos¬ 
ing based on the accelerator pedal position, DSC intervention and cruise control functions. 
For exclusive control, the EC M supplies the voltage and ground for operation. The system 
requires approx. 110 milliseconds in order to fully open the closed throttle valves. 

When the EDR is operated, the ECM monitors a feedback potentiometer located on the 
actuator shaft for position/plausibility. As the EDR opens the Throttle Valves to accelerate 
the engine, the position is also monitored by a feedback potentiometer located on the end 
of the throttle shaft on the number 1 throttle housing. These two sensors operate inverse¬ 
ly (voltage values) with throttle actuation. 



The EDR actuator will "open” the throttle valves 
for acceleration when the engine load is >15%. 
There is a transition during acceleration when the 
Idle Air Actuator will also be open providing addi¬ 
tional air for initial acceleration torque. 

With the Idle Actuator System and Electronic 
Throttle Control (EDR), the S54 is equipped with 
two independent air systems. The ECM is there¬ 
fore capable of dividing the air volume of the 
engine between the idle actuator and/or throttle 
valves corresponding to the load status. 



Engine Speed / Load-^ 


00410010.eps 


16 

MS S54 Air Management 














































Pre-drive Check 


The pre-drive check has following tasks: 

Zero point adaptation of the throttle potentiometers. 

Checking freedom of movement of the throttle valves and electronic accelerator pedal 
control circuit. 

Checking the safety cutout and the return springs of the electronic accelerator pedal and 
throttle valves. 


This check is conducted every time KL15 is activated. The full load adaptation stop is 
learned in a new ECM the first time KL15 is recognized. 


The pre-drive check is conducted in 3 phases: 


Phase 1: The throttle valves are closed by the EDR actuator. The position of the throttle 
potetiometer on the EDR is determined. 


Phase 2: The throttle valves are opened 3% by the EDR actuator. The position of the 
throttle potentiometer on the throttle valve shaft is determined. 


Phase 3: The throttle valves are opened by approx. 20%. The EDR actuator is switched 
off. The throttle valves are closed by spring force (a mechanical clicking sound can be 
heard while the throttle valves are closing). 


Post Drive Check 

Post Drive Check: 10 seconds after KL15 is switched "OFF" the EDR actuator is opened 
102% in order to carry out renewed full load adaptation. Adaptation during the post drive 
check is only carried out when the engine is turned off before reaching the operating tem¬ 
perature. 


17 

MS S54 Air Management 



EDR Safety Concept - Emergency Running Programs 

The safety concept of the throttle valve control system achieves a slow transition to an 
emergency running (limp-home) program that can still be managed by the driver. 

A basic differentiation is made between PWG emergency operation with a PWG sensorand 
PWG emergency operation without a PWG sensor. There is a total of 4 emergency opera¬ 
tion (limp-home) program stages. 

In the event of a PWG sensor failing, the system switches to a PWG emergency opera¬ 
tion characteristic curve with lower setpoints. "Engine Emergency Program" is indicated 
to the driver by the EM L warning lamp in the instrument cluster. 


Stage 1 (Emergency Operation with a Throttle Position Sensor) 

The emergency program stage 1 includes limiting the torque and the EDR setpoint. Based 
on the current engine torque, the maximum torque is limited in the emergency operation 
stage. The EDR actuator is limited by reducing the pulse duty factor. The plausibility of the 
throttle position sensors are checked based on the load signal from the hot-film air mass 
meter. The measured air mass must not exceed a defined limit. This limit is above the value 
that can be achieved with the idle air actuator. 


Stage 2 (Emergency Operation via Idle Air Actuator) 

The transition to emergency program stage 2 greatly depends on the type of fault. For 
example, if there is a defect in EDR actuatoroperation, the throttle valves are sprung closed 
without ECM influence. 

In the event of implausible signals from the throttle position Hall sensors 1 and 2, immedi¬ 
ate deactivation of the EDR actuator may be necessary under certain circumstances. 

In cases where feedback of the actual position is still available and the set position can still 
be controlled, the ECM closes the throttle valves. The EDR actuator is then switched off 
and engine speed and road speed limitation activated. 


18 

MS S54 Air Management 


Stage 3 (Emergency Operation with Open Throttle Valves) 

The stage 3 emergency operation program is activated when the actual throttle position 
exceeds the set throttle position for a defined period of time despite power being applied 
to the EDR actuator, the throttle valves cannot be closed. The ECM reduces the amount of 
fuel injected (fade out) and retards the ignition timing to limit engine torque. If it is neces¬ 
sary to further reduce the torque, individual fuel injectors are deactivated one cylinder at the 
time. 


Stage 4 (Emergency Operation with Internal ECM Fault) 

The stage 4 emergency operation program is always activated when an internal ECM fault 
is detected. In this case, the characteristics of the throttle valve control (EDR) are not pre¬ 
dictable, therefore the ECM reduces the amount of fuel injected (fade out) and retards the 
ignition timing to limit engine torque. If it is necessary to further reduce the torque, individ¬ 
ual fuel injectors are deactivated one cylinder at the time. 


Emergency Operation Functions 

Engine torque limitation In the emergency programs stage 1 - 4 is restricted to a value 
specified by the emergency operation (limp-home) program. 


Stage 

Engine Speed RPM 

Road Speed km/h 

Torque Nm 

1 

7600 rpm 

240 km/h 

320 Nm 

2 

4000 rpm 

80 Km/H 

250 Nm 

3 

2750 rpm 

50 km/h 

200 Nm 

4 

2750 rpm 

50 km/h 

200 Nm 


00410009.eps 

In the relevant emergency programs, the MS S54 limits the engine characteristics to the 
values indicated in the table. In emergency programs 3 and 4, in addition to the engine 
emergency program being indicated in the instrument cluster (EML), all warning elements 
in Hie tachometer are activated. 


19 

MS S54 Air Management 










The Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM) varies voltage monitored by the EC M representing 
the measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by the EC M to determine the 
amount of fuel to be injected. 


The heated surface of the hot-film in the intake air stream is regulated by the ECM to a con¬ 
stant temperature of 180 2 above ambient air temperature. The incoming air cools the film 
and the ECM monitors the changing resistance which affects current flow through the cir¬ 
cuit. The hot-film does not require a "clean burn”, it is self cleaning due to the high operat¬ 
ing temperature for normal operation. 


If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the "Malfunction Indicator Light" will illu¬ 
minate when the OBD II criteria is achieved. The ECM will maintain engine operation based 
on the Throttle Position Sensors and Crankshaft Position/Engine Speed Sensor. 


The Air Temperature signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The vary¬ 
ing voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found in 
cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the amount 
of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on oxygen sensing ratio. 


The ignition timimg is also affected by air temperature. If the intake air is hot the ECM 
retards the base igniton timing to reduce the risk of detonation. If the intake air is cooler, 
the base ignition timing will be advanced. The ECM uses this input as a determining factor 
for Secondary Air Injection activation (covered in the Emissions section). 


If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the "Malfunction Indicator Light" will illu¬ 
minate when the OBD II criteria is achieved. The ECM will maintain engine operation based 
on the HFM and Engine Coolant Temperature sensor. 


The Suction J et Pump is regulated bythe ECM to provide sufficient vacuum forthe brake 
booster under all operating conditions. The ECM controls the Suction J et Pump Solenoid 
to allow vacuum flow through. 


The additional vacuum compensation is activated bythe ECM when the idle air actuator is 
regulated for: 


A/C compressor "on" 

Vehicle in gear and the clutch is released (driving under load) 

Engine in warm-up phase <70 Q C 

Additional vacuum compensation is applied to the brake boosterwhen the circuit is "deac¬ 
tivated" (Solenoid sprung open). Vacuum enhancement is limited to the brake booster 
when the control circuit is "activated" (Solenoid powered closed). 


20 

MS S54 Air Management 


Workshop Hints 

Air Management 


Unmetered air leaks can be misleading when diagnosing faults causing "Malfunction 
Indicator Light"/driveability complaints. Refer to S.l. # 11 03 92 (3500) for testing intake 
vacuum leaks. 


Crankcase Ventilation System 

A fault in this system can often "mislead" diagnosis. This type of fault can produce 


ixture/misfire defect codes 


Whistling noises 


Performance/driveability complaints 


Please refer to the following Service Information Bulletins for details on the Crankcase 
Ventilation System: 


Crankcase Ventilation System Check S.l. #11 05 98 


Throttle Position Sensors - Testing 


The Throttle Position Sensors (potetiometers) can be tested with the following methods: 


DISplus Status Page (approx. 0.5v to 
4.5v) 

DISplus Oscilloscope - Select from the 
Preset Measurements which requires 
taking the measurement with the ECM 
and Universal Adapter connected to 
the circuit (as shown on the right). 

Resistance check of the entire circuit, 
using the Universal Adapter with the 
ECM disconnected. 




13410008.eps 


21 

MS S54 Air Management 









































































































Idle Air Actuator - Testing 

The Idle Air Actuator and idle air cir¬ 
cuit (passage ways) should be 
checked for physical obstructions. 

The resistance of the valve winding 
should be checked. 

The ECM output and Idle Speed 
Control Valve operation can be tested 
by "Component Activation" on the 
DIS plus/M oDIC. 

The Pulse Width Modulated ground 
output from the ECM can be tested 
using the DIS plus/M oDIC Oscilloscope. 

Consult Technical Data for specified 
idle speed. 




22 

MS S54 Air Management 


































































































Tools and Equipment 


The DISplus/M oDIC as well as a reputable hand 
held multimeter can be used when testing 
inputs/components. 



It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 




The correct Universal Adapter for the MS S54 
application should be used (#90 88 6 121 300). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 


When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located in the Electronics Box in the 
engine compartment), make sure the ignition is 
switched off. 


SKE BREAKOUT BOX SET 




The Slack Tube M anometer Test Tool (#99 00 0 
001 410) should be used to troubleshoot 
crankcase ventilation valves. 



12410010.bmp 


23 

MS S54 Air Management 










































































































