Table of Contents 


IBOC Update 


Subject 


Page 


Introduction . .3 

HD Radio and RTTI.3 

Components.4 

Antenna Splitter.4 

Principles of Operation . 5 


Initial Print Date: 04/07 


Revision Date: 








IBOC Update 

Model: E6x,E70, E9x 

Production: From 3/2007 Production (4/2007 E70) 





After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the operation of the HD Radio multicasting feature 

• Identify the components utilized in a vehicle with RTTI and HD Radio 


2 

IBOC Update 




Introduction 


In August 2005, BMW announced the first OEM availability of HD Radio technology in its 
2006 7 Series models. BMW then followed up in November 2005 by extending the HD 
Radio option to drivers of its 2006 6 Series vehicles. This pastj une, the company 
announced that HD Radio would be offered in its 2007 5 Series models. 

BMW continues to expand its pioneering position in providing high-quality audio sys¬ 
tems by offering a factory-installed digital HD Radio receiverwith FM multicasting capa¬ 
bility. HD Radio technology is one of the most significant advances in radio broadcasting 
history, providing listeners with enhanced digital audio quality and clear, noise-free 
reception, as well as multicasting and on-screen text information. The HD Radio multi¬ 
casting feature allows FM stations to broadcast multiple channels of digital programming 
simultaneously on a single frequency. 

Of the more than 1,000 stations across the country broadcasting with HD Radio technol¬ 
ogy, more than 500 FM stations are offering a second (HD2) and, in many cases, a third 
(HD3) multicast channel. 

For example, WAMU in Washington, DC, offers three channels: 88.5-1, a simulcast of its 
news/talk analog channel; 88.5-2, a simulcast of an innovative Baltimore music station 
not available in DC; and 88.5-3, bluegrass music. 

These channels are free but can only be found on HD Radio receivers. As with all HD 
Radio programming, there are no fees or additional costs associated with multicast 
channels. 

The number of HD Radio stations is growing daily and expected to exceed 3,000 within 
the next few years. A current list of HD Radio stations and multicast stations can be 
found at: www.hdradio.com. 

HD Radio and RTTI 

Until 3/2007 it was not possible to order a vehicle equipped with both RTTI and HD 
Radio together. 

This was due to the fact that only one antenna connection was available. It was used for 
either of the two options. 

In March 2007 production vehicles, an antenna splitter will become available that allows 
the antenna connection to be split. In this manner, both the HD Radio control unit and 
the CCC will have the FM signal that comes from the antenna amplifier diversity unit. 


3 

IBOC Update 




Components 


Antenna Splitter 

The antenna splitter is necessary in order to split the FM 
line output from the antenna amplifier/diversity unit. 



It is mounted to the rear of the HD Radio control unit and is 
comprised ofthe electronics housing, and three connectors. 



4 

IBOC Update 











Principles of Operation 


In order to utilize the multicasting option of the HD Radio, the HD Radio option must be 
set to on. This can be selected/performed from the settings menu under the sub-menu 
audio settings. 

The multicasting option uses the the HD Radio technology to its fullest potential. A radio 
station can broadcast more than one radio program on the same frequency digitally while 
still broadcasting its primary radio station in analog format. 


In orderforthe multicasting option to be selected, the HD Radio control unit has to be 
in the "digital” mode at the moment. In other words, the CID has to confirm that the HD 
Radio digital signal is being used at the moment. If the digital mode is noton/active, 
only the primary analog signal can be heard. 


The best way to know if the radio is in the 
"digital” mode is to observe the HD 
icon/symbol in the CID. 


WABC - HD1 H3) 


In the illustration above, we can see that the radio is in the "digital" mode and that it is in 
WKTU-HD1. in orderto select the WKTU-HD2, the forward seek button on the face 
panel of the head unit should be selected. 


4 m— FM > 

4 Ma.ni.ifil * 

Info: WABC - HD2 Country 

Gcc-rtie Strait 
n JUST COMES MATJRAL 


WABC HD2 11:45 aril 


4 L — 111 FM P ip 



4 

Man .jflI * 

Infer: WABC - H 




Beethoven 

Symphony 1 No. 2 in D 2r,d myt, 


WABC HD3 H3) 11:45 4m 


4 FM * 

P 

4 Manual P 

Info WABC-HD1 Pop Rocfe 

Ng Ombi 


IT’S M Y LIFE 


WABC HD 1 

11:44 am 


Note: Multicasting can only operate in the digital mode. 

If the HD Radio control unit switches over to the analog mode (usually 
due to poor reception), the unitwill revert back to the primary analog 
signal that is broadcast by the radio station (i.e HD1 will be played). 
Fora comprehensive listing of radio stations that are transmitting 
using multicasting technology please referto 
www.ibiquitydigital.com. 


5 

IBOC Update 











