Table of Contents 

E60/E61 Model Update 

Subject Page 

Introduction .5 

Systems Overview .6 

New Control Units .6 

Lane Departure Warning (TLC) .6 

GearSelector(GWS) .6 

Longitudinal Dynamics Management (LDM).6 

Car Access System (CAS) .7 

New Components .7 

Long Range Radar/Short Range Radar .7 

Rain/Light Solar Sensor.7 

New Bus Systems.7 

SensorCAN .7 

Diagnostics on CAN D-CAN.7 

Principle of Operation .8 

Car Access System 3 .8 

Rain/Light Solar Sensor .9 

Electrochramie Interior M irror.9 

Modified Center Console Switch Cluster.12 

Pop-up Menu .16 

CenterConsole Switch Cluster Assembly .17 

Electrical System.17 

Performance Electronics .17 

Steering Column Adjustment.17 

RollerSunblind E60 .18 

Buttons in the CenterConsole Switch Cluster.18 

Trunk Push Button .18 

Components.19 

Exterior Lighting.19 

Welcome Light .20 

Daytime Driving Lights.21 

Halogen Headlight.21 

Bi-Xenon Headlights/Adaptive Headlights.21 

Cornering Lights .22 


Initial Print Date: 04/07 


Revision Date: 




































Subject Page 

Activation Conditions.22 

Deactivation Conditions .23 

Rear Light Cluster.24 

Automatic Driving Lights Control.26 

Service Information.27 

Diagnostics Connection D-CAN.27 

Center Console Switch Cluster .27 













E60/E61 Model Update 


Model: E60, E61 

Production: From March 2007 Production 

■Biiermis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the changes made to the E60 and E61 as of March 2007 productio 


4 

E60/E61 Model Update 



Introduction 


At the change of model year in M arch 2007, there will be new systems in the E60 
and E61. 

These systems include, for example, the lane departure warning and active cruise 
control with stop & go function. 

With the lane departure warning, BMW is providing a new assistance system. 

The lane departure warning warns the driverto counter-steer in the event of unintention¬ 
al lane changing. It does this by generating a vibration in the steering wheel. The system 
is designed for use on B-roads, A-roads and highways. 

Active cruise control with stop & go function makes iteasierto drive in heavy traffic. 

The system supports repeated pulling away and braking in slow traffic queues. 

Other model year actions include: 

• Car Access System with electronic immobilized 

• Rain/light solar sensor with LIN bus 

• Two-part center console switch cluster and pop-up menus 
for seat auxiliary functions 

• Welcome light 

• Daytime driving light with corona rings 

• Adaptive headlights with turn-off light 

• Direction indicator based on light emitting diodes LED and 
additional side-marker lamps at rear as standard equipment 

• Diagnostics on CAN on body gateway module. 


5 

E60/E61 Model Update 





Systems Overview 


Bus Diagram 

RLSS 




CAS 




TLC 


LfF dme 


srr ... : 

H ; ; 

LRR c LOM 


D-CAN 


S-CAN r 


EGS 


GWS 


New control units are integrated in the bus system of the E60/E61.The modifications in 
the bus system are listed below in brief. 

New Control Units 

Lane Departure Warning (TLC) 

The lane departure warning generates a warning when the driver accidentally changes 
lane. The warning should prompt the driverto counter-steer. 

GearSelector (GWS) 

The control unit was first used with the E70 and is now also integrated in the E60/E61. 

Longitudinal Dynamics Management (LDM) 

LDM is used, amongst otherthings, forthe "Active cruise control stop & go function" 
driver assistance system. 


6 

E60/E61 Model Update 



















Car Access System (CAS) 

The model year actions provide forthe installation of the Car Access System 3 in the 
E60/E61. 

The Car Access System 3 was first installed on the E92 and includes electronic immobi¬ 
lizers EWS 3 and EWS 4. Depending on the engine variant, EWS 3 orEWS 4 is operated 
by the Car Access System 3. 

With EWS 4, the engine electronics are connected to the Car Access System 3 by a 
redundant data connection.The data connection is redundantto the PT-CAN and uses 
the K bus protocol. 

New Components 

Long Range Radar/Short Range Radar 

Both components are forthe newly installed active cruise control with stop & go function. 

Center console switch cluster E60/E61 The center console switch cluster, which previ¬ 
ously consisted of one switch bar, has been split into two switch blocks. One switch 
block is forthe driver's side, and the other is forthe front-passenger side. Between the 
switch blocks, there is an ashtray insert. 

Rain/Light Solar Sensor 

The installation of the rain/light solar sensor or rain/light sensor depends on the options. 
Thus, for example, only the rain/light sensor is fitted with thej apan specifications. 

For vehicles with the head-up display option, it is not possible to install the rain/light solar 
sensor. 

The above-mentioned options forthe sensors result in the different connections via the 
LIN bus orK-CAN. 

New Bus Systems 

SensorCAN 

The sensorCAN S-CAN is a new bus system.The bus system is based on the PT-CAN. 
Therefore, the S-CAN works at the same speed as the PT-CAN and uses the PT-CAN 
protocol. 

Diagnostics on CAN D-CAN 

The body gateway module KGM now has a connection forthe Diagnostics on CAN 
D-CAN.The connection of a D-CAN depends on the engine variant. 


7 

E60/E61 Model Update 



Principle of Operation 

Car Access System 3 

The Car Access System 3 CAS 3 includes the functions of Car Access System 2. A 
more detailed description of the Car Access System 3 is given in the following Product 
Information: 

• "Electrical/Electronic Systems E92" 

• "Car Access System E70". 

Electronic immobilized EWS 4 can be used with Car Access System 3.The use ofthe 
electronic immobilizer 4 depends on the engine control system fitted. The following 
table specifies the engine variants and their relationship to the electronic immobilizer. 

The Car Access System 3 CAS 3 includes the functions of Car Access System 2. A 
more detailed description ofthe Car Access System 3 is given in the following Product 
Information: 


• "Electrical/Electronic Systems E92" 

• "Car Access System E70". 


Vehicle 

Production 
Date (launch) 

Engine 

Engine Management 

EWS 3 

EWS 4 

E 60/E 61 

03/07 

N52B30UO/N52B3000 

N52B3001/N52B30M1 

MSV80 


X 

E 60/E 61 

03/07 

N53B25U1/N52B2501 

MSD80 


X 

E 60/E 61 

03/07 

N54B30U0 

MSD80 


X 

E 60/E 61 

03/07 

N53B30U0/N53B30O0 

MSD80 


X 

E 60/E 61 

03/7 

N62B40O1/N62B48O1 

ME9.2.3 

X 



Electronic immobilized EWS 4 can be used with Car Access System 3.The use ofthe 
electronic immobilizer 4 depends on the engine control system fitted. The following 
table specifies the engine variants and their relationship to the electronic immobilizer. 


8 

E60/E61 Model Update 





Rain/Light Solar Sensor 

From 03/07 the E60/E61 will befitted with the rain/light solar sensor. In addition, the LIN 
bus will be installed between the rain/light solar sensor and the light module. 

The rain/light solar sensor is taken from the E70 and is adapted to the E60/E61.The light 
module requests the values from the rain/light solar sensor every 20 ms. In this way, it 
receives the request to activate or deactivate the driving light, for example. 

Requests received by the light module from the solar sensor or rain sensor, are converted 
into K-CAN format. The light module sends the sensor signals via the K-CAN. 

In this way, the body basic module receives the requests for automatic wiping and the air 
conditioning system receives requests for air distribution in the vehicle. 

The rain/light solar sensor cannot be fitted on vehicles with the head-up display option. 

Therefore, in this option, the rain/light sensor used to date is fitted. The rain/light sensor is 
connected via the K-CAN. 

Both specifications are illustrated in the system circuit diagram on the next page. 

Electrochromic Interior Mirror 

The electrochromic interior mirror sends the request for lighting/dimming the outside mir¬ 
ror directly to the body basic module. The body basic module prompts lighting/dimming 
of the outside mirror. 

The electrochromic interior mirror cannot be dimmed if reverse gear is engaged. 
Therefore, the light module sends the "RFSI" signal directly to the electrochromic interior 
mirror. This prevents the electrochromic interior mirror from dimming when reverse gear is 
engaged. This enables an optimal view to the rear via the interior mirror orthe outside 
mirror. 


9 

E60/E61 Model Update 



System Circuit Diagram 



10 

E60/E61 Model Update 



















































































Index 

Explanation 

1 

Universal garage-dooropenerUGDO 

2 

Electrochromic interior mirror 

3 

High beam assistant FLA 

4 

Anti-theft alarm system LED 

5 

Anti-theft alarm system LED 

6 

Remote control receiver FBD 

7 

Rain/light sensor RLS 

8 

Rain/light solar sensor RLSS 

9 

M ist sensor 

10 

Integrated heating-air conditioning control IHKA 

11 

Luggage compartment electrical distribution box 

12 

Body gateway module KGM 

13 

Light module LM 

14 

High beam assistant image sensor 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

LIN-bus 

Local Interconnect Network bus 

LVDS 

Low Voltage Differential Signalling 

KL 15 

Terminal 15 

KL 30 

Terminal 30 

KL 30g 

Terminal 30 switched 

FBD 

Remote control service 

FBD_OUT 

Remote control service OUT 

FBD_ON 

Remote control service ON 

+EC 

+ Electrochromic interior mirror 

-EC 

- Electrochromic interior mirror 

RFSI 

Reversing light signal 


11 

E60/E61 Model Update 























































Modified Center Console Switch Cluster 


The center console switch cluster SZM will be 
replaced by a two-part SZM from 03/07. This not 
only changes the visual aspect, but also the func¬ 
tionality of the buttons. 

The SZM is available in single, double ortriple 
row versions. The version depends on the number 
of buttons required. 

In principle, the buttons for Dynamic Traction 
Control (DTC) or Park Distance Control (PDC) 
are located in the top row. 



Previous and new centerconsole switch 


If, for example, Park Distance Control was not ordered, the button for unlocking the lug¬ 
gage area ortailgate will be located here instead. 



12 

E60/E61 Model Update 











13 

E60/E61 Model Update 



System Circuit Diagram 



14 

E60/E61 Model Update 


K13O0< 





































































As forthe triple-row version, it is only possible to display the function via the LED in the 
button. 

This means that pressing the button (2 or 3) calls up the associated pop-up menu in the 
Central Information Display. 

The individual activation stages of the specific function are shown in the Central 
Information Display. 


15 

E60/E61 Model Update 



















































Pop-up Menu 

Depending on the option, pop-up menus can be displayed in the Central Information 
Display. The pop-up menus are dependent on the following auxiliary seat functions: 


• Seat heating in conjunction with seat climate 

• Seat heating in conjunction with active seat 

• Seat heating in conjunction with seat climate and active seat 

• Seat heating in conjunction with active seat back width adjustment 

• Seat heating in conjunction with seat climate and active seat back width adjustment 


Example of "Pop-up" Menu 


« J Heizvertelluog Sit 2 * 


, fTjf 

▼ 

i 

GONG96 T VI* 

14:46 

« J SittkJima Beifahrer * 

__ J 

i 

GOWG96 T TMC 


14:46 

Aktrvx? Lehnenbrctfcnvcrstciung 


Beifahrer 


Kcmfott * 


GONG96.3 T TMC 

10:11 


Seat Function 


Seat Heating 


Seat Climate 


Active seat back width adjustment 


Pressing the button for an auxiliary seat function causes this function to be activated. 

A pop-up menu appears in the Central Information Display. When the function is 
switched on, the highest setting forthe activated function is shown first. By pressing the 
button again, you can shift through until the function is switched off or reactivated again. 


The pop-up menu forthe auxiliary seat functions fades to show Check Control messages 
forthe time during which the Check Control messages are present. 


It is still possible to shift through the seat function. The only indicator in this situation is 
the activation display via the LED on the button. 


Note: If seat functions were stored before leaving the vehicle, they will still be 
active the nexttime the vehicle is started. 


16 

E60/E61 Model Update 












CenterConsole Switch Cluster Assembly 

The center console switch cluster consists of an 
electrical system, performance electronics and the 
driver's and front-passenger side button blocks. 

The performance electronics are connected via a 
20-pin connector. The electrical system has a 32- 
pin connection. The two electrical systems com¬ 
municate with each othervia a 12-pin ribbon 
cable. 

The electrical system is integrated in a 2/3 hous¬ 
ing and the performance electronics are integrated 
in a 1/3 housing (module). Both modules are 
installed in the glove box device holder. 

The electrical system, performance electronics 
and buttons are connected to terminal 30g. 



Basic Assembly of the Steering 
Column Switch C luster 


Electrical System 

The LIN bus of the SZM-electrical system only connects the SZM-button blocks. 

The electrical system is responsible for analyzing the information from the following 
bus systems: 

• Body-CAN K-CAN 

• Seat bus S bus based on K bus protocol 

• Local Interconnect Network bus LIN bus, only for internal 
connection in the center console switch cluster. 


Performance Electronics 

The performance electronics control the motors for 
steering-column adjustment and forthe roller sunblind. 

Steering Column Adjustment 

The electrical system monitors the Hall sensors forthe electric steering-column adjust¬ 
ment. Thus, the position of the steering column can be used forthe steering column 
memory function, based on the Hall sensor pulses. 

The request to activate the motors for steering column adjustment is received by the 
electrical system via the K-CAN. The electrical system forwards the request to the perfor¬ 
mance electronics, which activates the motors. 

Note: The buttons forthe steering-column adjustment are analyzed by the 
steering column switch cluster. The steering column switch cluster 
sends the request via the PT-CAN.The body-gateway-module converts 
the signal to the K-CAN. 


17 

E60/E61 Model Update 






















RollerSunblind E60 

The request to activate the roller sunblind is received via the K-CAN.The electrical 
system analysis the request and the performance electronics activate the motor. 

Note: The button forthe roller sunblind is analyzed by the driver's switch block. 
The driver's switch block is connected to the body gateway module via 
the LIN bus. The body gateway module requests the status of the button 
cyclically from the driver's switch block. 

In this way, the body-gateway-module receives the requestto activate 
the rollersunblind and converts this to the K-CAN. 

Buttons in the Center Console Switch Cluster 

The buttons in the center console switch cluster are connected to the electrical system 
via the LIN bus. The electrical system sends the status of the buttons via the K-CAN. 

In this way, the Park Distance Control can be activated or deactivated by pressing the 
PDC button, for example. 

Trunk Push Button 

For vehicles without optional equipment, the boot-lid push button is located on the A-pil- 
larand is redundant in the center console switch cluster. 


18 

E60/E61 Model Update 



Components 

Exterior Lighting 

In 03/07, the exterior lighting of the E60/E61 will have the following function additions: 

• Welcome light 

• Daytime driving light with corona rings (only with bi-xenon lights) 

• Turn-off light (only with bi-xenon lights) 

• Side-marker light at rear, as standard 

• High beam assistant option 5AC can be deactivated via the light settings menu 

Forthese additions, not only new headlights or rear lights are required, but also a new 
light module.The light module contains the abovementioned functions and the connec¬ 
tion options. The pin assignment is to be taken from the BMW diagnostics system. 

The external dimensions of the headlights and rear lights remain the same. The modifi¬ 
cations are within the headlight ortail light, such as corona ring forthe daytime driving 
light or direction indicator based on light emitting diodes LED in the rear light. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Parking light/daytime driving light 

2 

Turn-off light 

3 

Parking light/daytime driving light 

4 

Low-beam headlights/high-beam headlights 

5 

Direction indicator 

6 

Side-marker light 


19 

E60/E61 Model Update 

















Welcome Light 

The welcome light is activated for around 20 seconds when the 
vehicle is unlocked. In addition to the interior lighting, the following 
lights are also activated for the welcome light: 

• Parking light, corona rings in parking light function 

• Tail light bars, also the dimmed rearfog lights on the E60 

• License plate light 

• Courtesy lights 

• Side-marker light 

• Illumination of the instrument cluster as indicator lamp 


oo 


Note: Forthe welcome light function, the lightswitch must be in the "low-beam 
headlights" or "automatic driving lights control" position. 


The welcome light is activated as factory default. With the controller, the welcome light 
can be deactivated via the Central Information Display. 


To do this you must select menu item: 

"Settings" >"Vehicle/Tires" >"Lightsettings" 
> "Welcome light" 

Confirm the desired setting by pressing the con¬ 
troller. 


i Lighting ► i) 

Pathway lighting 40 s 

Sport 

Welcome light 

WABC-HD1 H§) 11:44 am 


20 

E60/E61 Model Update 


106-2923 





Daytime Driving Lights 

The daytime driving light is available with halogen headlights or bi-xenon headlights as 
well as with adaptive headlights. 

Halogen Headlight 

With halogen headlights, the light switch must be in the "automatic driving lights control" 
position. With the daytime driving light, the driving light is used. 


Bi-Xenon Headlights/Adaptive Headlights 

The daytime driving light with corona rings is only available in conjunc¬ 
tion with the bi-xenon headlights and adaptive headlights options. In 
the daytime driving light function, the corona rings of the headlights 
and the tail light bars of the rear lights are activated. 

The principle for generating the daytime driving light with corona rings is taken from the 
E92.The light in the inside chamber of the main headlight is fed into the corona rings 
through optical fibercables. Only one bulb per headlight is used forfeeding light to the 
corona rings. 

Forthe daytime driving light function, the light switch must be in the "light OFF" or "auto¬ 
matic driving lights control" position. The switch position is important, as the daytime dri¬ 
ving light cannot be activated by the light module otherwise. 

The corona rings are switched on from terminal 15 ON, with the corresponding light 
switch position. The bulb is actuated in pulse width modulation. Pulse width modulation 
makes it possible to realize the daytime driving light and parking light functions. 


OCJ 


In the event of a defect in the daytime driving light or parking light, the following informa¬ 
tion is displayed or issued: 


Check Control 
Message 

Meaning 

Messages in the Central Information Display 


* 

1 


Left parking light/daytime 
driving light failed. 

Left parking light/daytime driving light. 

Left parking light/daytime driving lightfailed. 

Have checked by nearest BMW Service. 


1 


Right parking light/daytime 
driving light failed. 

Right parking light/daytime driving light. 

Right parking light/daytime driving lightfailed. 

Have checked by nearest BMW Service. 


The daytime driving light function can be activated or deactivated via the Central 
Information Display using the controller. 


To do this, you must select the menu option "Settings" > "Vehicle/Tires" > "Light set¬ 
tings" > "Daytime driving light". See also the Owner's Handbook. 


Note: The daytime driving light is subjectto statutory and country-specific 
regulations. These statutory and country-specific regulations must be 
complied with. 


21 

E60/E61 Model Update 










Cornering Lights 

The cornering lights is integrated with the xenon light option. With the turn-off light, the 
areas in front of and beside the vehicle can be illuminated, in addition to the adaptive 
headlights. 

The cornering lights has been integrated in the place of the former auxiliary high-beam 
light in the headlight. 

A special reflector geometry and positioning of the H 3-bulb makes it possible forthe light 
to be beamed to the side. 

The function of the turn-off light is taken from the E92.The function ofthe H 3-bulb is 
monitored by the light module. 


In the event of a defect in the turn-off light, the following information is displayed or 
issued: 


Check Control 
Message 

Meaning 

Messages in the C entral Information Display 


1 


Left cornering lights failed. 

Left cornering lights light. 

Left cornering lights failed. 

Have checked by nearest BMW Service. 


* 

1 


Right cornering lights failed. 

Right cornering lights. 

Right cornering lights failed. 

Have checked by nearest BMW Service. 


To activate the cornering lights, the adaptive headlights must first be switched on via the 
automatic driving lights control. 


The cornering lights is not activated if the hazard warning lights or one-touch direction 
indicatorfunction are in operation. 

The cornering lights is not activated when the high-beam headlights or headlight flasher 
are activated. If the high-beam headlights or headlight flasher is switched off and the 
switch-on conditions are fulfilled, the cornering lights are activated. 

Activation Conditions 

The activation conditions forforwards travel are: 

• 0 mph 

• Steering angle approximately 40 - 70° 

• Engine Running 

The activation conditions for reverse travel are: 

• Reverse gear selected 

• Turn-off light on both sides 


22 

E60/E61 Model Update 










Deactivation Conditions 

The turn-off light is switched off if none of the switch-on conditions is met: 

• Adaptive headlights OFF and 

- Direction indicator OFF or 

- Steering angle reversed or 

- Reverse gear OFF. 

In vehicles with Europe specifications, the turn-off light is also switched off when the 
high-beam headlights or headlight flasher are activated. 

In addition, the turn-off light is switched off if one of the following parameters applies: 

• Road speed 

• Vehicle stationary 

• Time out, time ortemperature-related limitation 

• Dynamism, vehicle drifting 

The conditions are given in the following table: 


Other Switch-off Conditions 

Road Speed 

Switch-on Condition 

Remark 

70 km/h 

Steering Column 

When the vehicle is in motion 

Stationary 

Switch-on Condition 

Remark 

0 mph 

Steering angle 

5° - 10° reduced according to switch-on condition 

Time out 

Condition 

Remark 

>4 seconds 

F RAZ on, v= < 2 km/h steering angle 0° 

Turning at traffic lights 

Temperature 

Model 

Steering movement and yaw 
rat have opposite directions 

Headlight protection 

Dynamism 

Condition 

Remark 

Drifting 

Steering movement and yaw 
rate have opposite directions 

Adaptive headlights switch to 
straight-ahead position 


23 

E60/E61 Model Update 



Rear Light Cluster 

A new feature here is the side-marker light integrated in the rear light cluster as standard 
on vehicles with Europe specifications. 

The direction indicators and the side-marker lights are shown in LEDs (light emitting 
diodes). 

Forthe additional side-marker light, four LEDs are used on the E60 and two LEDs 
on the E61. 

Forthe brake light (BL), the outer and inner 
chamber of the rear light cluster is used. Forthe 
brake-force display (BFD) function, the rearfog 
light NSL chamber is used. If the rearfog light is 
switched on, the brake-force display is not 
shown. The following table shows which lights 
are activated, according to the function. 


Function 

Activated Lights 

BL Normal 

BKl +BL2 

BL +BFD 

BL1 +BL2 + BFD 

BL +NSL 

BL1+ NSL 


Note: When the rearfog light is ON, the innerchamberofthe rear lights cluster 
is not used as the brake light (BL2). This is because a legally required 
distance of 100 mm is prescribed between the light surfaces of the brake 
light and the rearfog light. 


1 1 2 ) 3 ) 



>100 mm 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Exteriorchamberfor brake light - BL1 

2 

Interior chamber for brake light - BL2 

3 

Rearfog light NSL/brake-force display - BFD 

>100 mm 

Legally required distance 
between light surfaces of BL/NSL 
must be greater than 100 mm 


24 

E60/E61 Model Update 
























Rear Light E60 RearLightE61 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Direction indicator (basic LED) 

2 

Side-marker light (LED) 

3 

Tail light bars (basic LED) 

4 

Brake light 1 

5 

Brake light 2 

6 

Reflector 

7 

Brake-force display 

8 

Reversing light 

9 

Tail light bars (basic LED) 


25 

E60/E61 Model Update 
















Automatic Driving Lights Control 

With the model year actions, the E60 and E61 also now have a rain/light solar sensor. 

The rain/light solar sensor is connected to the light module via the LIN bus. 

The requests to switch the driving light on or off are received by the light module via the 
LIN bus.The light module requests the status ofthe rain/light solar sensor cyclically from 
the LIN bus. 

The rain/light solar sensor responds to the requests from the light module. 

The light module converts the signals from the rain/light solar sensorto the K-CAN and 
vice versa. Thus, the light module is the gateway between the LIN bus and the K-CAN 

Note: In vehicles with the head-up display, lane departure warning the 

previous rain/light sensor is used. The rain/light sensor is connected 
via the K-CAN. 


26 

E60/E61 Model Update 



Service Information 


Diagnostics Connection D-CAN 


A new communication interface will be used for diagnostics in future. 


D-CAN (Diagnostics on Controller Area Network) will replace the previous diagnostics 
interface world-wide. In this way, BMW has met the requirements of standard ISO 15765 
(Diagnostics on CAN with KWP 2000 [Keyword Protocol 2000] orUDS [Unified 
Diagnostic Service]). 

The D-CAN data-signalling rate is 500 kbit/s. 

The background forthe change-over is a new legal regulation in the USA, according to 
which all vehicles from model year2008 must be fitted with a D-CAN.The transition 
phase began in September2006. 


The change-overto D-CAN in all ranges and model variants is planned for 3/2007 and 
9/2007, depending on the type of engine installed. 



□ □□□□□□□ 

16 9 

□ □□□□□□□ 


Pin Assignments E60/E61 

An OBD-tool or BMW diagnostics system is automatically detected and distinguished 
during data output.The second TXD interface (pin 8) is not necessary. 

Center Console Switch Cluster 

The center console switch cluster is now split into two. For servicing, it must be noted 
that the performance electronics and the electrical system are integrated in a single 
module. Both modules are installed in the glove box device holder. 


27 

E60/E61 Model Update 


















