Table of Contents 
Battery Basics 

Subject Page 

Battery.4 

Purpose of the Automotive Battery .4 

Battery Construction.4 

Battery Case .5 

The Grids .5 

The Plates .5 

The Separators .5 

Elements.6 

Electrolyte.6 

The Lead Terminals .6 

How the Battery Works.7 

Discharging .7 

Charging.8 

Battery Types .9 

Lead-Acid Battery.9 

Lead/Calcium Battery.9 

Hybrid Battery.9 

Absorbent Glass Mat Battery.9 

Common Battery Terms.10 

Battery Testing.12 

Inspection.12 

Removal of Surface Charge .12 

State-of-Charge Test.12 

Load Test.13 

Load Test Conditions.13 

Battery Maintenance.14 

Electrolyte Level .14 

Battery Cable Connections.14 

Battery Charging.14 

Sulfated Batteries.15 

Testing a Battery for Sulphation.15 

Battery Replacement.16 

Battery Failures.16 

Absorbent Glass Mat Battery .17 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 Revision Date: 10/10 





































Subject Page 

Construction .18 

How it Works.18 

Service Instructions for AGM Batteries .19 

Charging.19 

Installation Location .19 

Battery Testing .19 

Battery Replacement.19 

IBS: Intelligent Battery Sensor .20 

Determining the Battery State of Charge .21 

Battery state of charge .21 

Evaluation of the battery state of charge.22 

Startability limit .22 

Determining the Battery Condition.23 

Battery condition .23 

Fault entry: Battery very aged or defective .23 

IBS Service Information.24 

Charging and trickle charging of the battery.24 

Replacing the IBS.24 

Register battery replacement.24 

Service Information.25 

Dead Battery Diagnosis .25 

Performing the Energy Diagnosis Test Plan.26 

Fault Analysis (Energy Diagnosis) .26 

Vehicle fault.26 

Operating fault .26 

Closed circuit current measurement .27 

Checking the charging system .27 

Checking the battery condition .27 

New battery registration .28 

Recharging the battery .28 

Battery Charging and Testing Procedure .29 

Battery Charging Procedure .29 

Midtronics Battery Testing Procedure .29 

Additional Information .31 

Warranty Information .32 

Closed Circuit Current Draw Testing .33 

Performing a Closed Current Measurement.33 

Closed Circuit Current Measurement with the IMIB .35 









































Battery Basics 


Model: All 
Production: All 

iBinmuis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the battery components and construction. 

• Explain the chemical process of charging and discharging. 

• Understand the different types of batteries. 

• Describe the operation of the AGM battery used by current BMW vehicles. 

• Perform battery diagnostic and charging procedures. 

• Register a new battery to the vehicle. 

• Check and analyze “stand by” or parasitic current draw. 


3 

Battery Basics 



Battery 


Purpose of the Automotive Battery 

The battery is the primary Electromotive Force (EMF) source in the automobile. 

In addition the battery performs the following functions: 

• Provides voltage and current for the starter motor. 

• Provides voltage and current for the ignition during cranking. 

• Supplies all electrical power when the charging system is not operating. 

• Supplies the extra power necessary when the vehicle’s electrical load exceeds 
the supply from the charging system. 

• Acts as a voltage stabilizer in the electrical system. The battery evens out voltage 
spikes and prevents them from damaging other components in the electrical 
system. 

• Provides power to KL30, KL15 and KLR. 

The battery does not store electrical energy. It stores chemical energy that is converted 
to electrical energy as it discharges. 

Battery Construction 

The battery is made of a plastic case containing alternat¬ 
ing plates of Lead and Lead Dioxide (or Lead Oxide) sep¬ 
arated by insulators. 

These alternating plates are connected in series to pro¬ 
duce a voltage of 12.6 volts, or about 2.1 volts for each 
set of Lead and Lead Dioxide plates. The negative termi¬ 
nal is connected to a Lead Dioxide plate and the positive 
terminal to a Lead plate. 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

Plastic container. 

2 

Positive and negative internal plates made of lead. 

3 

Plate separators made of porous synthetic material. 

4 

Electrolyte which is a dilute solution of sulfuric acid 
and water better known as Battery Acid. 

5 

Lead terminals which are the connection point 
between the battery and whatever it powers. 


4 

Battery Basics 




















Battery Case 

Most battery cases and their covers are made of polypropylene. The case is divided 
into six sections or cells, shaped similar to an ice-cube tray. 

The case is designed to: 

• Withstand hot and cold temperature extremes. 

• Resist damage caused by mechanical shock in automotive applications. 

• Resist acid absorption and chemical damage. 

The Grids 

The grids are the supporting framework for the active material of the plates. 

They also conduct current to and from the active material plates. 

The Plates 

Plates are grids covered with a paste mixture of Lead Oxide and Sulfuric Acid and water. 
An expander material made of powdered sulfates is added to the paste to produce nega¬ 
tive plates. 

A forming charge is applied to the positive plates converting the Lead Oxide to Lead 
Dioxide, a highly porous material which allows the electrolyte to freely penetrate the plate. 

A forming charge is also applied to the negative plates converting the Lead Oxide to 
Sponge Lead. The Sponge Lead allows the electrolyte to penetrate freely allowing the 
material beneath the plate surface to take part in the chemical reaction. 

The Separators 

Separators are thin sheets of electrically insulating porous material used as spacers 
between the plates to prevent short circuits within the cells. 

Fine pores in the separators allow ionic current flow in the electrolyte between the 
positive and negative plates. 


GRID WITH 
PASTE=PLATE 


SEPARATOR 

A cell: Cells are connected 

positive and with metal that 
negative plates conducts electricity 
with separators from one cell to the 
next. 




5 

Battery Basics 




































Elements 

In the most common method of construction, a stack of alternate positive and negative 
plates are formed with separators between each positive and negative plate. The lugs 
of the negative plates are welded together as are those of the positive plates. The plate 
strap of each group of plates is used to connect them in series with the plate group of 
the next cell, or with a battery terminal. 

The assembly resulting from placing one positive plate group and one negative plate 
group together, with separators is known as an element. There is one element per 
battery cell. 

More or larger plates per cell will increase plate surface area and increase capacity of the 
battery but will not affect the voltage output. 

Electrolyte 

The electrolyte is a mixture of Sulfuric Acid and Water. Electrolyte consists of 35% 
sulfuric acid and 65% water on a fully charged normal battery. 

The electrolyte is the carrier for the electric current to move between the positive and 
negative plates through the separators. 

The Lead Terminals 

BMW’s use a tapered top terminal. This design uses tapered terminal posts built to 
industry standards so that all cable clamps will fit any battery with these posts. 

The positive terminal is slightly larger than the negative to minimize the danger of 
installing the battery in reverse. The positive terminal is 17.5mm in diameter at the top. 
The negative terminal is 15.9mm at the top. 


15.9 


17.5 


mm 
-► 


mm 




6 

Battery Basics 








How the Battery Works 


Discharging 

Batteries don’t store electrical energy, they store chemical energy and convert it to electri¬ 
cal energy during the discharging process. 

Each cell of a battery contains positive and negative plates (grids). The positive plate is 
made of lead dioxide, the negative plate of a spongy lead. The negative plate combines 
with the sulfuric acid to create lead sulfate and one extra electron. The positive plate pro¬ 
duces hydrogen ions and sulfuric acid ions (positive ions, atoms missing one electron). 

The extra electrons from the negative plate are passed from the negative battery terminal 
and through the electrical consumer, back to the positive battery terminal. Once back at 
the battery, the free electrons combine with the positive ions at the positive battery termi¬ 
nal producing lead sulfate and water. 

It is important to remember that the system is closed. For every electron generated at the 
negative terminal, there is an electron consumed at the positive terminal. 

As the process continues, the active materials (lead and lead dioxide plates and the elec¬ 
trolyte) become depleted and the reactions slow down until the battery is no longer capa¬ 
ble of supplying electrons. At this point the battery is discharged. 

The discharge process changes the ratio of sulfuric acid to water in the electrolyte, as 
more water is produced in the discharge process. By measuring the volume of acid in the 
water, the state of charge of the battery is discovered. 


Discharge Process 



Negative 

Sponge lead changing 
to Lead Sulfate. 


f.. 

°V' 


Positive 

Lead peroxide 
changing to 
Lead Sulfate 


Starter 


a Ignition 1 =*; 

i ' 


Lights 


Horn 


Radio 1^=1* 




Electrolyte 

The sulfate of sulfuric acid unites with active material 
on plates leaving water and acid solution. Hydrogen of 
acid and oxygen of lead peroxide combine to form 
water diluting solution. 


7 

Battery Basics 










































Charging 

Applying voltage to the battery from an external source such as the generator or battery 
charger reverses the chemical action in the battery. 

Reversing the chemical action in the battery, forces the free electrons at the negative ter¬ 
minal of the battery back into the electrolyte raising the sulfuric acid percentage. This 
chemical action removes the Lead sulfate that had formed on the negative plates leaving 
pure active material. 

The electrons that were forced into the electrolyte are able to react with the lead sulfate 
on the positive terminal again raising the Sulfuric acid content and leaving pure active 
material on the positive plates. 

This process enables the battery to be used over and over again. 


Charging Process 


Negative Plate 

Lead sulfate changes 
to sponge lead. 

Sulfate returns to 
electrolyte 



l 


Positive Plate 

Lead sulfate changes 
to lead peroxide. 

Sulfate returns to 
electrolyte 


Very dilute electrolyte made stronger 
by return of sulfate from plates. 


8 

Battery Basics 











Battery Types 

There are at least four types of the Lead-acid batteries that are currently used in the 
Automotive Industry. 

Lead-Acid Battery 

The three major contributors to battery chemistry are lead, lead dioxide and sulfuric acid. 
Pure lead is too soft to withstand the physical abuse of mobile applications, so a 
strengthener is needed. About 6% antimony, a semi metallic element produced 
as a by-product to copper and lead ore refining, is added to strengthen the lead. 

The antimony added to the grids acts as a catalyst and makes the loss of hydrogen and 
oxygen through outgassing worse. These batteries reguire freguent water replenishing. 

Lead/Calcium Battery 

Introduced in the 1970’s Lead/Calcium batteries have Calcium added to the positive and 
negative grids to reduce the outgassing. These batteries were first referred to as “mainte¬ 
nance free”. The Lead/Calcium batteries are not resistant to deep-cycling which occurs 
when a battery is drained to a very low voltage before being recharged. Freguent deep¬ 
cycling renders these batteries unable to sustain a charge. Lead/Calcium batteries need 
to be charged at higher voltage settings or they will not be recharged to full capacity. 


Hybrid Battery 

Hybrid batteries use a positive grid strengthened with antimony and a negative grid with 
calcium. The hybrid battery is more resistant to deep cycling than the lead/calcium, but 
still not as good as the original Lead-acid battery. Water usage is greatly reduced in the 
hybrid battery, although regular checking is advisable. Most cars supplied with hybrid 
batteries have their voltage regulators set to 14.3 volts. 

Hybrid batteries were first installed in the E30 convertible (SIB 61 12 91) during the 
1991 Model Year. 

Absorbent Glass Mat Battery 

In September 2002, the first VRLA batteries, better known as AGM batteries came into 
use. VRLA means valve-regulated lead acid, ora lead battery with a pressure relief valve. 
AGM stands for absorbent glass mat, or absorbent glass-fiber fleece.) 

An AGM battery (90 Ah) was initially installed in the E46 with the M56 engine and it is 
currently installed on all BMW vehicles. (Refer to the AGM Battery section for further 
information) 


9 

Battery Basics 



Common Battery Terms 



Teile-Nr. (Part No.) 61021 6 902 796 


12V 55AH 480A EN 555 080 048 

12V 90RC 425CCA SAE Group No . 47 


fur Ersatz (for replacement): 

Teile - Nr. 61 21 6 902 796 Nass (wet) 


• Ah (Amp Hour Capacity) 

This rating is derived from discharging a fully charged battery at a constant amp 
draw for 20 hours @ 80°F, without the voltage of the battery falling below 10.5 volts. 
The constant amp draw is multiplied by the 20 hours to come up with the Amp 
Hour Rating. 

• CCA (Cold Cranking Performance) 

Represents the amperage capacity a fully charged battery can deliver @ 0°F for 30 
seconds before the voltage of the battery falls below 7.2 volts. 

• RC (Reserve Capacity) 

Reserve capacity is expressed in minutes and relates to the amount of time a fully 
charged battery can maintain a constant draw of 25 amps @ 80°F before the volt¬ 
age falls below 10.2 volts. 

• W (Watts) 

The measurement of electrical power that the battery can deliver for a cold start. It 
is calculated by multiplying the starter amperage draw @ 0°F times 10 volts. 

• V (Volt) 

Unit of measure of potential difference (Electrical pressure). 

• A (Amp) 

The current flow in a circuit. Value is proportional to the number of electrons flowing 
past a point in one second. 

• Q(Ohm) 

The measurement of the resistance of a component or circuit to current flow. 


10 

Battery Basics 







• Electrolyte 

The mixture of sulfuric acid and water. 35% sulfuric acid, 65% water. 

• Specific Gravity 

The measurement (by weight) of the volume of sulfuric acid in the electrolyte. A spe¬ 
cific gravity of 1.275 (the specific gravity of a fully charged battery) means that the 
electrolyte is 1.275 times heavier than water. The specific gravity of water is 1.000. 

• Sulfate 

Deposits formed on the plates of the battery as the electrolyte gives up its sulfuric 
acid. 

Excessive deep cycling of a battery can cause a hardening of this deposit and make it 
impossible to return sulfate to the electrolyte. A sulfated battery is one which has 
these hardened deposits on the plates and cannot be recharged to full capacity. 

• OCV Open Circuit Voltage 

The measurement of the voltage of a battery across the terminals. 

Notes: 



Original BMW 

Teile-Nr.(Part No.) 61 21 8 381 762 

12V 90Ah 720A EN 590 051 072 
12V175C 850CA SAE _ 

fur Ersatz (for replacement). 

Teile-Nr.61 21 8 381 762 neB (wet) 



ManUfaxtured for 

DETA-DOUGLAS 

BATTERIES, INC. 


DOULAS BATTEY 

Winston-Salem, NC 


11 

Battery Basics 





















Battery Testing 

There are four steps to follow in testing an automotive battery: 

• Inspection 

• Removal of Surface Charge 

• State-of-Charge Test 

• Load Test 

Inspection 

Visual inspection is important for the detection of obvious problems: 

• Loose Generator Belt 

• Low Electrolyte Level 

• Corroded Cable or Terminal Clamps 

• Loose Hold-Down Camps or Cable Terminals 

• Damaged Battery Case 

Removal of Surface Charge 

If the battery has just been recharged, or the car has been driven, eliminate any surface 
charge by one of the following methods: 

• Allow the battery to sit for 2-3 hours. 

• Turn the headlights on high beam for 5 minutes and wait 5 minutes after turning off. 

• With battery load tester, apply a load of 1/2 the battery’s CCA for 15 seconds, then 
wait 5 minutes. 


State-of-Charge Test 

Using the measured battery voltage, the state of charge can be determined. Use the table 
to determine the battery’s state-of-charge. 


Open Circuit Battery Voltage 

Approximate State of Charge 

Average Cell Specific Gravity 

12.65 + 

100% 

1.265 + 

12.45 

75% 

1.225 

12.24 

50% 

1.190 

12.06 

25% 

1.155 

11.89 

0% 

1.120 


Pay special attention if the DVOM measurement of OCV is equal to: 

• 0 volts - Indicate an open cell. 

• 10.45 - 10.65 volts - Indicates a shorted cell. 

12 

Battery Basics 























For non-sealed batteries, check both specific gravity (SG) in each cell with a temperature 
compensated hydrometer and battery OCV, without the engine running. 

For sealed batteries (currently installed in all BMW’s), measuring the battery’s OCV (with¬ 
out the engine running) with an accurate DVOM is the only way to determine the state-of- 
charge. 

Batteries with a built-in hydrometer measure the state-of-charge in one cell only. If the 
indicator is clear or light yellow, the battery has a low electrolyte level and should be 
refilled before proceeding or replaced. 

A state-of-charge reading BELOW 75% using SG, voltage measurement or dark indicator 
in batteries with a built-in hydrometer, indicates the battery must be recharged before 
proceeding. 

Replace the battery if one or more the following conditions are met: 

• More than 0.050 difference in the specific gravity readings between the highest 
and lowest cell (There is a weak or dead cell). 

• The battery will not recharge to 75% or greater state-of-charge or the built in 
hydrometer does not indicate good (green indicates 65% or better). 

• DVOM reading indicates 0 volts (Open cell). 

• DVOM reading indicates 10.45 - 10.65 volts (Shorted cell). 

Load Test 

A battery which has a state-of-charge of 75% or greater or has a “good” built-in hydrom¬ 
eter indication may be load tested. 

With a battery load tester properly installed, load the battery for 15 seconds to one of the 
following: 

• One-half (1 12 ) the CCA (Cold Cranking Amps). 

• Three (3) times the AH Rating (Amp Hour Rating). 

The voltage on a good battery will NOT drop below 9.7 volts during the battery load test. 
After the load is removed, wait 5 minutes, the battery should bounce back to 50% or 
greater state-of-charge. If a battery drops below 9.7 volts during the load test, does not 
bounce back or fails to start the engine, the battery should be replaced. Batteries which 
pass this test should be recharged to restore peak performance. 

Load Test Conditions 

• Tests assume electrolyte temperature of 80°F, 26.7°C. 

• If the electrolyte temperature is above 80°F add .1 volt for every 10° up to 100°F. 

• If the temperature is below 80°F subtract .1 volt for every 10° to 40°. 


13 

Battery Basics 



Battery Maintenance 

Electrolyte Level 

If battery electrolyte level is allowed to drop substantially, the gas volume inside the bat¬ 
tery grows proportionately resulting in an increased amount of flammable gas mixture. 
Any external or internal spark may result in an oxyhydrogen explosion. Additionally the 
plates are no longer covered by the electrolyte and may corrode. 

Note: Because BMW vehicles use a maintenance free battery, the electrolytic 
level cannot be topped off or maintained. 

Battery Cable Connections 

The top of the battery should be clean. 

Check for and correct corrosion on the top of the battery and the cable connections. 

Battery Charging 

The purpose of charging a battery is to put back the energy that has been removed. 

A battery that is not properly charged will deliver sub-standard performance and display 
a shorter life span. 

A battery should be charged only after performing a visual inspection on the battery case 
and the electrolyte levels. Never attempt to charge a battery with a damaged case or low 
electrolyte levels. 

A state-of-charge test should be performed before attempting to charge a battery. 

Unplug the charger or turn it off before disconnecting the leads at the battery. 

The best charging method is to SLOWLY recharge the battery using the BMW approved 
battery charger. A slow charging rate allows more time for the electrolyte to penetrate the 
plates. Batteries that are fully discharged should be charged according to the following 
table. 


Reserve Capacity Rating (RC) 

Slow Charge 

Fast Charge 

80 minutes or less 

15 hours @ 3 amps 

2.5 hours @ 20 amps 

80- 125 minutes 

21 hours @ 4 amps 

3.75 hours @ 20 amps 

125 - 170 minutes 

22 hours @ 5 amps 

5 hours @ 20 amps 

170 - 250 minutes 

23 hours @ 6 amps 

7.5 hours @ 10 amps 

above 250 minutes 

24 hours @ 10 amps 

6 hours @ 40 amps 


Workshop Hint Workshop Hint 


Electrolyte levels may drop at a higher rate in Many battery problems are caused by loose or 

the winter months, due to higher loads and corroded connections. Insure that cables are 

increased utilization of electrical systems. free from corrosion and tight before continuing 

diagnosis. 


14 

Battery Basics 




























Before a battery is to be charged, it is necessary first to interrogate the fault memory in 
the DME/DDE in order to locate a possible load/consumer. 

It is also necessary to check the battery status with the battery tester as described in the 
Service Information section and in bulletin 61 01 02 (804) "Battery tester". 

If the battery is still discharged after a short period of use, it is necessary to carry out an 
external closed-circuit current measurement as described in the Service Information sec¬ 
tion and in bulletin 61 03 99 (474) "External closed-circuit current measurement". 

Faulty batteries must be replaced immediately. 

Before connecting the battery charger, it is also necessary to check what type of battery 
is installed. 

Note: The battery must not be charged via the connected safety battery termi¬ 
nal and the intelligent battery sensor. The jump-start terminal point must 
be used. 

Note: For further information regarding approved BMW charging equipment 
refer to SI B0411 02. 

Sulfated Batteries 

Continuous discharging of the battery or low electrolyte levels cause crystals to form on 
the plates. These crystals of lead sulphate occur when a battery is discharged. The deep¬ 
er the discharge the more serious the sulphation. The sulphur molecules that form the sul¬ 
phate are then absent from the electrolyte, causing the electrolyte to become inefficient. 

A battery relies on clean plates and strong electrolyte to both receive charging current 
and offer strong current discharge. A sulphated battery can do neither. Proper recharging 
of the battery will remove some but not all of the sulphate. Eventually the battery plates 
are coated with enough sulphate that it is impossible to achieve an efficient recharge. 

Testing a Battery for Sulphation 

A battery which fails the load test should be tested for sulphation. To test a battery for sul¬ 
phation, place it on a battery charger for three minutes with the charger set on 40 amps. 

After three minutes check the OCV, if the reading is greater than 15.0 volts the battery is 
sulphated. Batteries which indicate a sulphated condition should be recharged slowly 
and retested before being discarded. 


15 

Battery Basics 



Battery Replacement 

Batteries determined to be defective through testing procedures should be replaced 
using the following guidelines. 

• Reconfirm battery is actually defective and it does not need charging. 

• Insure that ignition switch is in “Off” position and engine is not running. 

• Disconnect negative battery terminal first. 

• Place negative battery cable in a position so that it can not come in 
contact with battery during removal process. 

• Reinstall battery hold down clamp. 

• Install positive cable first. 

• Recheck output of vehicle generator and balance of electrical system 
for other problems. 

• Provide clear and concise description of the defect including cell readings, load test 
results and any other pertinent information which led to the battery replacement. 

• Tag battery with VIN and repair order number. 

Battery Failures 

An analysis of batteries replaced under warranty shows that many claims could have 
been avoided had the batteries been maintained in a full state of charge. 

Batteries must be maintained at all times when vehicles are at a retailer whether they are 
new cars, used cars, in storage (back lot), on display, or customer cars in for maintenance 
or repairs. 

Batteries replaced due to lack of maintenance will not be covered by warranty. 

Most common causes of premature battery failures: 

• Failure to maintain proper state of charge 

• Loss of electrolyte due to overcharging or excessive heat 

• Deep discharging (Leaving lights on or other parasitic draws) 

• Undercharging of battery 

• Vibration (Loose battery hold down clamp) 

• Using tap water (instead of distilled water) 

• Corrosion 

• Freezing. 


16 

Battery Basics 





Absorbent Glass Mat Battery 

The continuously increasing energy requirements of modern vehicle electrical systems, 
demands ever more efficient battery solutions. A modern luxury vehicle has many com¬ 
ponents that have to be provided with electrical current. In addition, many safety, environ¬ 
mental and comfort features became increasingly a part of the standard equipment such 
as ABS (anti-lock brake system), DSC (dynamic stability control), EPS (electric power 
steering), heated catalytic converters, electronically controlled suspension, air condition¬ 
ing and navigation systems. Current consumption is considerable even when the vehicle 
is not in use. 

AGM batteries are more expensive to produce, however this extra cost is offset by the fol¬ 
lowing benefits: 

• Much longer service life Improved starting reliability at low temperatures 

• Reliable starting of engines with high starting current requirements 

• 100% maintenance-free 

• Low risk in the event of an accident (reduced environmental risk) 


>!> 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Positive grille with silver alloy 

6 

Set of positive plates 

2 

Positive plate 

7 

Set of negative plates 

3 

Negative grille 

8 

Block of plates 

4 

Negative plate 

9 

Block box with base strips 

5 

Separator made of glass-fiber fleece 




17 


Battery Basics 




Construction 

AGM batteries differ from conventional lead-calcium batteries in the following points: 

• Larger plates: 

Larger plates allow a power density some 25% greater. 

• Glass-fiber-fleece separators: 

This enables a cycle consistency up to 3 times greater to be achieved. 

This improves cold-starting ability, current consumption and service life. 

• Airtight housing with pressure relief valve: 

• The inspection plugs are sealed and cannot be opened. 

• Acid bound in grass-fiber fleece: 

In contrast to conventional lead-calcium batteries, the sulfuric acid in a battery with 
fleece technology is not held as a liquid in the battery housing, but rather it is com¬ 
pletely bound (100%) in the glass-fiber fleece (separators). This gives increased 
security against the acid escaping and thus reduces the environmental risk. For this 
reason, no acid can escape if the battery housing is damaged. In addition, the AGM 
battery is sealed to be airtight. This is possible because the gases are converted 
back into water by the permeability of the separators. 

How it Works 

AGM batteries differ from conventional lead-calcium batteries in their environmental com¬ 
patibility and their retention of gases during charging. 

When a vehicle battery is charged, the electrolysis process emits the gases oxygen and 
hydrogen. 

• In a conventional lead-calcium battery, these two gases are released into the atmos¬ 
phere. 

• In an AGM battery, the two gases are converted back into water: The oxygen created 
at the positive electrode during charging moves through the permeable glass-fiber 
fleece to the negative electrode, where it reacts with the hydrogen ions that are 
brought in with the electrolyte, to create water (oxygen cycle). In this manner, the 
gases, and thus the electrolyte, is not lost. 

Only when the gas production is excessive, that is when too much pressure is generated 
(20 to 200 mbar), does the pressure-relief valve open, thereby allowing gas to escape 
while also preventing entry of atmospheric oxygen. Because the pressure in the battery is 
regulated by a valve, the AGM battery is also known as the VRLA battery (valve-regulated 
lead acid). 


18 

Battery Basics 



Service Instructions for AGM Batteries 

When handling AGM batteries, certain special factors must be taken into consideration 
with regard to battery renewal and installation location. 


Charging 

When charging batteries in the "stand alone" mode, the maximum charge voltage of 14.8 
volts must not be exceeded. Even briefly charging an AGM battery with a charge voltage 
of more than 14.8 volts (voltages usually used in rapid charge programs) will damage the 
battery. 


WARNING!!! 


Do not charge AGM batteries with 14.8 volts! 
Do not use rapid charging programs! 


Installation Location 


WARNING!!! 


Do not install AGM batteries in the engine compartment! 


Because of large temperature variations, AGM batteries must not be installed in the engine 
compartment. This would result in a significant reduction in the service life of the battery. 


CAUTION!!! 


Do not open AGM batteries 


On no account should AGM batteries be opened, as oxygen from the atmosphere would 
cause the battery to lose its chemical balance and cause it to fail. 


Battery Testing 

For all models up to F10, we should use the Midtronics tester, NOT a VAT40 or eguiva- 
lent to test the battery. 

For F10 and later, a battery test is built into the vehicle, and is accessed using ISTA. 

A battery may only be replaced on FI 0 when identified as faulty using ISTA (the test plan 
returns a diag. Code for the replacement). 

Note: For all models up to FI 0, we should use the Midtronics tester, NOT a 

VAT40 or equivalent to test the battery. For FI 0 and later, a battery test 
is built into the vehicle, and is accessed using ISTA. 


A battery may only be replaced on FI 0 when identified as faulty using 
ISTA (the test plan returns a Diagnostic Code for the replacement) 

Battery Replacement 

An AGM battery, when installed as original eguipment, must always be replaced with an 
AGM battery. 

In special cases, where a customer's driving profile (e.g. short distance driving), results in 
a discharged battery, the AGM battery is a recommended replacement. Note that 
replacement batteries resulting from a customer's driving profile cannot be claimed under 
warranty. 


19 

Battery Basics 








IBS: Intelligent Battery Sensor 

The IBS was first introduced with the E60 and later 
was gradually installed in most current models. It is a 
mechatronic, intelligent battery sensor with its own 
microprocessor. The microprocessor is an element of 
the electronics module. The electronics module is 
used to detect the voltage, the current flowing and the 
temperature of the battery. 

The following components are fitted in the electronics 
module: 

• a shunt (resistor for current measurement) 

• a temperature sensor 

• evaluation electronics on a board 

The IBS continuously measures the following values 
on the battery: 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Negative battery terminal 

2 

Intelligent battery sensor 

3 

Negative battery cable 


• Terminal voltage 


• Charge current 


• Discharge current 


• Battery temperature 

For data transfer, the IBS is connected to the DME (Digital Motor Electronics) or DDE 
(Digital Diesel Electronics) via a Local Interconnect Network bus (LIN bus) or BSD on 
earlier vehicles. 



20 

Battery Basics 



























Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Measurement of the battery voltage between 
the positive battery terminal and 
negative battery terminal 

5 

Digital Motor Electronics (DME) or 

Digital Diesel Electronics (DDE) 

2 

Temperature measurement 
of the battery (T) 

6 

Current measurement (A) 

[indirect, via the proportionally voltage drop 
(V) at the measuring resistor (shunt)] 

3 

Microprocessor (pC) in the 
intelligent battery sensor (IBS) 

7 

Negative battery terminal 

4 

Local Interconnect Network bus (LIN bus) for 
transmission of the values to the DME or DDE. 

8 

Positive battery terminal 


Determining the Battery State of Charge 

Battery state of charge 

The APM with the intelligent battery sensor determines the battery state of charge while 
the vehicle is being driven and when the vehicle is at a standstill on the basis of measure¬ 
ment data: 

• Vehicle being driven: 

Balancing the charge and discharge current of the battery. 

Calculation of the current characteristics on engine start to ascertain the 
battery condition. 

While the vehicle is being driven, the IBS transfers the data across the LIN bus bit 
to the engine control unit (DME/DDE). The software in the IBS controls the com¬ 
munication with the higher-level engine control unit (DME/DDE). 

• Vehicle at a standstill 

When the vehicle is at a standstill, the measured values (open-circuit voltage 
measurement) are queried in cycles to detect energy losses. The measured 
values are entered in the IBS in the memory and transferred to the DME/DDE 
after restarting the engine. 

Note: Refer to the Power Supply section in the ST401 Body Electronics II train¬ 
ing material for further information regarding the IBS (Intelligent Battery 
Sensor) and BST (Battery Safety Terminal). 


21 

Battery Basics 



For the history of the battery state of charge, the following values are stored in the 
DM E/DDE: 

• Battery state of charge of the last 5 days. 

• Charge status histogram showing periods in the ranges 0 - 20%, 20 - 40%, 

40 - 60%, 60 - 80% and 80 - 100%. The charge status histogram is reset in the 
following cases: programming the DME/DDE or registering a battery replacement. 

Evaluation of the battery state of charge. 

If the rest phase is not sufficiently long or if there is a standby current violation, the battery 
state of charge cannot be determined correctly: the state of charge is implausible. 

Startability limit 

The APM calculates a lower and an upper startability limit for the battery: 

• The lower startability limit corresponds to the minimum charge state of the battery 
so that the vehicle can still be started. 

• To counteract discharge down to the lower startability limit, a certain charge volume 
is kept as a reserve. To achieve this, the upper startability limit is calculated. This 
value is used e.g. as the limit value for the requests for deactivation of terminal 30B 
when auxiliary consumer units are active. 

The startability limit is calculated by evaluating the following measured variables: 

• Average battery temperature with vehicle parked. 

• Ambient temperature of the last journey. 

• Current state of charge. 

• Voltage dip of the last engine start (trend for aging of the battery). 


Note: For all models up to FI 0, we should use the Midtronics tester, NOT a 
VAT40 or equivalent. ForFIOand later vehicles, a battery test is built 
into the vehicle (through the IBS), and is accessed using ISTA. 

Note: A battery may only be replaced on FI 0 when identified as faulty using 
ISTA (the test plan returns a Diagnostic Code for the replacement) 


22 

Battery Basics 



Determining the Battery Condition 

Battery condition 

The battery condition cannot be determined based on the battery state of charge alone. 
All batteries are subject to natural wear due to the natural aging process. The chemical 
reactions in the battery, consisting of the charge cycles with battery charging and dis¬ 
charging, mean that deposits form in the battery, preventing the battery from reaching full 
capacity. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Battery Charge 

2 

Battery Discharge 

3 

Aging/deposits 

4 

Self-discharging 


The enhanced intelligent battery sensor as of FI 0 enables better detection of the battery 
condition by: 

• Detection of defective battery cells 

• Calculation of the remaining battery capacity 

Each total discharge results in a loss of battery capacity: The longer the battery remains 
completely discharged, the greater the loss of battery capacity. The batteries installed at 
BMW can withstand several short total discharges or up to two long total discharges, 
however, when they are fully recharged with a constant charging voltage of 14.8 V after 
the total discharge. 

Fault entry: Battery very aged or defective 

If monitoring of the battery condition identifies an aged or defective battery, a fault entry is 
registered in the engine management fault memory. The fault entry can not be deleted 
until the battery has been replaced and the new battery has been registered. 


23 

Battery Basics 
















IBS Service Information 


Charging and trickle charging of the battery 

The battery may only be charged using the chargers approved by BMW at a constant 
charging voltage of 14.8 V.lf possible, the battery temperature during charging should be 
between 15 °C and 25 °C. Under these conditions, the battery is adeguate charged if the 
charge current has fallen below 2.5 A. If the charging process is carried out at low tem¬ 
peratures, it is only to be terminated after the charge current falls short of 1.5 A. If the bat¬ 
tery is charged when fitted, the charging process must take place via the jump start termi¬ 
nal point. This is the only way to ensure that the charging process is detected correctly by 
the vehicle electronics on vehicles with an intelligent battery sensor (IBS). If the battery is 
charged directly at the battery terminals, misinterpretations of the battery condition and, 
under certain circumstances, unwanted Check Control messages or fault code memory 
entries can occur. The cigarette lighter is supplied with voltage by the front power distrib¬ 
ution box via switched terminal 30B. After terminal 30B off, the relay de-energizes. This 
means that a trickle charger connected at the cigarette lighter would be disconnected 
from the battery. Only charge the battery via the jump start terminal point. 

Replacing the IBS 

The vehicle with the new IBS must be placed in the rest state for at least 3 hours: Only 
then can the new IBS determine the battery condition. The Check Control message 'bat¬ 
tery severely depleted' is then no longer displayed if the battery is adeguately charged 
and the correct battery state of charge can be displayed. 


Register battery replacement 

After fitting a new battery, the service function 'Register battery replacement' should be 
run. The battery change has to be registered in order to tell the power management sys¬ 
tem that a new battery has been fitted to the vehicle. If the battery change is not regis¬ 
tered, the power management will not function properly, with the result that Check 
Control messages may be displayed and functions limited by individual electrical con¬ 
sumers being switched off or having their power consumption reduced, for example. 


24 

Battery Basics 



Service Information 


Dead Battery Diagnosis 

The electrical system of BMW vehicles has been subject to an ongoing development 
process over the last few years. This has led to increased demands being placed on the 
battery. 

A dead battery can have various causes, most of which do not concern the battery itself. 
A failed battery is often the symptom and not the cause. A fully serviceable battery fails 
because it becomes discharged. 

For this reason, replacing the battery is not usually a permanent repair. The cause of the 
dead battery must be analyzed in order to guarantee a proper repair. 

Only use the latest diagnostic software when diagnosing dead battery complaints. 

To correctly troubleshot a dead battery in current BMW vehicles (E65, E66 from 3/2004 
vehicle production and all other vehicles eguipped with MOST-bus) the “Energy 
Diagnosis” test plan must be performed on all dead battery complaints. (Refer to SI B61 
13 05) 

At the conclusion of the "Energy Diagnosis" test plan, a diagnostic code will be generat¬ 
ed. Certain Energy Diagnosis test plan results ("Exhaustive Battery" charge or "Terminal 
30g-f shutdown due to start capability limit", for example) are for informational purposes 
only, and would not display a diagnostic code. In these cases, the most likely cause is a 
faulty battery. 

This code (if displayed in the test plan) must be included in the "Comments" section 
when submitting the warranty claim. 

Note: Failure to quote the diagnostic code in the comments of the warranty 

claim may result in a delay in processing or refusal of the warranty claim. 

The two exceptions to the rule are: 

• Battery damage and leakage 

• Use of mobile service and battery replacement to restore customer drivability as 
soon as possible. In the case of a battery replacement during a roadside repair, a 
subseguent service appointment needs to be scheduled for the customer, in order 
to perform an energy diagnosis to locate and address the cause of the battery fail¬ 
ure, as well as to register the replacement battery. 


25 

Battery Basics 




Performing the Energy Diagnosis Test Plan 

Fault Analysis (Energy Diagnosis) 

There are currently two paths to access the energy diagnosis test plan: 

• If a power management fault is stored, ISTA will select the energy diagnosis test plan 
automatically. 

• The test plan can also be selected manually: 

"Function structure>Body>Power supply>Energy Diagnosis". 

Note: The vehicle must have a discharged battery before Energy Diagnosis can 
be performed. Also, fault codes must not be deleted. 

Once the test plan has finished, the "Most Likely Causes" are automatically displayed if 
any are calculated by the test plan. Finish the test plan by processing all the "Most Likely 
Causes", starting from [1]. If no "Most Likely Causes" are calculated, the results screen 
will be displayed: "Most Likely Cause (0)". 

Possible "Most Likely Causes" are: 

Vehicle fault 

• Battery fault/alternator fault 

• Vehicle is not entering sleep mode 

• Vehicle is constantly awoken from sleep mode 

• Closed-circuit current is too high 

• Exhaustive battery charge (for information only) 

• Terminal 30g-f shutdown due to start capability limit (for information only) 

• Undetermined 

Operating fault 

If one of the causes shown below is displayed in "Most Likely Causes", this is not consid¬ 
ered a factory defect and a warranty claim should not be submitted, even though a diag¬ 
nostic code is generated at the end of the test plan. 

• Lights/hazard warning lamps left on for too long 

• Terminal R/15 left on for too long 


26 

Battery Basics 



Except for the vehicles listed below, the fault is set when the engine is off and terminal 
15/R is left on for more than 30 minutes; and the power supply drops below 11.5 volts for 
at least 2 minutes. The amount of time that terminal 15/R is left on is accurate. 

For the following vehicles, this fault is not reliable and should not be considered a 
customer error: 

• E65 and E66 (7 Series) 

• E90, E91, and E92 (3 Series) prior to 3/07 

• E60 and E61 (5 Series), vehicle integration level prior to E060-07-09-500 

• E63 and E64 (6 Series), vehicle integration level prior to E060-07-09-500 

• E70 (X5) prior to 3/07 

• Unfavorable driving profile (e.g., extremely short distances) 

• Vehicle parked for too long 

Note: A functional description of Energy Diagnosis and terminal control, 

together with troubleshooting information, can be found in the Energy 
Diagnosis test module. 

Closed circuit current measurement 

Refer to the Closed Circuit Current Measurement section in this training material, for the 
procedure and troubleshooting hints and to ISTA functional description for further infor¬ 
mation. 

Note: For further information regarding Closed-circuit Current Measurement 
refer to SI B61 08 00 available in ISTA. 

Checking the charging system 

Refer to SI B04 25 02 for information on how to test the charging system. 


Checking the battery condition 

Refer to SI B61 11 09 for information on how to test the battery. For further information 
refer to the ISTA functional description. 

Use the following path: 

Function structure>Body>Power supply>Alternator. 


27 

Battery Basics 




New battery registration 

Registration of the new battery is necessary, using the ISTA service function. If the new 
battery is not registered, erroneous messages (check control) may appear. 

Use the following path the register the new battery and follow the test plan instructions: 

"Service function>Body>Power supply>Battery>Register battery change". 

If a new battery is installed, the "Energy Diagnosis" test plan should be completed prior to 
registering the new battery. When the battery is registered, the stored energy history is 
deleted. This may cause the vehicle to return if the root cause of the dead battery is not 
determined. 

Recharging the battery 

Refer to the battery Charging section of this training material or to SI B61 11 09 for 
more information on how to recharge the battery. 


28 

Battery Basics 



Battery Charging and Testing Procedure 

The following proper battery testing and charging procedures are necessary to fulfill the 
requirements of the warranty as well as meeting customer expectations. 

Vehicles with a discharged battery must have their batteries charged and tested prior to 
proceeding with further diagnostics. 

Battery Charging Procedure 

1. As described in bulletin SI B04 27 06, be certain that the charging voltage on 
approved BMW chargers has been set to 14.8 volts. Failure to set the charge rate to 
14.8 volts will result in the charger switching to FC (floating charge) before the bat¬ 
tery is adequately charged. 

2. Be sure to refer to the Deutronic DBL-430/DBL-800 or V&FI MultiCharger 750 
manuals for proper charger setup procedures. Additionally on Deutronic chargers 
refer to attachments "DBL-430 Settings" and "DBL-800 Settings" for the correct 
default settings to use. 

When using any Deutronic battery charger, be sure that the charging amperage has 
been set at 15%-20% above the amp hour rating of the battery. Since the 
Deutronic DBL-430 is only adjustable in amperage increments of 10, it may be nec¬ 
essary to round up to the next higher amperage setting. Failure to do so will result in 
an undercharged battery. For a 90Ah battery, set to 110A and for 110Ah, set to 
130A. 

The Deutronic DBL-800 charger, as well as the V&H MultiCharger 750, is self-cali¬ 
brating; however, voltage and amperage can be manually set in the service menu 
and should be checked and adjusted as necessary, prior to charging. 

3. If the vehicle is equipped with an IBS (Intelligent Battery Sensor), be sure to charge 
the battery from the service port or disconnect the battery from the vehicle. DO 
NOT connect the charger directly to the IBS. 

4. A fully charged battery is indicated on the Deutronics chargers by a green LED and 
the letters "FC" for "Floating Charge" being visible in the LCD display. The V&H 
MultiCharger 750 will display "Battery Full" in the LCD display. 

Midtronics Battery Testing Procedure 

1. All battery tests must be performed directly at the battery. 

2. For in-vehicle testing, all electronic loads must be off, as a high-current draw in the 
period before sleep mode may adversely affect the result. 

3. Both Midtronics tester clamps must be firmly attached to the appropriate battery 
terminals which have been cleaned with a wire brush. Follow the menu prompts. 


29 

Battery Basics 



4. Select "IN-VEHICLE" or "OUT-OF-VEHICLE" (as appropriate). 

5. Select the CCA rating from the vehicle battery label. 

6. If the warning "SYSTEM NOISE" is displayed, be sure all electrical loads such as 
open doors, interior lighting or active systems are turned off. In rare cases, it is pos¬ 
sible for an active BUS line to produce sufficient electrical noise to hamper testing. 
In such instances, the BUS must be allowed to enter sleep mode before proceed¬ 
ing, or the vehicle may be placed in sleep mode using the diagnostic eguipment. 

7. Dependent on the battery voltage, the guestion "BEFORE CHARGE" or "AFTER 
CHARGE" will be displayed. 

• "BEFORE CHARGE" must be selected if the battery has not yet been charged. 

• "AFTER CHARGE" must be selected after the battery has been charged. 

8. After testing, use the Midtronics printer to print a result ticket with the warranty 
code. The following tester results are possible: 

a. "CHARGE & RETEST" - If the battery has less than approximately 8 volts when 
tested and the tester does not find the battery to be defective (e.g., a shorted 
cell), the battery will be tested and the message "CHARGE & RETEST" will be 
displayed. 

b. "GOOD-RECHARGE" - If the tester displays "GOOD-RECHARGE", the bat¬ 
tery must be retested after recharging. 

Note: Should the tester display "GOOD—RECHARGE" after fully charging, 
print a second result ticket and charge the battery for two additional 
hours. If the tester still displays "GOOD— RECHARGE", print the 
results and replace the battery. 

c. "GOOD BATTERY" - Only release the vehicle when the tester displays "GOOD 
BATTERY" and the open circuit voltage (OCV) is 12.6 volts or higher - this indi¬ 
cates a fully charged battery. Note that the display "GOOD BATTERY" is not in 
itself an indication of a fully charged battery. This is important, as the Midtronics 
tester does not reguire a 100% state of charge to determine whether the bat¬ 
tery is good; however, a 100% state of charge is necessary to insure proper and 
trouble-free operation of the vehicle's electrical system components. 

d. "REPLACE BATTERY" - If the tester determines the battery to be defective, the 
message "REPLACE BATTERY" will be displayed. 


9. Retain all Midtronics printouts with the warranty code in the vehicle file. 


30 

Battery Basics 



Additional Information 

1. Below is an Open Circuit Voltage chart listing battery voltage as it relates to the 
state of battery charge. 

An Open Circuit Voltage measurement is only valid if the surface charge has been 
removed. It can be measured using a multimeter. It is also the voltage shown on the 
Midtronics printout. To remove the surface charge, turn on the high beams for one 
minute and then allow the battery voltage to stabilize (approximately one minute) 
before testing. 


Open Circuit Voltage vs. State of Battery Charge 


ocv 

State of Charge 

12.65 volts 

100% 

12.45 volts 

75% 

12.24 volts 

50% 

12.06 volts 

25% 

11.89 volts 

Discharged 


2. If the Midtronics tester detects a surface charge, it will be displayed on the tester. 
Follow the prompts to turn on the headlights for about one minute, and then follow 
the prompts. The tester will continue testing the battery automatically. For best 
results when testing the battery out of the vehicle, always remove the surface 
charge before testing if the battery has been charged. 

3. Do not replace a batteryjust because the eye is black. The green eye is only an 
indicator of the cell to which it is attached. 

4. When a discharged battery is encountered, check the function of the charging sys¬ 
tem. Perform the "Energy Diagnostics" test plan (B61 13 05) and, if necessary, 
check the electrical system for closed circuit current draw as per SI B61 08 00. 

5. Other related Service Information bulletins: 

• SI B04 25 02 - Operation of current Midtronics tester 

• SI B04 11 02 - Operation of Deutronic DBL-430 charger 

Note: For all models up to FI 0, we should use the Midtronics tester, NOT a 
VAT40 or equivalent. For FI 0 and later vehicles, a battery test is built 
into the vehicle (through the IBS), and is accessed using ISTA. 

Note: A battery may only be replaced on FI 0 when identified as faulty using 
ISTA (the test plan returns a Diagnosis Code for the replacement) 


31 

Battery Basics 




Warranty Information 

Warranty Code for claims relating to all BMW batteries 

The warranty code is an encrypted code that includes all of the information from the 
printout. 

Excluding the situation described in Note 2 (below), the 
Midtronics tester must be used fortesting batteries with 
charge related defects, and that are to be claimed under 
warranty. 

On completion of a battery test, print out the results, and 
file the printout with the completed repair order for future 
reference, if reguested. 

The printout contains a warranty code (1). This code must be included in the 
"Comments" section when submitting the warranty claim. 

Failure to guote the warranty code in the comments of the warranty claim may result 
in a delay in processing or refusal of the warranty claim. 

Notes: 

1. The "Warranty Code" is notan authorization number to replace the 
battery. Only replace the battery when this is stated in the test results 
(for example, "Replace Battery") or in the special case identified in 
8b), above. 

2. For vehicles with power management systems (vehicles with an IBS 
[Intelligent Battery Sensor]): If the battery is damaged due to dis¬ 
charge prior to QC1, depending on the vehicle model, either the mes¬ 
sage "Battery damaged, replace battery before delivery" will show 
during CBS Handover Inspection, or a similarly worded Check Control 
message will be displayed in the instrument cluster. In this case, a 
Midtronics printout is not required because the CBS message will be 
transmitted automatically within the FASTAdata. 

3 Battery failures that are the result of storage neglect or physical dam¬ 
age will not be covered by the BMW New Vehicle Limited Warranty. 



32 

Battery Basics 




Closed Circuit Current Draw Testing 

Increased closed-circuit currents may occur permanently or intermittently and cause the 
battery to discharge prematurely. The increase in closed circuit current may be caused by 
a faulty control unit or by the installation of a non-approved accessory. 

Minimal amounts of parasitic draw can be overcome by the chemical reaction that takes 
place inside the battery. A problem occurs when the average vehicle current consumption 
higher that the battery can produce chemically. 

In a situation where a vehicle has broken down due to a discharged battery, for diagnostic 
purposes it is important not to disconnect the battery. This is because a control unit will 
be reset if the battery is disconnected. Following a reset, the faulty control unit may start 
functioning correctly again, making accurate diagnosis impossible. 

To correctly measure closed-circuit current, the 50-amp clip-on probe (previously used 
with the MIB) can now be used in conjunction with the IMIB (Integrated Measurement 
Interface Box) to properly diagnosis closed-circuit current problems over an extended 
period of time. Connect the 50-amp clip-on probe directly to the IMIB Measurement 
input 3 (green socket). Refer to SI B04 35 09 for information about the IMIB. 

Use the following path to access this information: 

• All except E65 and E66: Function structure>Body>Power supply>Deactivation, 
closed circuit current violation 

• E65 and E66: Function structure>Body>Power supply>Voltage and current monitor- 
ing>Closed-circuit current performance>Closed-circuit current diagnosis. 

The following tools are needed: 

• ISID 

• IMIB 

• 50-amp clip-on probe 

Performing a Closed Current Measurement 

• It is very important that any "Power management" faults stored be diagnosed and 
corrected, and the "Energy Diagnosis" test plan carried out before the following pro¬ 
cedure is performed. 

• Check and test the battery using the BMW Battery Tester. Refer to SI B 04 25 02 for 
information about the BMW Battery. If necessary, recharge or replace the battery. 

• If the battery is installed in the trunk, open the trunk and turn the lock to the locked 
position, using a screwdriver or similar (simulates the trunk lid being closed). The 
hood must be closed. If the battery is installed in the engine compartment, open the 
hood and pull the front lid contact switch fully up, and lock in this position (workshop 
position, simulates the front lid being closed). The trunk must be closed. 


33 

Battery Basics 



• With the exception of the trunk/hood above, all other doors/lids must be closed. 

• In order to simulate normal closed-circuit conditions: 

- Turn the ignition on and activate all electrical consumers, including any acces¬ 
sories. Turn the ignition off. In some cases, a drive cycle may need to be carried 
out in order to duplicate a closed-circuit current problem. 

- Open and close the driver's door (simulates somebody getting out). 

- Lock the car, arming the DWA if this is installed. 


• In general, closed-circuit current consistently over 50mA must be investigated. 
Depending on the vehicle's equipment, closed-circuit current by vehicle model is 
approximately as follows: 


Vehicle 

Closed circuit current measurement 

E36, Z3 

30 milliamps after 16 minutes 

E46 

40 milliamps after 16 minutes 

E60, E61.E63, E64 

40 milliamps after 60-70 minutes 

E65, E66 

40 milliamps after 60-70 minutes 

E53 

40 milliamps after 16 minutes 

E70, E71, E72 

40 milliamps after 60-70 minutes with TCU (30 minutes without TCU) 

E83 

40 milliamps after 16 minutes 

E82, E88 

40 milliamps after 60-70 minutes with TCU (30 minutes without TCU) 

E90, E91.E92, E93 

40 milliamps after 60-70 minutes with TCU (30 minutes without TCU) 

E85 

40 milliamps after 16 minutes 

E89 

40 milliamps after 60-70 minutes with TCU (30 minutes without TCU) 

E52 

50 milliamps after 16 minutes 

F01.F02, F07, FI 0 

7-21 milliamps after 30 minutes 


• If the nominal milliamp reading is not achieved after the appropriate time, refer to the 
attached troubleshooting charts. On 2005 MY vehicles equipped with BMW 
ASSIST, there are additional current fluctuations as high as 500ma that last for 
approximately 2 minutes. The fluctuations occur every 15 minutes for up to 14 hours 
after key off. This is considered normal operation of the TCU, and should not be con¬ 
sidered a fault. This also applies to 2005 TCUs that are installed into earlier produc¬ 
tion vehicles as replacement parts. 


34 

Battery Basics 




Closed Circuit Current Measurment with the IMIB 

This technique with an IMIB is particularly suitable for extended measurements, and pro¬ 
vides a graphical readout of recorded measurements overtime. It is recommended for sit¬ 
uations where the use of a multimeter provided insufficient information for problem diag¬ 
nosis. 

1. The IMIB can be accessed from any ISID within the workshop. 

2. Select "Activities". 

3. Select "Measuring devices". 

4. Select from the "Level 1" column, "Measuring devices", and then "OK". 

5. From the "Connection manager" screen, select the free IMIB and "Set up 
connection". 

6. The "Measures devices" screen opens on the "Multimeter" tab. 

7. Select the "Oscilloscope" tab. 

8. Highlight the "CHI" tab to activate channel 1. 

9. Under channel 1, "Source", scroll with the arrows to select "Clip-on probe 50A". 

10. Make sure that clip-on probe is not connected to the battery cable, and acknowl¬ 
edge the pop-up message with "OK". 

11. Change the "A/Div" setting to "1 A". 

12. Under the "Time" selection box, change the "Time/Div" setting based on the 
number of measurements needed (5 ms to 200 s). The longer times should be 
selected when performing the measurement over an extended period. 

13. Select "CH 1" under "Cursor" to monitor the actual readings. 

14. Select "Record" if performing long term measurements. 

15. After performing the measurement, select "Record" again; the display will change 
to "Compress" and display the recorded data on the 1 screen. 


Note: For further information regarding Closed-circuit Current Measurement 
refer to SI B61 08 00 available in ISTA. 


35 

Battery Basics 



Closed circuit current monitoring using the IMIB and the “Clip-on Clip probe 50A or 100A” 


FtelCui ?H1»/A 
LMtCur 2 BZII5 A 
A Cur -0 0066 A 


t 0 00 mu 
IA 11.00 ttz 
in ooo% 

M H mil oil m* 


Integrated Service 

T cl tinkal Application 

/ 9 A 

■ 

■ 

? 

|jpg] x 

VIM. Vehicle 






HJ 

MiriliirMer Signals 

® 






7 



Referenc Differem 

£ “' w HE HE 

Cvapnsi Signal! 

Petition 




7«m«/D»v 

'Tl'l 

tr.a 0 «r 

Soured 

CH 2 


Smi e 

Position 

PlOM 2 

H E 

A. .»H%| ▼ 

OflMt 

1 hvmI 

El “''El 

.o»| ■» 

V/Ory 

Slap* 

a. Q iimv j -w 

MS 


Coupling _ Coupling 

I ono « 


M ods 
Aiiln i 


►*vr settings 


load 1 

Uut measuring 

delete sntkig 

devices 


(1) Select channel 1 or 2. 

(2) Change the “Source” to “Clip-on probe 50A or 100A” (confirm calibration prompt). 

(3) Set “A/DIV” to “10A”. 

(4) Change the “Time/DIV” in the “Time” box to “1 s” to start (the value can be 
changed if longer recording time is needed). 

(5) Select the “Cursor” for the channel selected, 1 or 2. 

(6) Once the measurement is started, press the “Record” button to start monitoring. 

(7) Select “Save settings” to save the configuration setup (can be loaded back up at a 
later time). 


36 

Battery Basics 

























Integrated Sendee r, 

! echnkalApplicsbun 

□0 

I 1 

@0 @ 

BE ■ [3 m x 


VIN VF4937? VbWi W 1'/F8?/COUPFV1 Pfli/NSI/AUTO/USA IFFT HAND DRWF/?0(W/B 




Ref Cur BA 

IMt Cur 1 A 

A Cur 7 A 


At CMIXIII Itll 


_ ... I Owl t 

S«o settings drWnsrtano 


Referenc Otfferenc 


Coupled 


Display 

toy flCCIHl! 


Compress Signals 


®® 


_!!_> 1111 ► 1 
Time 

on 

•* ► 


0 1IWWUW 

[Zr 33 I 


© 


33 


0«D « H l°"° “ I 


1 nggnr 

Baurcci 


Slup» 


Auto Morin 




Qn*rrr**j*lmj 

davlcns 


(1) Select the “Record” button to stop recording. 

(2) Select the “Compress” button to start analyzing the recorded signal. 

(3) Change the “Time/DIV” in the “Time” box to the value which makes the signal easi¬ 
er to view glitches. 

(4) Change the “Position” in the “Time” box to scroll through the signal. 

(5) The white bar along the top of the display indicates the part of the entire signal 
being viewed. 

(6) The cursor(s) may be moved to display the value of different parts of the display. 


37 

Battery Basics 



























