Table of Contents 


N73B60 Engine 

Subject Page 

N73B60 Engine 

Objectives of the Module.2 

Purpose of the System.3 

Technical Data.4 

Components 

Fresh Air System.6 

Crankcase Ventilation.9 

Exhaust System.10 

Secondary Air System.12 

Ancillary Components and Drive Belts.14 

Cylinder Heads.15 

Valvetronic.17 

Bi-VANOS.23 

Cooling System.30 

Engine block.37 

Lubrication System.40 

Review Questions .45 


















N73B60 Engine 

Model: E66 - 760Li 
Production: MY 2003 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the function of the throttle valve(s). 

• List the function of the low temperature area in the radiator. 

• Describe the cooling circuit flow. 

• Expalin how the initial VANOS sprocket to hub position is retained when oil pressure is 
not present. 

• Describe what conditions are necessary for the Auxiliary Air Flaps to be opened. 

• List the Valvetronic components that are different as compared to the N62. 

• Locate the engine oil thermostat and understand how it functions. 


2 

N73B60 Engine 




N73B60 Engine 

Purpose of the System 


The N73 engine is a complete new BMW development from the NG Series (New 
Generation) as a B60 (6 liter). The N73B60 will be used in the E66 as a 760Li (USA). 



The BMW 760Li will set new standards in terms of performance and driving dynamics in 
the 12-cylinder market segment as well as significantly reduce fuel consumption. 


For the first time at BMW, 
Valvetronic technology (combina¬ 
tion of Bi-VANOS and variable 
intake valve lift) is supplemented 
by direct injection (Dl). 

In addition, the N73 cylinder 
heads use 4 valve technology. 

The combination of these cutting 
edge technologies provides low 
fuel consumption and maximum 
power output and torque, making 
the N73 the best engine in its 
class. 



3 

N73B60 Engine 










Technical Data 


Technical Data Comparison 

N73B60 

M73B54 

V-angle configuration 

12 cyl. V / 60° 

12 cyl. V/ 60° 

Displacement (cm 3) 

5972 

5379 

Bore / Stroke (mm) 

89/80 

79/85 

Cylinder spacing (mm) 

98 

91 

Crankshaft main bearing diam. (mm) 

70 

75 

Conrod big end diam. (mm) 

54 

48 

Power output (kW/HP) 

320 / 438 

240 / 326 

at engine speed (rpm) 

6000 

5000 

Torque (Nm) 

600 

490 

at engine speed (rpm) 

3950 

3900 

Idle speed (rpm) 

550 

600 

Maximum engine speed (rpm) 

6500 

6500 

Compression ratio 

11.3 : 1 

10 : 1 

Valves per cylinder 

4 

2 

Intake valve diam. (mm) 

35 

42 

Exhaust valve diam. (mm) 

29 

36 

Intake valve lift (mm) 

0.3 - 9.85 

10.3 

Exhaust valve lift (mm) 

9.7 

10.3 

Engine weight (kg) 

280 

- 

Fuel requirement 

Premium unleaded 

Premium unleaded 

Knock control 

Yes 

Yes 

Injection pressure (bar) 

50 - 120 

3.5 

Digital Motor Electronics (ECM) 

2x MED 9.2.1 & Valvetronic ECU 
with 2x HDEV ECU 

2x ME 5.2 & EML Ills 

Emission compliance level 

LEV 

LEV 

Firing order 

1-7-5-11-3-9-6-12-2-8-4-10 

1-7-5-11-3-9-6-12-2-8-4-10 

Fuel consumption savings compared 

with M73 

12 % 


Maxmimum regulated vehicle speed 
(km/h / mph) 

250/155 

250/155 


4 

N73B60 Engine 













































































Power and Torque Output - N73B60 / M73B54 


Nm 

960 

920 

B&O 

B40 

BOO 

760 

720 

660 

640 

600 

660 

520 

460 

440 

400 

360 

320 





























r 

£ 

f 

_ M _ 

* %. 

\ 

\ 

\ 



/ _i 

F 

i 

M 

f 

r 

*■ 

% 



/ 1 

/ f 
/ t 

I * 





/ 1 
f t 

¥ 

¥ 




/ J 

J 

§ 

S 

’ 




/ + 
/ ¥ 

/ 1 





/ r j 

/ I jT 





¥ 

/ # 

¥ 1 

■ h 



/ * 

/ ¥ * H 

/ * 

1 /* 1 * 

m 

w 

% 

* 

1 

\ 

L 


/ ¥ ^ * 
f- 



t 

% 

1 

_ 1 _ 





6 

1 

m 

6 





1 

i 








hW 

psmp 

320 

435,2 

300 

408,0 

280 

300,8 

260 

353,6 

240 

326,4 

220 

209,2 

200 

272,0 

100 

244,8 

160 

217,6 

140 

190,4 

120 

153,2 

100 

136,0 

60 

108,8 

60 

81,6 

40 

54,4 

20 

27,4 

0 

0,0 


0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 



Engine RPM 

— 

i 


N73B60 

M73B54 


5 

N73B60 Engine 













































































































Fresh Air System 

Air Routing 


A separate air cleaner housing is used for each cylinder bank. Air is supplied from the area 
between the headlights and cooling module via the intake snorkel (1) from the radiator fresh 
air duct. 

The air cleaner volume is approxi¬ 
mately 10.5 litres for each air 
cleaner housing. 

The replaceable (as specified by 
the recommended service) air 
cleaner element is reinforced by a 
sheet metal grille. 

1. Intake snorkel 

2. Hot-film air mass sensor (HFM) 

3. Air duct to throttle 

4. Solenoid valve for auxiliary air flaps 

Each air cleaner housing incorporates an auxiliary air flap in its side wall (3 below). The aux¬ 
iliary air flaps supply the engine with enough air volume to attain the maximum perfor¬ 
mance. The auxiliary air flaps are closed in the lower rpm ranges so that only cooler ambi¬ 
ent air is drawn in for hot idling and stop and go driving. 

The auxiliary air flaps are actuated by diaphragm cells (4 below) which are located inside 
the air cleaner housings. Both diaphragm cells are supplied with vacuum from a common 
solenoid valve (7 below). 

1. Air duct to throttle 

2. Intake resonator 

3. Auxiliary air flap 

4. Diaphragm cell 

5. Diaphragm cell vacuum connection 

6. Intake snorkel 

7. Solenoid valve for auxiliary air flaps 




6 

N73B60 Engine 



























The auxiliary air flaps are fully opened by the 
ECM: 

• In driving position “D” with kickdown 
operation from 3500 rpm 

• In driving position “S” from 3000 rpm 
and simultaneous full load recognition. 



10-15% additional air is drawn in from the engine compartment when the auxiliary air flaps 
are open. It is not necessary to draw in additional cold air from outside the engine com¬ 
partment since the engine compartment is adequately ventilated at full load. 


Throttle Valves 

The throttle valves (one per cylinder bank) on the N73 are not 
necessary for engine load control. This is carried out by the 
intake valves variable lift adjustment. 

• Throttle Valve Housing with Throttle Valve. 

• Throttle Valve Actuator 

• Two Throttle Valve Potentiometers 

The tasks of the throttle valves are: 

Starting the engine 

Airflow is controlled by the throttle valves during the starting procedure and idle when the 
air temperature is between 0 °C and 60 °C, . 

If the engine is at operating temperature, it will be switched to non-throttle mode approx¬ 
imately 60 seconds after start up. In cold conditions however, the engine is started with 
the throttle valve fully opened because this has a positive effect on the starting characteris¬ 
tics. 

Ensuring a constant vacuum of 50 mbar in the intake manifold 

This vacuum is needed to exhaust the blow-by gases from the crankcase and the fuel 
vapors from the activated charcoal filter. 

The backup function 

If the Valvetronic system should fault, the throttle valve implements conventional load con¬ 
trol). 



42 - 02-25 


7 

N73B60 Engine 







Intake Manifold 


The intake system is a complete component constructed of magnesium in a shell type 
design and has separate manifold chambers for each cylinder bank. 


1. Intake manifold pressure sensors 

2. Captured gaskets 

3. Pressure control valves for crankcase 
ventilation 

4. Throttle valves 



The individual parts of the intake system are bonded and bolted to each other, providing 
considerable weight reduction (separating the shell halves is not permitted). 

The entire intake system is protected against corrosion by a dip coating procedure. The 
fastening bolts of the add on parts are also coated and must be replaced in the event of 
damage, to prevent corrosion and pitting. 

All of the gaskets (2) are secured by retainers (captured) to provide ease of installation. The 
intake system is isolated from the engine by rubber elements on the fastening bolts. 

An intake manifold pressure sensor (1) is used for each cylinder bank. Recording the man¬ 
ifold differential pressure is necessary for the correct throttle position (synchronization) so 
that a manifold differential pressure of 50 mbar can be balanced on each bank. 

Both sides of the induction system are fitted with a pressure control valve (3) for crankcase 
ventilation which is distributed to both banks. 


Note: When replacing the spark plugs, it is necessary to remove the entire intake system to 
avoid damaging the spark plugs during installation. The spark plugs must be replaced 
every 100,000 miles in US vehicles. 


8 

N73B60 Engine 










The intake system has an integrated intake noise resonator for each cylinder bank. The 
intake noise resonators reduce the intake pulsation noises caused by the intake valves 
opening and closing. 

The manifold chamber on each 
cylinder bank has been fitted with 
a partition and an additional reso¬ 
nance chamber (2). 


Each resonance chamber is con¬ 
nected by a pipe (1) with the 
remaining manifold chamber (on 
its side of the engine). 


Crankcase Ventilation 

The crankcase vapors (a result of combustion blow-by gasses) are led out of the crank¬ 
case and back into the combustion chamber via the intake manifold. The blow-by gasses 
contain droplets of oil which must be separated. The oil is returned to the sump while the 
blow-by gasses are led into the intake manifold for combustion. 

The engine performance is affected by the introduction of crankcase vapors into the com¬ 
bustion process, particularly in idle speed ranges. This influence is monitored by lambda 
regulation. 

The crankcase vapors are carried from the 
crankcase and into the cylinder head covers 
through labyrinth separators (1 - two per cylin¬ 
der head). 

The oil which accumulates on the walls of the 
labyrinth separators flows into the cylinder head 
via a siphon and from there back to the sump. 

The remaining vapors are passed to the engine for combustion via the pressure control 
valves in the intake manifold (one per cylinder bank). The throttle valve is controlled so that 
there is always a minimum of 50 mbar vacuum in the intake manifold. The pressure control 
valve regulates the crankcase pressure to a low 0 - 40 mbar. 




9 

N73B60 Engine 

















































Pressure Control Valves 


The pressure control valves (one per cylinder bank) vary the vacuum applied to the 
crankcase ventilation depending on engine load. The valve is balanced between spring 
pressure and the amount of manifold vacuum. The oil vapors exit the separator labyrinth 
in the cylinder head covers. The oil vapors are drawn into the intake manifold, regulated by 
the pressure control valves. 

At idle when the intake manifold vacuum is high, 
the vacuum decreases the valve opening and 
only allows a small amount of crankcase vapors 
to be drawn into the intake manifold. 

At part to full load conditions when intake man¬ 
ifold vacuum is lower, the spring opens the valve 
and additional crankcase vapors are drawn into 
the intake manifold. 



To the intake manifold 


11550001 


Exhaust System 

The exhaust system is completely redesigned for the N73B60 engine. It has been opti¬ 
mized for cylinder filling, scavenging, sound level and rapid catalytic converter activation. 
Because the catalytic converters are in the exhaust manifolds (situated close to the engine), 
the response temperature is reached very quickly. 


1. Rear silencer 

2. Center silencer 

3. Front silencer 

4. Exhaust manifold with catalytic 
converters, cylinders 7-12 

5. Exhaust manifold with catalytic 
converters, cylinders 1 - 6 



10 

N73B60 Engine 





















Silencers 

• A 2.8 liter capacity front silencer has been fitted for each cylinder bank. 

• A single 12.5 liter center silencer is fitted downstream of the two front silencers. 

• The resonator type rear silencers have capacities of 12.6 and 16.6 liters (4 and 3 below). 


Exhaust Flap 

The 12.6 liter rear silencer (4) is fitted with an exhaust flap to keep noise to a minimum at 
engine idle speed and low rpm. The exhaust flap is opened allowing additional flow when: 

• The transmission gear is engaged and 

• The engine speed is above 1,500 rpm 

A vacuum-controlled diaphragm (2 - actuator 
mounted on the silencer) opens and closes the 
exhaust gas flap. 

The exhaust flap is opened with vacuum, and is sprung closed by the actuator (when vac¬ 
uum is not present). The procedure is carried out using a solenoid valve (1) which is elec¬ 
trically controlled by the ECM. 

The efficiency of the flap is based essentially on two effects: 

• Minimization of the cross-section and the outlet level at low exhaust flow rates 

• Large cross-section with low backpressure at high speeds and loads 



Notes: 


11 

N73B60 Engine 














Exhaust Manifold with Catalytic Converter 

Each cylinder bank is equipped with a six into 
one exhaust manifold (4 and 5). The manifold 
and the catalytic converter housing together 
form one component. 

Two ceramic-substrate catalytic converters are 
arranged one behind the other in the catalytic 
converter housing (2). 

The mounting for the broadband planar oxygen sensors (Bosch LSU 4.2) and the sec¬ 
ondary oxygen sensors is located in front of (3) and behind (1) the catalytic converter. 



Secondary Air System 

Injecting additional air (secondary air) into the cylinder head exhaust track during the warm¬ 
up phase initiates a thermal secondary combustion which results in a reduction of the non- 
combusted hydrocarbons (HC) and carbon monoxide (CO) in the exhaust gas. 

The energy generated during this process heats up the catalytic converter faster during the 
warm-up phase, and increases it’s conversion rate. The activation temperature of 250° C is 
reached in a few seconds. 


1. Secondary air pump 

2. Fresh air inlet from 
air cleaner housing 

3. Non-return valve 
cylinder bank 1 - 6 

4. Non-return valve 
cylinder bank 7-12 

5. Connection to cylinder 
head 1 - 6 

6. Connection to cylinder 
head 7-12 



12 

N73B60 Engine 




















Secondary Air Pump (SLP) 


The electrically-operated secondary air pump is mounted to the vehicle body. The pump 
draws out filtered fresh air from the air cleaner housing during the warm-up phase and sup¬ 
plies it to the two secondary air Non-return Valves. 

Once the engine has been started, the secondary air pump is supplied with voltage by the 
ECM via the secondary air pump relay. It remains switched on until the engine has taken in 
a certain amount of air. 

The ON period may be a maximum of 90 seconds and it depends on the following engine 
operating conditions: 

• Coolant temperature (from -10° C to approximately 60° C) 

• Air mass and temperature (from HFM) 

• Engine speed 


Non-Return Valves (SLV) 

One non-return valve is mounted on each cylinder head. The non-return valves are opened 
by the pressure generated from the secondary air pump. The secondary air is led through 
a pipe to the secondary air ducts (integral in the cylinder heads) for distribution into the 
exhaust ports. 


1. Secondary air pump connection 

2. Non-return valve (SLV) 

3. Connection to cylinder head 



The non-return valves are sprung closed when the secondary air pump is deactivated. This 
prevents exhaust vapors, pressure and condensation from flowing back into the secondary 
air pump. 


KT-9664 


13 

N73B60 Engine 













Ancillary Components and Drive Belts 

Drive Belts 

The belt drive has two components and is subdivided into the main and A/C drives. Both 
belts are driven by the crankshaft pulley. 

A four rib belt is used to drive the air conditioning compressor and a six rib belt is used for 
the main drive. Each drive belt has a maintenance free tensioning unit with tensioning pul¬ 
ley and torsioner. 

1. Water pump pulley 

2. 6 rib main drive belt 

3. Main drive belt tensioner 

4. Alternator 

5. Deflection pulley 

6. Power steering and dynamic drive pump 

7. A/C compressor drive belt tensioner 

8. Crankshaft pulley 

9. A/C compressor 

10. 4 rib A/C compressor drive belt 


To remove the drive belts: 

The tensioning pulley is pushed back using a 
Torx tool in the recess provided (1) and fixed in 
this position by inserting a locking pin as shown 
( 2 ). 


The following ancillary components are the same 
as the N62: 

• Liquid cooled alternator (180 A) 

• Clutch less A/C compressor 

The compact gear reduction starter motor is located on the right side of the engine under¬ 
neath the exhaust manifold (2.0 kW output). 



42-02-16 



14 

N73B60 Engine 













Cylinder Heads 


The two N73 cylinder heads are a new development from BMW and have been adapted to 
the new direct injection system. The cylinder heads are equipped with Valvetronic valve 
gear and bi-VANOS. The inlet camshaft and the Valvetronic eccentric shaft are jointly guid¬ 
ed by a bridge support. 

The ports for the high pressure fuel injectors are located on the intake side. The engine is 
equipped with a high pressure fuel pump for each cylinder head. Each cylinder head has 
a bucket-tappet drive on the exhaust camshaft for the high pressure fuel pump. 

The secondary air ducts for subsequent exhaust gas treatment are integrated in the cylin¬ 
der heads. The cylinder heads are cooled by the “cross-flow” principle. The cylinder heads 
are made from aluminum and are manufactured using gravity die-casting. 




Cylinder Head Gaskets 


DCS00654 


The cylinder head gasket is a triple layer steel gasket with rubber coating. This gasket ver¬ 
sion is already established in previous engines (N62). A four layer repair gasket is available 
if the cylinder-head surface is machined. 

The cylinder head bolts for the N73 engine are Ml 0x160 necked-down “stretch” bolts. 

Note: These bolts should always be replaced when repairs are performed. 


The lower part of the timing chain housing is bolted to the cylinder head using two M8x45 
bolts. 


15 

N73B60 Engine 






Engine Cover 


The engine is equipped with a 
design cover (1) on the intake sys¬ 
tem. 

There is also a front shield (2) sit¬ 
uated between the radiator cover 
and the design cover with an 
opening for the oil filler neck (3). 

The cover is a “push fit” with 
retaining pins (4) into rubber 
grommets on the intake manifold. 



Cylinder Head Covers 

The cylinder head covers are 
made from plastic. The retaining 
sleeves for the ignition coils have 
molded-on gaskets. 

The sleeves must be replaced if 
any hardening or damage is visi¬ 
ble on the gaskets. 

The sleeves are secured between 
the cylinder head cover and cylin¬ 
der head (arrow showing one 
removed). 


1. Bore for Valvetronic Sensor 

2. Bore for intake camshaft sensor 

3. Bore for exhaust camshaft sensor 

4. Opening for ignition coils 

5. Cutout for high pressure pump drive 

6. Cutout for Valvetronic motor 

7. Outlet for crankcase ventilation 




KT-9747 


16 

N73B60 Engine 


































Valvetronic 


The mixture control is influenced by the throttle valve and is not optimal in all the different 
load ranges. This is particularly true in the idle to part-load ranges, since the throttle valve 
is only opened slightly in these ranges. The consequences are less than optimal cylinder 
filling, torque and increased fuel consumption. 

Technical measures were previously introduced; such as the optimization of air/fuel mixing, 
introduction of bi-VANOS and the steady improvement of mixture control all depend on the 
throttle valve. This is where the unique Valvetronic design comes in. 

The Valvetronic system simultaneously varies the valve opening time and the intake valve 
opening lift between 0.3 mm and 9.85 mm, according to engine speed and load. This 
means that the air volume is controlled according to engine requirements. This type of vol¬ 
ume control makes the typical throttle valve control unnecessary. 

The valve gear is essentially the 
same as the N62 engine and has 
been adapted to the geometry of 
the N73 (with two more cylinders). 

1. Valvetronic motor * 

2. Intermediate shaft * 

3. Bridge support * 

4. Eccentric shaft 

5. Torque compensation spring * 

6. Intake camshaft 

7. Exhaust camshaft with “triple” cam 
lobe for high pressure pump * 

* Modifications have been made to 
these components making them 
different from the N62. 


Note: To remove the cylinder head, 
it is necessary to remove the inter¬ 
mediate shaft (requiring a special 
tool) in order to gain access to the 
cylinder head bolts. 



17 

N73B60 Engine 









Physical considerations: 


On engines with throttle valve control, the throttle valve is slightly open in the idling and part¬ 
load ranges. This results in the formation of up to 500 mbar vacuum in the intake mani¬ 
fold, which prevents the engine from aspirating freely and in turn prevents optimum cylin¬ 
der filling. The Valvetronic system with an open throttle valve largely counteracts this dis¬ 
advantage. The air-mass flow to the intake valves is unrestricted. The full ambient pressure 
is available directly at the intake valves for cylinder filling and scavenging. 

The Valvetronic system primarily controls the fill by adapting the valve opening time and the 
valve lift (short opening time/small valve lift = lower fill, and vice versa). During the valve 
opening phase the engine aspirates more freely via the intake valves even with small valve 
lifts vs. a throttle valve which is continuously blocked. 

The slower cylinder filling from the intake valves with partial lift results in more turbulence in 
the combustion chamber, thus faster and better mixture control and more efficient com¬ 
bustion. At lower engine speeds this effect is intensified by opening the intake valves later, 
after top dead center (ATDC) using VANOS. This increases vacuum in the combustion 
chamber which accelerates filling and turbulence when the intake valves are opened. 

In summary, the additional variability of the Valvetronic system results in optimization of 
cylinder filling and scavenging throughout the engine's entire operating range. This has a 
positive effect on output, torque and a decrease in fuel consumption and exhaust emis¬ 
sions. 


N73 Features : 

• Valve lift adjustment 

• Bi-VANOS (intake and exhaust) 

• Mixture control and ignition control 

• Direct fuel injection (Dl) 

Thjs results in: 

• Improved engine idling 

• Improved engine torque 

• Improved engine torque curve 

• Fewer pollutant emissions 


The main benefits of these features are: 

• Improved cylinder filling 

• Improved mixture control 

• Improved combustion procedure 


These benefits result in a clear improvement in performance and fuel consumption reduc¬ 
tion (12% as compared to the M73) for the driver. 


18 

N73B60 Engine 



Principle of Operation 


The Valvetronic system is a combination of VANOS and valve lift adjustment. This combi¬ 
nation of abilities allows the ECM to control when the intake valves are opened and closed, 
and also the opening lift. The intake air flow is set by adjusting the valve lift while the throt¬ 
tle valve is fully opened. This further improves cylinder filling and reduces fuel consumption. 


Each cylinder head in the N62 engine has a Valvetronic assembly. This Valvetronic assem¬ 
bly consists of a bridge support with eccentric shaft, intermediate levers with retaining 
springs, drag lever and the intake camshaft. 


In addition, the following components belong to 
the Valvetronic system: 


• A Valvetronic motor for each cylinder head 

• A Valvetronic control module 

• A Valvetronic position sensor for each cylinder head 


The intake valve lift can be infinitely adjusted 
between 0.3 mm and 9.85 mm. 



The cylinder heads are precision manufactured together to ensure precise flow rate and 
uniform distribution. The valve gear components on the intake side are precisely matched 
together to the tightest limits. 


System Components 

Valvetronic Motors 


- Because of the tighter vee angle (60°), the 
Valvetronic motors are attached to the cylin¬ 
der heads on the exhaust side. 

- An intermediate shaft connects the 
Valvetronic motors with the Valvetronic 
eccentric shaft. 



kt-9573 


1. Cylinder head cover 

2. Motor mounting/isolating element 

3. Intermediate flange 

4. Mounting for high pressure fuel pump 


The main distinguishing features from the N62 
are: 


19 

N73B60 Engine 














The Valvetronic motor is rubber mounted at the rear (1 lower left) to isolate it from the cylin¬ 
der head cover. The Valvetronic motor is secured to the bridge support by the intermedi¬ 
ate flange and has a hexagon drive (2 lower left), which engages into the intermediate shaft 
(7 lower right). 


The intermediate shaft is mounted in the bridge support and is engaged by its spindle in 
the eccentric shaft teeth. This design provides ease of removal if the motor/gear fails. 



1 2 

KT-9574 

Diagram shown to the right: 


1. Eccentric shaft 

2. Intake camshaft 

3. Mounting for high pressure fuel pump 

4. Exhaust camshaft 

5. Bridge support with receptacle for 



KT-9571 


intermediate shaft and Valvetronic 


motor 

6. Bridge support 

7. Intermediate shaft 


The Valvetronic motor worm gear rotates the 
eccentric shaft clockwise or counterclockwise at 
a very quick rate (1). The motors are capable of 
traveling from minimum to maximum lift in 300 
milli-seconds. 

Due to the progressive “lobe” on the eccentric 
shaft, this rotation positions the intermediate 
lever (2) closer or further to the camshaft lobe. 



20 

N73B60 Engine 



























Eccentric Shafts 



43-02-32 


The eccentric shafts (one per cylinder head) are driven by the 
Valvetronic motors and are supported by caged needle bear¬ 
ing assemblies for a smooth rotation. 

To assist in maintaining the set positions and counter the 
valve train torque, a torque compensation spring (rectangular 
cross section) is mounted on the end of the shaft for tension. 

Magnets are fitted in the (removable) magnetic wheel at the 
end of the eccentric shaft. Together with the position sensor, 
the Valvetronic Control Module determines the exact shaft 
position. The eccentric shaft sensor is mounted through the 
cylinder head cover (one per cylinder head) at the back. 

The magnetic wheel is secured to the shaft by a bolt and is 
indexed by a tab (arrow) to prevent incorrect installation. 



Intermediate Lever and Roller Finger 


43-02-38 


The intermediate lever is positioned further (minimum valve 
opening) or closer (maximum valve opening) to the camshaft 
by the the progressive “lobe” on the eccentric shaft as it is 
rotated. This offers a variable ratio effect for valve actuation. 
The roller finger is used to actuate the intake valve. 

The intermediate levers and roller fingers are matched (by 
classification) to ensure uniform valve lift. 

Note: When disassembling/assembling the valvetrain, the 
intermediate levers and roller fingers must be returned to the 
original positions to prevent uneven cylinder charging which 
can result in rough idle and engine performance complaints. 



43-02-33 


Refer to the Repair Instructions! 


21 

N73B60 Engine 




Valve Lift 

The Valvetronic motor worm gear rotates the eccen¬ 
tric shaft clockwise or counterclockwise at a very 
quick rate (1). 

Due to the progressive “lobe” on the eccentric shaft, 
this rotation positions the intermediate lever (2) closer 
or further to the camshaft lobe. 

As the camshaft is rotating (3), the cam lobe will pivot 
the intermediate lever (4) and the “heel” of the inter¬ 
mediate lever will depress the roller finger. A spring is 
located on each intermediate lever to maintain con¬ 
stant contact with the camshaft. 

The roller finger is cushioned by the HVA and will open 
the intake valve (5). 

The Valvetronic system varies the valve opening lift 
between 0.3 mm and 9.85 mm by rotating the eccen¬ 
tric shaft during engine operation to increase or 
decrease intake (flow) into the cylinder based on throt¬ 
tle request. 

* This is an assembly that affects all of the intake valves (per cylinder head) to work in uni¬ 
son. 



43-02-31 


Notes: 


22 

N73B60 Engine 













Bi-VANOS (Variable Camshaft Adjustment) 

The N73 features compact infinitely variable vane-type VANOS for the intake and exhaust 
camshafts. The VANOS unit is easy to remove and install. The VANOS unit is designed as 
an integral component of the chain drive and is secured to the respective camshaft with a 
central bolt. 

The intake camshafts adjustment ranges are 63° (as compared with the crankshaft). The 
exhaust camshafts adjustment ranges are 60°. 

The VANOS unit gear teeth are different as 
compared to the N62 (roller chain like M73). 

The VANOS unit for the cylinders 1 -6 exhaust 
shaft has mounting provisions for the vacuum 
pump drive. 

A spring plate is fitted between the VANOS unit 
and the vacuum pump drive to reduce wear (3). 

The VANOS units are labeled “In/Out” for intake 
and exhaust installation positions. 

VANOS Units Cylinder Bank 7-12 

The VANOS units are supplied with oil via ports in the camshafts. The oil ports are locat¬ 
ed on the left and right of the thrust bearing. 

Depending on the individual VANOS adjustment direction, the VANOS is supplied with oil 
via either the rear oil ports (1 & 2) or the front oil ports (3 & 4). The oil moves through the 
camshaft to the VANOS units. 


1&2. Rear Oil Duct with Four Holes 
3&4. Front Oil Duct with Four Holes 
5. Front Oil Duct Outlets 
6&7. Hook Sealing Washer. 


42-02-40 

VANOS Oil Ports 




23 

N73B60 Engine 


Camshaft Sensors 


The camshaft sensors (Hall effect) are mounted through the cylinder head cover. There are 
two sensors per cylinder head to monitor the intake and exhaust camshaft positions. 


The sensors monitor the impulse wheels 
attached to the ends of the camshafts. 


1. Valvetronic Position Sensor opening 

2. Intake Camshaft Position Sensor 

3. Exhaust Camshaft Position Sensor 


Solenoid Valves 



DSC00607 

Camshaft Sensors 


The VANOS solenoid valves are mounted 
through the upper timing case front covers. 


There are two solenoids per cylinder head to 
control the oil flow to the camshaft ports for the 
intake and exhaust VANOS units. 



DSC00625 


The 4/3 way proportional solenoid valve is acti¬ 
vated by the ECM to direct oil flow. 


The solenoid valve is sealed to the front cover 
by a radial seal and secured by a retaining plate. 



24 

N73B60 Engine 


42-02-42 




VANOS Sectional Views 



VANO’S Components 


1. Housing with Sprocket 

7. Hub 

2. Front Plate 

8. Black Plate 

3. Torsion Plate 

9. Blade 

4. Lock Spring 

10. Spring 

5. Retaining Plate for Lock Spring 

11. Pressure Chamber A 

6. Spring Loaded Locking Pin 

12. Pressure Chamber B 


Mechanical Layout: 

The figures above show a sectional view of one VANOS unit. The VANOS unit is secured 
by a central bolt through the hub (!) to the camshaft. The timing chain connects the crank¬ 
shaft with the housing of the unit. 

There is a recess in the hub in which the locking pin (6) engages without oil pressure 
(sprung). When the solenoid valve is activated to supply oil pressure to the VANOS unit, 
the locking pin is compressed and releases the VANOS for adjustment. 

The internal blades (9) are spring loaded (10) to provide a seal between the oil pressure 
chambers (11 and 12). The torsion spring (3) acts against the camshaft torque. 


25 

N73B60 Engine 





























































Hydraulic Actuation: 


When oil pressure is applied to chamber A, the blades are forced away from the VANOS 
housing (counterclockwise). The blades are keyed into the hub which results in the hub 
position being rotated in relation to the housing (with sprocket). The hub is secured to the 
camshaft which changes the camshaft to sprocket relationship (timing). 

The example below shows the adjustment procedure together with the pressure progres¬ 
sion based on the VANOS unit for the exhaust camshafts. 





43 - 02-45 


Hydraulic Actuation - Chamber A 


1. Front View of Vanos Unit 

5. 

2. Side View of Vanos Unit 

6 . 

3. Camshaft Oil Port (Chamber B) 

7. 

4. Solenoid Valve 



Engine Oil Pump 

Supplied Oil from Pump (Switched Through Solenoid) 
Supplied Oil Pressure (From Engine Oil Pump) 


During this adjustment chamber B is open (through the solenoid) to allow the oil to drain 
back through the cylinder head (internal reservoir). 


26 

N73B60 Engine 






























When the solenoid valve switches over, oil pressure is applied to chamber B. This forces 
the blades (and hub) in a clockwise direction back to the initial position, again changing the 
camshaft timing. 

The example below shows the reset procedure together with the pressure progression 
based on the VANOS unit for the exhaust camshafts. 




Hydraulic Actuation - Chamber B 


42 - 02-44 


1. Front View of VANOS Unit 

2. Side View of VANOS Unit 

3. Camshaft Oil Port (Chamber B) 

4. Solenoid Valve 


5. Engine Oil Pump 

6. Oil Return (Switched through Solenoid) 

7. Supplied Oil Pressure (From Engine Oil Pump) 


During this adjustment chamber A is open (through the solenoid) to allow the oil to drain 
back through the cylinder head (internal reservoir). 


Notes: 


27 

N73B60 Engine 








































The chart below shows the VANOS unit camshaft adjustment possibilities (horizontal line). 
The valve lift adjustment has also been incorporated (vertical line). 

The special feature of Valvetronic is that the air mass drawn in the cylinders can be easily 
determined by the valve lift and closing time. The air mass can then be limited, thus the 
term “load control”. 

With the help of VANOS, the valve closing point can be easily selected within a defined 
range. With valve lift control, the opening duration and cross section of the valve opening 
can also be easily selected within a defined range. 


A 



Vacuum pump 

The N73 engine requires a vacuum pump for the vacuum 
assisted brake booster (large hose). With the throttle valve 
open while the car is being driven, additional vacuum is need¬ 
ed. 

The N73 vacuum pump has a second vacuum connection 
(small hose) for the exhaust flap adjustment. The vacuum 
pump is driven by cylinders 1-6 exhaust camshaft via the 
VANOS unit. The pump is lubricated through an oil gallery 
from the cylinder head. 



43 - 02-03 


28 

N73B60 Engine 




















Chain Drive 


The N73 camshafts are driven by roller type chains, one for each cylinder bank. The use 
of two separate roller chains reduces the strain on the individual chains, which significantly 
increases the service life. The N73 chain links are 1.5 mm shorter than the M73. The oil 
pump is driven by a separate roller chain. The chain tensioner assemblies are the same as 
the N62. 



KT-9745 


Chain Drive - Cylinder Bank 7-12 


1. Exhaust VANOS unit 

2. Roller drive chain 

3. Upper guide rail 

4. Intake VANOS solenoid port 

5. Intake VANOS unit 


Notes: 


29 

N73B60 Engine 


















Cooling System 


Coolant Circuit -14.94 Liter (15.8 Quart) Capacity 



Cooling System (Circuit Flow) 


1. Water pump 

2. Thermostat housing with MAP thermostat 

3. Coolant temperature sensor 

4. Radiator 

5. Partition wall (low temperature area) 

6. Radiator (high temperature area) 

7. Return flow (cool) 

8. Radiator vent line 


9. Coolant reservoir 

10. Water cooled alternator 

11. Thermostat for transmission 
oil heat exchanger 

12. Oil/water heater exchanger 
for automatic transmission 

13. Transmission oil line 
connections 


30 

N73B60 Engine 


14. Heater supply hose (hot) 

15. Water valves / electric pump 

16. Heater inlet hoses 

17. Holes (cylinder jacket venting) 

18. Cylinder head vent hose 

19. Cylinder head, bank 1-6 

20. Heater core(s) 

21. Cylinder head, bank 7-12 























































































































































































Coolant Circuit 


The coolant flow has been optimized allowing the engine to warm up as quickly as possi¬ 
ble after a cold start as well as even and sufficient engine cooling while the engine is run¬ 
ning. The cylinder heads are supplied with coolant in a cross-flow pattern. This ensures 
more even temperature distribution to all cylinders. 

The cooling system ventilation has been improved and is enhanced by using ventilation 
ports in the cylinder heads and in the radiator. The air in the cooling system accumulates 
in the reservoir/expansion tank. When a pressure of 2 bar is reached in the expansion tank, 
the air is bled out by the pressure relief valve in the reservoir cap. 

Note: The ventilation ports in the front of the cylinder heads provide quicker “self bleeding” 
during a routine coolant exchange. The complex cooling system and the small ventilation 
ports require that time should be allowed after the cooling system has been filled for the air 
to escape. 


Coolant flow in the Engine Block (similar to N62) 

Reference diagram on page 30 - The coolant flows from the water pump through the feed 
pipe in the engine's V and to the rear of the engine block. This area has a cast aluminum 
cover. From the rear of the engine, the coolant flows to the external cylinder walls and from 
there into the cylinder heads. 

The coolant then cross flows through the cylinder heads (exhaust to intake) into the engine 
block inner coolant jacket into the engine “V” and through the return connection to the ther¬ 
mostat housing. When the coolant is cold it flows from the thermostat (closed) directly into 
the water pump and back to the engine (recirculating for faster warm up). 

When the engine reaches operating temperature (85 °C-110 °C), the thermostat opens the 
entire cooling circuit to include the radiator. 


31 

N73B60 Engine 



The coolant flows to the rear of the engine block, from there through the side channels to 
the cylinder walls and then into the cylinder heads (lower left picture). The cast aluminum 
cover at the rear of the engine block (with sealing bead) is shown on the lower right. 



42-02-59 


42-02-58 


Water Pump/Thermostat Housing 

The water pump is combined with the thermostat housing and is bolted to the timing case 
lower section. 


1. Map-controlled themostat (radiator cool return flow). 

2. Electrical connection for Thermostat Heating element. 

3. Thermostat Mixing Chamber 

4. Temperature Sensor (hot coolant from engine) 

5. Radiator in-flow (hot coolant from engine) 

6. Heat exchanger (transmission oil return flow) 

7. Leakage Chamber (evaporation space) 

8. Alternator in-flow (cool supply) 

9. Water Pump 

10. Expansion Tank Connection 


42-02-60 

Water Pump / Thermostat Housing 



Caution during installation of the water pump: The impeller is made from reinforced plastic. 


32 

N73B60 Engine 


Leakage Restraint System in the Water Pump 


The water pump has a leakage restraint system for the functional leakage from the pump 
shaft piston ring type seal. The coolant which escapes through the pump shaft sliding ring 
seal usually accumulates and evaporates through a hold in the leakage chamber (evapora¬ 
tion area). 


If the sliding ring seal is faulty, the leakage chamber fills 
completely with coolant. Sliding ring seal leakages can 
be detected by monitoring the fluid level in the leakage 
chamber (inspection hole). 


1. Impeller 

2. Sliding Ring Seal 

3. Leakage Chamber / Evaporation Space 

4. Leakage Chamber Cover 

5. Delivery from the sliding ring seal to the leakage chamber 

6. Hub of pulley and viscous clutch 



Water Pump 

42-02-61 

Note: In the past, fully functional water pumps were often replaced because the functional 
sliding ring seal leakage which is necessary for water pump operation resulted in evapora¬ 
tion residues being left on the external walls of the water pump. 


The leakage restraint system has the advantage in that the coolant escaping from the slid¬ 
ing ring seal (normal, functional leakage) evaporates without a trace and cannot be mis¬ 
takenly identified as a water pump defect during visual inspections. 


Timing Chain Cover Lower Section 

The waterpump mounts to the lower section to 
channel coolant to the engine block. 


1. Coolant to Engine 

2. Rear Water Pump Housing in Lower Section 

3. Mount for Drive Belt Tensioner Pulley 

4. Crankshaft Radial Seal 

Timing Chain Cover Lower Section 

42-02-62 



33 

N73B60 Engine 
























































































Map-Controlled Thermostat 


The map-controlled thermostat allows the engine to be cooled relevant to operating con¬ 
ditions. This reduces fuel consumption by approximately 1% per 10° C temperature 
increase. The map-controlled thermostat function is the same as previous engines (N62). 


1. Radiator Return Flow To Thermostat 

2. Connection for Thermostat Heating Element 

3. Temperature Sensor 

4. Radiator in-flow (hot coolant from engine) 


Cooling Module 



42-02-63 


Maped-Controlled Thermostat 


The cooling module contains the 
following main cooling system 
components: 

1. Engine cooling radiator 

2. Air conditioning condenser 

3. Transmission oil/water heat exchanger 

4. Power steering cooler 

5. Electric fan 

6. External engine oil cooler 


Radiator 

The radiator is made from aluminum and is divided into a high-temperature section and a 
low-temperature section by a partition wall (see page 30). The coolant first flows into the 
high-temperature section and then back to the engine, cooled. 



Some of the coolant flows through an opening in the radiator partition wall to the low-tem¬ 
perature section where it is cooled further. The coolant then flows from the low-tempera¬ 
ture section (when the OWT thermostat is open) into the oil/coolant heat exchanger. 


34 

N73B60 Engine 













Coolant Reservoir 


The reservoir/expansion tank is mounted on the right hand wheel housing (engine com¬ 
partment). Note: The expansion tank should never be filled above the “Max” marking. 
Excess coolant is expelled by the pressure relief valve in the cap as it heats up. Avoid over¬ 
filling the expansion tank because the cooling circuit design ensures very good “self bleed¬ 
ing”. 


Engine Oil Cooling 

The cooling module of the E65/E66 has been expanded for the N73 to include an external 
engine oil cooler (6). The engine oil cooler is located in front of the engine coolant radiator 
above the A/C condenser. 

The engine oil flows from the oil pump through 
a channel in the crankcase to a connection on 
the alternator support. The alternator support 
has an oil thermostat (arrow to the right). 

A wax element in the oil thermostat opens the 
supply flow to the engine oil cooler from an oil 
temperature of 100 °C to 130 °C. 


A partial amount of engine oil will permanently 
bypass the oil thermostat, even when it is fully 
open and flows uncooled through the engine. 

The engine oil cooler helps to keep the engine oil temperature below 150 °C. Cooling the 
engine oil provides a uniform oil temperature and ensures a long service life for the oil. 



Transmission Oil/Coolant Heat Exchanger 

The transmission oil/coolant heat exchanger ensures that the transmission oil is heated up 
quickly and also that it is appropriately cooled. When the engine is cold, the transmission 
oil/coolant heat exchanger thermostat switches into the engine's recirculated coolant cir¬ 
cuit. This allows the transmission oil to heat up as quickly as possible (with the engine 
coolant). 

When the return flow water temperature reaches 82 °C, the thermostat switches the trans¬ 
mission oil/coolant heat exchanger to the low-temperature coolant radiator circuit (refer to 
page 30) to cool the transmission oil. 


35 

N73B60 Engine 



Electrically Operated Fan 

The electric fan is integrated in the cooling module and is mounted directly in front of the 
radiator. The fan speed is regulated by the ECM. 


Viscous Coupling Fan 

The viscous coupling fan is driven by the water pump. The noise output and the perfor¬ 
mance of the fan coupling and the fan wheel have been optimized as compared with the 
E38 M73. The viscous coupling fan is used as the final level of cooling and switches on at 
an air temperature of 92 °C. 


Notes: 


36 

N73B60 Engine 



Engine Block 


Oil Sump 


The oil sump consists of two parts. The upper section of the oil sump is made from cast 
aluminum and is sealed to the crankcase with a rubber-coated sheet steel gasket. This 
section of the oil sump has a cross shaped cut out oil filter element recess. The upper sec¬ 
tion of the oil sump is inter connected to the oil pump and is sealed with a sealing ring. The 
double panel (noise insulation) lower section of the oil sump is flanged to the upper section 
of the oil sump. 


1. Upper Section of The Oil Sump 

2. Oil Pump 

3. Oil Level / Condition Sensor 

4. Lower Section of The Oil Sump 

5. Oil Filter Housing 

6. Oil Drain Plug 



Crankcase Oil Sump Components 

42-03-65 

The crankcase is a one-piece “open deck” design and is made entirely from AluSil. In mass 
production, the cylinder bores are finished by an etching procedure. This involves etching 
out a thin aluminium layer from the cylinder walls. By doing this, the high strength silicon 
crystals are exposed. The silicon crystals form a high strength running surface for the pis¬ 
tons. 


Open Deck: 
Exposed cylinder 
coolant jacket 



37 

N73B60 Engine 









Crankshaft 


The N73 uses a forged steel 
crankshaft (1 - front). 

Each crankshaft throw has two 
counterweights for balancing the 
moving masses (12 counter¬ 
weights in total). 

The crankshaft is supported by 
seven main bearings, the seventh 
is the thrust bearing. 



Crankshaft 


Crankshaft Thrust Bearing 

The thrust bearing halves are multiple pieces that are assem¬ 
bled as one part for the the number seven main bearing at the 
rear of the engine. 

Piston and Connecting Rod 

The iron coated cast aluminum alloy pistons are “domed” with valve reliefs in the crowns 
(1). The recess (2) directs the combustible mixture directly under the spark plug and pre¬ 
vents the combustion chamber from being divided into two parts. 

Piston rings: 

• First piston ring groove = square ring 

• Second piston ring groove = taperface ring 

• Third piston ring groove = two-part oil control 
ring 

Note: Due to the shaping of the piston crown 
and the wrist pin offset, the pistons are cylinder 
bank specific (crown index arrow always points 
to the front of the engine). 

The forged steel connecting rod and cap is separated by the familiar “cracked” process. 
The large end is angled at 30° allowing sufficient articulation in a very compact space. The 
pistons are cooled by oil jets spraying under the exhaust side of the piston crown. 




38 

N73B60 Engine 








Flywheel 

The lightweight flywheel is constructed as a laminated assem¬ 
bly. The starter ring gear is also the increment wheel for 
engine speed and crankshaft positioning/misfire detection. 

The ring gear is hot riveted directly to the flexplate (6). The fly¬ 
wheel diameter is 320 mm. 


Vibration Damper 



43-02-04 


The vibration damper is a torsional vibration absorber (axial 
design). The outer edge of the damper has a notch (1) to 
accept the locating tool when positioning the crankshaft for 
initial setting. 

The locating tool inserts into the raised mount in the front 
cover (2). Refer to the Repair Instructions for the proper valve- 
train timing procedure. 


Engine Mounting 



43-02-03 


The engine is secured by two hydraulic damping mounts that are located on the front axle 
carrier (structure and function are the same as the E65/E66 N62). 


Notes: 


39 

N73B60 Engine 



















Lubrication System 

Oil Cicuit (view from engine front) 



A. Oil pressure from oil pump 

B. Oil supply to VANOS units 

C. Oil return 

1. Oil supply to intake camshaft 

2. Oil non-return valves 

3. Oil circuit in oil thermostat 

4. Oil return from oil cooler 

5. Oil supply to oil cooler 


KT-9632 

6. Oil supply from oil pump 

7. Oil supply , chain tensioner 

8. Oil supply , VANOS solenoid valves 

9. Oil supply to exhaust camshaft 

10. Oil supply to high pressure injection pumps 

11. Oil supply to HVA elements 

12. Oil supply to Valvetronic eccentric shaft 


The engine oil is supplied by the oil pump to the lubrication points in the engine block and 
is pumped into the cylinder heads. The following components in the crankcase and cylin¬ 
der head are supplied with engine oil: 


Crankcase 

• Crankshaft bearings 

• Oil jets for piston cooling 

• Oil jet for the drive chain (bank 7-12) 

• Tensioning rail for drive chain (bank 1 -6) 


Cylinder head 

• Chain tensioner 

• Guide rail on cylinder head 

• Hydraulic valve adjustment elements (HVA) 

• VANOS supply 

• Camshaft bearings 

• Overhead oil tubes for the valve gear 


40 

N73B60 Engine 


























Oil Non-return Valves 

Three oil non-return valves are inserted into each 
cylinder head from the outside. This prevents 
the engine oil from draining out of the cylinder 
head and the VANOS units. 

1. Oil Check Valve for VANOS Intake 

2. Oil Check Valve for VANOS Exhaust 

3. Oil Check Valve for Cylinder Head Oil Supply 



Note: The non-return valves are accessible from the outside, therefore; cylinder head 
removal is not necessary when changing the valves. The valves are different in design and 
should not be mixed up on installation. 


Oil Pressure Switch 

The oil pressure switch is located on the right front engine block (above the A/C compres¬ 
sor). 


Oil Pump 

The oil pump is mounted at an angle to the crankshaft bearing cap and is driven by the 
crankshaft using a roller chain. The oil pump is a two-stage gear oil pump with two gear 
clusters. 

1. Mounting points 

2. Oil pump drive shaft 

3. Oil pressure from pump to engine 

4. Control valve (Pump Stage/Pressure 
Control) 

5. Oil pressure control tube from the 
engine to the control valve. 

6. Oil pickup strainer 

7. Pressure relief valve (over 15 Bar) 

8. Oil filter 


Stage two (both pump supply circuits) is only active in the lower engine speed range (up to 
approx. 2,000 rpm) to provide sufficient oil pressure for the VANOS at high oil tempera¬ 
tures. Stage two is deactivated hydraulically at a pressure of 2 bar. 


2 13 14 



15 16 7 8 


Oil Pump KT-9614 


41 

N73B60 Engine 





















Oil Pressure Control 


1. Oil Pump Stage 1 

5. Sealing Plug 

2. Oil Pump Stage 2 

6. Oil Pump Housing 

3. Pressure Control Valve Piston 

4. Pressure Control Valve Spring 

7. Oil Sump 


^ Oil Pressure Control 



Oil pressure control valve in initial 
position, without pressure. 



Stage two = Both pump supply circuits 
activated with oil pressure less than 2 bar. 



Stage two deactivated = Oil pressure 
above 2 bar, pressure control valve 
opens channel for stage two to oil 
sump. 



Main pressure control = Oil pressure 
above 6 bar, pressure control valve opens 
channel for stage one (slightly) to oil sump 
relieving excessive pressure. 


42 

N73B60 Engine 












































































































































































Oil Filter 


The canister type oil filter (3) is located under the 
engine by the oil sump. The support for the oil 
filter is integrated in the rear oil pump cover. 

The oil filter housing (2 with o-ring) is threaded 
into the rear of the oil pump cover through an 
opening in the oil sump. 

A drain plug is integrated in the oil filter housing 
for draining the filter assembly before the hous¬ 
ing is removed (1 with o-ring). 



mi 4203 
42-02-77 


The filter element support dome contains an over pressure relief valve. If the filter element 
is blocked, this valve allows a bypass of unfiltered engine oil around the element to the sup¬ 
ply lubrication to the engine. 


Pressure Control 

The oil pressure control valve in the oil pump has two functions: 

1. Deactivates stage two oil pump circuit above 2 bar. Stage two is only active in the 
lower speed range. This is to ensure that there is always sufficient oil pressure for 
the VANOS units even at high oil temperatures and low speeds. The oil pump power 
consumption is reduced by deactivating stage two. 

2. Monitoring the required oil pressure for the engine. The piston in the control valve is 
moved by a spring against the engine control pressure which is returning from the 
engine. This means that precise monitoring of the actual engine oil pressure is pos¬ 
sible. 

A separate pressure relief valve in the oil pump automatically opens at the maximum pres¬ 
sure of approximately 15 bar. This prevents damage in the oil pump especially at low oil 
temperatures. 


43 

N73B60 Engine 



Technical Data - Lubrication System 

The recommended oil is BMW High Performance 5W-30 Synthetic Oil 

* P/N 07 51 0 017 866 


Oil Capacity in Liters (quarts) 

Explanation 

8.5 (9.0) 

Filling capacity with oil filter change 


Oil Pressure in Bar 

Explanation 

1.0 

Minimum oil pressure @ 20° C 

4.0 - 8.0 

Maximum oil pressure @ 20° C 


Oil Delivery Capacity 

Explanation 

9-12 liters/minute 

At idle speed (550 rpm) @ 20° C 

50 - 55 liters/minute 

At maximum engine speed (6500 rpm) @ 

20° C 


44 

N73B60 Engine 





















Review Questions 

1. What is the function of the throttle valve(s)? 

2. What are the conditions that will result in stage two oil supply? 

3. What does the term “cracked” connecting rod mean? 


4. What does the low temperature area refer to in the cooling system? 


5. What is minimum and maximum valve lift provided by the Valvetronic system? 

6. What is chamber A and chamber B used for in the Bi-VANOS system? 

A: 

B: 

7. What retains the initial VANOS sprocket to hub position when oil pressure is not pre¬ 
sent? 

8. Under what conditions are the Auxiliary Air Flaps fully opened by the ECM? 


9. What Valvetronic components are different as compared to the N62? 


10. Where is the engine oil thermostat located? 


45 

N73B60 Engine 



