Table of Contents 


MED 9.2.1 Engine Management System 

Subject Page 

MED 9.2.1 

Objectives of the Module.2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components.4 

Principle of Operation.7 

Power Supply 

Integrated Voltage Supply Module.9 

Principle of Operation.10 

Air Management 

System Components.12 

Principle of Operation.18 

Fuel Management 

System Components.23 

High Pressure Injection System.28 

Principle of Operation.36 

Ignition Management 

System Components.44 

Principle of Operation.47 

Emissions Management 

Evaporative Emissions.50 

Exhaust Emissions.54 

Principle of Operation.62 

Performance Controls 

System Components.71 

Review Questions .81 





















MED 9.2.1 Engine Management System 

Model: E66 - 760Li 
Production Date: MY 2003 
Manufacturer: Bosch 

Pin Connector: 134 Pins - 5 Modular Connectors per Control Module 

Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• List and locate the control modules required for engine operation. 

• Describe the inputs that are required for auxiliary air flap operation. 

• Identify the fuel pressures for the feed line from the in tank pump and the high pressure 
line to the fuel rail. 

• Explain the purpose of the Return Shutoff Valve. 

• Identify the ohmic value of the high pressure fuel injectors. 

• Describe what is unique about the fuel injector mounting. 

• Understand the safest way to check the function of the fuel injectors. 

• Explain the purpose of the HDEV control modules. 


2 


MED 9.2.1 





MED 9.2.1 

Purpose of the System 

The MED 9.2.1 system manages the following functions: 


Air: 


Fuel: 


Ignition: 

• Valvetronic Control 


• Fuel Supply 


• Direct Ignition 

• Electronic Throttle Valves 


• HDEV Control 


• Knock Control 

• Hot-Film Air Mass Meters 


- Fuel Injection 


• Ignition Monitoring 



MED 9.2.1 
1 



MED 9.2.1 
2 



4_4 



A \ 

i A 

A A 


J 







Emissions: 

• Secondary Air Injection 

• Pre and Post Catalyst Oxygen Sensing 

• Oxygen Sensor Heating 

• Misfire Detection 

• Evaporative Purge Control/Leak Testing 

• Malfunction Indicator Light 


Performance Controls: 

• Bi-VANOS 

• Oil Condition 

• Electric Cooling Fan 

• MAP Thermostat 

• Alternator 

• E-Box Cooling Fan 

• Comfort Start 

• Cruise Control 

• A/C Compressor (high engine load) 

• Exhaust Flap 


The basic engine management inputs, processes and outputs are not included in this mod¬ 
ule because they have not changed, refer to the ST055 Engine Electronics hand out for 
details. Some components and functions are the same as the ME 9.2 Engine Management 
System found in the E65/E66. Refer to the ST042 E65 Part 2 hand out for details. 


3 


MED 9.2.1 

















































System Components 


MED 9.2.1 Engine Control Modules - New Features: This Bosch Engine Management 
System is introduced for more stringent emission requirements as well as reducing fuel 
consumption and increasing driving performance. Flash EEPROMs (additional 1 MB flash 
memory) are used as the storage medium for program data, fault code memory as well as 
the adaptation values. 


The 134 pin MED 9.2.1 ECMs are manu¬ 
factured by Bosch to BMW specifica¬ 
tions. The ECM is the SKE (standard 
shell construction) housing and uses 5 
modular connectors. 

For testing, use the Universal Adapter 
Set (break-out box) Special Tool: # 90 88 

6 121 300 



The ECMs work in combination with the 
Valvetronic Control Module. The N73 
engine has a total of 5 control modules 
to manage the engine functions: 


1. MED 9.2.1 ECM 2 - overall engine management 

2. MED 9.2.1 ECM 1 - overall engine management 

3. Valvetronic Control Module - intake valve lift 

4. High pressure fuel injector control module 
(HDEV) - activates injector group for one bank 



5. High pressure fuel injector control module 
(HDEV) - activates injector group for one bank 


D-BUS 



These modules are located in the elec- 


tronic box in the engine compartment 


— DME1 - 

- EWF 

together with the Integrated Voltage 

Supply Module (6). 


— DME2 ■ 


The ECM controls an electric cooling fan 

Vr. viTtron lc 1 

- 

- GRS 

in the base of the electronic box to draw 
in cool air from the passenger compart- 

IHDEV1 

EDC-K - 

- DSC 

ment. 

HDEV2 — 

ACC - 

- EGS 


4 


MED 9.2.1 











































MED 9.2.1 ECM 1 Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


\,mmm 



CAS 


31 


ACCELERATOR 
PEDAL MODULE 



MAP 

SENSOR 



VALVETRONIC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 



RAILPRESSURE SENSOR 


AIRMASS 

SIGNAL 



COOLANT 
TEMPI, 
SENSOR 


_ 

n 


KNOCK 

SENSOR 

3x 



2 >^| 


RPM 

SENSOR 



PRE & POST 
CAT CONV. 
0„ SENSOR 





^ m6nitoring 





Camshaft 
Shaft Sensor 
(2x) 


u 




jJ 

DMTL 


(j 


RADIATOR OUTLET 
TEMPERATURE 
SENSOR 



ROLLING CODE 


JUT-rLTL 


KL 50 E 


CAS 



CRUISE CONTROL 



DRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 


DSC 






GENERATOR 




DHME 
OIL SENSOR 



N 


MED 9.2.1 
ECM 1 


POWER 

SUPPLY 


AIR 

MANAGEMENT 


FUEL 

MANAGEMENT 


IGNITION 

MANAGEMENT 


INTEGRAL 

BAROMETRIC 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 


PROVIDES ADDITIONAL CORRECTION 
FACTOR FOR FOLLOWING FUNCTIONS 


EMISSION 

MANAGEMENT 



PERFORMANCE 

MANAGEMENT 



CAS 


-nl 




ELECT*! C THTWTTLE 


AUXILARY 
AIR FLAP 
SOLENOID 


ECCENTRIC 

SENSOR 


VALVETRONIC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 


P '! 





VALVETRONIC RELAY 


' f Fuel Injection (6x) 


HDEV 


ZGM 


SIM 


SBSR 


p \ FUEL 
PUMP 



■N. 


Fuel Shutoff Valve 


Fuel Quantity 
Control Valve 


SECONDARY 
AIR PUMP 
RELAY 



IGNITION COIL 
CONTROL (6x) 

HEATED THERMOSTAT 





2 PRE- 

SENSOfl 

HEATING 


Jl 



otf 

EVAP. EMISSION VALVE 


DMTL 


CHECK 

ENGINE 

LIGHT 



CLOSE 

FILLER 

CAP 



EXHAUST FLAP 
SOLENOID 


E-BOX FAN 



VAN OS 

(2x) 




TRANSMISSION 





^ ' 

STARTER 


IVM 


LOCAL CAN 


PT-CAN 


I/* 



& 


AUX. FAN 
MOTOR 


ISO 9141 PROTOCOL 


ODD fl 



DISplus 


GT-1 


5 


MED 9.2.1 








































































































































































































































































MED 9.2.1 ECM 2 Inputs - Processing - Outputs 




IVM 


B+ 


-as 

CAS 




ELECTHiC THMmf 



HDEV 


FUEL INJECTORS (6x) 






AUXILARY 
AIR FLAP 
SOLENOID 



Fuel Quantity 
Control Valve 


IGNITION COIL 
CONTROL (6x) 


+ 



EVAP. EMISSION VALVE 


6 


MED 9.2.1 
















































































































































Principle of Operation 

The ME 9.2 Engine Management System from the N62 engine provides the basis for the 
MED 9.2.1 Engine Management System. 

The main distinguishing features of the MED 9.2.1 are: 

• Extended computer capacity (additional 1 MB flash) 

• Modified oxygen sensor chip which permits detailed diagnosis of the oxygen sensors 

• One MED 9.2.1 control module for each cylinder bank 

• Power is supplied to the high pressure fuel injectors for each cylinder bank by a high 
pressure fuel injector control module (HDEV) 

• Omission of DISA and variable intake manifold activation (N62) 

• Three knock sensors for each cylinder bank 

• Activation of the auxiliary air flaps in the air cleaner housing 

• Rail pressure sensor 

• Fuel quantity control valve 

An MED 9.2.1 control module is used for each cylinder bank. Both control modules are 
the same design and are classified into ECM 1 and ECM 2 by the programming. ECM 1 
receives the input signals from a sensor or switch: 

• Accelerator pedal module 

• Oil condition sensor 

• Alternator 

• Coolant temperature 

• Oil pressure 

ECM 1 transmits these signals via the local CAN to ECM 2. All further input signals are 
transmitted directly to the control module responsible for the relevant cylinder bank (see 
overview pages 5 and 6). 

Output signals which relate to not just one cylinder bank (e.g. electric fuel pump or exhaust 
flap) are transmitted by ECM 1 to the corresponding actuators. The crankshaft sensor sig¬ 
nal is transmitted simultaneously to both control modules. 

The MED 9.2.1 regulates the injected fuel quantity. For this purpose, the MED 9.2.1 
receives the rail pressure sensor signals and regulates this pressure with the fuel quantity 
control valve according to the value defined by the program map. This ensures that a 
defined quantity of fuel is injected over the injection period. 


7 


MED 9.2.1 




Power Supply 

KL30 - Battery Voltage: B+ is the main supply of operating voltage to the ECMs which is 
provided by the Power Module through the Integrated Voltage Supply Module (IVM). The 
IVM simply provides a splice point to provide B+ to the ECM. 



i r 


7 XS0092 


i;:;: * i 



12 XI866 
30DME 
Q,5 
RTVI 


A71 

Poweimodul 



17 X60Q93 


Aeaae 

Integrtertee. Vereor- 

gungsmoduf {IVM) 



4S 


XI031& 


A149 

Steuerg erat Car AC¬ 
CS^ 


XI05 50 


U_HR 

15 

RTVBL 


E_U_30 

0.75 

RT 


15WUP 

0.35 

RT/GN 




M_Z0G 

2.6 

BR 


91E 
0.5 

BR'SW 


an 

1.5 

SR 


91L 

1.5 

BR 


X64-54 


X10012 



X7517 


42 - 02-01 


42 - 02-01 


Power Supplies: The component power supplies (KL15 and ECM Relays) are fused to the 
MED 9.2.1 ECMs and output components. The fuses and relays are housed in the 
Integrated Voltage Supply Module (IVM) located in the Electronic Box. The fuses are sep¬ 
arately replaceable, the relays are integral in the IVM. 


KL15 - Ignition Switch Signal: When the ignition is switched “ON” the ECMs are 
informed from the CAS Module that the engine is about to be started via a “wakeup” call 
(15w) over the PT CAN line. The ECMs also receive a “hardwire” KL15 input from the CAS 
Module. The ECMs activate a ground circuit to the IVM to energize three relays providing 
operating power to the ECMs and engine management components. KL15 “OFF” 
removes the ECMs operating voltage and the KL15 signal from the PT CAN bus. 


KL50 E - Start Request Signal: The momentary start request is transmitted from the 
CAS Module to inform the ECM 1 to activate the starter relay (in the IVM) and activate 
engine management components. 


Ground: Multiple ground paths are necessary to complete current flow through the ECMs. 


8 

MED 9.2.1 Power Supply 



































































































































Integrated Voltage Supply Module (IVM) 

The IVM contains integral relays, replaceable fuses and offers a convenient splice point for 
harness connections. The IVM serves as a central power supply for Engine Management 
(including Valvetronic), Electronic Transmission and DSC. This diagram is a partial repre¬ 
sentation of the IVM for Engine Electronics. 



47 - 04-04 


9 

MED 9.2.1 Power Supply 
















































































































Principle of Operation 


When KL15 is switched “ON” the ECMs are ready for engine management. The ECMs will 
activate a ground path to energize the three Engine Control Module Relays in the IVM (see 
diagram on the previous page). 

• ECM Relays 3 and 4 supply operating voltage through fuses (in the IVM) to the ECMs. 

• Relay 5 supplies operating voltage through a fuse (in the IVM) to the Engine Management 
Components. 

• Relay 1 supplies operating voltage through fuses (in the IVM) to the ignition coils. This 
relay is activated by the CAS Module. 


The IVM receives high amperage voltage supply from fuses (100 Amp). The fuse junction 
is located on the right inner fender of the engine compartment (under the remote charging 
post). This supply is for the consumers that are controlled by the IVM internal relays. 


When KL15 is switched “OFF” the ECMs oper¬ 
ating voltage is removed. 

The CAS Module will maintain voltage to the 
Ignition Coil Relay for a few seconds to maintain 
ignition coil activation (Emission Optimized - 
introduced in 2000 MY). 


Ground is required to complete the current 
path through the ECMs. The ECMs also: 



• Internally link a constant ground (1) 
to the engine sensors. 

• Switches ground (2) to activate 
components. 



10 

MED 9.2.1 Power Supply 


© 0 


42 - 04-03 





































Engine Wiring Harness 



N73 Engine 5 


Indirect Signals and Wiring 

There is no direct connection to the OBD diagnostic connector. Both ECMs are connect¬ 
ed to the ZGM (central gateway module) via the PT-CAN bus. The OBD diagnostic con¬ 
nector is connected to the ZGM. 

The fuel pump relay is controlled by ECM 1 via the ZGM and ISIS (Integrated Safety and 
Information System) using the airbag control unit in the SBSR (right-hand side satellite B- 
pillar). This enables the fuel pump to be switched off in the event of an accident. 

The ECMs are classified into ECM 1 and ECM 2 by the wire harness connections (color 
coded) and location. ECM 1 receives the input signals from a sensor or switch and trans¬ 
mits these signals via the Local CAN to ECM 2. All further input signals are transmitted 
directly (via hardwire harness) to the control module responsible for the relevant cylinder 
bank. 


Output signals which are required for both cylinder banks are transmitted by ECM 1 to the 
corresponding actuators. The crankshaft sensor signal is transmitted simultaneously to 
both control modules. 


11 

MED 9.2.1 Power Supply 








Air Management 


Auxiliary Air Flaps: Each air cleaner housing incorporates an auxiliary air flap in its side 
wall. The auxiliary air flaps supply the engine with enough air volume to attain the maximum 
performance. The auxiliary air flaps are closed in the lower rpm ranges so that only cooler 
ambient air is drawn in for hot idling and stop and go driving. 


The auxiliary air flaps are fully opened by the 
ECM: 

• In driving position “D” with kickdown 
operation from 3500 rpm 

• In driving position “S” from 3000 rpm 
and simultaneous full load recognition. 



The auxiliary air flaps are actuated by vacuum diaphragms which are located inside the air 
cleaner housings. Both diaphragms are supplied with vacuum from a common solenoid 


10-15% additional air is drawn in from the engine compartment when the auxiliary air flaps 
are open. It is not necessary to draw in additional cold air from outside the engine com¬ 
partment since the engine compartment is adequately ventilated at full load. 


Electronic Throttle Valves: The throttle valves on the N73 are not necessary for engine 
load control. This is carried out by the intake valve variable lift adjustment (Valvetronic). The 
ECMs provides the operating voltage and ground to the Electronic Throttle Valves for open¬ 
ing and closing the throttle plate. 


The throttle plate position is monitored by two 
integral potentiometers providing DC voltage 
feedback signals to the ECM. 

Potentiometer signal 1 is the primary signal 
(closed 0.5V - full open 4.5V). 

Potentiometer signal 2 is used as a plausibility 
cross-check (closed 4.5V - full open 0.5V) 
through the total range of throttle plate movement. 



Electronic Throttle Valve 

42-02-25 


12 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 






Accelerator Pedal Position (PWG): The 

accelerator pedal module provides two variable 
voltage signals to ECM 1 that represents accel¬ 
erator pedal position and rate of movement. 
ECM 1 will activate the Valvetronic system and 
share this signal with ECM 2 via the Local-CAN 
bus. 

Dual Hall sensors are integral in the accelerator 
pedal module. ECM 1 compares the two val¬ 
ues for plausibility. 



ECM 1 provides voltage (5v) and ground for the 
Hall sensors. As the accelerator pedal is 
moved from rest to full throttle, the sensors pro¬ 
duce a variable voltage signal. 


• Hall sensor 1 (request) = 0.5 to 4.5 volts 

• Hall sensor 2 (plausibility) = 0.5 to 2.0 volts 


If the signals are not plausible, ECM 1 will use 
the lower of the two signals as the request 
input. The acceleration response will be slower 
and the maximum Valvetronic opening will be 
reduced. 


42-04-02 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE WITHIN THE 



Hot-Film Air Mass Meters (HFM): The air vol¬ 
ume input signal is produced electronically by 
the HFMs (1 per cylinder bank) which uses a 
heated metal film in the air flow stream. The 
HFM housings are mounted in the air inlet pipes 
between the air filters and the throttle valves. 

As air flows through the HFM, the film is cooled 
changing the resistance which affects current 
flow (voltage drop) through the circuit. Each 
ECM (1 and 2) monitors this change regulating 
the amount of fuel injected. 



13 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 
































































Air Temperature Signal: The HFMs contain an integral air temperature sensor. This is a 
Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) type sensor. This signal is needed by the ECMs to 
correct the air volume input for changes in the intake air temperature (air density) affecting 
the amount of fuel injected, ignition timing and Secondary Air Injection activation. 

The ECMs provide the power supply to the sensors which decreases in resistance as the 
temperature rises and vice versa. The ECMs monitor an applied voltage to the sensors that 
will vary as air temperature changes the resistance value. 


Ambient Pressure: The ambient pressure sensor is located in the ECMs (integral). This 
sensor enables continuous measurement of the air pressure. The signal is used in ECM 1 
to calculate the altitude correction for the mixture formation and as a reference value for the 
intake manifold pressure. 

The voltage supply from ECM 1 is 5 V. The resistance of the sensor is dependent on pres¬ 
sure. The output voltage signal is processed by ECM 1. 


Intake Manifold Pressure Sensors: The pressure sensors (one per bank) are located in 
the back of intake manifold (1 peizo-electric). The voltage supply from the ECMs is 5 V. The 
varying resistance of the sensors is dependent on manifold pressure. The output voltage 
signal is processed by the ECMs. The intake manifold pressure is calculated by the ECMs 
and is compared with the ambient pressure (internally measured in ECM 1). 

A minimum intake manifold vacu¬ 
um of 50 mbar is required for the 
fuel tank evaporative purge func¬ 
tion. 


This vacuum is set by the elec¬ 
tronic throttle valves (4) and mon¬ 
itoring with the intake manifold 
pressure sensors. 

Shown to the right is the intake 
manifold (upside down) with both 
sensors (1). 



14 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 









Valvetronic: The N73 Valvetronic control sys¬ 
tem simultaneously varies the valve opening 
time and the valve opening lift according to 
engine speed and load. The electrical structure 
of the fully variable valve lift adjustment consists 
of the following individual components: 

• Valvetronic Control Module 

• ECM 1 

• ECM Main Relay (in the IVM) 

• Valvetronic Relay (in the IVM) 

• Two eccentric shaft adjustment motors (1) 

• Two eccentric shaft position sensors 

• Two magnetic wheels on the eccentric shafts 


Valvetronic Control - bank 1-6 


The Valvetronic control module adjusts the valve 
lift based on a request from ECM 1. The 
Valvetronic control module (located in the E 
Box) adjusts the eccentric shaft motors by two 
internal power output stages (connectors 1&2). 

Faults in the Valvetronic system are detected by 
the Valvetronic control module and are transmit¬ 
ted via the Local-CAN to ECM 1 where they are 
stored for diagnostics. 





Valvetronic Motors: Two DC motors are fitted 
to adjust the two eccentric shafts. They are 
operated at a frequency of 16 kHz in order to 
make exact adjustments. 

1 

In order to position the motors exactly, the polarity is briefly 
reversed once the target position has been reached (as iden¬ 
tified by ECM 1). This generates braking torque which imme¬ 
diately stops the motors. 


42-04-08 


The eccentric shaft sensors continuously monitor the position 
of the Valvetronic assembly. The self-stopping of the motors 
and the worm gear drives prevents position changes when 
the system is deactivated. If automatic adjustment is not 
detected, the fault is recorded and the motors are moved 
back to the target position (1 mount, 2 hex shaft). 

The adjustment time required to move the motors from the minimum to the maximum valve 
lift is approximately 300 ms. The motors can peak up to 100 Amps during adjustment. 


15 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 

















Valvetronic Sensors: Each eccentric shaft is monitored by a magneto-resistive position 
sensor. The N73 engine has two sensor assemblies, one for each eccentric shaft. These 
sensors are very durable for the environment (inside the cylinder head) and cope well with 
vibrations and high temperatures. The sensor assembly consists of: 


• Measuring Sensor 

• Evaluation Sensor 

• Communication Electronics 


A magnetic wheel is mounted on the end of the 
eccentric shaft. The eccentric shaft sensor is 
mounted through the cylinder head cover at the 
back. 

Both sensors monitor the eccentric shafts rotation angles of 180°. The Valvetronic control 
module supplies the sensors with 5 volts and ground. 



42-04-10 

Eccentric Shaft Position Sensor 


1. Magnetoresistance element with resistance R (a) 

2. Lines of magnetic field 

3. Direction of rotation of magnetic field 

4. Current flow 1 


The magneto-resistive element consists of a fer¬ 
romagnetic layer. The resistance R is dependent 
on the angle (a) under the influence of a strong 
magnetic field. The magnetic field is generated 
by permanent magnets. 



Magneto-Resistance Principle 

42-04-11 


The resistance of the magneto-resistive element (1) in the sensor is dependent on the direc¬ 
tion of the lines of the magnetic field (2) as influenced by the eccentric shaft magnetic 
wheel. The angle value signal of the measuring sensor is opposite to that of the evaluation 
sensor (opposing voltage values) during the rotation of the eccentric shaft. The Valvetronic 
control module constantly compares the values with each other. 


16 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 








The position data “message” is transmitted via a serial interface from the eccentric shaft 
sensors to the Valvetronic control module. Each of the two sensors requires three inter¬ 
faces for data transfer: 

• CS (chip select - measuring sensor or evaluation sensor) 

• DAT (data transfer - of eccentric shaft position) 

• CLK (clock line - signals the sensor requesting an update) 

There is only one clock line, but it works inside the sensor assembly on both the measur¬ 
ing and evaluation sensor. The measuring sensor transmits the eccentric shaft positions to 
the Valvetronic control module at shorter intervals than the evaluation sensor. 

Once the exact position of the eccentric shaft has been recorded by the magneto-resistive 
bridge circuit, this value is stored in an internal register. The Valvetronic control module 
sends the command to the measuring sensor via the CS line to transmit or upload the data 
from the internal register to the output register. The Valvetronic control unit then sends the 
command to the output register via the CLK line to transfer the data. 

The data “message” from the measuring sensor is then issued on the DAT line, giving the 
exact position of the eccentric shaft (at a frequency of 250 kHz). The evaluation sensor 
works similarly but is only periodically checked for position (plausibility). 



42-04-41 


17 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 














































Principle of Operation 


Air flow into the engine is regulated by the Valvetronic system controlling valve lift adjust¬ 
ment. The intake air flow is set by adjusting the valve lift while the throttle valves are fully 
opened. This further improves cylinder filling and reduces fuel consumption. All of the ECM 
monitoring, processing and output functions are a result of regulated air flow. 


The Accelerator Pedal Position is monitored by ECM 1 for pedal angle position and rate 
of movement. As the accelerator is moved, a rising voltage signal from the Hall sensors 
requests acceleration (and at what rate). 

ECM 1 will request the Valvetronic control module to increase the intake valve “lift”. As a 
result of the increased air flow, both ECMs will increase the volume of fuel injected into the 
engine and advance the ignition timing. The “full throttle” position indicates maximum 
acceleration and in addition to the functions just mentioned, this will have an effect on the 
air conditioning compressor (covered in Performance Controls). 

As the accelerator pedal is released (integral springs), the decrease in voltage signals ECM 
1 to activate fuel shut off if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). The Valvetronic control 
module will decrease the valve lift to maintain idle speed. The ECMs monitor the engine 
idle speed in addition to the accelerator pedal position and Valvetronic position. 

The pedal position sensor consists of two separate Hall sensors with different voltage char¬ 
acteristics and independent ground and voltage supply. Sensing of the accelerator pedal 
position is redundant. The pedal position sensor is monitored by checking each individual 
sensor channel and comparing the two pedal values. Monitoring is active as soon as the 
sensors receive their voltage supply (KL15). 


The Electronic Throttle valves are operated by the ECMs (supplying voltage and ground) 
for opening and closing based on the accelerator pedal position, engine load and intake 
manifold vacuum. 

When the throttle valves are operated, the ECMs monitor feedback potentiometers locat¬ 
ed on the actuator shaft for position/plausibility. These two sensors operate inversely (volt¬ 
age values) with throttle plate actuation. 


18 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 



The tasks of the throttle valves are: 

Starting the engine 

During the starting procedure at a temperature between 0 °C and 60 °C, airflow is con¬ 
trolled by the throttle valve. 

If the engine is at operating temperature, it will be switched to non-throttle mode approx¬ 
imately 60 seconds after start up. In cold conditions, however, the engine is started with 
the throttle valve fully opened, which has a positive effect on the starting characteristics. 

Ensuring a constant minimum vacuum of 50 mbar in the intake manifold 

This vacuum is needed to exhaust the blow-by gases from the crankcase and the fuel 
vapors from the activated charcoal filter. 

The backup running function 

If the Valvetronic system should fail, the throttle valve implements the engine's backup run¬ 
ning function (conventional load control). 


The Hot-Film Air Mass Meters (HFM) vary voltage monitored by the ECMs representing 
the measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by the ECMs to determine 
the amount of fuel to be injected. 

The heated surface of the hot-film in the intake air stream is regulated by the ECMs to a 
constant temperature of 180° above ambient air temperature. The incoming air cools the 
film and the ECMs monitor the changing resistance which affects current flow through the 
circuit. The hot-film does not require a “clean burn”, it is self cleaning due to the high oper¬ 
ating temperature for normal operation. 


The Air Temperature signal allows the ECMs to make a calculation of air density. The 
varying voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found 
in cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECMs will adjust the 
amount of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on oxygen sensing 
ratio. 

The ignition timing is also affected by air temperature. If the intake air is hot the ECMs 
retard the base ignition timing to reduce the risk of detonation. If the intake air is cooler, 
the base ignition timing will be advanced. The ECMs use this input as a determining fac¬ 
tor for Secondary Air Injection activation (covered in the Emissions section), VANOS, 
Valvetronic, Knock adaptation and exhaust flap operation. 


19 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 



The Valvetronic System is operational when activation of terminal 15 switches the ECM 
main relay to supply voltage. The Valvetronic module reduces the voltage supply to the 
internal electronics and the sensors (5 volts). The system carries out a pre-drive check. 
The relays (in the IVM) are activated after a delay (approx. 100 ms) which supplies the load 
circuit for the Valvetronic motors. From this stage on, ECM 1 and the Valvetronic control 
module communicate via the Local-CAN bus. 

ECM 1 determines the intake valve lift for starting based on engine and ambient tempera¬ 
ture (large lift when cold, minimum lift when warm). ECM 1 also determines the intake valve 
lift based on the acceleration requested by the driver. The Valvetronic control module con¬ 
verts the ECM command by operating the motors until the actual value from the eccentric 
shaft position sensor corresponds with the target value. The Valvetronic control module 
transmits the exact position of the eccentric shaft to ECM 1 via the Local-CAN bus. When 
the Valvetronic module detects a fault, it is also transmitted on the Local-CAN bus to ECM 
1 for storage in fault memory. 


Fault 

Emergency Program 

Effect 

Sensor Faulty 

Activated 

Maximum Valve Lift 

Local-Can 

Activated 

Maximum Valve Lift 

Valvetronic 

Activated 

Valve Lift Which is 
Currently set 

Operating Motor Fault 

Activated 

The Second Motor is 
Driven in Exactly the 
same position at the 
faulty motor 


A Redundant Position Control Hard Wire is between ECM 1 and the Valvetronic control 
module. Only two messages can be transmitted using this wire: 

• Test function 

• Maximum valve lift 


A signal with a frequency of 100 Hz is placed on this wire to transmit these two messages. 
The test function is carried out during the pre-drive check. The pulse width rate is 50%. 

• The maximum valve lift command is given if the Local-CAN bus is faulty. In this case, 
the pulse width rate is 80%. 


20 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 





• If there is a fault (backup running function) when running with maximum valve lift, the 
operating motors are supplied with 30% power. This drives the motors softly to the limit 
stop which prevents additional mechanical faults. The load control is now operated 
conventionally by using the throttle valve. 



Valvetronic Block Diagram 


DME 1 (ECM 1) 

K1 Valvetronic Relay (in IVM) 

K2 Valvetronic Relays (in IVM) 
Ml Valvetronic Motor Bank 1-6 


M2 Valvetronic Motor Bank 7-12 
V SG Valvetronic Control Unit 

51 Valvetronic Sensor Bank 1-6 

52 Valvetronic Sensor Bank 7-12 


The Bank Alignment function adjusts the distribution of load between the two cylinder 
banks. This alignment runs continuously during the engine operation to assure an equal 
load distribution to both cylinder banks. 

The values of the individual cylinders are determined by the load request and the crankshaft 
reference/rpm signal. ECM 1 compares these actual values with stored limit values. As 
soon as the values are recognized, ECM 1 increases the lift of the intake valves on each 
bank. 


21 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 






After deletion of the adaptation values, the bank alignment is automatically performed by 
ECM 1 (or the DISplus can be used). The eccentric shafts are adjusted in steps (1 degree 
of rotation increments) until both bank outputs are equal. The following conditions must be 
present for the bank alignment: 

ECM 


• No load on the engine 

• Coolant Temperature > 85 degrees C 

• No Faults Present 

• All Auxiliary Consumers Switched Off 

• Minimum Valve Lift Detected 


If faults relative to bank alignment are present, the following should also be considered dur¬ 
ing diagnosis: 

Faults Related to Bank Alignment 

• Damaged Valves 

• Defective HVA Elements 

• Misfire - Related functions and components (injection, 

ignition, compression, etc.) 


The Valvetronic control module is assigned (programming) to the appropriate engine and 
ECM by the DISplus. 


The Idle Speed Control is also regulated by the Valvetronic system. Reduced valve lift when 
the engine is idling ensures that the engine receives the appropriate airflow. When the 
Valvetronic system is in use, the idle speed control and intake manifold vacuum is also reg¬ 
ulated using the electronic throttle valve. 

During the starting procedure at a temperature of between 0 °C and 60 °C, airflow is con¬ 
trolled by the throttle valve. If the engine is at operating temperature, it will be switched to 
non-throttle mode approximately 60 seconds after it is started up. 

At temperatures below 0 °C, the engine is started with the throttle valve fully opened using 
the Valvetronic for idle speed control (this has a positive effect on the starting characteris¬ 
tics). 

Note: If the idle speed control is faulty, the engine must be checked for vacuum leaks 
because leaking air has an immediate effect on idling (unmetered air leaks). 


22 

MED 9.2.1 Air Management 



Fuel Management 


Fuel Tank: The fuel tank is made of high density polyethylene (reduced weight) which is 
manufactured to meet safety requirements and is mounted over the rear axle. The tank 
capacity is 23.2 US gallons (88 liters) including a reserve capacity of 2.6 US gallons for vehi¬ 
cles with the N73 engine. A “saddle” type tank is used which provides a tunnel for the dri- 
veshaft but creates two separate low spots in the tank. A Syphon jet is required with this 
type of tank to transfer fuel from the left side, linked to the fuel return line. As fuel moves 
through the return, the siphon jet creates a low pressure (suction) to pick up fuel from the 
left side of the tank and transfer it to the right side at the fuel pick up. 

There must be no escape of fuel vapors when the tank is being filled and it must be possi¬ 
ble to fill the tank quickly and the fuel must not foam up. The fuel is prevented from foam¬ 
ing up when the tank is being filled because the tank filler pipe is located low down on the 
fuel tank. An anti-spitback flap is fitted on the fuel tank filler pipe as it enters the tank to 
prevent fuel from splashing back towards the pump nozzle during refuelling. The filler neck 
is designed so that the incoming fuel functions like a venturi tube during refuelling and also 
draws external air into the tank so that no fuel vapors can escape during this stage. 



23 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 






MED 9.2.1 - N73 Fuel System 


1 2 345678 9 



24 23 22 21 20 


KT-9780 


1. Air cleaner 

2. Intake manifold 

3. Engine 

4. Exhaust system 

5. Oxygen sensor 

6. Evaporative emission valve (TEV) 

7. Purge vapors 

8. MED 9.2.1 ECM 

9. Carbon Canister 

10. Fuel tank leak diagnostic module (DM TL) 

11. Roll-over valve 

12. Liquid/vapor expansion tank 

13. Dust filter 

14. Service ventilation 

15. Pressure test lead 

16. Fuel tank filler cap 


17. Filler vent valve 

18. Service vent valve (float valve) 

19. Anti-spitback flap 

20. Surge chamber (fuel pump baffling) 

21. Electric fuel pump (EKP) 

22. Pressure relief valve 

23. Suction jet pumps 

24. Fuel Tank 

25. Outlet protection valve 

26. Service vent valve (float valve) 

27. Refueling breather 

28. Leakage line 

29. Fuel pressure regulator (6 bar) 

30. Fuel filter 

31. High pressure fuel pump (HDP) 

32. Fuel rails 


24 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 














































































































































Tank Ventilation: Optimum ventilation of the tank system ensures trouble free refuelling 
and that no vacuum can develop during this operation. 

The Ventilation System Consists of: 

• Two service vent valves (left/right 18&26) 

• Filling ventilation valve (17) 

• Hose to the fuel expansion tank (27) 

• Two rollover valves in the fuel expansion tank (11) 

• Service vent hose (14) 

• Activated-carbon filter with hoses (10) 

• Dust filter (13) 


Tank Ventilation Components: 

• Service vent (18&26): The service vent valve (18) on the right side of the tank consists of 
a float which locks the ventilation while fuel is being admitted (ball valve). The service 
vent valve ensures that no fuel enters the ventilation pipe when the vehicle is on an 
incline. A simple ventilation connection piece is located in the left tank chamber. Both 
service vent valves ensure that no air pockets form in the lower portions of the tank. 

• Expansion tank (12): The task of the expansion tank is to receive fuel when the fuel 
tank is full and the vapors have expanded due to heat. 

• Rollover valve (11): The rollover valve is also a plastic ball valve. When the vehicle is 
in its usual position, the rollover valve is open allowing air to flow in and out. In the 
same way, fuel can flow via the filling vent valve (17) from the fuel tank into the expan¬ 
sion tank and from the expansion tank back into the fuel tank. In the event of an acci¬ 
dent in which the vehicle rolls over, the ball locks the expansion tank inlet and outlet 
openings and prevents fuel from escaping. 

• Dust filter (13): The dust filter prevents dust and small insects from entering the acti¬ 
vated carbon filter. 


Tank Ventilation Function 

During refuelling, the air escapes via the service ventilation in the expansion tank. Air mol¬ 
ecules in the tank have combined with hydrocarbon molecules. These must not escape 
into the atmosphere. The air containing hydrocarbon molecules is fed through the activat¬ 
ed carbon filter. This filters out the hydrocarbon molecules and stores them. 


25 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 



The activated carbon filter is purged when the engine is running. This means that atmos¬ 
pheric air is drawn through the activated carbon filter in the opposite direction and is sup¬ 
plied for combustion via the engine's purge air pipe (7). The evaporative emission valve (6) 
controls the purging, which is activated by the ECM. 

The air which is now free of hydrocarbon molecules escapes via the dust filter into the 
atmosphere. If the fuel level reaches the ventilation valve (18), the ball floats and closes the 
ventilation pipe. The tank pressure increases beyond the pump nozzle cut-out pressure 
and switches it off. During fuel withdrawal, the fuel tank system is ventilated in the reverse 
direction to prevent the formation of a vacuum. 


Fuel Supply System: The fuel tank system must fulfill various requirements concerned 
with supplying the engine with fuel. These include: 

• Providing sufficient fuel volume and pressure regardless of the driving style 

• Ensuring that the tank can be almost completely drained (full utilization of volume) 

The tank is made up of two halves which are only directly connected up to a certain height. 
A large proportion of the fuel volume cannot reach the fuel pump without assistance (suc¬ 
tion jet pumps). 

For the N73 engine, minor modifications have been made to the fuel supply system to 
adapt it to the direct injection system. The additional features are: 

• Leakage line 

• Electric fuel pump with increased delivery 

Fuel Supply System Components: 

• Fuel tank (24) 

• Surge chamber (20) 

• Fuel pump (21) 

• Two suction jet pumps (23) 

• Outlet protection valve (25) 

• Pressure relief valve (22) 

• Internal tank fuel lines 

• Fuel filter with fuel pressure regulator (30&29) 

• High pressure fuel pump (HDP) 

• Fuel rails with injection valves (32) 


26 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 




Internal Tank Fuel Circuit Operation 


The fuel pump supplies fuel from the surge chamber via the fuel filter (located next to the 
frame rail under the driver’s floor) to the high pressure fuel pumps (HDP). The fuel pump 
always pumps more fuel than the engine requires in all operating conditions. The fuel pres¬ 
sure regulator built into the fuel filter adjusts the pressure to 6 bar and feeds the excess fuel 
in the return flow back into the tank. 

The pressure regulator valve in the return flow sets a return pressure of 1.0 - 1.5 bar. This 
pressure prevents fuel vapor locks in the return flow and also ensures operation of the two 
suction jet pumps. 

The fuel flows from the pressure regulator valve on to an intersection point where the fuel 
return flow is split. Some of the fuel flows through the suction jet pump in the left half of 
the tank via the internal fuel line to the surge chamber. The suction jet pump acts like a 
venturi tube which draws the fuel from the left half of the tank into the right half. 

The other amount of diverted fuel flows via the second internal fuel supply directly to the 
right half of the tank and to the second suction jet pump. This pumps the fuel from the 
right half of the tank into the surge chamber to ensure that the surge chamber is always 
filled with enough fuel in all driving conditions and takes full advantage of the reserve capac¬ 
ity. 


Electric Fuel Pump (EKP) 

The N73 fuel pump is a roller cell type (EKP Bosch 3.1) with an increased delivery pressure 
of 6 bar. This pressure is required to adequately supply the high pressure fuel pumps. The 
fuel is delivered according to consumption by the engine (controlled regulation) which pro¬ 
duces the following benefits: 

• The load balance of the alternator/battery is improved (lower pump power demand) 

• The lower power input reduces the fuel pump heat radiation in the fuel tank 

• Integration of the crash cut-out in the EKP regulation 

• Longer EKP service life 

• Deletion of the EKP relay 


27 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 



Fuel Pressure Regulator 


The pressure regulator is integrated in the fuel filter (3) and the line connections are fitted 
with quick release couplings due to the 6 bar fuel pressure. There is a return line (5) from 
the pressure regulator between the fuel pressure regulator and the fuel tank. The pressure 
regulator has a small hose connected (2) to ensure that if there are any leaks in the pres¬ 
sure regulator, any leaking fuel does not escape into the environment. This hose joins the 
Leakage line which returns excess fuel from the high pressure pump to the tank. 


1. Fuel supply to high pressure fuel pumps 

2. Pressure regulator leakage hose 

3. Fuel filter with integral fuel pressure regulator 

4. Fuel supply from in tank electric fuel pump 

5. Fuel return from pressure regulator to tank 


High Pressure Injection System: A BMW gasoline direct injection system is used for the 
first time in the N73 engine series. Each fuel rail is supplied with fuel by a high pressure 
pump (HDP), which is driven via a bucket tappet by a triple lobe cam on the exhaust 
camshaft. The two high pressure pumps are supplied with fuel by the electric fuel pump 
(EKP), which is located in the fuel tank. The high pressure fuel injectors are connected to 
a pressure rail (accumulator) for each cylinder bank. The two rails are not interconnected. 


1. Supply line 

2. High pressure pumps 

3. High pressure lines 

4. Fuel rail (7-12) 

5. Fuel rail (1-6) 

6. High pressure fuel 
injectors 

7. Rail pressure sensors 

8. Pressure limiting 
valves 

9. Leakage line 


91 278645872 





KT-9612 



1 2 3 4 5 

KT-9572 


28 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 






































High Pressure Pumps 


A single cylinder high pressure pump is used for each cylinder bank. The pumps are 
mounted on the cylinder heads and driven via bucket tappets by triple cam lobes on the 
exhaust camshafts. Each pump has three connecting lines: feed line, high pressure line 
and leakage line. 


1. Feed line 

2. Inlet valve 

3. High pressure chamber 

4. Outlet valve 

5. High pressure line 

6. Pump plunger 

7. Annular plunger groove 

8. Feed area channel 

9. Sealing ring 

10. Fuel quantity control 
valve 

11. Diaphragm 

12. Pressure attenuator 

13. Mounting flange 

14. Leakage line 


1 5 4 11 12 2 3 10 



14 13 8 9 7 6 8 

KT-9698 


29 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 


























































Fuel is delivered to each high pressure pump through the feed line at a pressure of 6 bar 
from the electric in tank fuel pump via a T-branch. In the pump, the fuel passes through 
the inlet valve (2) into the high pressure area (3). 

As the pump plunger is forced up by the camshaft, the fuel is pressurized (up to 120 bar) 
in this area. The pressurized fuel is then forced out through the high pressure line to the 
fuel rail. The outlet valve (4) prevents back flow from the rail into the high pressure pump. 

Due to the extreme pressure on and around the plunger shaft, a small amount of fuel (max. 
1 litre per hour) flows past the plunger shaft against the sealing ring (9). This also serves 
as lubrication for the plunger shaft. The sealing ring provides a seal between the fuel side 
of the pump and the engine oil at the pump drive. 

To relieve the pump pressure (up to 120 bar) at the sealing ring, the pressure is reduced in 
two stages, at which point the fuel returns through the leakage line to the tank. The pump 
pressure is reduced down to 6 bar at the annular groove (7) because it is connected by a 
channel (8) to the feed area of the pump. The fuel flow from this channel is regulated by 
the fuel quantity control valve (MSV). 

Below the annular groove, some fuel flows past the pump plunger against the sealing ring. 
At this point the fuel pressure is virtually reduced to atmosheric pressure, which is sufficient 
to return the fuel through the leakage line to the tank. 


Fuel Quantity Control Valves (MSV) 

The fuel quantity control valve (10) is installed in the high pressure pump to regulate the fuel 
delivery rate as required based on load and engine rpm. This valve opens a channel from 
the high pressure chamber (3) to the feed area allowing excess fuel to return to the feed 
area. 

When the pump plunger is at it’s lowest position, the valve is energized closed by the ECM. 
The valve is de-energized as soon as the injection pressure calculated by the ECM is 
reached during the upwards travel of the pump plunger. The valve is now opened to allow 
excess fuel to return to the feed area. This switching is repeated three times per camshaft 
revolution because the drive cam for the pump has three lobes. 

The pulsations generated in the pump during the process are absorbed by the pressure 
attenuator spring (12). The pressure attenuator is sealed by a diaphragm (11) from the 
pump feed area. 


30 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 



Fuel Rails (pressure accumulator) 


The fuel is stored in the fuel rail at a pressure 
between 50 and 120 bar for distribution to the 
fuel injectors. The fuel rail connects to the injec¬ 
tors through brass coupling connections. 

Due to length and position compensation 
between the rail and the fuel injectors, brass 
coupling connections are used in order that the 
fuel injector O-ring can float inside this coupling. 



Pressure Limiting Valves 

Each fuel rail contains an integral pressure limiting valve (1 below). This valve opens from 
a pressure of 125 bar to prevent damage to the injection system. The outlet of this valve 
is connected by a line to the high pressure pump fuel feed line. The valve can open briefly: 

• When no fuel is required by the fuel injectors (fuel cutoff when vehicle is coasting) 

or 

• During the afterheating (hot soak) phase when the hot engine is turned off. 



Rail Pressure Sensors 

Each fuel rail incorporates a rail pressure sensor (2 above). The sensor is a pressure 
dependent resistor and the voltage (5 V) is supplied by the ECM. The increasing system 
pressure alters the sensor resistance. 

According to the fuel pressure applied, the rail pressure sensor outputs a varying voltage 
signal as the rail pressure increases from 0.5 V (0 bar) to 4.5 V (140 bar). If the rail pres¬ 
sure sensor malfunctions, the fuel quantity control valve (on the HDP) is activated with a 
back up function (set value) by the ECM. 


31 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 




Return Shutoff Valve 


The return shutoff valve prevents a pressure drop in the system while the engine is stopped 
and is located in the leakage line. When the engine is started, the valve is energized after 
a slight delay to prevent a pressure drop in the feed area of the high pressure pump (cavi¬ 
tation). 

While the engine is running, this valve is sup¬ 
plied with system voltage (from the ECM Main 
Relay) and activated by the ECM providing a 
ground path which allows leakage fuel to return 
to the tank. 

1. High pressure pump 

2. Leakage line 

3. Return shutoff valve 

Pressure Damper Vent Valve: The Pressure Damper Vent Valve provides a controlled 
outlet for fuel/vapors that accumulate in the Pressure Attenuator (damper) chamber in the 
top of each High Pressure Pump. This is a 3/2 way electrically controlled valve (KL15 from 
the IVM, ground path provided by ECM 1) that provides: 



KT-9618 


• A circuit for fuel to return to the fuel tank when energized (KL15 on) or 

• A circuit for fuel vapors to vent into the evaporative system when de-energized (KL15 off) 



ECM 1 


IVM 


HDEV 


RETURN LINE 
(TO FUEL TANK) 


HDEV 


PRESSUE DAMPER 
VENTVALVE 


LEAKEAGE LINE FROM 
RETURN SHUT OFF VALVE 


EVAPORATIVE LINE 
(TO EVAPORATIVE 
EMISSION VALVE) 


EVAPORATIVE LINE 

(FROM ACTIVE CHARCOAL CANISTER) 


32 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 
















When the engine is running, a slight amount of fuel may accumulate in the Pressure 
Attenuator upper chambers due to natural leakage through the internal diaphram (extreme 
pressure). This fuel (circuit) is returned to the fuel tank by combining with the Leakage Line 
of the Return Shut-off Valve. The Pressure Damper Vent Valve provides a passage to com¬ 
bine these two circuits when the ignition is switched on (KL15) and isolates the Evaporative 
Emission circuit. 

When the engine is not running, fuel vapors remain in these chambers and is routed into 
the Evaporative Emission circuit. This is accomplished by Pressure Damper Vent Valve 
blocking the passage from the Return Shut-off Valve (KL15 off) and opening a passage to 
the circuit leading from the Active Charcoal Canister to the Evaporative Emission Valve. 


High Pressure Fuel Injectors (HDEV) 


The high pressure fuel injectors are designed 
essentially the same as conventional fuel injec¬ 
tors. They are secured by a taper (2) in the 
cylinder head and sealed by a Teflon ring (1) 
against the combustion chamber. 

The O-ring (3) seals the top of the injector and 
floats inside the brass coupling connections on 
the fuel rail. Each fuel injector incorporates a 
single hole nozzle with a spray angle of 70° to 
the piston crown. 



KT-9637 


6 5 2 4 1 3 

1. Electrical connection 

2. Solenoid coil (1.5 ohms) 

3. Fuel inlet port 

4. Pressure spring 

5. Nozzle needle 

6. Single hole nozzle 


To open the high pressure fuel injector, the nozzle needle is lifted off its seat when the sole¬ 
noid coil is energized. Due to the high injection pressure (up to 120 bar), the pressure 
spring is designed to accommodate a pressure force of 30 newtons (5 newtons for con¬ 
ventional fuel injectors). The pressure spring forces the nozzle needle onto its seat during 
closing with sufficient contact pressure. 

33 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 
































































Note: The installed position and mounting pres¬ 
sure are maintained by a twin hold down fixture 
(2) (one hold down fixture for every two fuel injec¬ 
tors). 


Note: The twin hold down fixtures are bolted to 
the cylinder head with spring washers (3); the 
correct mounting pressure is ensured by the 
contact pressure of the spring washers. 


The high pressure fuel injectors are positioned 
on the intake side at a 30° angle to the cylinder 
head and reach directly into the combustion 
chamber between the two intake valves (1 
below). 



KT-9586 



KT-9663 


Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor: This sensor provides the crankshaft position and 
engine speed (RPM) signal to both ECMs for engine management operation (hardwire). 
This is a Hall type sensor mounted in the bell housing which scans the impulse wheel 
(attached to the ring gear). The impulse wheel contains 58 teeth with a gap of two miss¬ 
ing teeth. The IVM provides the operating voltage supply to this component. 


The rotation of the impulse wheel generates a 
square wave DC voltage signal in the sensor 
where by each tooth of the wheel produces one 
square wave. The ECMs count the pulses and 
determines engine rpm. 

The gap of two missing teeth provides a refer¬ 
ence point that the ECMs recognize as crank¬ 
shaft position. 

The crankshaft position sensor (arrow shown 
on the right) is monitored as part of OBD II 
requirements for Misfire Detection. 



34 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 




















Camshaft Position Sensors (Hall Effect): The ECMs use the signal from the camshaft 
sensors to set up the triggering of the ignition coils, correct timing of fully sequential fuel 
injection and VANOS operation. The ECMs monitor power flow through the Hall elements 
as the basis for the signal output. 

As the camshafts rotate, the leading edge of the impulse wheel approaches the sensor tip 
creating a magnetic field with the permanent magnet in the sensor. The attraction causes 
the magnetic field to penetrate through the Hall element. The magnetic field affects the 
power flow in the element causing the input signal to go high. As the impulse wheel pass¬ 
es by the sensor, the signal goes low. 

The repetitive high/low creates a square wave 
signal that the ECMs use to recognize the 
camshaft position. 

The ECMs determine an approximate location of 
the camshaft position (high or low signal) during 
engine start up optimizing cold start injection 
(reduced emissions). 

An impulse wheel is mounted on the end of 
each camshaft for position detection. The sen¬ 
sors are mounted on each side at the back of 
the cylinder heads cover (2 and 3). 

42-04-88 



Engine Coolant Temperature: The Engine Coolant Temperature is provided to ECM 1 
from a Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) type sensor. ECM 1 determines the correct 
fuel mixture and base ignition timing required for the engine temperature and shares this 


with ECM 2. 

The sensor is located in the thermostat housing 
(3). The sensor decreases in resistance as the 
temperature rises and vice verse. 

The ECM monitors an applied voltage to the 
sensor (5V). This voltage will vary (0-5V) as 
coolant temperature changes the resistance 
value. 



42-04-89 


35 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 




Principle of Operation 


Fuel Management delivers fuel from the tank to the engine combustion chambers. To 
accomplish this, fuel supply must be available to the fuel injectors. Then the fuel must be 
injected in the precise amount and at the correct time. The ECMs do not directly monitor 
fuel supply, although ECM 1 manages it. The ECMs (with the aid of HDEV control modules) 
control and monitor fuel injection. 


The Fuel Pump (EKP) 

EKP regulation and fuel cut-out in the event of a crash, are ISIS (Intelligent Safety Integration 
System) features. 

The fuel requirement is transmitted by ECM 1 via the PT CAN bus and the byteflight bus to 
the right hand side satellite B-pillar (SBSR). The EKP regulation is integrated in the SBSR. 
The SBSR controls the front right belt force limiter and the fuel pump. 

The SBSR controls the EKP via a pulse width modulated (PWM) signal according to the fuel 
quantity required by ECM 1. The present pump speed is recorded in the SBSR from the 
EKP electrical current consumption to calculate the fuel quantity required. The fuel quanti¬ 
ty required is then set (from the coded map in the SBSR) by the PWM signal to control cur¬ 
rent which regulates the pump speed. 


DME 


PT-CAN 



byteflight 



Fuel Requirement Signal Path 


Note: If the fuel quantity requirement from ECM 1 and/or the EKP rotation speed signal in 
the SBSR fails, the fuel pump will continue to operate with the greatest delivery rate when 
terminal 15 is activated. This guarantees the fuel supply even if the control signals fail. 


36 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 

















Basics of Direct Injection 


With direct injection, the fuel is injected at high pressure (between 50 and 120 bar) direct¬ 
ly into the combustion chamber (see fig. 2 below). There are essentially two possible con¬ 
cepts of gasoline direct injection: homogeneous and stratified mixture formation, which 
have distinct strengths and weakness in terms of consumption and emissions. The differ¬ 
ences are created by the different mixture formation processes. 



1. Manifold Injection 


2. Direct Injection 


KT-9700 


The figure below (comparison of mixture formation) shows the chronological sequence of 
mixture formation for direct injection in homogeneous and stratified modes in comparison 
with manifold injection. The mixture composition is shown as an air/fuel ratio for four points 
in time. The colors represent the relevant local air/fuel ratio according to the scale. 


1. Manifold injection 

2. Homogeneous direct 
injection 

3. Stratified direct 
injection 




i 



KT-9696 

37 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 











































Manifold Injection (other BMW gasoline engines) 

With manifold injection (1), injection already begins before the intake process. Due to the 
intake manifold vacuum, high speed in the valve opening and the comparatively long mix¬ 
ture formation time, there is already a homogeneous mixture in the cylinder at the end of 
the intake process. 


Homogeneous Direct Injection (N73) 


With direct injection, the fuel injector mounts directly into the combustion chamber. 
Injection takes place during the intake stroke (after the intake valve closes and the piston is 
starting to uptravel). In this way, an extensively homogeneous mixture is achieved by the 
point of ignition. The mixture formation and thus the combustion sequence is similar to a 
conventional engine with manifold injection. 


Because the fuel is first introduced into the cylinder and vaporized there, the cylinder 
charge is cooled by the heat of vaporization, thereby increasing efficiency by up to 10%. 
This also improves the anti-knock characteristics allowing an increase in compression ratio. 

Advantages: If the air/fuel ratio is stoichiometrically regulated (Lambda =1, i.e. 1 kg of fuel 
to 14.8 kg of air) 


• Conventional exhaust gas treatment system with three-way catalytic converter can be 
used. 


and 


• Sulphur-free fuel is not necessary, without any impaired function. 


Direct Injection with Charge Stratification 

The main advantage of direct injection is that it permits stratified lean-burn operation in 
part-load mode: 

• The fresh charge is drawn in unthrottled, as in a diesel engine. The fuel is only injected 
at a late stage of the compression phase, where a rough stoichiometric mixture is cre¬ 
ated only in the area of the spark plug. 

• The desired unthrottled operation is possible because a combustible mixture is only 
needed in a tightly restricted area and the main part of the combustion chamber can 
consist of an extremely lean mixture. 


38 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 



Disadvantages: 

• The excess oxygen associated with lean-burn operation prevents the possibility of 
reduction in the catalytic converter and therefore precludes conventional exhaust gas 
treatment with a three-way catalytic converter. 

• To safeguard the operation of a DeNox catalytic converter that would then be needed, it 
would be necessary to use low sulphur fuel, which is currently only available to a limited 
extent (on a worldwide basis). 


Possible Modes of Petrol Direct Injection 

Ndi 


Nd Engine torque 
n Engine speed 

1. Lean, charge stratification 

2. Lean, homogeneous 

3. Homogeneous 


n 

KT-9762 

As the above chart shows, the use of load stratification (1) is only possible in a limited load 
and speed range. Over and above this load and speed range, the engines can only be 
operated in homogeneous mode (2-3). 

Through the use of of Valvetronic, the N73 engine in the middle torque/speed range (1) 
demonstrates the same consumption advantages as engines of other manufacturers 
with charge stratification. 

Notes: 



39 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 
























Direct Injection System 


A high pressure fuel injector control module (HDEV) is used for each cylinder bank and is 
located in the engine compartment E box (refer to page 4). The HDEV control module is 
supplied with system voltage from the ECM main relay. Data is transmitted from the ECMs 
to the HDEV control modules for each high pressure fuel injector via the Local-Can bus. 
The HDEVs activate the injectors individually. 

Note: The high pressure fuel injectors are activated by the HDEV control modules with a 
voltage of 100 V and energized during the opening period with approx. 85 V. 


HDEV Control Modules 

The HDEV control modules contain pulse width modulated final output stages with high 
performance capacitors to transform the system voltage up to 85 to 100 volts. Current 
flows in the output stages up to a specific cutoff value. This cutoff creates an induced volt¬ 
age, e.g. 85 V, which is then charged to the high performance capacitors (boosters). The 
high pressure fuel injectors are actuated by this capacitor with 2.8 to 16 amps of current. 


HDEV activation: 

12 3 4 



The oscilloscope pattern (example above) shows the premagnetization, the booster cur¬ 
rent, injection starting phase and injection time (ti) holding phase. 


40 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 






























The Fuel Injectors will be opened by the HDEV control modules to inject pressurized fuel 
into the combustion chambers. Based on the ECMs request, the HDEVs control the open¬ 
ing by activating the ground circuit for the solenoid windings (approx. 1.5 ohms). The ECMs 
will vary the duration request (in milli-seconds) of “opening” time to regulate the air/fuel ratio. 

Each HDEV control module has six final stage output transistors that switch ground to the 
individual injector solenoids. ECM 1 establishes the injector “triggering” first from the 
Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor and shares this value with ECM 2. 

The ECMs are programmed to request injector activation once (per cylinder) for every work¬ 
ing cycle of the engine (Full Sequential Injection). The ECMs calculate the total milli-second 
time to open the injectors and the HDEVs activate them independently. 

During start up, the ECMs recognize the Camshaft Position (Cylinder ID) inputs. The 
camshaft positions are referenced to the crankshaft position. This process “times” the 
injection to the intake stroke (after the intake valve closes and the piston is starting to 
uptravel) for increased efficiency. When activated, each injector delivers the full fuel charge 
at separate times for each cylinder intake stroke. 

The Camshaft Position inputs are monitored by the ECMs during start up. There will be an 
effect on injector timing if this input is missing when the engine is started. When KL15 is 
switched “off”, the ECM main relay discontinues voltage to the HDEV and deactivates the 
six final stage transistors to discontinue fuel injection. 


The Injector “open” Time maintains engine operation after start up is determined by the 
ECM (programming). 

The injection ms value is influenced by battery voltage. When cranking, the voltage is low 
and the ECM will request an increase the ms value to compensate for injector “lag time”. 
When the engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the 
requested injection ms value due to faster injector reaction time. 

Cold starting requires additional fuel to compensate for poor mixture and the loss of fuel as 
it condenses onto cold cylinder walls. The cold start fuel quantity is determined by ECM 1 
based on the Engine Coolant Temperature Sensor input during start up and shares this 
information with ECM 2 via the Local-CAN bus. 

During cranking, additional fuel is injected for the first few crankshaft revolutions. The ECMs 
recognize the Camshaft Positions and precisely times the request for Full Sequential 
Injection. After the first few crankshaft revolutions, the injected quantity is metered down 
as the engine comes up to speed. 


41 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 



When the engine is cold, an enriched mixture is required. The Coolant Temperature input 
allows the ECMs to adjust the injection ms value to compensate during warm up and min¬ 
imize the the fuel injected at engine operating temperature. 

When the engine is at idle, minimum injection is required. Additional fuel will be added if 
the ECMs observe low engine rpm and increasing Valvetronic valve lift / air volume inputs 
(acceleration enrichment). As the accelerator pedal is actuated, ECM 1 monitors acceler¬ 
ation and rate of movement and shares this value with ECM 2. The ECMs will request an 
increased volume of fuel injected into the engine to the HDEVs. The “full throttle” position 
indicates maximum acceleration and the ECMs will request more fuel (full load enrichment). 

As the accelerator pedal is released, the ECMs decrease the injection ms value request 
(fuel shut off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreases fuel con¬ 
sumption and lowers emissions. When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injec¬ 
tion ms value request is increased (cut-in) to prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in 
rpm is dependent upon the engine temperature and the rate of deceleration. 

The HFM signals provide the measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by 
the ECMs to determine the amount of fuel to be injected to “balance” the air / fuel ratio. 

The Air Temperature Signals allow the ECMs to make a calculation of air density. The vary¬ 
ing voltage input from the NTC sensors indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found in 
cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECMs will adjust the amount 
of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on the oxygen content (details 
in Emissions). 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECMs to start the injection request to the HDEVs 
as well as providing information about the engine operation. This input is used in combi¬ 
nation with other inputs to determine engine load which increases / decreases the injection 
ms value. Without this input, the ECMs will not request the HDEVs to activate the injec¬ 
tors. 

When KL15 is switched “off”, the ECM main relay discontinues voltage to deactivate the 
HDEVs six final stage transistors to cease fuel injection. 


42 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 



Injection “Reduction” Time is required to control fuel economy, emissions, engine and 
vehicle speed limitation. The ECM will request to “trim” back or deactivate the fuel injec¬ 
tion as necessary while maintaining optimum engine operation. 


As the Valvetronic valve lift is decreased during deceleration, the ECMs decreases the injec¬ 
tion request (fuel shut off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreases 
fuel consumption and lowers emissions. 

When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injection ms value is increased (cut-in) to 
prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon the engine tempera¬ 
ture and the rate of deceleration. 

The ECMs will request deactivation the injectors to control maximum engine rpm (regard¬ 
less of vehicle speed). When the engine speed reaches 6500 rpm, the injectors will be 
deactivated to protect the engine from Over-Rev. As the engine speed drops below 6500 
rpm, injector activation will be resumed. 

Maximum vehicle speed is limited by the ECMs requesting a reduction in the injection ms 
value (regardless of engine rpm). This limitation is based on the vehicle dimensions, spec¬ 
ifications and installed tires (speed rating). 

The ECMs will also protect the Catalytic Converters by requesting a deaction of the injec¬ 
tors. 

When the ECMs detect a “Misfire” (ignition, injection or combustion), they will selectively 
request the HDEV(s) to deactivate the final stage output transistor for that cylinder(s). On 
the MED 9.2.1 system, there are six individual injector circuits per bank resulting in deacti¬ 
vation of one or multiples. This will limit engine power, but protect the Catalytic Converters. 


Fuel Injection Control Monitoring is performed by the ECMs for OBD II requirements. 
Faults with the fuel injectors and/or control circuits will be stored in memory. This monitor¬ 
ing includes: 

• Closed Loop Operation 

• Oxygen Sensor Feedback 

These additional corrections are factored into the calculated injection request time. If the 
correction factor exceeds set limits a fault will be stored in memory. 


43 

MED 9.2.1 Fuel Management 



Ignition Management 


Ignition Coils: The high voltage supply required to ignite the mixture in the combustion 
chambers is determined by the stored energy in the ignition coils. The stored energy con¬ 
tributes to the ignition duration, ignition current and rate of high voltage increase. The Coil 
circuit including primary and secondary components consists of: 


1. Coil Assembly 

2. Insulator Boot 

3. Spark Plug 

4. ECM Final Stage Transistor 

5. Secondary Coil Ground 



Ignition Coil 


42-04-00 


The Coil Assembly contains two copper windings insulated from each other. One winding 
is the primary winding, formed by a few turns of thick wire. The secondary winding is 
formed by a great many turns of thin wire. 


The primary winding receives battery voltage from the Ignition Coil Relay (in the IVM) which 
is activated by the CAS Module. The ECMs provide a ground path for the primary coil (Coil 
Terminal 1) by activating a final stage transistor. The length of time that current flows 
through the primary winding is the “dwell” which allows the coil to “saturate” or build up a 
magnetic field. After this storage process, the ECMs will interrupt the primary circuit at the 
point of ignition by deactivating the final stage transistors. The magnetic field built up with¬ 
in the primary winding collapses and induces the ignition voltage in the secondary winding. 


The high voltage generated in the secondary 
winding is discharged through Coil Terminal 4 
to the spark plug (insulated by the boot con¬ 
nector). 

The primary and secondary windings are un¬ 
coupled, therefore, the secondary winding 
requires a ground supply (Coil Terminal 4a). 


Insulator 

Boot 


f— 

4 




4a 

A 

A- 




Secondary 

Winding 



44 

MED 9.2.1 Ignition Management 


42-04-01 


^■ilpimzrQ 



















































There is an individual ignition circuit and coil for 
each cylinder on the MED 9.2.1 system. The 
MED 9.2.1 uses “pencil type” ignition coils. The 
eight individual ignition coils are integrated with 
the insulated connector (boot). 

The coils are removed by lifting the swivel latch connector retainer to release the wiring har¬ 
ness, apply a slight twist and lift the assembly upwards. The primary ignition cables are 
routed on the top of the cylinder head covers. 

Spark Plugs: The spark plugs introduce the ignition energy into the combustion chamber. 
The high voltage “arcs” across the air gap in the spark plug from the positive electrode to 
the negative electrodes. This creates a spark which ignites the combustible air/fuel mix¬ 
ture. 

The spark plugs are located in the center of the combustion 
area (on the top of the cylinder heads) which is the most suit¬ 
able point for igniting the compressed air/fuel mixture. The 
correct spark plugs for the MED 9.2.1 are the NGK 
BKR6EQUP quad electrode (non-adjustable gap). 

Note: When replacing the spark plugs, it is necessary to 
remove the entire intake system to avoid damaging the spark 
plugs during installation. The spark plugs must be replaced 
every 100,000 miles in US vehicles. 

The Ignition System is monitored by the ECMs via the Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. If 

a Misfire fault is present, the ECMs will deactivate the corresponding fuel injector(s) for that 
cylinder(s). Engine operation will still be possible. 

Knock Sensors: These are required to prevent detonation (pinging) from damaging the 
engine. The Knock Sensor is a piezoelectric sound conductor microphone. The ECM will 
retard the ignition timing (cylinder selective) based on the input of these sensors. 

There are three Knock Sensors bolted to each 
cylinder head. If the signal value exceeds the 
threshold, the ECM identifies the “knock” and 
retards the ignition timing for that cylinder. 

If a fault is detected with the sensor(s), the ECM 
deactivates Knock Control the ignition timing 
will be set to a conservative basic setting based 
on intake air temperature and a fault will be 
stored. 






42-04-02 


45 

MED 9.2.1 Ignition Management 





















Camshaft Position Sensors (Cylinder Identification): The camshaft sensors (Hall type) 
inputs allows the ECMs to determine camshaft positions in relation to crankshaft position. 
It is used by the ECMs to establish the “working cycle” of the engine for precise ignition tim¬ 
ing. For details about the sensor, refer to the Fuel Management section. 

Accelerator Pedal Position (PWG): As the accelerator pedal is actuated, the ECMs will 
advance the ignition timing. The “full throttle” position indicates maximum acceleration to 
the ECMs, the ignition will be advanced for maximum torque. For details about the sensor, 
refer to the Air Management section. 

Hot-Film Air Mass Meters (HFM): The air volume input signals (one per bank) are used 
by the ECMs to determine the amount of ignition timing advance. For details about the 
sensor, refer to the Air Management section. 

Air Temperature: This signal allows the ECMs to make a calculation of air density. The 
sensor is located in each HFM. The ECMs will adjust the ignition timing based on air tem¬ 
perature. When the intake air is hot the ECMs retard the ignition timing to reduce the risk 
of detonation. When the intake air is cooler, the ignition timing will be advanced. If this input 
is defective, a fault code will be set and the ignition timing will be set to a conservative basic 
setting. For details about the sensor, refer to the Air Management section. 


Notes: 


46 

MED 9.2.1 Ignition Management 



Principle of Operation 


Ignition Management provides ignition to the combustion chambers with the required volt¬ 
age at the correct time. Based on the combination of inputs, the ECMs calculate and con¬ 
trol the ignition timing and secondary output voltage by regulating the activation and 
dwell of the primary ignition circuit. The ECMs control and monitor the primary ignition 
circuit as well as the secondary ignition output (Misfire Detection). 

The ECMs have a very “broad” range of ignition timing. This is possible by using a Direct 
Ignition System, or sometimes referred to as “Static Ignition System”. Reliability is also 
increased by having separate individual ignition circuits. 

The Ignition Control is determined by the ECMs (load dependent). The ECMs will calcu¬ 
late the engine “load” based on a combination of the following: 

The dwell time will be regulated based on battery voltage. When cranking, the voltage is 
low and the ECMs will increase the dwell to compensate for saturation “lag time”. When 
the engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECMs will decrease the dwell 
due to a faster saturation time. 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECMs to start ignition in firing order (1-7-5-11-3- 
9-6-12-2-8-4-10) as well as providing information about the engine operation. This input 
is used in combination with other inputs to determine engine load which advances/retards 
the ignition timing. Without this input, the ECMs will not activate the ignition. 

Cold start is determined by the ECMs based on the engine coolant temperature and rpm 
during start up. A cold engine will crank over slower than a warm engine, the ignition tim¬ 
ing will range between top dead center to slightly retarded providing optimum starting. 

When starting a warm engine, the rpm is higher which results in slightly advanced timing. 
When the engine coolant and intake air temperature is hot, the ignition timing will not be 
advanced reducing starter motor “load”. 


During cranking, the ECMs recognize the Camshaft 
Positions (compression stroke) and activates the igni¬ 
tion per cylinder (firing order). 


Multiple Ignition Pulses ensure good spark quality dur¬ 
ing engine start up and reduce emissions at engine 
speeds < 2000 rpm. The ECMs will activate the igni¬ 
tion coils multiple times (1) per 720° of crankshaft rev¬ 
olution. 








1_ 

l 








RU 








L 









4 






"”'l 



i 

k— 






_u 

ill 

r 




















yz 


47 

MED 9.2.1 Ignition Management 




The ignition timing will be progressively advanced assisting the engine in coming up to 
speed. As the engine speed approaches idle rpm, the timing remains slightly advanced to 
boost torque. When the engine is at idle speed, minimum timing advance is required. This 
will allow faster engine and catalyst warm up. The multiple pulsing switches to single pulse 
when engine speed > 2000 RPM (varied with engine temperature). 

The timing will be advanced when the ECMs observe low engine rpm and increasing accel¬ 
erator/air volume inputs (acceleration torque). As the Valvetronic valve lift is increased, the 
ECMs advance the timing based on the engine acceleration request (and at what rate). The 
ECMs will fully advance timing for the “full throttle” position indicating maximum accelera¬ 
tion (torque). 

The Air Flow Volume signal provides the measured amount of intake air volume. This input 
is used by the ECMs to determine the amount of timing advance to properly combust the 
air/fuel mixture. 

The Air Temperature Signal assists the ECMs in reducing the risk of detonation (ping). 
When the intake air is hot the ECMs retard the ignition timing. When the intake air is cool¬ 
er, the ignition timing will be advanced. 

As the Valvetronic valve lift is decreased, the ECMs decrease the ignition timing if the rpm 
is above idle speed (coasting). This feature lowers the engine torque for deceleration. 
When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the timing is slightly advanced to prevent the 
engine from stalling. The amount of advance is dependent upon the engine temperature 
and the rate of deceleration. 


Emission Optimized - IGNITION KEY OFF 

“Emission Optimized Ignition Key Off” is a programmed feature of the CAS Module. After 
the CAS Module detects KL 15 is switched “off”, the ignition coil relay (in the IVM) stays 
active (CAS voltage supply) for two more individual coil firings. This means that just two 
cylinders are fired - not two revolutions. 

This feature allows residual fuel injected into the cylinders, as the ignition key is switched 
off, to be combusted as the engine runs down. 

When KL15 is switched “off” the ECMs remove the operating voltage from the fuel injec¬ 
tion relay (in the IVM). The CAS Module will maintain power to the ignition coil relay for a 
few seconds to maintain ignition coil activation (by the ECMs). 


48 

MED 9.2.1 Ignition Management 



Knock Control 


The use of Knock Control allows the ECMs to further advance the ignition timing under load 
for increased torque. This system uses three Knock Sensors per cylinder head. Knock 
Control is only in affect when the engine temperature is greater than 35 °C and there is a 
load on the engine. This will disregard false signals while idling or from a cold engine. 

Based on the firing order, the ECMs monitor the Knock Sensors after each ignition for a nor¬ 
mal (low) signal. If the signal value exceeds the threshold, the ECMs identify the “knock” 
and retards the ignition timing (3°) for that cylinder(s) the next time it is fired. 

This process is repeated in 3° increments until the knock ceases. The ignition timing will be 
advanced again in increments right up to the knock limit and maintain the timing at that 
point. 

If a fault is detected with the Knock Sensor(s) or circuits, the ECMs deactivate Knock 
Control. The ignition timing will be set to a conservative basic setting (to reduce the risk of 
detonation) and a fault will be stored. 



12410015 


49 

MED 9.2.1 Ignition Management 












































































































Emissions Management - N73B60 Low Emission Vehicle (LEV) 


Evaporative Emissions: The control of the evaporative fuel vapors (Hydrocarbons) from 
the fuel tank is important for the overall reduction in vehicle emissions. The evaporative sys¬ 
tem has been combined with the ventilation of the fuel tank, which allows the tank to breath 
(equalization). The overall operation provides: 

• An inlet vent, to an otherwise "sealed" fuel tank, for the entry of air to replace the fuel 
consumed during engine operation. 

• An outlet vent with a storage canister to "trap and hold" fuel vapors that are produced 
by the expansion/evaporation of fuel in the tank, when the vehicle is stationary. 


1. Fuel tank 

2. Left sensor unit/suction jet pump 

3. Fuel pump/right sensor unit/suction jet 
pump 

4. Expansion tank 

5. Active carbon filter 

6. Fuel filler pipe 

7. DM-TL pump 

8. Dust filter 



The canister is then "purged" using the engine vacuum to draw the fuel vapors into the 
combustion chamber. This "cleans" the canister allowing for additional storage. Like any 
other form of combustible fuel, the introduction of these vapors on a running engine must 
be controlled. The ECMs control the Evaporative Emission Valves which regulates purging 
of evaporative vapors. 


On-Board Refueling Vapor Recovery (ORVR): The ORVR system recovers and stores 
hydrocarbon fuel vapor during refueling. Non ORVR vehicles vent fuel vapors from the tank 
venting line back to the filler neck and in many states reclaimed by a vacuum receiver on 
the filling station’s fuel pump nozzle. 


When refueling, the pressure of the fuel entering the tank forces the hydrocarbon vapors 
through the tank refuelling breather hose (27 on the following page) to the liquid/vapor 
expansion tank and into the active charcoal canister. The HC vapors are stored in the 
active charcoal canister and the system can then “breath” through the DM TL and the air 
filter. 


50 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 



MED 9.2.1 - N73 Fuel and Evaporative System 


1 2 345678 9 




32 

31 

30 

29 

28 

27 

26 

25 



24 23 22 21 20 


10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 
19 


KT-9780 


1. Air cleaner 

2. Intake manifold 

3. Engine 

4. Exhaust system 

5. Oxygen sensor 

6. Evaporative emission valve (TEV - only 1 shown) 

7. Purge vapors 

8. MED 9.2.1 ECM (only 1 shown) 

9. Carbon Canister 

10. Fuel tank leak diagnostic module (DM TL) 

11. Roll-over valve 

12. Liquid/vapor expansion tank 

13. Dust filter 

14. Service ventilation 

15. Pressure test lead 

16. Fuel tank filler cap 


17. Filler vent valve 

18. Service vent valve (float valve) 

19. Anti-spitback flap 

20. Surge chamber (fuel pump baffling) 

21. Electric fuel pump (EKP) 

22. Pressure relief valve 

23. Suction jet pumps 

24. Fuel Tank 

25. Outlet protection valve 

26. Service vent valve (float valve) 

27. Refueling breather 

28. Leakage line 

29. Fuel pressure regulator (6 bar) 

30. Fuel filter 

31. High pressure fuel pump (HDP) 

32. Fuel rails 


51 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 











































































































































Liquid/Vapor Expansion Tank: Fuel vapors are rout¬ 
ed from the refuelling breather hose and the Service 
Ventilation hose to the Liquid/Vapor Expansion Tank (1) 
located in the right rear fender well. 

The vapors cool when exiting the fuel tank, condense 
and drain back to the fuel tank. The remaining vapors 
exit the Liquid/Vapor Expansion Tank to the Active 
Carbon Canister. 


Active Carbon Canister: As the fuel vapors enter the 
canister, they will be absorbed by the active carbon. 
The remaining air will be vented to the atmosphere 
through the end of the canister (passing through the 
DM TL and filter) allowing the fuel tank to “breath”. 



42-04-01 

When the engine is running, the canister is then "purged" using intake manifold vacuum to 
draw fresh air through the canister which extracts the hydrocarbon vapors into the com¬ 
bustion chamber. This cleans the canister for additional storage. The Active Carbon 
Canister (2) is combined with the DM TL Pump and is located in the right rear fender well. 


Evaporative Emission Valves: These ECM controlled solenoid valves (located on the left 
strut tower of the engine compartment) regulate the purge flow from the Active Carbon 
Canister through the air inlet pipes into the intake manifold. 


The ECM Relay (in the IVM) provides operating 
voltage, and the ECMs control the valves by 
regulating the ground circuit. The valves are 
powered open and closed by an internal spring. 

If the Evaporative Emission Valve circuits are 
defective, a fault code will be set. If the valves 
are “mechanically” defective, a driveability com¬ 
plaint could be encountered and a mixture relat¬ 
ed fault code will be set. 



one of two shown 


42-04-02 


52 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 








1 


Evaporative Leakage Detection (DM TL): This com¬ 
ponent ensures accurate fuel system leak detection for 
leaks as small as 0.5 mm by slightly pressurizing the 
fuel tank and evaporative components. The DM TL 
pump contains an integral DC motor which is activated 
directly by the ECM. The ECM monitors the pump 
motor operating current as the measurement for 
detecting leaks. 

The pump also contains an ECM controlled change 
over valve that is energized closed during a Leak 
Diagnosis test. The change over valve is open during 
all other periods of operation allowing the fuel system 
to “breath” through the inlet filter. The DM TL is locat¬ 
ed is located in the right rear fender well. 

1. In its inactive state, filtered fresh air enters the evap¬ 
orative system through the sprung open valve of the 
DM TL. 

2. When the DME activates the DM TL for leak testing, 
it first activates only the pump motor. This pumps air 
through a restricter orifice (0.5 mm) which causes 
the electric motor to draw a specific amperage 
value. This value is equivalent to the size of the 
restricter. 

3. The solenoid valve is then energized which seals the 
evaporative system and directs the pump output to 
pressurize the evaporative system. 

• A large leak is detected in the evaporative system if the amperage 
value is not achieved. 

• A small leak is detected if the same reference amperage is achieved. 

• The system is sealed if the amperage value is higher than the refer¬ 
ence amperage. 


Since MY 2002, a heating element is integrated in the 
DM TL pump to eliminate condensation. The heater is 
provided battery voltage with “KL15” and the ECM pro¬ 
vides the ground path. 


FRESH 
AIR INLET 


DM-TL 



(Diagnostic Module - 
Tank Leak detection) 


vJ7 


r\ r\ 


ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 


+1 


1 


42-04-03 




V 


"3/ 


A_A 

3IDEI 


fi 



1 

CUR 

MON 

RENT 

ITOR 



Rl_ 

"(Q fp 


REFERENCE 


©v. 


FRESH 
AIR INLET 



DM-TL 


(Diagnostic Module - 
Tank Leak detection) 


II 


V V V 



FRESH 
AIR INLET 



DM-TL 
(Diagnostic Module - 
Tank Leak detection) 


V V 


V 



ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 



2 


3 


42-04-05 


53 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 





































































































































































































































Exhaust Emissions: The combustion process of a gasoline powered engine produces 

Carbon Monoxide (CO), Hydrocarbons (HC) and Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx). 

• Carbon Monoxide is a product of incomplete combustion under conditions of air defi¬ 
ciency. CO emissions are strongly dependent on the air/fuel ratio. 

• Hydrocarbons are also a product of incomplete combustion which results in unburned 
fuel. HC emissions are dependent on air/fuel ratio and the ignition of the mixture. 

• Oxides of Nitrogen are a product of peak combustion temperature (and temperature 
duration). NOx emissions are dependent on internal cylinder temperatures affected by 
the air/fuel ratio and ignition of the mixture. 

Control of exhaust emissions is accomplished by the engine and engine management 

design as well as after-treatment. 

• The ECMs manage exhaust emissions by controlling the air/fuel ratio and ignition. 

• The ECM controlled Secondary Air Injection further dilutes exhaust emissions leaving 
the engine and reduces the catalysts warm up time. 

• The Catalytic Converter further reduces exhaust emissions leaving the engine. 


Oxygen Sensors: The N73 engine is fitted with a total of four oxygen sensors. One pla¬ 
nar broadband oxygen sensor (constant characteristic curve), which regulates the fuel-air 
mixture, is located upstream (2) of each of the two catalytic converters. The catalytic con¬ 
verter assemblies are integral with the exhaust manifolds (1). 


There is a post catalytic converter sensor (Bosch LSH25) for 
each cylinder bank positioned downstream of the catalytic 
converter (3) which monitors the catalyst efficiency. 

This monitoring means that if the exhaust gas concentration is 
too high, a fault code is stored. The post catalyst sensors can 
also detect an emission relevant fault in a pre-catalyst oxygen 
sensor. 



43-02-06 


54 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 



Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor: The N73 engine is equipped with planar 
wideband oxygen sensors (pre-catalyst). The sensor is planar shaped (type of construc¬ 
tion) which is more compact and is made up of thin layers of zirconium dioxide (Zr02) 
ceramic films. This modular lamination structure enables the integration of several func¬ 
tions including the heating element which ensures the minimum operating temperature (750 
°C) is reached rapidly. 

In contrast to conventional oxygen sensors, the wideband features can measure not only 
at Lambda=1, but also in the rich and extremely lean range (Lambda=0.7 to complete 
atmospheric oxygen) very rapidly. 

To operate effectively, the oxygen sensor requires ambient air as the “reference gas” inside 
the sensor. The ambient air reaches the inside of the sensor through the plug connection 
and through the harness. The plug connection socket must therefore be protected from 
contamination (wax, preservatives, engine degreasers, engine washing, etc.). In the event 
of the oxygen sensor malfunctioning, the connector should always be checked first with 
regard to contamination and cleaned if necessary. The plug connection must be discon¬ 
nected and then reconnected to remove any oxidation from the connector pins. 


1. Exhaust gas 

2. Pump cell 

3. Platinum electrode, reference cell 

4. Heating element 

5. Heating element 

6. Reference air gap 

7. Zirconium ceramic layer 

8. Measuring gap 

9. Reference Cell 

10. Platinum electrode, reference cell 

11. Platinum electrode, pump cell 

12. Platinum electrode, pump cell 


1 



42-04-07 


Sensor Element Design 


The pump cell (2) and reference cell (9) are made of zirconium dioxide and each coated with 
two porous platinum electrodes. They are arranged so that there is a measuring gap (8) of 
approx. 10 to 50 microns between them. This measuring gap is connected by an inlet 
opening to the exhaust gas (1). The pump cell is controlled by the ECM applying voltage 
to the electrodes to initiate oxygen ion pumping across the porous membrane of the refer¬ 
ence cell, providing a quicker response time. 


55 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 





























If the exhaust gas content is lean, the pump cell pumps oxygen away from the measuring 
gap to the outside. The direction of flow is reversed for rich exhaust gas content, then oxy¬ 
gen is pumped from the exhaust gas into the measuring gap. 

The pump current flow is proportional to the oxygen concentration (lean) or the oxygen 
requirement (rich). The pump is constantly working to maintain that the gas composition in 
the measuring gap is constantly at Lambda=1. The required current of the pump cell is 
evaluated by the ECM as a signal that represents oxygen content in the exhaust gas. 

Oxygen Sensor Signals 

The sensor conductivity is efficient when the oxygen sensor is hot (750° C). For this reason, 
the sensor contains a heating element. This reduces warm up time, and retains the heat 
during low engine speed when the exhaust temperature is cooler. The oxygen sensor heat¬ 
ing elements receive power from the IVM (12 V) and the ground sypply is pulse width mod¬ 
ulated by the ECMs. The monitored voltage signal is constantly changing due to combus¬ 
tion variations and normal exhaust pulsations. 

If necessary, the ECMs will “correct” the air/fuel ratio by regulating the ms injection time. The 
ECMs monitor the length of time the sensors are operating in the lean, rich and rest condi¬ 
tions. The evaluation period of the sensors is over a predefined number of oscillation cycles 
and pump cell amperage. 

Catalytic Converter Monitoring: The efficiency of catalyst operation is determined by 
evaluating the oxygen storage capability of the ceramic monolyth catalytic converters using 
the pre and post oxygen sensor signals. 

A properly operating catalyst consumes or stores most of the 02 (oxygen) that is present 
in the exhaust gas (input to catalyst). The gases that flow into the catalyst are converted 
from CO, HC and NOx to CO 2 , H 2 O and N2 respectively. 



N73 Oxygen Sensors 


56 


MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 




In order to determine if the catalysts are working correctly, post catalyst oxygen sensors are 
installed to monitor exhaust gas content exiting the catalysts. The signal of the post cat. 
02 sensor is evaluated over the course of several pre cat. 02 sensor oscillations. 


During the evaluation period, the signal of the 
post cat. sensor must remain within a relatively 
constant voltage range (700 - 800 mV). ^ 

The post cat. 02 voltage remains high with a 
very slight fluctuation. This indicates a further 
lack of oxygen when compared to the pre cat. 
sensor. If this signal decreased in voltage 
and/or increased in fluctuation, a fault code will 
be set for Catalyst Efficiency. 


UJ 



o 

> 


TIME 

42-04-08 



Bosch LSH 25 Oxygen Sensors: The post catalyst oxygen sensors produces a low volt¬ 
age (0-1000 mV) proportional to the oxygen content exiting the catalytic converters. 


12 3 4 


Exhaust 

Stream 


Ambient Air 

6 7 8 9 / 10 



42-04-09 


Oxygen Sensors 


1. Electrode (+) 

2. Electrode (-) 

3. Porous Ceramic Coating (encasing electrolyte) 

4. Protective Metal Cage (Ventilated) 

5. Casing 

6. Contact Sleeve 


7. External Body (Ventilated) 

8. Contact Spring 

9. Vent Opening 

10. Ouput Lead 

11. Insulator 

12. Exhaust Pipe Wall 


57 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 




































































The “tip” of the sensor contains a microporous platinum coating (electrodes) which conduct 
current. The platinum electrodes are separated by solid electrolyte which conducts oxy¬ 
gen ions. The platinum conductors are covered with a highly porous ceramic coating and 
the entire tip is encased in a ventilated metal “cage”. 

This assembly is submersed in the exhaust stream. The sensor body (external) has a small 
vent opening in the housing that allows ambient air to enter the inside of the tip. 

The ambient air contains a constant level of oxygen content (21 %) and the exhaust stream 
has a much lower oxygen content. The oxygen ions (which contain small electrical 
charges) are “purged” through the solid electrolyte by the hot exhaust gas flow. The elec¬ 
trical charges (low voltage) are conducted by the platinum electrodes to the sensor signal 
wire that is monitored by the ECMs. 



42-04-10 

If the exhaust has a lower oxygen content (rich mixture), there will be a large ion “migration” 
through the sensor generating a higher voltage (950 mV). 

If the exhaust has a higher oxygen content (lean mixture), there will be a small ion “migra¬ 
tion” through the sensor generating a lower voltage (080 mV). 

This conductivity is efficient when the oxygen sensor is hot (250° - 300° C). For this reason, 
the sensor contains a heating element. This “heated” sensor reduces warm up time, and 
retains the heat during low engine speed when the exhaust temperature is cooler. 


58 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 





























Secondary Air Injection: Injecting ambient air into the exhaust stream after a cold engine 
start reduces the warm up time of the catalysts and reduces HC and CO emissions. The 
ECMs control and monitor the Secondary Air Injection. An Electric Air Pump and Air 
Injection Valves direct fresh air through internal channels in the cylinder heads into the 
exhaust ports. 

1. Secondary air pump 

2. Fresh air inlet from 
air cleaner housing 

3. Non-return valve 
cylinder bank 1 - 6 

4. Non-return valve 
cylinder bank 7-12 

5. Connection to cylinder 
head 1 - 6 

6. Connection to cylinder 
head 7-12 



Secondary Air Pump (SLP): The electrically-operated secondary air pump is mounted to 
the vehicle body. The pump draws out filtered fresh air from the air cleaner housing during 
the warm-up phase and supplies it to the two secondary air injection valves. 

Once the engine has been started, the secondary air pump is supplied with voltage by the 
Secondary Air Pump Relay (located in front of the glovebox) which is activated by the 
ECMs. It remains switched on until the engine has taken in a certain amount of air. The 
ON period may be a maximum of 90 seconds and it depends on the following engine oper¬ 
ating conditions: 

• Coolant temperature (from -10 °C to approx¬ 
imately 60 °C) 

• Ambient air temperature (from the HFMs) 

• Engine speed 


The power is supplied from the fuse junction 
located on the right inner fender of the engine 
compartment (under the remote charging post) 
for the relay to energize the SLP. 



59 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 













Non-return Valves (SLV): One 

non-return valve is mounted on 
each cylinder head. 


1. Secondary air pump connection 

2. Non-return valve (SLV) 

3. Connection to cylinder head 



The Non-return valves are opened by the air pressure generated from the secondary air 
pump. The secondary air is led through a pipe to the secondary air ducts (integral in the 
cylinder heads) for distribution into the exhaust ports. There are two outlets in each 
exhaust port next to the exhaust valve guides. The Non-return valves are sprung closed 
as soon as the secondary air pump is switched off. This prevents exhaust vapors, pres¬ 
sure and condensation from flowing back to the secondary air pump. 


Misfire Detection: As part of the OBD II regulations the ECMs must determine misfire and 
also identify the specific cylinder(s), the severity of the misfire and whether it is emissions 
relevant or catalyst damaging based on monitoring crankshaft acceleration. 


In order to accomplish these tasks the ECMs monitor the crankshaft for acceleration by the 
impulse wheel segments of cylinder specific firing order. The misfire/engine roughness cal¬ 
culation is derived from the differences in the period duration of individual increment gear 
segments. If the expected period duration is greater than the permissible value a misfire 
fault for the particular cylinder is stored in the fault memory of the ECMs. 



Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 



Function 

Document 

Test 


< >1 


Test 

Selection 


Module 



System 


SMOOTH RUNNING ENGINE 
(NOTE SQUARE WAVE SIGNAL) 



Print 


Change 


End 


Services 











BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 





ENGINE MISFIRE DETECTED 



MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 


42-02-13 











































































































































































































































































































































































Depending on the level of misfire rate measured the ECMs will illuminate the "Malfunction 
Indicator Light”, deactivate the specific fuel injector to the particular cylinder and switch 
lambda operation to open-loop. 

In order to eliminate misfire faults that can occur as a result of varying flywheel tolerances 
(manufacturing process) an internal adaptation of the flywheel is made. The adaptation is 
made during periods of decel fuel cut-off in order to avoid any rotational irregularities which 
the engine can cause during combustion. This adaptation is used to correct segment dura¬ 
tion periods prior to evaluation for a misfire event. 

If the sensor wheel adaptation has not been completed the misfire thresholds are limited to 
engine speed dependent values only and misfire detection is less sensitive. The crankshaft 
sensor adaptation is stored internally and if the limit is exceeded a fault will be set. 


Notes: 


61 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 



Principle of Operation 


Emissions Management controls evaporative and exhaust emissions. The ECMs monitor 
the fuel storage system for evaporative leakage and controls the purging of evaporative 
fuel. The ECMs monitor and control the exhaust emissions by regulating the combustible 
mixture and after treating by injecting fresh air into the exhaust system. The catalytic 
converters further break down remaining combustible exhaust gases and is monitored by 
the ECM for catalyst efficiency. 


The Evaporative Leakage Detection is performed on the fuel storage system by the 
DM TL pump which contains an integral DC motor that is activated by the ECM. The ECM 
monitors the pump motor operating current as the measurement for detecting leaks. 

The DM TL generates a pressure of 20-30 mbar in the fuel tank and evaporative system. 
The electrical current required for this is calculated by the ECM serves as the indirect value 
for the tank pressure. 

The DM TL carries out a reference measurement before each measurement. This is per¬ 
formed by building up a pressure for 10-15 seconds using an internal orifice of 0.5 mm as 
a reference and the ECM monitors the current required by the pump motor (20-30 mA). 

If a lower pressure is detected in the pressure build-up (low current draw) as compared to 
the reference measurement, this indicates a leak in the fuel tank/evaporative system. If a 
higher pressure is detected (higher current draw), the system does not have a leak. 

The pump also contains an ECM controlled change over valve that is energized closed dur¬ 
ing a Leak Diagnosis test. The ECM only initiates a leak diagnosis test every second time 
the criteria is met. The criteria is as follows: 

• Engine OFF with ignition switched OFF. 

• ECM still in active state or what is known as “follow up mode” (ECM Relay energized, 
ECM and components online for extended period after key off). 

• Prior to Engine/Ignition switch OFF condition, vehicle must have been driven for a min¬ 
imum of 20 minutes. 

• Prior to minimum 20 minute drive, the vehicle must have been OFF for a minimum of 5 
hours. 

• No faults in the ECM for DM TL / tank venting system. 


62 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 



• Fuel Tank Capacity must be between 10 and 90% (safe approximation between 1/4 - 
3/4 of a tank). 

• Ambient Air Temperature between -7°C & 35°C 

• Altitude < 2500m (8,202 feet). 

• Battery Voltage between 11.5 and 14.5 Volts 

When these criteria are satisfied every second time, the ECM will start the Fuel System 
Leak Diagnosis Test. The test will typically be carried out once a day ie:, once after driving 
to work in the morning, when driving home in the evening, the criteria are once again met 
but the test is not initiated. The following morning, the test will run again. 


PHASE 1 - REFERENCE MEASUREMENT 

The ECM activates the pump motor. The pump pulls air from the filtered air inlet and pass¬ 
es it through a precise 0.5 mm reference orifice in the pump assembly. 

The ECM simultaneously monitors the pump motor current flow. The motor current raises 
quickly and levels off (stabilizes) due to the orifice restriction. The ECM stores the stabilized 
amperage value in memory. The stored amperage value is the electrical equivalent of a 
0.5 mm (0.020”) leak. 

PHASE 2 - LEAK DETECTION 

The ECM energizes the Change Over Valve allowing the pressurized air to enter the fuel 
system through the Charcoal Canister. The ECM monitors the current flow and compares 
it with the stored reference measurement over a duration of time. 

The time taken for the measurement is: 

• 60-220 seconds if there are no leaks 

• 200-360 seconds if there is a leak measuring 0.5 mm (small leak) 

• 30-80 seconds if there is a leak measuring over 1 mm (large leak) 

The evaporative emission valve is closed during the measurement. The time taken for the 
measurement is dependant on how much fuel there is in the tank. 

Once the test is concluded, the ECM stops the pump motor and immediately de-energizes 
the change over valve. This allows the stored pressure to vent thorough the charcoal can¬ 
ister trapping hydrocarbon vapor and venting air to atmosphere through the filter. 


63 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 



Test Results 


The time duration varies between 
30 & 360 seconds depending on 
the resulting leak diagnosis test 
results (developed tank pressure 
“amperage” within a specific time 
period). 

When the ECM detects a leak, a 
fault will be stored and the 
“Malfunction Indicator Light” will 
be illuminated. Depending on the 
amperage measurement detect¬ 
ed by the ECM, the fault code 
displayed will be “small leak” or 
“large leak”. 


Current 



Refuelling: After refueling and switching the ignition “ON”, the ECM detects a fuel level 
increase. When the ignition is switched “OFF”, the ECM activates the DM TL for a “brief 
test” to check the filler cap. If the filler cap was not properly installed; when the vehicle is 
started and driven at a speed >10 Km/h, the “Check Filler Cap” light will illuminate for 25 
seconds (and then go out). 

The second time the ignition is cycled “OFF”, the DM TL is activated to test the filler cap. 
If loose; when the vehicle is started and driven at a speed >10 Km/h, the “Check Filler Cap” 
light will be illuminated for 25 seconds (and then go out). If the filler cap is properly secured, 
the “Malfunction Indicator Light” will not be illuminated and a fault code will not be stored 
in the ECM. 

The third time the ignition is cycled “OFF”, the DM TL is acti¬ 
vated to test the filler cap. If loose; a “Large Leak” fault code 
is stored in the ECM. The “Malfunction Indicator Light” will be 
illuminated the next time the engine is started. 


Variable Indicator Lamp (shown to the right) and the “Please 
Close Filler Cap” Check Control message will be displayed. 



42-02-15 


64 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 


















F003 

10A 


► 


Starting with 2002 MY, a heating element was 
added to the DM TL pump to eliminate con¬ 
densation. 

The heater is provided battery voltage when 
KL15 is switched “on” and the ECM provides 
the ground path. 


KL.87 

0.75 

RT/WS 


4 


X1714 




3 


2 


1 I X1714 


Ml 19 

Diagnostic module, fuel tank leakage 


S_DMTLV 

0.5 

BR/BL 


S_DMTLH 

0.5 

GR 


S_DMTLP 

0.35 

SW/GN 



A6000 

DME control module 


Catalyst Monitoring is performed by the ECMs under oxygen sensor closed loop opera¬ 
tion. The changing air/fuel ratio in the exhaust gas results in lambda oscillations at the pre¬ 
catalyst sensors. These oscillations are dampened by the oxygen storage activity of the 
catalysts and are reflected at the post catalyst sensors as a fairly stable signal (indicating 
oxygen has been consumed). Conditions for Catalyst Monitoring: 

Requirements Status/Condition 


Closed loop operation 
Engine coolant temperature 
Vehicle road speed 
Catalyst temperature (calculated) 
Valvetronic position deviation 
Engine speed deviation 
Average lambda value deviation 


YES 

Operating Temp. 

3 - 50 MPH (5 to 80 km/h) 
350°C to 650°C 
Steady 

Steady/stable engine speed 
Steady/stable load 


* Catalyst temperature is an ECM calculated value based on load/air mass and time. 

Note: The catalyst efficiency is monitored once per trip while the vehicle is in closed loop 
operation. 


65 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 







As part of the monitoring process, the pre and post 02 sensor signals are evaluated by the 
ECMs to determine the length of time each sensor is operating in the rich and lean range. 

If the catalyst is defective the post 02 sensor signal will reflect the pre 02 sensor signal 
(minus a phase shift/time delay), since the catalyst is no longer able to store/comsume oxy¬ 
gen. The catalyst monitoring process is stopped once the predetermined number of cycles 
are completed, until the engine is shut-off and started again. After completing the next 
"customer driving cycle" whereby the specific conditions are met and a fault is again set, 
the "Malfunction Indicator Light” will be illuminated. 


Secondary Air Injection Monitoring is performed by the ECMs via the use of the pre¬ 
catalyst oxygen sensors. Once the air pump is active and is air injected into the exhaust 
system the oxygen sensor signals will indicate a lean condition. If the oxygen sensor sig¬ 
nals do not change within a predefined time a fault will be set and identify the faulty bank(s). 
When diagnosing a Secondary Air Injection fault, in addition to the electric air pump and 
non-return valves always consider the following: 

• Restricted air inlet to the pump. 

• Restricted supply hoses to the non-return valves. 

• Internal restrictions in the cylinder head passages into the exhaust ports. 


Misfire Detection is part of the OBD II regulations the ECMs must determine misfire and 
also identify the specific cylinder(s), the severity of the misfire and whether it is emissions 
relevant or catalyst damaging based on monitoring crankshaft acceleration. 

Emission Increase: 

• Within an interval of 1000 crankshaft revolutions, the ECM adds the detected misfire 
events for each cylinder. If the sum of all cylinder misfire incidents exceeds the pre¬ 
determined value, a fault code will be stored. 

• If more than one cylinder is misfiring, all misfiring cylinders will be specified and the 
individual fault codes for all misfiring cylinders and for multiple cylinder will be stored. 

Catalyst Damage: 

• Within an interval of 200 crankshaft revolutions the detected number of misfiring 
events is calculated for each cylinder. The ECMs monitor this based on load/rpm. 

If the sum of cylinder misfire incidents exceeds a predetermined value, a fault code is 
stored and the “Malfunction Indicator Light” will be illuminated. 


66 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 



If the cylinder misfire count exceeds the predetermined threshold the ECMs will take the 
following measures: 

• The oxygen sensor control will be switched to open loop. 

• The cylinder selective fault code is stored. 

• If more than one cylinder is misfiring the fault code for all individual cylinders and for 
multiple cylinders will be stored. 

• The fuel injector to the respective cylinder(s) is deactivated. 


The Integrated Ambient Barometric Pressure Sensor of the MED 9.2.1 is part of ECM 
1 and is not serviceable. The internal sensor is supplied with 5 volts. In return it provides 
a linear voltage of approx. 2.4 to 4.5 volts representative of barometric pressure (altitude). 

The MED 9.2.1 ECM 1 monitors barometric pressure for the following reasons: 

• The barometric pressure signal along with calculated air mass provides an additional cor¬ 
rection factor to further refine injection “on” time. 

• Provides a base value to calculate the air mass being injected into the exhaust system 
by the Secondary Air Injection System. This correction factor alters the secondary air 
injection “on” time, optimizing the necessary air flow into the exhaust system. 





INTEGRAL 

BAROMETRIC 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 


PROVIDES ADDITIONAL CORRECTION 
FACTOR FOR FOLLOWING FUNCTIONS 


2 3 




42-04-16 


67 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 


















































The Malfunction Indicator Light is illuminated when the OBD system (integral in the 
ECM) determines that a problem exists and a corresponding “Diagnostic Trouble Code” is 
stored in the ECM(s) memory. The Malfunction Indicator appears both in the instrument 
cluster upper center section (fixed) and in the Check Control Display (variable indicator). 
This light informs the driver of the need for service with a Check Control message dis¬ 
played. 

After fixing the problem the fault code is deleted to turn off the light. If the conditions that 
caused a problem are no longer present, the OBD system can turn off the light automati¬ 
cally. If the OBD system evaluates the component or system three consecutive times and 
no longer detects the initial problem, the dashboard light will turn off automatically. 


The Malfunction Indicator Light will illuminate for the following reasons: 

• Pre-drive check when the ignition is switched on (in the fixed location) 

• Increased emissions (both fixed and variable indicator locations with message dis¬ 
played) 


• Engine fault - drive with moderation (variable indicator location with message dis¬ 
played) 


Fixed Location 




42-04-18 


Variable Indicator Location 


68 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 










The Malfunction Indicator Light will illuminate with a “half 
shading” in the variable indicator location for the following rea¬ 
sons: 

• Engine fault - with reduced power (with message dis¬ 
played) 

• Engine damage possiblel (with message displayed) 


42-04-18 

Emissions Diagnosis 

The "BMW Fast" (BMW fast access for service and testing) diagnosis concept is used in 
the E66 for MED 9.2.1 ECMs. This concept is based on the "Keyword Protocol 2000" 
(KWP 2000) diagnosis protocol defined as part of the ISO 14230 standard. Diagnosis com¬ 
munication takes place entirely on the basis of a transport protocol on the PT-CAN and 
Local-CAN bus. The Diagnosis bus is connected to the Central Gateway Module (ZGM). 



Vehicle Diagnosis Access Point 


The diagnosis tool is connected to the vehicle at the OBD diagnosis connector (On-Board 
Diagnosis). The connector is located behind a small cover in the drivers side lower “A” pil¬ 
lar trim. There is a black plastic cap that bridges KL30 to the D-bus when the connector 
is not being used. This cap must be removed before installing the diagnosis cable. 


The TxD lead is located in pin 7 of the OBD 
socket and is connected directly to the ZGM. 

The ZGM detects by means of the data 
transmission speed whether a BMW diagno¬ 
sis tool (DISplus, GT-1) or an aftermarket 
scanner is connected. 

The ECMs allow access to different data 
depending on the diagnosis tool connected. 



Note: When using an OBD scan tool for diagnosis, the transmission speed is 10.4 KBit/s. 


69 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 






Diagnosis Bus 

The aim of diagnosis is to enable a Technician to reliably identify a defective component. 
By the use of appropriate hardware and monitoring software, the microprocessor of the 
diagnosis tool is able to detect faults in the ECMs and their peripherals. 

Faults identified are stored in the fault memory and can be read out using the Diagnosis 
Program. Data transfer between the vehicle and the diagnosis tool takes place via the 
Diagnosis bus (D bus). 

The new features of the diagnosis bus are: 

• Faster data transmission speed of 115 kBd. 

• Central diagnosis access point (OBD connector). 

• Single diagnostic cable (TxD II) for the entire vehicle. 

• Omission of the TxDI cable. 

• Access to diagnosis functions requires “Authorization”. 

• Diagnosis protocol "KWP 2000" (Keyword Protocol 2000). 

• Standardized diagnosis structure for all control units. 

D-BUS 



KT-9715 

The ECMs are not directly connected to the OBD diagnostic connector. The OBD diag¬ 
nostic connector is connected to the ZGM. Both ECMs are connected to the ZGM (cen¬ 
tral gateway module) by the PT-CAN bus. The ECMs are also connected to the Valvetronic 
control module and HDEV control modules by the Local-CAN bus. Valvetronic faults are 
stored in the ECMs. 


70 

MED 9.2.1 Emissions Management 








































































Performance Controls 


Bi-VANOS Control (Variable Camshaft Adjustment) 

Performance, torque, idle characteristics and exhaust emissions reduction are improved by 
Variable Camshaft Timing (Bi-VANOS). The VANOS units are mounted directly on the front 
of the camshafts and adjusts the timing of the Intake and Exhaust camshafts from retard¬ 
ed to advanced. The ECMs control the operation of the Bi-VANOS solenoids which regu¬ 
lates the oil pressure required to move the VANOS units. Engine RPM, load and tempera¬ 
ture are used to determine Bi-VANOS activation. 



N73 Bi-VANOS tif 


The Bi-VANOS mechanical operation is dependent on engine oil pressure applied to posi¬ 
tion the VANOS units. When oil pressure is applied to the units (via ports in the camshafts 
regulated by the solenoids), the camshaft hubs are rotated in the drive sprockets changing 
the position which advances/retards the intake/exhaust camshafts timing. The Bi-VANOS 
system is “fully variable”. When the ECMs detect that the camshafts are in the optimum 
positions, the solenoids maintain oil pressure on the units to hold the camshaft timing. 

The operation of the VANOS solenoids are monitored in accordance with the OBD II 
requirements for emission control. The ECMs monitor the final stage output control and the 
signals from the Camshaft Position Sensors for Bi-VANOS operation. 



MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 






Solenoid Valves: The Bi-VANOS solenoid valves are mount¬ 
ed through the upper timing case front cover. There are two 
solenoids per cylinder head to control the oil flow to the 
camshaft ports for the intake and exhaust VANOS units. 

The 4/3 way proportional solenoid valve is activated by the 
ECM to direct oil flow. The solenoid valve is sealed to the front 
cover by a radial seal and secured by a retaining plate. 



Hydraulic Actuation 


42-02-41 


When oil pressure is applied to chamber A, the blades are forced away from the VANOS 
housing (counterclockwise). The blades are keyed into the hub which results in the hub 
position being rotated in relation to the housing (with sprocket). The hub is secured to the 
camshaft which changes the camshaft to sprocket relationship (timing). The example 
below shows the adjustment procedure together with the pressure progression based on 
the VANOS unit for the exhaust camshaft. 


1. Front View of VANOS 
Unit 

2. Side View of VANOS 
Unit 

3. Camshaft Oil Port 
(Chamber B) 

4. Solenoid Valve 

5. Engine Oil Pump 

6. Supplied Oil 
(Switched Through 
Solenoid) 



7. Supplied Oil Pressure 
(From Engine Oil 
Pump) 



42-04-02 


VANOS 


During this adjustment chamber B is open (through the solenoid) to allow the oil to drain 
back through the cylinder head (internal reservoir). 

72 


MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 






























When the solenoid valve switches over, oil pressure is applied to chamber B. This forces 
the blades (and hub) in a clockwise direction back to the initial position, again changing the 
camshaft timing. 

The example below shows the reset procedure together with the pressure progression 
based on the VANOS unit for the exhaust camshafts. 


1. Front View of VANOS 
Unit 

2. Side View of VANOS 
Unit 

3. Camshaft Oil Port 
(Chamber B) 

4. Solenoid Valve 

5. Engine Oil Pump 

6. Oil Return (Switched 
through Solenoid) 



7. Supplied Oil Pressure 
(From Engine Oil 
Pump) 



During this adjustment chamber A is open (through the solenoid) to allow the oil to drain 
back through the cylinder head (internal reservoir). 


Camshaft Sensors: The camshaft sensors 
(Hall effect) are mounted through the cylinder 
head cover. There are two sensors per cylinder 
head to monitor the intake and exhaust 
camshaft positions. The sensors monitor the 
impulse wheels attached to the ends of the 
camshafts. 

1. Valvetronic Position Sensor 

2. Intake Camshaft Position Sensor 

3. Exhaust Camshaft Position Sensor 



42-02-48 



MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 































Oil Condition 


An oil condition sensor records the exact engine oil level, oil temperature and the condition 
of the engine oil. Recording the engine oil level protects the engine from having a level 
which is too low which will result in engine damage. Recording the condition of the oil 
means that it is possible to determine exactly when an oil change is required (CBS). 


Oil Condition Sensor (OZS): The electronic condi¬ 
tion sensor is located in the engine sump mounted to 
the engine oil pan. 


1. Electronic Sensor 

2. Housing 




3. Lower section of the oil sump (inverted view) 


The sensor consists of two connected cylinder capac¬ 
itors. The smaller capacitor (6) records the oil condi¬ 
tion. Two metal tubes (2+3) act as capacitor elec¬ 
trodes located inside the sensor. The engine oil (4) 
dielectric is located between the electrodes. 



42-04-06 


With increased wear and additive 
deterioration, the electrical materi¬ 
al properties of the engine oil 
change. 


1. Housing 

2. Outer metal tube 

3. Inner metal tube 

4. Engine oil 

5. Oil level sensor 

6. Oil condition sensor 

7. Sensor electronics 

8. Oil sump 

9. Temperature sensor 




Oil Condition Sensor 


MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 





















The different electrical material properties of the engine oil (dielectric) change the capaci¬ 
tance of the oil condition sensor. This capacitance value is processed to a digital square 
wave signal in the evaluation electronics (7) which is integrated in the sensor. This signal is 
sent to ECM 1 over the BSD interface as a “statement” about the engine oil condition. 
ECM 1 processes this sensor value to calculate the next oil change service. 

The engine oil level is determined in the upper section of the sensor (5). This part of the 
sensor is located on the top of the oil level in the oil sump. As the oil level lowers (dielec¬ 
tric), the capacitance of the sensor also changes. The sensor electronics process this 
capacitance value into a digital square wave signal which is also sent over the BSD inter¬ 
face to ECM 1. 

A platinum temperature sensor (9) is integrated at the base of the oil condition sensor to 
measure the oil temperature. The engine oil level, oil temperature and engine oil condition 
are constantly recorded when voltage is supplied (KL15). The oil condition sensor is sup¬ 
plied with voltage from the IVM. 

The oil condition sensor electronics performs its own diagnostics. A fault in the OEZS 
results in a corresponding error message that is transmitted over the BSD interface to ECM 
1 for fault storage. 


Electric Cooling Fan 

The variable speed electric cooling fan is controlled by ECM 1. ECM 1 uses a remote 
power output final stage (mounted on the fan housing). The power output stage receives 
power from the fuse (50 amp) junction located on the right inner fender of the engine com¬ 
partment (under the remote charging post). The electric fan is controlled by a pulse width 
modulated signal from ECM 1. 

The fan is activated based on the ECM calculation of: 

• Coolant outlet temperature (monitored by the Outlet Temperature Sensor in the ther¬ 
mostat housing) 

• Catalyst temperature 

• Vehicle speed 

• Battery voltage 

• Air Conditioning high side pressure (calculated by IHKA via a bus signal to the ECM) 



MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 



Alternator 


Due to the high power capacity of 180 A, the alternator is cooled by the engine's cooling 
system to enhance heat dissipation. The brushless Bosch alternator is installed in an alu¬ 


minum housing which is mounted to the engine block. The exterior alternator walls are sur¬ 
rounded with circulated engine coolant. The function and design of the alternator is the 
same as in the N62, using the BSD interface (bit-serial data interface) for ECM 1. 


1. Watertight Housing 

2. Rotor 

3. Stator 

4. Seal 


Regulation 



Altenator 


The alternator conveys data to ECM 1 via the BSD (bit-serial data interface). This is nec¬ 
essary to allow the ECM to adapt its calculations and specific control to the alternator out¬ 
put. The connection with the ECM makes it possible to almost completely equalize the 
alternator load torque. This supports the engine idling speed control and the battery load 
balance. 


In addition, the ECM receives information from the Power Module about the battery's cal¬ 
culated temperature and charge status. This means that alternator output can be adapt¬ 
ed precisely to the temperature and load status of the battery which increases the battery 
service life. The ECM takes on the following functions: 

• Activation/deactivation of the alternator. 

• Informing the alternator regulator of the nominal voltage value to be set. 

• Controlling the alternator's response to load. 

• Diagnosing the data line between the alternator and the ECM. 

• Storing alternator fault codes. 

• Activating the charge indicator lamp in the instrument cluster. 

The charge indicator display strategy has not changed in comparison with the alternators 
currently in use. Regulating the alternator output is particularly important when activating 
Valvetronic operating motors. 

76 

MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 





Electronic Box Cooling Fan 


The E-box develops very high temperatures 
caused by engine heat and the energy dissipat¬ 
ed by the control units. ECM 1 controls an 
electric cooling fan in the base of the electronic 
box to draw in cool air from the passenger 
compartment. 

Since electronic control modules need to oper¬ 
ate at a reduced temperature, the air tempera¬ 
ture in the E-box must be kept as low as possi¬ 
ble. Lower temperatures extend the life expec¬ 
tancy of electronic control modules. 



Comfort Start 

The comfort start makes easy engine starting possible 
because the starter remains automatically activated until the 
engine is running (rpm signal). Security is enhanced by using 
the CAS Module with coded keys and the ignition starting but¬ 
ton (integral). 

When starting to the engine, the CAS contains the data for the EWS code which is trans¬ 
ferred to ECM 1. The transmission of EWS data between the CAS and ECM 1 is over the 
data line D - EWS. Terminal R and terminal 15 is directed by the CAS for all electrical sys¬ 
tems. The CAS also activates KL15 WUP (Wake UP) for control modules on the PT-CAN. 

When KL15 WUP is activated, the control modules change from the state of rest into the 
operating condition. During the starting procedure, KL 50L for the comfort starting relay (in 
the IVM) and KL 50E is switched to the ECM for the starting request. ECM 1 will activate 
a ground signal to the comfort starting relay to energize the starter motor. 

The brake light switch is monitored by ECM 1 for the comfort start feature. An engine start 
is possible only if the brake pedal is pressed. For safety reasons, the CAS monitors both 
signals of the brake light switch (the actual brake light switch and the brake light test 
switch). 

The selector lever of automatic transmission must be in position P or N. The position of 
the selector lever is detected from the direct hardwire signal or via a CAN signal. 




MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 




Comfort Start - Block Diagram 




MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 


































































































Actuation Time of Terminal 50: The monitored actuating times of terminal 50 protects 
the starter against overloading. The actuation times of terminal 50 are: 


• A maximum of 21 seconds. A repetition is possible immediately. 

• The actuation time is reduced for each repetition by 2 seconds until the minimum 
actuation time of 3 seconds is reached. 

• If the start/stop button is pressed for longer than the preceding actuation time, the 
actuation time is increased by 2 seconds again (up to a maximum of 21 seconds). 


Switching off the Engine: The vehicle engine is switched off when the vehicle is stopped 
and the start/stop button is pressed. If the start/stop button is pressed for longer than 2 
seconds, the vehicle engine is switched off and then the key is automatically released and 
pushed out with spring pressure ("convenience off"). 


Incorrect Operation and "Emergency On": To ensure the safety of the vehicle in the 
case of an accidental engine shutdown during driving, the "Emergency On" function is 
available. An engine shutdown during driving can be caused by accidentally pressing the 
start/stop button (the button must be pressed for at least 1 second or 3 times consecu¬ 
tively). 

The "Emergency On" function enables the starter to be actuated again without brake oper¬ 
ation at a vehicle speed above 5 km/h (3 mph). The "Emergency On" function also pre¬ 
vents terminal R from being switched off during driving. 


Service Functions: When replacing the ECM and/or CAS Module, the following must be 
completed: 

The Service Function "DME/DDE - CAS alignment" in the DISplus/GTI. After the alignment 
the two modules are rigidly assigned to each other and the vehicle. 

Note: It is not possible to exchange these control modules with another vehicle for testing 
purposes. 



MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 



Exhaust Flap 

The 12.6 liter rear silencer (4) is fitted with an exhaust flap to keep noise to a minimum at 
engine idle speed and low rpm. 

The exhaust flap is opened allowing additional 
flow when: 

• The transmission gear is engaged and 

• The engine speed is above 1,500 rpm 

A vacuum-controlled diaphragm (2 - actuator mounted on the silencer) opens and closes 
the exhaust gas flap. The vacuum is supplied from the camshaft driven vacuum pump. 

The exhaust flap is opened with vacuum, and is sprung closed by the actuator (when vac¬ 
uum is not present). The procedure is carried out using a solenoid valve (1) which is elec¬ 
trically controlled by the ECM and located on the left rear luggage compartment floor. 

The efficiency of the flap is based essentially on two effects: 

• Minimization of the cross-section and the outlet level at low exhaust flow rates 

• Large cross-section with low backpressure at high speeds and loads 



Notes: 



MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 
















Review Questions 

1. List the control modules required for engine operation. 


2. What inputs are required for auxiliary air flap operation? 


3. What is the fuel pressure (value): 

At the feed line from the in tank pump? 

At the high pressure line to the fuel rail? 

4. What is the purpose of the Return Shutoff valve? 

5. What is the ohmic value of the high pressure fuel injectors? 

6. What is unique about the fuel injector mounting? 

7. What is the safest way to check the function (electrically) of the fuel injectors? 

8. Describe the purpose of the HDEV control modules. 


9. After refuelling, what criteria will set a “Large Leak” fault code? 



MED 9.2.1 Performance Controls 



