Table of Contents 
E46 FL 

Subject Page 

E46 FaceLift Coupe/Convertible .3 

Keys.4 

IHKA.4 

Drive Train.4 

Engines .4 

SULEV .4 

M56 Engine .5 

Catalytic Converters.5 

Oxygen Sensors.5 

Fuel Pump System.6 

Fuel Injectors .6 

Secondary air system .7 

Fuel system .7 

Cooling System .9 

Transmission.9 

General vehicle electronics .9 

Mirror System Components .10 

Mirror Operation.11 

Windows .11 

Anti-trap Protection.11 

AHL.12 

Brake Force Display .13 

LIN Bus.14 


Initial Print Date:01/03 


Revision Date: 


























Model: E46 Coupe/Convertible 
Production: Start of Production March 2003 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the update exterior of the Coupe/Convertible. 

• Relate the updates and changes to SULEV equipped vehicles. 

• Understand the electrical improvements to mirror and lighting systems. 

• Know the operation of the LIN Bus. 


2 


E46FL 




E46 FaceLift Coupe/Convertible 

E46 Coupe and Convertibles (E46/2, E46/C) will receive a facelift effective March 2003. 



The front headlights, kid¬ 
ney grills, bumper, turn 
signals and hood have 
been revised. 



The rear bumper and 
taillights have been 
revised. 



New front facia with 
wider kidney grills, 
reshaped headlights and 
turn signals, and new 
fog light openings. 



New rear bumper with 
new reflectors and LED 
taillight assemblies. 


3 


E46FL 

















































































New LED taillight assemblies accent the new rear facia. 

Keys 

Beginning with production March 2003 all E46 Models will not be supplied with the grey 
workshop key. The purse key replaces the function of the workshop key. 

IHKA 

The location of the operating buttons on the IHKA control unit has been changed. The func¬ 
tionality remains the same. 



Drive Train 

Engines 

SULEV 

M56 SULEV (SuperUltraLowEmissionVehicle) is available on a limited (by state) basis in the 
E46/2, E46/3 and E46/4. 

SULEV models (E46 sedan, coupe and sportwagon all with automatic only) will be sold in 
California, New York and Massachusetts as 2003 models and in Vermont starting in 2004 
model year. 


4 


E46FL 




In addition these vehicles are certified as PZEV (Partial Zero Emissions Vehicles). 

PZEV regulations include: 

• Vehicles must meet SULEV tailpipe emissions standard (approx. 1 /5 of ULEV standards) 

• Vehicles conform to Zero Evaporative Emissions 

• Vehicles subject to extended OBD regulations. 

• Emission relevant components warrantied for 15 years or 150,000 miles 

M56 Engine 

The following components are used to achieve SULEV and Zero Evaporative Emission 
requirements: 

• Pistons Revised to change spark travel path 

• Catalytic Converters Ceramic carriers with high cell density for better “Warm Up” 
Control 

• Oxygen Sensors Planar wide band 02 sensors in front of the cats 

• Vanos Positioning changed during start up for improved start up and emissions 

• Fuel Pump Control Revised with raised pressure and more accurate flow control 

• Fuel Injectors New design for improved fuel flow and higher working pressure 

• Fuel System All metal fuel system components made of stainless steel 

• Air Intake System Revised to block HC escape 

• Crankcase Ventilation Revised 

• Secondary Air System Mass air flow sensor to monitor secondary air flow 

• Cooling System Revised to reduce Ozone levels 

Catalytic Converters 

The catalysts attached in direct proximity to 
the engine and are equipped with ceramic(s) 
carriers in high cell density technology. These 
converters reach operating temperature faster 
and offer quicker control of exhaust emissions. 

Vehicles are also equipped with dual down¬ 
stream converters. 

Oxygen Sensors 

The M56 engine uses four Oxygen sensors, 
two planar broadband sensors upstream of 
the converter and two sensors downstream. 

The planar broadband sensor reach operating 
temperature very fast and are able to effect fuel 
mixtures in approximately 5 seconds. 

5 



E46FL 









o 

Q 



11402 

Fuel Pump System 

Fuel system operating pressure is increased to 5 Bar. 

The fuel pump is controlled by the Fuel pump control unit, based on engine demand as 
received from the DME over the Lo-CAN. The fuel pump control unit additionally receives 
information over the K-Bus, specifically crash information from the MRS. 

Fuel Injectors 



Nozzle diameter of the fuel injectors has been reduced and the 
installation angle has been changed. The injectors were also 
adapted to perform at the higher system operating pressure. 

Injectors screw into the rail and a tap to test pressure 
readings is NOT provided. 


6 


E46FL 




























Secondary air system 



The secondary air pump has been revised 
to improve its response time in cold 
weather starting situations. 

A HFM (Hot Film Air Mass Meter) has been 
added to the secondary air system to 
monitor air volume pumped into the 
exhaust for more accurate control of the 
NOx emissions. 


Fuel system 







1. DMTL 

2. Pressure Pipe 

3. Charcoal canister 

4. Breather Pipe 

5. Evaporation Line 

6. Fuel Fill Line 

7. Fuel Tank 

8. Fuel Tank Vent Line 


mron \v? 


7 


E46FL 























In order to meet the Zero Evaporative Emission requirement, the fuel system was com¬ 
pletely revised. The fuel tank, tank filler neck, charcoal canister, fuel rail and tank ventilation 
valve are all made of stainless steel. 

When perform repairs on the fuel system, it is imperative that all fitting remain clean and that 
the proper tightening torques are observed. 




The fuel tank is manufactured of high grade 
steel and completely coated to meet the 
requirements of a minimum durability of 15 
years. 

The fuel tank can be exchanged only as a 
complete unit. 



1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 


Syphon Jet 
Roll over valve 
Fuel Filter 
Electric fuel pump 

Liquid Vapor Separator 




8 


E46FL 































Cooling System 



The radiator of the E46 SULEV looks 
similiar to the standard E46 radiator. 

The surface of the cooling fins are coat¬ 
ed with a special “PremAir” coating. 

The coating consists of multiple porous 
layers of a catalytic surface. The task of 
the catalyst coating is to convert Ozone 
into Oxygen. 


Transmission 

New 6 speed manual transmissions will soon be available for all E46 models except the xi. 
The 6 speed will be available as the H-SMG as well. Refer to the E85 Training Manual for 
more information. 

General vehicle electronics 

Outside Mirror Control E46/3/4 

Beginning with production March 2003 the E46/3/4 will be equipped with a new outside 
mirror control system. 

The GM will store the mirror memory position and access the position either through seat 
memory switches or car key memory. 


9 


E46FL 



1. 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8 . 
9. 


(W- 

3 




■ 

("i- 

||C 


<“> 







i m iriiarm pi ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ i~ ■ ■ r i ~i ■ ■! ■ *■ ■ b in i 


tr 


5 ! 


a 

4=\ 

try 

□MT 



nt^JTTT 



Mirror Switch 

Mirror Electronics on Right Mirror 

R/S Mirror Heating 

R/S Horizontal Motor 

R/S Vertical Motor 

R/S Folding Motor 

R/S Potentiometers 

Seat Memory Controller 

GM 



J UU L i -_JJ 


f. i ^ 

*' 1 

l ,L 

«■■■ ■ 


■ ; '■ 


10. Instrument Cluster 

11. DME 

12. Outside temp sensor 

13. US Potentiometers 

14. US Folding Motor 

15. US Vertical Motor 

16. US Horizontal Motor 

17. US Mirror Heating 

18. US Mirror Electronics 


B- 

2 

ELM E 


The motion control of the mirrors is by the mirror electronics located in the mirror motor 
assemblies. Mirror position is monitored by potentiometers and passed on to the GM via 
the LIN Bus. (See LIN Bus explanation) 

The mirror switch passes all requests for movement over the LIN Bus to the GM which then 
sends command signal to the mirror electronics, again via the LIN Bus. 

All mirror functions including mirror heating and automatic folding are also controlled by the 
GM. 

Mirror System Components 

The mirror system consists of the following components: 

• Left and Right Mirror Assemblies 
-with integrated drive motors, 
potentiometers and heating 
elements 

• Mirror Switch Assembly 

• Flat band wiring harness 


10 



E46FL 












































































Mirror Operation 

All decisions regarding mirror function and movement are made by the GM and passed on 
to the mirror electronics for execution. 

Mirror position is monitored by the GM via LIN Bus information from the potentiometers. 
Tilt function when in reverse of the passenger mirror is the same as on previous E46 mod¬ 
els. 

Mirror heating is controlled by the GM based on information received from the outside temp 
sensor. 

In all mirror operations the GM is the master control module and the mirror electronics are 
the secondary modules. 

Windows 

Anti-trap Protection 

Beginning production March 2003 the E46 M3/C and beginning September 2003 E46C, 
front windows will be equipped with anti-trap protection. 

A new electric window motor has been developed that includes evaluation electronics to 
monitor window operation and provide “indirect trapping protection.” 

The Evaluation Electronics monitor the num¬ 
ber of 

revolutions of the motor, the direction of 
rotation, and the position of the motor. 

The GM is responsible for controlling win¬ 
dow operation. 

Window movement requests as input into 
the window switches is processed by the 
GM and based on information received from 
the evaluation circuit the window is operat¬ 
ing. 

1. GM 

2. R/S Window Motor 

3. US Window Motor 

4. R/S Window Switch 

5. US Window Switch 


11 



1. Window Motor 

2. Window Motor Evaluation Electronics 



E46FL 


























































Two sensors integrated in the window motor assembly provide speed, direction and posi¬ 
tion information to the evaluation electronics, which shares this with the GM. 

The GM monitors the current spikes at the beginning point and closing point of window 
operation as well as amperage during window operation. A sudden rise in amperage and 
slow down of window speed before reaching the closing point, signals the GM that the win¬ 
dow is obstructed and power is cut to the window motor. 

The windows do include a panic mode so that if the switch is activated a second time the 
window is driven with full power until the switch is released. 

The windows must be initialized after repair work to the window system or GM. 

AHL 

E46 2/C produced after March 2003 may be equipped with AHL (Active Headlight Control). 
AHL will be coupled with Bi-Xenon Lights only. 

AHL provides movement of the headlights in the vertical plane to improve the view for the 
driver in darkness. 

* ■ 

1. Ride Level Sensors (Front and Rear) 

2. Instrument Cluster 

3. DISplus 

4. Brake Light Switch 

5. DSC 

6. Steering Angle Sensor 

7. LSZ 

8. AHL Control Unit 

9. Stepper Motor for Vertical Movement R/S 

10. Stepper Motor for Vertical Movement US 
Shining width adjustment 


- 

The AHL control unit decides based on input from the ride level sensor, steering angle sen¬ 
sor, brake light switch and other data provided by the DSC the speed and direction that the 
headlights are pivoted. 

AHL now controls the horizontal movement of the headlights also. 




E46FL 


































1. Light Switch 

2. LSZ 

3. Instrument Cluster 

4. DISplus 

5. Steering Angle Sensor 

6. DSC 

7. AHL Control Unit 

8. Rear Ride Height Sensor 

9. Front Ride Height Sensor 

10. Brake Light Switch 

11. US Headlight Assembly 

12. Bi-Xenon Assembly 

13. R/S Headlight Assembly 

14. Bi-Xenon Assembly 



Each headlight assembly contains two stepper motors for 
headlight movement. One for horizontal movement and 
one for vertical movement. 

Based on processed information the AHL adjust the hor¬ 
izontal position of the headlight to compensate for load 
changes or swivels the headlights to provide more road 
illumination in a turn. 


The swiveling range of the headlights is 7° for the the light closer to the inside of the curve 
and 15° for the outside light. 

Brake Force Display 


E46 2/C models equipped with LED tail lights also include the Brake Force Display func¬ 
tion. 



A. Taillight operation 

B. Normal Stop Light operation 

C. Brake Force Display operation 



E46FL 













































































LIN Bus 


April 5, 2000. . . BMW AG, several other car manufacturers, the communications special¬ 
ist Volcano Communications Technologies AB, and the semiconductor manufacturer 
Motorola announced the formation of an industry consortium with the objective to define 
and implement an open standard for class-A serial buses in vehicle networks. The standard 
has been named Local Interconnect Network (LIN) and will be the enabling factor for the 
implementation of a hierarchical vehicle network in order to gain further quality enhance¬ 
ment and cost reduction of vehicles. The standardization will reduce the manifold of exist¬ 
ing low-end multiplex solutions and will cut the cost of development, production, service, 
and logistics in vehicle electronics. 

Typical applications for the LIN bus are assembly units such as doors, steering wheel, 
seats, climate regulation, lighting, rain sensor, or alternator. In these units the cost sensitive 
nature of LIN enables the introduction of mechatronic elements such as smart sensors, 
actuators, or illumination. They can be easily connected to the car network and become 
accessible to all types of diagnostics and services. The commonly used analog coding of 
signals will be replaced by digital signals, leading to an optimized wiring harness. 

The increasing software complexity of today's distributed electrical systems represents a 
major challenge for car manufacturers in terms of design, implementation and maintenance 
of these systems during the lifecycle of a car project. Provision for highly automated tools 
addressing the needs of this process are essential in order to ensure efficiency, high quali¬ 
ty and short lead-times. 

For this very reason - as an industry first - the LIN specification covers not only the proto¬ 
col definition itself, but also the standardization of tool and application programming inter¬ 
faces. The introduction of LIN is accompanied by a holistic chain of tools supporting the car 
manufacturer in all phases of the development project. 

The goal of LIN is to define a communication standard below the level of CAN - the major 
standard in vehicle networking. With respect to cost and performance, LIN is comple¬ 
menting CAN but not competing with it. LIN targets low end applications where the com¬ 
munication cost per node must be two to three times lower when compared to CAN and 
where the performance, bandwidth, and complexity of CAN is not required. 

The communication protocol is based on the common serial ISO 9141 NRZ transmission. 
It is a single-master/multiple secondary protocol, transmitted via a single-wire bus powered 
by the 12V car battery. The concept of message identification allows a multi-cast data 
transmission between any network node controlled by the master. A particular feature of 
LIN is the incorporation of a synchronization mechanism for slave nodes so that - unlike 
CAN - a crystal resonator is not required. This enables the application of true single-chip 
solutions for low cost mechatronics. 



E46FL 



The LIN standard includes the specification of the transmission protocol, the transmission 
medium, the interface between development tools, and the interfaces for software pro¬ 
gramming. LIN guarantees the interoperability of network nodes from the viewpoint of hard¬ 
ware and software, and a predictable EMC behavior. It is not exclusively defined for auto¬ 
motive applications and is expected to be also successfully applied to industrial or white- 
good electronics. A wide portfolio of semiconductor and software products is already avail¬ 
able for first LIN implementations. 

The LIN Bus is a standardized, serial single wire bus transferring data at a speed of 19.2 
kBd. (Some LIN Busses may operate at slightly different speeds.) 

The LIN Bus is very similiar to the M-Bus normally found on climate control systems. 

The LIN Bus (Busses) are diagnosible with the DISplus. 

Vehicles may have more than one LIN Bus that are not interconnected (i.e. mirror system 
bus, AHL motor control bus, etc.) 



E46FL 



