Table of Contents 

E65/66 Air Suspension 

Subject Page 

Single Axle Air Suspension (E65/E66).2 

Purpose of the System.2 

Components (E65/E66) .4 

Air Supply Unit (LVA).4 

Control Unit .5 

Air Springs.6 

Ride Height Sensor .7 

Control Mode Flow Chart.8 

Principle of Operation.9 

Control Mode Overview .9 

Control Modes .9 

Sleep .9 

Post Mode.10 

Pre-Mode.10 

Normal.11 

Drive.11 

Kerb (Curb) Mode.12 

Curve.12 

Lift .13 

Transport .13 

Belt .13 

Operating Principle.14 

Initialization/Reset Performance .14 

Control Sequence.14 

Safety Concept .15 

Workshop Hints.16 

Diagnosis .17 

Service Functions .17 


Initial Print Date:01/03 


Revision Date: 































Single Axle Air Suspension (E65/E66) 

Purpose of the System 

The single axle air suspension system used on the the E65/E66 is a further enhancement 
of the previous single axle air suspension system used on the the E39 and X5. The com¬ 
ponents used are similar to the Single Axle EHC System on the E53. The E65/E66 Air sus¬ 
pension consists of the following components: 

• Air Supply System (LVA) 

• Control Unit (EHC) 

• Two Air Springs 

• Two Ride Height Sensors 

• CC Display/Telltale Icon 



KT-105OB 



2 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 





























3 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 


ISDN 5 Mj 1 A d HUD 1 y 












































































































































Components (E65/E66) 

Air Supply Unit (LVA) 


The air supply unit is located in the spare tire recess and consists of the following compo¬ 
nents: 


• Protective cover with internal acoustic 
insulation 

• Lid 

• Rubber-mounted component carrier 

• Compressor Unit 

• Compressor Relay (Replaceable) 

• Solenoid Valve Block 




Fig. 11: Air supply unit, single-axle air suspension 


KT-10606 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rubber Mount 

6 

Air Drier 

2 

Component Carrier 

7 

Compressor 

3 

Compressor Relay 

8 

Solenoid Valve, Right 

4 

Electric Motor 

9 

Solenoid Valve, Left 

5 

Air Cleaner 




4 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 





































Control Unit 


The EHC control module is located in the right rear luggage compartment area in the mod¬ 
ule carrier next to the battery. On the E65/E66, the control module is connected to the K- 
CAN S. The EHC control module receives the following information: 


• Vehicle Ride Height 

• Load Cutout Signal 

• Terminal 15 ON/OFF 

• Vehicle Speed 

• Lateral Acceleration 

• “Engine Running” Signal 

• Flap Status (Door, Hood, Trunk) 

The Control unit decides on a case by 
case basis whether a control opera¬ 
tion is required in order to compen¬ 
sate changes in load. It prevents 
intervention in the case of other caus¬ 
es. This makes it possible to adapt 
the frequency, specified height, toler¬ 
ance thresholds and battery load opti¬ 
mally by means of the control opera¬ 
tion to the relevant situation. 

In addition to handling the self levelling 
suspension, the control module moni¬ 
tors the system components as well 
as storing and displaying faults. The 
control module has full diagnostic 
capability. 

The EHC module is a 26 pin module 
with an ELO type connector. The 
module is connected to the K CAN S. 
The majority of the input messages 
are from K CAN S. 



EHC Module Location 








5 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 








Air Springs 


An identifying feature of the E65/E66 air spring is the internally guided air bellows. Internally 
guided means that the bellows is guided in an aluminum casing. The bellows is support¬ 
ed on this casing. This prevents the compression forces from weighing heavily on the bel¬ 
lows. 

This process allows the bellows to be manufactured from a thin, flexible diaphragm which 
can react to minimal shocks and in this way provide a more comfortable suspension. 

The diaphragm is composed of only one fabric layer embedded in rubber. The fibers with¬ 
in the fabric run longitudinally along the spring strut. The bellows is therefore known as an 
axial air bellows. 

The bottom end of the air spring strut is enclosed 
in a bellows in order to protect the diaphragm 
against the mechanical effects of fouling (sand, dirt 
etc.). The lower end of the bellows incorporates 
small holes for pressure compensation in the 
space between the roll piston and bellows. The 
action of the bellows rolling in this space produces 
pressure differences. 

The bellows together with the roll piston contains 
a volume of air that is sufficient for optimum sus¬ 
pension. 

A residual pressure holding valve on the air spring 
strut prevents it from being depressurized. The air 
spring strut remains under pressure in the event of 
a loss of pressure in the system. The residual 
pressure is 3.25 +/- 0.75 bar. This ensures that 
the bellows is not damaged when the car is still 
being moved. 

The residual pressure holding valve is secured with 
Loctite and must NOT be removed. 

The air spring strut is initially filled at the manufac¬ 
turer to 10 bar. This pressure is reduced to 3.5 bar 
when the spring strut is to be stored. Under this 
pressure, the strut is extended to maximum 
length. 

The connection of the air spring struts to the air 
supply unit (distributor block) is located on the left 
of the luggage compartment under the flap on 
which the wheel nut wrench is mounted. 




6 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 


















Ride Height Sensor 


There are two ride height sensors, one for each rear wheel. The ride height sensor is actu¬ 
ated by a coupling rod and sends a signal to the EHC control unit. 

The sensor is a hall sensor which sends a DC Analog output voltage to the EHC module. 
The voltage range is approximately .5 to 4.5 volts. The voltage increases with increasing 
vehicle height and the nominal voltage at normal ride height is approximately 2.5 volts. The 
right side rear sensor is a double sensor, the additional sensor is an input to the headlight 
leveling system and has it’s own power supply, ground and signal wires. 



Check Control Messages 


Control 

Unit 

Cause 

Variable 

Telltale Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Information in Control Display 

EHC 

Alive failure or 
loss of function¬ 
ality; transport 
or belt mode set 




Level Control 
System failure 

“Level Control system failure” 
Ground clearance and driving 
comfort reduced. Avoid high 
speed cornering. Have 

checked by BMW Service as 
soon as possible. 

EHC 

Level Control 
System sensor 
failure. 




Level Control 
System Fault 

“Level Control System fault” 
Possible reduction in driving 
comfort. Have problem 

checked by BMW Service. 


7 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 




















Control Mode Flow Chart 

The following chart demonstrates the control sequences of the E65/E66 with single axle 
rear air suspension. 


-^ 

Sleep ' | 

_ _ J ( 

k 

Post 

V_ 



A 

) 


A 

) 


Drive 


V_ 

♦ 

— 

Curve 

_ 


'N 

) 


8 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 


Principle of Operation 

Control Mode Overview 



E39/E53 EHC 1 
(Single Axle) 

E65/E66 
(single Axle) 

E53 EHC II 
(Dual Axle) 

Sleep 

X 

X 

X 

Wake-up 



X 

Post 


X 


Pre 

X 

X 

X 

Terminal 15 On 



X 

Normal 

X 

X 

X 

Drive 

X 

X 

X 

Curb 

X 

X 

X 

Curve 

X 

X 

X 

Lift 

X 

X 

X 

Twist 



X 

Trailer 



X 

Off-Road 



X 

Access 



X 


Control Modes 

Ongoing control operations are not affected by transitions from one mode to another. 
However, in the case of load cutout OFF, control operations are always concluded in order 
to safeguard system deactivation. The control unit then sets the Sleep Mode. 

Sleep 

The vehicle is in Sleep mode, at the latest, when it has been parked for longer than 16 min¬ 
utes with a door, hood or rear lid/hatch being operated or the terminal status changing. 
This is the initial state of the control system. No control operation is being performed in 
Sleep mode. 

The control system goes into Pre-mode when a wake-up signal is received by the control 
unit. 


9 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 




































Post Mode 


The Post-mode is adopted in order to compensate any inclination or to adjust the ride 
height after driving and between the Pre-mode and Sleep mode. 

The Post-mode is limited in time to 1 minute. The Post-mode is only executed if the engine 
has been running before the system switches into this mode. If the engine has not been 
previously running, the system switches directly from Pre-mode into Sleep mode. 

The control operation is performed in a narrow tolerance band of +/- 6mm and is terminat¬ 
ed at +/- 4mm. The fast signal filter is used. 

In the event of an inclination (Kerb Mode), the control operation takes place for the nominal 
heights applicable in this situation. 

Pre-Mode 

The Pre-mode is activated by the “Load Cutoff” signal (e.g. by opening the door or unlock¬ 
ing with the remote control). The Pre-mode then stays set for 16 minutes and is restarted 
with a change in status. 

The ride height of the vehicle is monitored and evaluated with a wide tolerance band. 

In Pre-mode, the vehicle is only controlled to the nominal height if the level is significantly 
below the nominal height. The control tolerance band is -40mm from the mean value for 
the single axle air suspension and -20mm for the dual axle system. This control tolerance 
ensures that the vehicle is only controlled up in the case of large loads in order to increase 
the ground clearance prior to departure. Small loads give rise to small compression travel 
and this is compensated only when the engine is started. This control setting helps reduce 
the battery load. 

With the single axle air suspension, the vehicle is controlled down when the mean value 
derived from both ride height signals is > 0mm and one side is in excess of -i-IOmm. With 
twin axle air suspension, the vehicle is controlled down when one side is >15mm. 

In this mode, only the mean value of the two height signals is considered when deciding 
whether there is an need for control operation. 

The control operation is executed as long as pressure is available in the accumulator. When 
the accumulator is empty and the engine is turned off, the control operation is driven direct¬ 
ly by the compressor. User-activated changes of ride level and filling of the accumulator are 
not possible. 

Control operations which were started in other modes are continued with the inner toler¬ 
ance bands applicable to these modes. 

There is no inclination identification in Pre-mode. 


10 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 



Normal 


The normal mode is the starting point for the vehicle’s normal operating state. It is obtained 
by way of the engine running signal. 

Ride level compensation, changing the vehicle’s ride height and filling the accumulator are 
possible. The compressor starts up as required. 

A narrower tolerance band than that in Pre-mode can be used because the battery capac¬ 
ity does not have to be protected. The fast filter is used with a narrow tolerance band of 
+/-10mm. In this way, ride level compensation takes place outside a narrow band of 10+/- 
10mm. The faster filter allows the system to respond immediately to changes in ride level. 
Evaluation and control are performed separately for each wheel. 

When a speed signal is recognized, the control unit switches into Drive mode. When the 
vehicle is stopped, the control unit remains in Drive mode. The system switches back into 
Normal mode when a door or the boot (trunk) lid is also opened. If none of the doors or 
the boot lid is opened, the vehicle cannot be loaded or unloaded. 

This prevents a control operation happening when the vehicle (for example) is stopped at 
traffic lights and the ride height is above the mean axle due to the pitching motion on the 
rear axle. 

Drive 

The Drive mode is activated for E39/E53 single axle air suspension when a speed signal of 
>4km/h is recognized. The Drive mode is recognized from >1km/h for the E65/E66 single 
axle air suspension and for the E53 twin-axle air suspension system. 

Low pass filters are used. In this way, only changes in ride height over a prolonged period 
of time (1000 seconds) are corrected. These are merely the changes in ride height, caused 
by vehicle compression and a reduction in vehicle mass due to fuel consumption. The high 
pass (fast) filter is used during the control operation. The slow filters are recognized at the 
end of the control operation. The slow filters are re-initialized at the end of the control oper¬ 
ation. The markedly dynamic height signals caused by uneven road surfaces are filtered 
out. 


11 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 



Kerb (Curb) Mode 


The Kerb mode prevents the inclination caused by the vehicle mounting an obstacle with 
one wheel from being compensated. Compensation would cause a renewed inclination of 
the vehicle and result in a renewed control operation after the vehicle comes off the obsta¬ 
cle. 

The Kerb Mode is activated when the height difference between the left and right sides of 
the vehicle is > 32mm for the E65/E66 with single axle air suspension and >24mm for the 
E39/E53 with single axle air suspension and lasts longer than 0.9s. Twisting (also over both 
axles) > 45mm must occur for the E53 with twin axle air suspension. 

There must be no speed signal present. The system switches from single wheel control to 
axle control. 

The Kerb mode is quit when the difference between the left and right sides of the vehicle is 
< 28mm for the single axle air suspension and lasts longer than 0.9s when the speed is 
greater than > 1 km/h. 

If the system switches from Kerb mode to Sleep mode, this status is stored in the 
EEPROM. 

If the vehicle is loaded or unloaded in Kerb mode, the mean value of the axle is calculated 
by the control unit. The value is calculated in the control unit from the changes in ride level 
of the spring travel on the left and right sides. 

A change in ride level is initiated if the mean value of compression or rebound at the axle is 
outside the tolerance band of +/- 10mm. The left and right sides of the vehicle are raised 
or lowered in parallel. The height difference between the two sides is maintained. 

Curve 

Since rolling motions have a direct impact on the measured ride level, an unwanted control 
operation would be initiated during longer instances of cornering with an appropriate roll 
angle in spite of the slow filtering of the Drive mode. The control operations during corner¬ 
ing would cause displacement of the air volume from the outer side to the inner side of the 
curve. Once the curve is completed, this would produce an inclination which would result 
in a further control operation. The Curve mode prevents this control operation whereby 
when cornering is recognized slow filtering is stopped and a potential control operation that 
has started is terminated. 

The Curve mode is activated for the E65/E66 single axle EHC and for the E53 twin axle 
suspension for a lateral acceleration of > 2m/s 2 and deactivated at < 1.5 m/s 2 

The lateral acceleration is recorded by the rotation rate sensor. 

12 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 



Lift 


The Lift mode is used to prevent control operations when a wheel is changed or during 
work on the vehicle while it is on a lifting platform. 

This mode is recognized when the permitted rebound travel at one or more wheels is 
exceeded. For the E65/E66 the limit is > 55mm. 

A “jack” situation is also recognized when the ride level is stored and the lowering speed 
drops below the value of 2 mm/s for 3 seconds. 

If the vehicle has been raised slightly and the permitted rebound travel has not yet been 
achieved, the control operation attempts to readjust the ride height. If the vehicle is not low¬ 
ered, a car jack situation is recognized after a specific period of time and this ride height is 
stored. 

A reset is performed if the vehicle is again 10 mm below this stored ride height. 

Transport 

The Transport mode is set and cleared by means of a diagnosis activation. It serves to 
increase the ground clearance in order to ensure a safe transportation of vehicles on trans¬ 
porter trucks. The nominal height of the vehicle is raised in this mode by 30 mm. 

When the Transport mode is activated, the air suspension symbol is indicated in the vari¬ 
able telltale in the instrument cluster and a text message is output in the Check Control 
Display. 

Control operations do not take place in this mode because the vehicle mass does not 
change during transportation. 

Belt 

The Belt mode is set for mounting on the belt in order to avoid control operations. 

When the Belt mode is activated, the air suspension symbol is indicated in the variable tell¬ 
tale in the instrument cluster and a text message is output in the Check Control display. 

The Belt mode is cleared by means of a diagnostic activation only. The Belt mode can no 
longer be set. 

New control units are supplied with the Belt mode set. 

Control operations are not performed, the safety concept only operates with limited effect. 
The Belt Mode is also known as “Band Mode” or “Assembly Line Mode”. 


13 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 



Operating Principle 

Initialization/Reset Performance 


When the control unit is powered up after a reset (such as an undervoltage < 4.5 V or by a 
load cutoff), different tests and initializations are performed. This system is only enabled 
after the tests have been successfully completed and starts to execute the control pro¬ 
grams on a cyclical basis. 

Occurring faults are stored and displayed. 

Control Sequence 

In an ongoing control operation, the high pass filter (fast filter) is always used to prevent the 
controlled height from overshooting the nominal value. If a low pass filter (slow filter) were 
used to calculate the ride height, brief changes of ride height would be consumed. The 
low-pass filter is used while the vehicle is driven. This type of filtering filters out vibrations 
which are excited by the road surface. 

The high pass filter is used to respond quickly to ride level deviations from setpoint. These 
take place while the vehicle is stationary in the event of large load changes. 

Both sides of the vehicle are controlled individually, i.e. even the setpoint/actual value com¬ 
parison for both sides is carried out individually. Exception: check for undershooting of the 
minimum height in Pre-mode and Curb mode: consideration of the left and right mean val¬ 
ues in each case. 

The following stipulations are applicable here: 

• Raising before lowering 

• Activation of all valves with control in the same direction 

• Individual wheel deactivation 

To ensure safe closing of the non-return valve in the air drier, the drain valve is actuated 
briefly for 200ms after the control operation has ended. 

The permissible ON period of the components is monitored while control up operation are 
executed. 


14 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 



Safety Concept 

The safety concept is intended to inhibit any system malfunction, particularly unintentional 
control operations, through monitoring of signals and function relevant parameters. If faults 
are detected, the system is switched over or shut down depending on the affected com¬ 
ponent. The driver is informed of existing faults via the display. Detected faults are stored 
for diagnostic purposes. 

In order to ensure high system availability, existing faults, as far as possible, are cleared with 
terminal 15 ON. This is done by resetting the fault counter to zero. However, the fault 
memory content in the EEPROM is retained and can be read out for diagnostic purposes. 
The system is then operational again. The fast troubleshooting helps to detect existing 
faults before control operation can take place. 

Only lowering is permitted if: 

• The permissible supply voltage of 9 volts is undershot 

• The permissible compressor running time of 480 seconds is exceeded. 

A reset takes place if the voltage is in the OK range of 9 to 16 volts or after the compres¬ 
sor pause time of 100 seconds has elapsed. 

Only raising is permitted if: 

• The permissible control down period of 40 seconds is exceeded 

• The reset takes place the next time the vehicle is driven or after the next control up 
operation. 

No control operation takes place if: 

• The permissible supply voltage of 16 volts is exceeded 
The reset takes place as soon as the voltage is in the OK range. 


15 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 



Workshop Hints 

Ride Height Measurement 

When checking vehicle ride height with EHC, measure from the lower edge of the wheel 
opening to the center of the wheel hub. 



KT-10804 

Fig, 23; Ride height measurement (h) 


16 

E65/66 Air Suspensions 




Diagnosis 

Diagnostic items can be found in the “Control Unit Functions” path when using the DISplus 
or GT-1. The functions available are Identifcation (ID page), Read/Clear Fault Memory, Read 
Test Codes, Diagnosis Requests and Component Activation. 

Service Functions 

In the Diagnosis Program, there are numerous Service Functions that can be performed for 
the E65/E66 EHC system. By entering into the “Function Selection” program and follow¬ 
ing the “Chassis - Pneumatic Suspension” path all of the Service Functions are listed. The 
Service functions include Ride-Level Offset, Transport Mode and Band Mode. 


E65/66 Air Suspensions 


17 



