Table of Contents 

E65 INTRODUCTION 

Subject Page 

Introduction.2 

History.3 

The New E65.5 

Drive.7 

Electrical System.9 

Engine.11 

Handling Dynamics.11 

Refinements.12 

E65 Specifications.14 

Garage Dimensions.16 

E65 Bodyshell.18 

Body Trim.22 

Interior Trim.29 

Locations of Control Units.35 

E65 Abbreviations.39 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 Revision Date: 1/02 

















Introduction 


The E65 - The fourth generation BMW 7 series. 

If its predecessors were at the forefront of technical innovation when first launched, then 
the E65 is a genuine revolution in executive class automobiles. 

Sporting over 60 innovations, not only does it put the technical credentials of the BMW 
marque to the test but its attractiveness to buyers is beyond the boundaries of the 
executive sector of the market. 

The highlights of the E65 innovations are: 


• An entirely new body and interior design 
which sets the trend for future models. 


420001 


• An innovative instrumentation and control 
concept called “Drive” that interprets the 
trademark BMW “driver’s car” qualities in a 
manner in keeping both with technological 
advances and the BMW name. 


• A completely new V8 engine with an 
innovative valve control system called 

Valvetronic. 


2 





E65 Introduction 









History 

From The 335 to The E3 

The first “big” BMW was the showpiece 335 
sedan which was launched in 1938 in London. 
The 335 was powered by a 3.4 liter straight six- 
cylinder which produced 90bhp. Between 
1939 and 1941 a total of 393 were sold. 

The 1951 IAA show in Frankfurt saw the launch 
of the 501 sedan with its 2 litre, 6 cylinder, 65 
bhp engine. Three years later, it was followed 
by the 502 with the world’s first V8 aluminum 
engine; as the 3200S, it was the fastest 
German mass-production car in its class with a 
top speed of 190 km/h. From 1952 to 1964 a 
total of 21,851 vehicles were manufactured 
with various engine and body options. 

The E3, which was produced between 1968 
and 1977, was BMW’s first volume-production 
executive model. In 1968, the 2800 was the 
first large sedan to break the 200 Km/h barrier. 
A total of 217,645 vehicles with model desig¬ 
nations from 2500 to 3.3 Li (L for long wheel¬ 
base) rolled off the production lines in Munich 
and Dingolfing. 


E23 

The first BMW called the “7 Series” was the 
E23. The 7 Series sported ABS, electronic 
engine management, On-Board Computer, dri¬ 
ver’s side airbag and ellipsoid headlights. 

In 1979 the 733i was the first mass-produced 
vehicle with Digital Motor Electronics. 

The E23 was initially built at the Munich and 
Dingolfing factories. After December 1982, all 
7 series have been produced only in Dingolfing. 
Between 1977 and 1986, 285,029 units were 
sold. 


335 



501 / 502 


420025 



3 


E65 Introduction 















The second generation 7 Series gave BMW the 
breakthrough into the top end of the market. 
Design, equipment and elegance were the selling 
points for the E32. 

Xenon headlights, Adaptive Transmission Control 
(AGS) and the first German 12 cylinder engine 
since the end of the Thirties made the car a 
model of real substance in comparison with its 
competitors. 



440008 


In 1992, an eight cylinder engine was introduced to bridge the gap between the straight six 
and the VI2. As with its ancestor the E3, the E32 was also available as a long wheelbase 
version which offered an extra 11 cm between the axles for greater rear-passenger com¬ 
fort. 


E38 

The third generation of 7 series placed the emphasis on elegant styling, smoothness and 
ride comfort. This immediate predecessor of the E65 introduced Europe’s first navigation 
system with color monitor, active seats, multifunction steering wheel, Steptronic and tire 
pressure monitoring system to a volume production car. 

Another new variation first brought in with the E38 is the “Protection Line” sedan which 
offers security features to the private buyer as an additional option. 




42 - 00-10 


4 


E65 Introduction 













The New E65 

The E65 marks the start of a completely new era in BMW design in which the individual 
characteristics of the different series will once again be more clearly defined. No other 
model re-launch in the recent history of the company has seen such a major leap in visual 
styling as the new 7 series. 

The new lines and proportions give expression to the brand qualities of dynamic style and 
a challenging, cultured character. The proportion create a different impression 
depending on the viewpoint of the observer. Contrasting features such as short and long, 
high and wide, angular and curved merge seamlessly in fluid combination. 



42 - 00-11 


The front retains the typical BMW kidney grille and double headlights. The “eyes” 
however, always the most telling feature of a face, have been remodeled. They extend 
elegantly into the sides of the front fenders, emphasized by the direction indicators forming 
a delicate “eye-liner” above the double headlamps. Even at night the E65 is unmistakably 
a BMW, identified by the shape and power of the bi-xenon headlights and the four wave 
guide light rings. 


5 


E65 Introduction 










The side view with its unifying line extending the full length of the vehicle from grille to tail 
light exudes calm and elegance. The large wheels symbolizes power and agility but also 
solidity and stability. The roof line is almost coupe like in style, while the door handles and 
roof antenna add an extravagant style. 



The tail is as charasmatic as the frontal aspect. The reversing lights are broad and bright 
and the intensity of the beam projects quality and sophistication. 

The outward appearance is continued on the inside. The design concept follows a hori¬ 
zontal pattern which reinforces the impression of spaciousness and generous proportions. 


6 


E65 Introduction 




















42 - 00-05 


The instrument panel has been full redesigned and addresses driver and front passenger 
alike. All driver controls are arranged within the driver’s immediate line of sight and reach, 
while all convenience functions are equally easily visible and accessible from both front 
seats. 

Large expanses of wood, high quality fabric and leather upholstery and the subtle texturing 
of the cockpit surfaces set a distinctive tone. All plastic components are finished in a fine 
textured coating and frequently used contact surface are highlighted in a metallic finish. 

A variety of types of wood and upholstery fabrics, classical and modem interior color 
schemes and exterior paint finishes with new and unusual metallic effects lend the E65 a 
wide range of distinctive appearances entirely dependent on the individual taste of its 
owner. 


“iDrive” 

The ever increasing number of functions and 
associated controls in cars makes it more and 
more difficult for the driver to concentrate on 
the essential activity of driving. “iDrive” groups 
functions into two clearly defined areas: 

“Driving” and “Comfort” and by doing so 
simultaneously creates more space. 



42 - 00-05 


7 


E65 Introduction 




































All functions related purely to driving are arranged 
within the “driving area” in the trademark BMW 
“driver’s car” style. Behind the Multi-function 
steering wheel with Steptronic buttons an LCD 
instrument cluster provides the driver with all 
essential information. 


Arranged around the steering column are the cruise con¬ 
trol lever, the direction indicator/high-beam stalk and the 
automatic transmission selector lever which has been 
moved from its previous location on the center console. 


On the left hand side of the instrument panel 
there is a switch for the Electro-Mechanical 
Parking Brake (EMF), the light switch and the 
trunk release button. 


On the right there is the Park Distance Control 
(PDC) button, the Start/Stop button and the 
ignition switch with the slot for the remote con¬ 
trol transmitter (instead of a key). 


Finally, immediately to the left of the steering col¬ 
umn is the adjuster “joystick” for the steering wheel 
and the button for the optional steering wheel 
heater. 


8 



E65 Introduction 







































The “comfort area” is positioned centrally in the dash¬ 
board and combines all convenience functions into one 
area for easy access by the driver or front passenger. 

Clear grouping into frequently and less frequently used 
functions ensures that, on the one hand, an adequately 
wide range of adjustment options is provided according to 
need and on the other the number of controls remains 
manageably small. 

The central element of the comfort area is the control dis¬ 
play which is operated by turning, pressing or sliding the 
“controller” on the center armrest. All functions that do not 
necessarily have to be directly accessible (up to 700 of 
them depending on equipment level) are controlled by it. 

Below the center air vents are the controls for the most important automatic air-condition¬ 
ing functions. The CD and volume control is located underneath the air-conditioning 
control panel. 

Electrical System 

The demands on modern cars are continually increasing. Buyers expect an ever growing 
array of functions, while legal requirements relating to fuel consumption and emission 
levels are becoming stricter all the time. Such demands can only be met by the increased 
use of electronic components and intelligent interaction between them. 

Conventional electrical system are no longer capable of handling the ever growing volume 
of data in modern cars. In order to be able to process all information in real time, 
substantially faster communication channels are required. 



420056 

















■ ..'iH P 


P-CAU a 


NU1I 




■1-1 AH 


420060 

9 


E65 Introduction 


































































That is why new data bus systems have been introduced on the E65. Two of them are 
based on fiber-optic technology. The “Media Oriented System Transport” (MOST) system 
for multimedia applications (data transfer rate: 22.5 MBd) and the “byteflight" safety sys¬ 
tems bus (10 MBd). 

The body Controller Area Network (K-CAN, lOOkBd) on the E65 consists of two copper 
twist wires and replaces the previous K-Bus (9.6 kBd). 

The PT-CAN (500 kBd) for the powertrain related control units has been expanded to a 3- 
wire interface. 

The power supply to all electric components is controlled by the “ Power Module”. This is 
a new development for the E65 which ensures that the charge level of the battery is main¬ 
tained both when the engine in running and when it isn’t and even in the event of faults in 
the electrical system. If necessary, the Power Module switches to “ emergency mode” in 
order to ensure that essential systems remain functional while driving. 


420062 



For the first time, a lightweight aluminum ribbon cable is used for the positive lead. The 
high current plug in contacts are also a new feature and can withstand peak currents of up 
to 220 A, with a continuous load rating of 100 A: despite such high current ratings, these 
contacts are crimped not soldered. 

If no electrical functions are operated for a continuous period of three weeks, the E65 bat¬ 
tery is automatically isolated from the electrical system. This ensures that the battery is 
adequately protected against power drain. An additional data memory that can be 
accessed using the Diagnostic program provides a status read-out of the battery load and 
life. 



E65 Introduction 





Engine 


When launched, the E65 will be supplied exclusively 
with the completely new N62 engine. The key tea -1 
tures of this new power unit are the new fully variable 
intake valve travel control system (Valvetronic) and 
optimized cylinder charging made possible by a vari¬ 
able intake system. 

Thanks to this sophisticated technology, power out¬ 
put and torque have been impressively improved as 
compared with the M62 (N62: 325hp/325Nm) and 
fuel consumption and harmful emissions simultane¬ 
ously substantially reduced. 

There is no other engine on the market at present which offers comparable technology. 

Handling Dynamics 

“Dynamic Drive” is a revolutionary system that minimizes or even completely eliminates 
body roll when cornering. It incorporates an active anti-roll bar (ARS) which optimizes the 
line-holding characteristics and thereby substantially improves the handling, agility and 
stability of the E65. Rear-seat passengers in particular will find that reading and working 
are considerably easier and more pleasant. 

Dynamic Drive sets new standards in chassis and suspension engineering. 

The Continuous Electronic Damping Control system (EDC-K: Optional) instantaneously and 



420061 



“fcfi 





|TJ, 

ML 1 


420063 


infinitely variable adjusts the damping force of the shock absorbers. 

All vehicle movement that affects handling characteristics are continuously monitored and 
analyzed. A microprocessor then permanently controls the shock absorbers in response 
to the driving conditions and the vehicle load. 

As a result, maximum comfort and maximum safety are guaranteed at all times. 



E65 Introduction 


Refinements 


Only a driver who is in a comfortable and relaxed position in the car can be in full control of 
it. That is why the optional BMW comfort seat with memory has been further improved. 



420064 


The 20 way power front comfort seats have many new innovations over the predecessor 
E38. In addition to electrically adjustable seat cushion depth and backrest width, there are 
luxury head restraints with side retaining bolsters. Optional seat heating includes a fast 
heat-up function and adjustable balance between seat cushion and backrest. 



Active seats that reduce driver fatigue as first seen on the E38 
are also available for the E65 comfort seat and finally, a seat 
ventilation system optimizes seat climate by means of fans 
mounted directly in the seat cushions. 


The E65 will be equipped with the basic 
seat in the rear. Head restraints are elec¬ 
trically adjustable if rear airbags are 
ordered. Heated rear seats are available 
as well. 



E65 Introduction 































A door-closing assistance system (optional: Automatic Soft Close) minimizes the force 
required to close the doors. The doors will automatically close if they have not been prop¬ 
erly closed. 



A variable position door brake mechanism on all doors ensures that doors are securely 
fixed in any open position, there are no pre-set stop positions any more. 

Top quality LOGIC 7 Hi-Fi system with dash installed CD changer are as much a natural 
accessory of the E65 as up to date communication systems (fax and internet planned). 



Other new equipment includes such features as a vanity mirror for rear passengers and 
ventilated storage compartment in the center console. 



E65 Introduction 











































E65 Specifications 

Dimensions 

The E65 is larger than it’s predecessor model, the E38, the dimensions are as follows: 


Dimensions 

E65 

E38 

Length 

5029mm/198in. 

4964mm/195in. 

Width 

1902mm/74.9in. 

1864mm/73.3in 

Height 

1470mm/57.8in. 

1410mm/55.4in 

Wheelbase 

2090mm/117.7in. 

2030mm/115.1 in. 

Curb weight 

1945kg/4288lb 

1930kg/4255lb 


The E65 is 45mm longer, 38mm wider and 60mm taller than the E38. The wheelbase of 
the E65 is also 60mm longer than that of the E38. 



Additional Dimensions: 


E38 



Accommodations 

E65 

E38 

Seating capacity, persons 

5 

5 

Shoulder room, front/rear, in. 

59.3/58.7 

58.4/58.4 

Head room, front/rear, in. 

37.4/38.5 

37.4/37.9 



E65 Introduction 




















Weight 


Despite the bigger sedan, larger tires/brakes and the new engine, the E65 tips the scales 
at only 15kg (35lbs) heavier than the E38. 

Additional Specifications: 


Engine and Electrical 

E65 

Engine Type 

DORIC 32 Valve V-8 

Valvetronic and VANOS 

Bore x Stroke, mm 

92.0x82.7 

Displacement, cc 

4398 

Compression Ratio 

10:1 

Power @ rpm, hp 

325 @ 6100 

Torque @ rpm, Ib-ft 

330 @ 3600 

Engine Management 

Motronic ME 9.2 

Fuel Requirement 

91 Octane Unleaded 

Fuel Capacity U.S. gal. 

23.2 

Battery Capacity 

IIOAh 

Drivetrain 


Automatic Transmission ZF 
6HP26, 6 speed 


Ratios: 


1st 

4.17:1 

2nd 

2.34:1 

3rd 

1.52:1 

4th 

1.14:1 

5th 

0.87:1 

6th 

0.69:1 

Reverse 

3.40:1 

Chassis 

E65 

Body/Frame 

Unitized all-steel structure with 
aluminum hood and fenders. 

Front Suspension 

Double-pivot McPherson strut. All 
Aluminum Components. Active Roll 
Stabilizer. Opt. EDC-K 

Rear Suspension 

4 link integral suspension. All 
Aluminum Construction. ARS. Opt. 
EDC-K and EHC 

Steering Type 

Rack & Pinion, Servotronic 

Turn Radius, ft. 

39.8 

Front Brake Discs Diameter 
and Thickness, mm 

348/30 

Rear Brake Discs 

Diameter and Thickness, mm 

345 x 24 

Wheels, Standard Optional 

275/40R-19 Front 

275/40R-19 Rear 

Performance 



E65 Introduction 

































Garage Dimensions 



Q 

I--- 

’Tf 


157E 
21 EE 




904 


2990 

5029 


1135 



Drawing dimensions are in mm 


42 - 00-19 



E65 Introduction 






































































































































































































42 - 00-14 

17 


E65 Introduction 






































































































E65 Bodyshell 

Introduction 



42 - 02-27 


The body of the E65 is a light weight design. 

The design has essentially been determined by styling, crash performance, comfort, 
ergonomics and quality. 

The E65 panels are made of different steel types and material thickness. These factors 
together create strong bonding advantages: 

• The unladen weight of the vehicle is reduced, thereby lowering energy consumption. 

• Improved crash performance resulting in increased passive safety. 

• Increased body rigidity resulting in improved directional stability. 

• A reduction of vibrations and acoustic noises provides the driver with increased driving 
comfort. 

Through the use of high tensile steel and the use of spot weld bonded joints, it is possible 
to avoid an excessive body weight increase. 



E65 Introduction 


Materials 


The choice of materials for the bodyshell is geared towards the design objectives: 

• Static Performance (rigidity and strength) 

• Dynamic Performance (reduction of vibrational and acoustic disturbances) 

• Crash Performance (Improve passive safety) 

• Weight Optimization (reducing fuel consumption and improving handling) 

Roughly 90% of the sheet panels used in the bodyshell consists of higher-tensile steels. 

In comparison, only roughly 30% of higher-tensile steels was used in the E38 while only 5% 
was used in the E32. 

In addition to the benefits of reduced weight and increased strength, the use of higher-ten¬ 
sile sheet panels provides the possibility of a more efficient deployment of materials in the 
manufacture of the vehicle. 


Front End 

The front end is joined together from over 100 individual parts by shielded-arc and spot 
weld bonding. 

The vehicle identification number is located on the right front strut tower. 

The strut tower provides elongated holes for a further 0.5 degree of camber adjustment. 



42 - 00-28 

19 


E65 Introduction 


Front Bumper 


The front bumper is made of aluminum. 
There are no longer any shock absorbers 
used in the bumper assembly. 

In the complex structure with the bumper 
trim and the polystyrene foam impact 
absorber, it can absorb a 15 km/h frontal 
impact without deformation of the body 
structure. 





4,3 


44 - 02-28 


Front Panel (Core Support) 


The front panel is made from aluminum 
for weight reduction and consists of 
three components bolted together. 

The bolted construction makes replacing 
the radiator and air-conditioning compo¬ 
nents an easier task by removing the 
center section and removing them from 
the top. 

In case of a minor collision the front 
panel can also be replaced in sections 
by regular service technicians making it 
less expensive to repair. 


Frame Rails 

The frame rails are designed in the profile 
section as a double hexagon. 

IHPD 

This optimal cross sectional geometry 
offers good exploitation of the available 
space. 

Front axle attachments are integrated 
in the engine carrier and consists of an 
extruded part similar to the E39. 

▼ ~* Double Hexagon 

420231 

20 








gonai strut 




E65 Introduction 









The wheel arch has a diagonal support on the front wheel arch liner that uses a technolo¬ 
gy called “IHPD” (internal high pressure deformation). 

The frame rail and wheel house assembly has the advantage of reduced weight and 
increased rigidity. A similar IHPD section has been fitted in the E46 convertible located in 
the windshield frame as a rollover protective structure. 

Because of their special properties, these profile sections cannot be reworked after a 
collision. They must therefore be replaced after any deformation. 

Joints and Gaps 

When removing or replacing body parts it is essential to adjust the gap dimensions and 
parallelism in compliance with BMW specifications. 

Symmetry has top priority for the overall appearance of the joints/gaps on the components. 
A maximum deviation of +/- 0.5mm to the specified values must be observed here. 



E65 Introduction 









































Body Trim 


Bumper System 

The bumpers do not have shock absorbers as used in the past. The forces are transmit¬ 
ted through the bumper to a deforming element between the aluminum mounting and the 
frame rail. Lighter impacts are absorbed by a foam impact absorber behind the plastic 
bumper cover. 

Impacts up to 4 km/h are absorbed by the bumpers without damage and impacts up to 8 
km/h cause only minor damage to the bumper. 


The bumper cover is integrated into the vehicle structure. The one-piece sections front and 
rear are swept all the way around the wheel fenders. 


F'.i'nd Cl Hi I i i 

1 




42 - 02-36 


The Park Distance Control (PDC) sensors are integrated into the bumpers and are finished 
in the same color as the car. 

The panels at the bottom on the right and left between the front bumper and the wheel- 
house liners close off the space in front of the wheel fenders. 

These panels have fixtures to accommodate the temperature sensor of the external tem¬ 
perature gauge on the left and the thermostat switch for heating the windshield spray jet on 
the right hand side. 

22 


E65 Introduction 























The rear bumper system consists of: 


• Aluminum Mounting 

• Impact absorbers (Foam) 

• Plastic Panel 

The rear bumper does not 
have shock absorbers either. 
The impact absorbers (foam 
system) absorb the impact 
energy and can return to their 
original shape. An impact up 
to 15km/h will not cause struc¬ 
tural damage to the body. 

The tail pipes are concealed 
underneath the bumper skirt. 



Front End 

The front end is bolted to the frame rails. It can be removed completely with the headlights 
and bumper mountings. 

The Bowden cable for the engine compartment hood release is disengaged at the con¬ 
nector on the left side carrier of the wheel arch. 



E65 Introduction 



















Engine Compartment Hood 

The engine hood is light and easy to open because the hood is made of aluminum. 

In the customer position, the engine compartment hood opens to a height of 1750 mm. 

The engine hood can also be raised to an almost vertical service position. The hood opens 
to this position similar to other models by disengaging the dampers and extending them 
with the aid of a special tool. 

The two piece kidney grille 
snap fits into the hood. 


The new hood locking system 
is much easier for customers 
to operate from the inside and 
outside. 

The hinges are of the multiple 
joint type and are made from 
steel. 

Luggage Compartment Lid 

The steel luggage compartment lid is redesigned and equipped with new tail light cluster, 
trim and trunk operation. The E65 has an optional automatic trunk opening and closing 
mechanism. 




The tail lights and reverse light is now also inte¬ 
grated into the luggage compartment lid. 


The trunk’s single joint bow type hinge is concealed 
above the inner wheel arch. The bow moves 
through the water drain and therefore does not 
restrict available luggage space. 

An emergency external lock cylinder is provided in 
case the electronics fail to open the trunk. 



E65 Introduction 















Doors 


The E65 doors are made of steel and open to an angle of 70°. The E65 does not have a 
door stop. A hydraulic damper is used instead. The door damper makes it possible to stop 
the door in any open position within 70°. 

The hydraulic damper is bolted in place and can be replaced if necessary. 

There are no rubbing strips on the outside of the doors and the chrome strip in the window 
frame is snap on. The black moulding at the edge of the window at the B-pillar is held in 
place by threaded fastners. Once the window seal is removed, the fastners are accessi¬ 
ble. 


The outside door handles contain two optical fibers that illuminate the handles and the area 
in the vicinity of the door. 



The outside door handles are finished in the same color as the bodywork. 
Inside, the front doors contain the following components: 

• Power Window Lifter 

• Side Airbag 

• Mid Range Speaker 100 mm 

• Cold-Air Duct 

• Door Control Unit 



E65 Introduction 




Outside Mirrors 


The outside mirrors of the E65 have heated glass as standard. 

The mirrors also incorporate an automatic auto-dim function (electro-chromatic) which 
applies a voltage to the gel element in the mirror to the darken glass. The light sensor is 
located in the rear view mirror. 


Driver’s side and passenger’s 


side mirror is electrically adjustable and can be swivelled in. 


The mirror glass is snap fit into the 
cup (no bayonet lock). 

The trim cap is also snap fitted. The 
mirror glass has to be removed 
before the cap can be removed. 

Three screws install from the inside, 
securing the outside mirror to the 
door. Removal/lnstallation requires 
removing the door lining, because 
the cable connector is plugged into 
the door module. 

Roof Antenna 




The E65 is the first car with the antenna for the Global Positioning System (GPS) and tele¬ 
phone antenna integrated into one roof antenna. 



E65 Introduction 




Glass/Windshield 


The E65 has green heat reflecting glass in all its windows and the windshield is equipped 
with ultraviolet protection. 

The glass is 6-7 mm thick and the black moulding strip around the windows has an 
internal water drain. 

The windshield has a silk-screen print spot pattern around the border edge and the park 
zone for the wipers is electrically heated. 

The windshield has a viewing panel for the vehicle identification number. 

The mounting plate for the rearview mirror is bonded to the windshield glass. 

In order to remove the windshield, the new snap on roof moulding needs to be removed 
first. The one piece moulding extend all the way from the A-pillars to the C-pillars. The trim 
beneath the windshield also needs to be removed. 

The E-65 incorporates a heat control windshield that helps prevent heat build up inside the 
passenger compartment. The rain/light sensor prism is bonded to the windshield. 


Windshield Cleaning System 

A windshield wiper mechanism is a new feature of the E65. The spraying nozzle is inte¬ 
grated into the wiper. 


The windshield cleaning system and the headlight cleaning system (SRA) share the same 
6.5 liter fluid tank. The tank is located beneath the left wheel well and is protected by a 
panel. The filler neck is located in the engine compartment. 



420074 



E65 Introduction 





Underbody Paneling 



The ram air lips are integrated into the underbody paneling. This optimizes the aerody¬ 
namic effect of the underbody. 

The underbody panels are the covers for the following components: 

• The Dynamic Drive valve block behind the right front under paneling. 

• The DMTL located above the splash shield at the right rear. 

• The siren/tilt sensor for DWA located above the splash shield at the left rear. 

The E65 has a thrust plate made of aluminum. It helps stabilize the front axle. It has open¬ 
ings so that the engine oil can be changed without the panel having to be removed. 


Do not drive the vehicle on the road without this panel as excessive flexing may cause components 
to touch and could create damage. 



E65 Introduction 






Interior Trim 


The interior trim consists of following assemblies: 

• Door Trim Panels 

• Roof Trim Panels 

• A/B/C Pillar Trim Panels 

• Rear Window Shelf 

• Luggage Compartment Trim 

• Floor Covering (carpet) 

Door Trim Panels 

The door trim panels are made of PVC with a natural fibre polyurethane reinforcement 
(NFPU) and are laminated with foil. 

A function decor strip with a fiber optic conductor is integrated in the door trim panel. The 
light curtain serves the purpose of lighting up the controls in the door. 


• Door Opener 

• Switch Unit 

• Ashtray (Rear Doors Only) 


The following components are secured to the door panel: 

• Door Interior Lighting (ambient) in the function decor strip by means of an LED via 
Optical fiber conductor. 

• Entrance Lights At The Bottom of The Door Panel. 

• Interior Door Handle 

• Switch for Power Windows (Only On Driver’s Side). 

• Outside Mirror (Front Only). 

• Child Safety Locks (Front Only). 

• Rear Window Sun Roller Blind. 

• Side Sun Roller Blind. 

• Airbag Module. 

• Air duct for ventilation from B-pillar (front doors only). 




E65 Introduction 








1. Mounting Screw behind armrest cover. 

2. Mounting Screw behind armrest cover. 

3. Mounting Screw behind airbag Badge cover. 

4. Decoration Strip with optical fibre conductor. 

5. Mounting Screw Behind Door handle cover. 



Front Door Mounting Screws 


1. Mounting Screw behind armrest cover. 

2. Mounting Screw behind armrest cover. 

3. Mounting Screw behind door handle cover. 




Rear Door Mounting Screws 



E65 Introduction 









The inner door carrier serves as attachment point to these components: 

• Door Module 

• Speakers 

• Central light source for illuminating the entrance area of the vehicle and also for lighting 
up the external door handles by means of optical fiber conductors 

• Intrusion sensor for intelligent safety and information system (ISIS) with optical fiber 
conductor. 

• Door trim panel 

• Bowden cable for door opener 

• Motors for “side roller sun blind” 



Front Inner Door Carrier 


Rear Inner Door Carrier 


kt-7714 

31 


E65 Introduction 





Roof Trim Panels 


Two parts are new in the headlining compared to the E38: The location of the hands-free 
microphone and the addition of a rear overhead console. 


1 Top Light for Front Center Armrest 

2 Interior Lighting 

3 Reading Lamp 

4 Sunroof switch location 

5 SOS button location 


The microphone for the hands-free telephone is 
located in the headliner behind the left sun-visor. 

A microphone trim cover is located on the left 
and right sides of the headliner to accommodate 
both left and right hand drive vehicles. There is 
only one microphone 




E65 Introduction 








Rear Roof Console 


1 Top Light (Center Console) 

2 Interior Light 

3 Reading Lamp 

4 Make Up Mirror Light 

5 Make Up Mirror 

6 Ultra Sonic Interior Protection 



A Pillar Trim 


• The Right/Left A-Pillar Trim Cover is fastened with 
one screw behind the “HPS” cover. 

B Pillar Trim 

• Two-piece B-pillar trim cover (top/bottom). The bot¬ 
tom cover contains an air duct with grill. 

• Function Strip, B-Pillar Trim Cover 

• Mounting Bracket, B Pillar Trim Cover, Bottom 

• B-Pillar Air intake Grill 

The upper seat belt anchor point of the E65 is no longer 
adjustable. 




E65 Introduction 









































C Pillar Trim 

• Three Piece C-Pillar Trim Cover (rear/front/bottom) 

• Mounting Bracket, C-Pillar Trim Cover, Top 

• Retaining Clip, C-Pillar Trim Cover, Bottom 

• Seat Belt Slot Cover, C-Pillar Bottom 

Rear Window Shelf 




The rear window shelf consists of the following items: 

• Cover for Trunk Lid Hinge 

• Seat Belt Outlet Cover, Center Seat Belt 

• Rear Window Shelf Mount 

• Rear Window Shelf Ventilation Grill 

• Rear Window Shelf Speaker Grill 

• Plastic or Wood Trim Cover 

• Roller Sunblind Assembly 

The third brake light is additionally integrated in the rear window shelf. It is necessary to 
remove the rear window shelf in order to disassemble the brake light. 



E65 Introduction 









Locations of Control Units 


The E65 contains a significantly larger number of control units than the E38. 

The arrangement of the control units is not the same as in the E38 - the changes involved 
are due to the introduction of new technologies such as fiber-optics. 

This overview shows the locations of the control units. 

Control Units in the Engine Compartment 

The electronics box is in the right housing under the microfilter. 



The electronics box contains the following control units: 

• Digital engine electronics DME (one for 8-cylinder engines, two for 12-cylinder 
engines) 

• Valvetronic VVT 

• Integrated supply module (IVM) with fuses 

The positive terminal and some fuses for the WT system are readily accessible in front of 
the electronics box, level with the wheel arch. 

The engine compartment also houses: 

• Control unit for Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

• Wiper module 

35 


E65 Introduction 



Control Units Behind the Dashboard 



Control Units Inside the Passenger Compartment 




E65 Introduction 





















Control Units Inside the Luggage Compartment 



Luggage Compartment, Left 




E65 Introduction 




















Luggage Compartment, Right 




E65 Introduction 

























E65 Abbreviations 


ACC 

Active Cruise Control 

RLS 

Rain-Light Sensor 

AHM 

Trailer Module (not for U.S.) 

SASL 

Satellite A-Pillar Left 

AKS 

Active Head-Restraint System 

SASR 

Satellite A-Pillar Right 

ALC 

Automatic Light Control 

SBFH 

Seat Module Passenger Side Rear 

ALR 

Auto. Light Range Adj. 

SFAH 

Seat Module Driver Side Rear 

AMP 

Audio System Amplifier 

SBSL 

Satellite B-Pillar Left 

ARS 

Anti-Roll Stabilization 

SBSR 

Satellite B-Pillar Right 

ASK 

Audio System Controller 

SFZ 

Satellite Vehicle Center 

AUC 

Auto. Recirc. Air Control 

SHD 

Sunroof Module 

AVT 

Antenna amplifier Tuner 

SIM 

Safety Information Module 

BZM 

Center Consol Control Center 

SINE 

Siren/Tilt Sensor 

BZMF 

Center Consol Control Center 

Rear 

SMBF 

Seat Module Passenger Side 

CAS 

Car Access System 

SMFA 

Seat Module Driver Side 

CD 

Control Display 

SRA 

Headlight Cleaning System 

CDC 

Compact Disc Changer 

SSBF 

Seat Satellite Passenger Side 

CIM 

Chassis Integration Module 

SSFA 

Seat Satellite Driver Side 

CON 

Controller 

SSH 

Seat Satellite Rear Seat 

DD 

Dynamic Drive 

STVL 

Satellite Left Front Door 

DME 

Digital Motor Electronics 

STVR 

Satellite Right Front Door 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

SVS 

Speech Processing System 

DWA 

Anti-theft Alarm System 

SZL 

Switch Center, Steering Column 

ECO 

Now: Controller (CON) 

TAGE 

Door Handle Electronics 

EDC-K 

Electronic Dampening 
Control-Continuous 

TEL 

Telephone Control Unit 

EHC 

Electronic Height Control 

TMBFT 

Door Module Passenger Side 

EMF 

Electro-Mechanical Parking 
Brake 

TMBFTH 

Door Module Passenger Side Rear 

FBD 

Remote Control Services 

TMFAT 

Door Module Driver Side 

GRS 

Rotation Rate Sensor 

TMFATH 

Door Module Driver Side Rear 

HKL 

Hydraulic Trunk lid lift 

USIS 

Ultrasonic Passenger Compartment 

Sensor 

IHKA 

Automatic Integrated Heating 
and Air-conditioning. System 

VID 

Video Module 

ISIS 

Intelligent Safety Integration 
System 

VVT 

Valvetronic 

ISOFIX 

Standardized Mounts For 

Child Restraints 

WIM 

Wiper Module 

IVM 

Integrated Power supply 
module 

ZGM 

Central Gateway Module 

KHI 

Interface For Headphones 



KOMBI 

Instrument Cluster 



LM 

Light Module 



LVA 

Air Supply Unit 



MAL 

Center Armrest 



MMC 

Multi-Media Changer 



NAVI 

Navigation Module 



PDC 

Park Distance Control 



PGS 

Passive Go System 



PM 

Power Module 





E65 Introduction 















































