Table of Contents 

E65 BUS SYSTEMS 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

Bus Systems.3 

E65 Bus System Overview. 6 

E65 Sub-Bus Systems.7 

Gateways.10 

Controller Area Network (CAN Bus).16 

E65 K-CAN.16 

PT-CAN.20 

Fiber-Optic Bus Lines.21 

Fiber-Optic use in the E65.28 

MOST Bus.31 

Byteflight .45 

Diagnosis Bus.49 

Review Questions.51 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 11/01 

















E65 BUS SYSTEMS 
Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001- Start of Production 


Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Identify the various bus systems used in the E65. 

• Define the purpose of a “Gateway” module. 

• Describe the structure of the various bus systems. 

• Explain the purpose of Terminal Resistors in the CAN bus. 

• Understand the reason why fiber-optic bus systems are used in the E65. 

• Describe how fiber-optic cables can be damaged due to improper handling. 


2 

E65 Bus Systems 





Introduction 


The safety and comfort of vehicles are continually advancing. Legal requirements relating to 
fuel consumption and exhaust emissions can now only be met by the use of more elec¬ 
tronic components (e.g. control units, actuators and sensors) in vehicles. 

Processes controlled by individual control units are increasingly being linked to one anoth¬ 
er via bus systems. That means that the processes are shared together and control units 
interact with one another in a coordinated manner. 

As a result, the exchange of data across the vehicle's electrical system is increasing rapid¬ 
ly and because of that exchange of information, many new functions are being made 
possible. The consequences of this trend are greater vehicle safety, 
superior ride comfort and improved fuel economy. However, such continuing advances can 
no longer be achieved with conventional electrical systems. 

Limits of Conventional Electrical Systems 

The increasing amount of desirable electronic components in cars is limited by a number 
of factors. These factors include: 

• Increasing complexity of wiring systems 

• Higher production costs 

• Increasing demands on available space in the vehicle 

• Extreme complexity of component configuration 

• Reduced reliability of the overall system 

In order to minimize such disadvantages, bus systems are now being used for the vehicle's 
electrical system. 


Bus systems 

Bus systems enable the individual control units on the vehicle to be networked with one 
another via "serial interfaces." The use of bus systems in vehicle electrical systems provides 
a number of advantages. 


3 

Bus Systems 



Advantages of Bus Systems 

• Greater reliability of the overall system 

• Simplification of wiring systems 

• Reduction of the number of separate cables 

• Reduction of the cross-sectional areas of wiring looms 

• Greater versatility in terms of cable routing 

• Multiple use of sensors in the vehicle, thereby reducing the number of duplicated 
sensors 

• Use of shared interfaces by signals, thereby reducing the number of interfaces 

• Transmission of complex data 

• Greater flexibility in the event of system modifications 

• Data volume can be expanded at any time 

• Flexible configuration of control units 

• Adoption of new functions for customers 

• Efficient diagnosis 

• Lower hardware costs 

The E65 introduces three (3) new bus systems. Two of them are based on fiber-optic tech¬ 
nology. The two new fiber-optic bus systems are called: 

MOST bus (Media Orientated System Transport) and 11 byteflight" (safety systems bus). 

The third bus system consists of two insulated copper twisted-pair wires and is called the: 

K-CAN (Body-Controller Area Network). The K-CAN bus replaces the single wire K bus 
(body bus) and is subdivided into two sections: the K-CAN System and the K-CAN 
Periphery. 

The powertrain control units continue to use a CAN bus called the PT-CAN, except that 
now it is a three wire bus to include a KL-15 wake-up wire. 

Comparison of E38 and E65 bus systems 


E38 

E65 

CAN 

PT-CAN 

1-Bus 


K-Bus 

K-CAN System 

P-Bus 

K-CAN Periphery 

- MOST Bus 

- byteflight 

D-Bus 

D-bus 


4 

E65 Bus Systems 







Bus Communication Speeds 

The communication speed of the busses in the E65 have been increased significantly to 
handle the demand placed on them by a greater number of control units. 

Here is a comparison between the busses of the E38 and the E65. 


Model 

Bus 

Data Rate 

Structure 

E38 

l/K/P Bus 

9.6Kbps 

linear 


CAN 

500Kbps 

linear 


D-Bus 

9.6Kbps 

linear 

E65/E66 

K-CAN-S 

100Kbps 

linear 


K-CAN-P 

100Kbps 

linear 


PT-CAN 

500Kbps 

linear 


MOST 

22.5Mbps 

ring 


byteflight 

10Mbps 

star 


Sub-Busses 

9.6Kbps 

linear 


D-Bus 

115Kbps 

linear 


5 

E65 Bus Systems 








D^BUS 


E65 BUS SYSTEM 







T 


-1 



u_ 

LD 


(7 

CJ 


E 

if. 


l 



■ff 

35 




:■ 




CL 


U i 
< 











|_L 


p- 

£ 


f£ 


i 


i 



Li 


ii 


l_ 


V 

m 


£ 


> 

1- 




X 


KT-7323 


6 

E65 Bus Systems 


K-CANF K-CANS MOST btfufUgh C PT-CAN 











































































































































































E65 Sub-Bus Systems 

In addition to the bus systems, sub-bus systems are also used. These are subordinate ser¬ 
ial bus systems. Their functions correspond to those of the previous l/K bus. 

The following sub-bus systems are fitted on the E65: 

• Driver's door P bus (driver's door switch block periphery bus) 

• Engine LoCAN (engine Low CAN bus; link between DME and Valvetronic control unit) 

• Telcommander CAN (Phone board CAN) 

• M bus (air-conditioning motor bus) 

• DWA K bus (alarm system body bus) 

• BSD interface (bit-serial data interface) 

Driver’s Door P-Bus 


K-CAN $ 



P-Bus 


SB 




| $MhA 


$Mt3K 



TMFAT 


TM0R - 



ry 

FAtH 


TM 

5-TH 



3M-W 


S^lBF- 



hKl 




K-CAN P 


KT-7327 


The driver's door P bus passes the signals from the driver's-door switch block to the door 
module (e.g. functions window lift, child lock-out request, Sun shade). 


7 

E65 Bus Systems 





























Engine LoCAN 


PT-CAN 


LOCAN 










KT-7329 


The Engine LoCAN enables communication between the DME and the Valvetronic control 
unit. 

TelCommander CAN 

k-Can s 


TCICOMM 





MOST 


KT-7335 


The TelCommander CAN provides the link to the telephone control panel module. It is a 
two-wire cable. 


8 

E65 Bus Systems 

























































M-Bus 


K-tAN S 




|H*A 





A-iM 


CON 


1 

MF-A 


MF0F 









Mr-i -A 


VlrrabSH 


hd:;: 


diVF 





Muni-A 




Civ 


LJ-M 





BDhFA 


SCHE f 


l£.Z 


RLS 





MO 


MU 




SNC 


SMI 


WM 


KT-7330 


The M bus enables control of the various motors for the air conditioning system 


DWA K-Bus 


K-B119 



AHM 


CON 


L_ 

PD C 


EZV1 



HOC 





CIM 


RLS 



LM 


SNC 



LAVA 


SH 



IHKA 


WiM 


KT-7325 


The functions of the alarm system are split between the two control units (DWA and SINE), 
The alarm system K bus enables communication between those two control units. 


9 

E65 Bus Systems 


























































BSD 


PT-CAN 


BSD 


Gf=n 



oz| 



ALC 


EMF 



DD 


GRS 



DME 


□SC 



EOS 


£DCK 


KT-7324 


Communication via the BSD enables adjustment of the battery charging voltage, and com' 
munication between the DME and oil quality sensor for example. 


Gateways 

Introduction 

A gateway (GW) is an interface. It connects different bus systems within the vehicle's elec¬ 
trical system. It provides a means of ensuring the exchange of information in spite of 
differences in the rates of data transmission on the individual bus systems. Diagnostic 
access to the individual control units from a central point is made possible by the gateway. 

The gateway modules used in the E65 are the Car Access System (CAS), Control Display 
(MCGW-MOST/CAN gateway) and the Central Gateway Module (ZGM). 

Method of Operation 

The data transmitted by the various bus systems is received by the gateway. At this point, 
transmission rates, data and priority levels of the individual messages are filtered and tem¬ 
porarily stored if necessary. This requires a non-volatile memory. 


10 

E65 Bus Systems 


















Using gateway rules and conversion tables, the gateway converts the messages as 
required by the various bus systems concerned. The messages are then passed to the var¬ 
ious bus systems via which they reach their ultimate destinations (recipient control unit). If 
necessary, messages that are relatively less important are held in the gateway's memory 
and sent later. 





K£AH 


PT-KL -15 wake-up 
fill gibf 

KT-8136 


Overview of E65 gateways 





ft-CAN P K LAh S MOST 


ifyltf'fttifii PT-CAN 


KT-8293 


11 

E65 Bus Systems 

























































































































Examples of the Function of the Central Gateway Module (ZGM) 


The DME and DSC control units both place mes¬ 
sages on the PT-CAN. Those messages are 
received by the Central Gateway Module from 
the PT-CAN. The buffer memory on the Central 
Gateway Module temporarily stores the mes¬ 
sages from the PT-CAN. 


ZGM Buffer memory 



DSC 


DME 


2 incoming messages 
via the PT-CAN. 


& ^<£= 

Out going mes- 

They are converted by the Central Gateway sage on k-can 
Module according to specific gateway rules and 
conversion tables for the K-CAN System Bus. 

As the K-CAN System Bus is slower than the PT- 

CAN, the two messages are joined together and are sent out as one message. The mes¬ 
sages reach their destinations (IHKA/Kombi) via the K-CAN SYSTEM bus. 


Electronic Fuel Pump Control 

The DME calculates the delivery rate of fuel required on the basis of the vehicle's operating 
status. The figure calculated is sent in the form of a message to the SBSR (right B-pillar 
satellite). 

The original message (PT-CAN signal) is converted by the ZGM to a byteflight message 
(fibre-optic signal). From the ZGM, the message is passed via the byteflight to the SIM, 
which passes it to the SBSR. 

The electronic evaluation unit integrated in the SBSR converts the signal to a PWM signal. 
That PWM signal controls the electronic fuel pump (EKP). The required fuel delivery rate can 
now be provided by the electronic fuel pump. 


DME 


PT-CAH 


tiytefhijftt 




12 

E65 Bus Systems 


































Windscreen Wiper Function 

The driver operates the windscreen wiper switch (SWS) to initiate a wiper system function. 
The wiper switch is plugged directly into the Steering Column Switch Center Module (SZL). 

The SZL module analyzes the signals from the wiper switch and calculates which wiper sys¬ 
tem function has been selected by the driver. That information is placed on the byteflight in 
the form of a message. 

The Safety Information Module (SIM) receives the driver's instruction from the SZL and 
passes it on to the ZGM via the byteflight. The ZGM receives the message from the SIM 
and passes it on in its role as "gateway control unit" to the Wiper Module (WIM) via the K- 
CAN S. The wiper module performs the action requested by the driver (e.g. wipe or wash). 



KT-8527 


Optimum Charging Controlled by Power Module (PM) 

In order to drain as little energy as possible from the battery (particularly in the winter), the 
idling speed is increased at an early stage. This ensures that the battery charge level is kept 
high. If the charge level falls below the minimum required to be able to start the car, the 
idling speed is increased. 


The PM detects that the battery charge level is low and places a message to that effect on 
the K-CAN P. The Car Access System (CAS) passes the message on to the K-CAN S. The 
ZGM receives the message from the CAS and passes it on via the PT CAN in its role of 
"gateway control unit". 

The DME module receives the request to increase the engine speed over the PT-CAN. The 
DME passes that request on via the LoCAN to the Valvetronic control unit (WT). The 
Valvetronic control unit controls the output stage for the valvetronic motors to increase the 
engine idle speed accordingly. 



KT-8529 

13 

E65 Bus Systems 



















































Examples of CAS Gateway Function 
Seat Adjustment 

The driver operates the seat adjustment switch. The command is processed by the switch 
block and passed via a 3-core data line to the Center Console Control Center Module 
(BZM). The BZM places the message on the K-CAN S for the Car Access System (CAS). 

The CAS passes the message on in its role as "gateway control unit" to the driver's seat 
module (SMFA) via the K-CAN P. The seat module activates the required seat adjustment 
motor via its output stages. 



CA5 



KT-8525 


Electric Windows (FH) and Sunroof (SHD) 

Using the convenience open function, the windows and sunroof can be opened by press¬ 
ing the open button on the remote control. The commands from the remote control are 
received by the Car Access System (CAS). 

The CAS places the message on the K-CAN P and the K-CAN S. All 4 door modules 
(TM...) receive their messages from the K-CAN P, while the sunroof receives its message 
from the K-CAN S. The modules then activate their output stages to open the windows and 
sunroof. If the button on the remote control is released while the operation is still in 
progress, it is then immediately halted. In order to re-activate the convenience open/close 
function, the appropriate button on the remote control has to be pressed again. 



KT-8531 


14 

E65 Bus Systems 





Example of CD Gateway Function 
PDC 

The audible PDC warning is output via the audio system speakers. If the car gets close to 
an obstacle when the PDC is active, this is signalled by the relevant sensor to the PDC 
control unit via the bi-directional data line. The PDC control unit calculates the distance from 
the obstacle and places that information on the K-CAN S. 

The Control Display (CD) receives the message and passes it on in its role as "gateway con¬ 
trol unit" to the MOST bus. The Audio System Controller (ASK) receives the message from 
the CD and calculates from it the required signal tone and frequency. On the basis of that 
calculation, the ASK activates the mid-range speaker in the appropriate corner of the vehi¬ 
cle. The audible signal is superimposed (mixed) over the current audio sound (radio, CD, 
etc.). 




KT-8532 


15 

E65 Bus Systems 




Controller Area Network (CAN Bus) 


Introduction 

The CAN bus is a serial communications bus in which all connected control units can send 
as well as receive information. Data exchanges over a CAN operate at a rate of 100 to 
500Kbps. 

The CAN protocol was originally developed by Robert Bosch GMbH and the Intel corpora¬ 
tion in 1988 for use in the automotive electronics industry to provide a standardized, reli¬ 
able and cost-effective communications bus. 

The CAN bus was originally introduced on BMW automobiles in 1992 740i/iL as a data link 
between the DME and AGS control units. 

E65 K-CAN 

Introduction 

For the E65, the functions that were incorporated within the main bodyshell electrical sys¬ 
tem on the E38 have been distributed among a number of separate control units. Those 
control units and various new control units are connected to the K-CAN. 

The K-CAN is a new development and is subdivided into two sections, the K-CAN System 
and the K-CAN Peripherals. 

Examples of new control units and functions on the K-CAN are the Car Access System 
(CAS), the Centre Console Control Center module (BZM), the Rear Centre Console Control 
Center module (BZMF) and the Power Module (PM). 

K-CAN System/Peripherals 

The subdivision of the K-CAN into the sections "SYSTEM" and "PERIPHERALS" relieves 
the load on the bus because the number of vehicle components (control units/modules) is 
divided between two "independent" bus systems. 


16 

E65 Bus Systems 



Advantages of two K-CAN Busses 

• In a crash, it is possible that components could fail as a result of a short circuit on the 
K-CAN. The K-CAN Peripherals covers such at-risk areas. If the K-CAN Peripherals 
were to fail, the K-CAN System would still remain functional. 

• Addition of new vehicle components to either bus is possible at any time. (Maximum 40 
control units per bus) 

• Low data load on the bus system from bus users due to division into two sections. 

• Greater reliability. 


□ gus 










TVF*T 


T>.' EFT 



rf r--1»- 





idP-- 





hhl 


py 



li CAN P K-CAN } 'JOBT 




HT-CAN 

KT-7805 


17 

E65 Bus Systems 






































































































































































Voltage Level on the K-CAN. 

If the CAN High voltage level changes from low to high, this represents a logical 1. If the 
voltage level changes back to low, this represents a logical 0. The voltage level on the CAN 
is in the range of IV to 5V. 



KT-6876 


Note: 

The voltage can alter as a result of a defective terminal resistor, for example. This has an effect on 
the CAN system. Communication between bus nodes no longer functions properly. 

Terminal Resistor 

An electrical conductor through which current passes always has an ohmic, an inductive 
and a capacitive impedance. When data is transmitted from point "A" to point "B" over a 
CAN line, the total sum of that impedance has an effect on the transmission of that data. 

The higher the transmission frequency, the greater the effect of the inductive and capaci¬ 
tive impedance. The result of this can be that when the signal reaches the end of the data 
transmission line, it is unidentifiable. For that reason, the data line is "modified" by terminal 
resistors so as to preserve the original signal. 

The inductive impedance is produced by phenomena such as the coil effect of the wire. The 
capacitive impedance for example is produced by the effect of routing the wire parallel to 
the vehicle body. The terminal resistors on a bus system vary. They are generally depen¬ 
dent on the following parameters: 

• Frequency of data transmission on the bus system. 

• Inductive/capacitive load on the transmission channel. 

• Length of the data transmission cable (The longer the cable is, the greater is the 
inductive component). 


18 

E65 Bus Systems 
























The control units are categorized either as basic control units or other control units. 
Categorization is performed on the basis of the impedance level. Basic control units are 
those which always have to be fitted in the car regardless of equipment level or market. 
Other control units are those that are dependent on the options fitted. 



The terminal resistor values for the K-CAN system 
are 820 Ohm for “Basic” controllers and 12K Ohms 
for all other control units. 

For the E65 the Basic controllers are: 

K-CAN S: LM, IHKA, CAS, CD, ZGM, KOMBI. 

K-CAN P: CAS, TMFAT, TMBFT, HKL 

The resistors are located inside of the control units. 


Wake-Up on the K-CAN 

The control units on the K-CAN network are "awakened" via the bus. For that reason, it 
has been possible to dispense with the previous function of terminal 15 as wake-up line. 
The wake-up message is passed directly to the control unit output stage by the CAS mod¬ 
ule receiver. The output stage switches terminal 30 on and the unit is woken up. 


19 

E65 Bus Systems 






































PT (Powertrain) CAN 


Introduction 

The PT CAN is the fastest CAN bus in the E65. It is an existing bus system. PT CAN 
stands for powertrain CAN. It links all control units/modules associated with the power- 
train. All the bus nodes are connected in parallel with one another. In contrast with the pre¬ 
vious bus, (two-core twisted pair) it now has three wires. The third wire of the bus cable is 
used as the wake-up line and has nothing to do with the actual CAN bus function. 


Voltage Level on the PT CAN 

When the bus is inactive, the bus high and low 
levels are at 2.5 V. 

When the bus becomes active, the CAN Low 
voltage level changes to low (1.5 V) and the 
CAN High level changes to high (4 V), thus rep¬ 
resenting logical 1. 


v 



PT CAN Terminal Resistors 

The PT CAN uses two terminal resistors to establish the correct inductive and capacitive 
impedance in the communication lines. Two 120 Ohm resistors are located in the wire har¬ 
ness (no longer in the control units as on previous systems). The resistors are located: 


• Behind the right front kick-panel 
trim. (A-pillar) 

• Below the rear seat. 

The resistance is measured by con¬ 
necting the appropriate adapter to any 
of the modules on the PT-CAN and 
measuring resistance between CAN-H 
and CAN-L. 



The measured resistance should be 
close to 60 Ohms. 


PT-CAN 


KT-8313 


20 

E65 Bus Systems 





























Failsafe Characteristics 

If the PT CAN goes into emergency mode it is no longer available for the engine control sys¬ 
tem. However, it can still provide communication between the other bus nodes even if: 

• One of the CAN leads (cores) is broken- one of the CAN leads (cores) is shorting to 
ground. 

• One of the CAN leads (cores) is shorting to the power supply B+. 

"Wake-up" Lead in PT CAN Network 

The PT CAN for the E65 is now a three wire CAN, the third wire is a hard wire KL-15 sig¬ 
nal used to wake up the powertrain control units. The "wake-up" lead has nothing to do 
with the actual PT CAN function. A wake-up telegram is still transmitted by the CAS via the 
ZGM - PT-CAN as a CAN message. 


Fiber-Optic Bus Lines 

Introduction 

Transmission of data, voice and images involves ever increasing volumes of data. Fiber¬ 
optic technology (already in use in tele-communications and industrial installations) is capa¬ 
ble of handling such large volumes of data while at the same time offering additional 
advantages. 

High data transmission rates in copper wires cause electromagnetic interference. This can 
interfere with other vehicle systems. Compared with copper wires, fiber-optic lines require 
less space and are lighter in weight for the same transmission band width. In contrast with 
copper wires, which carry digital or analog voltage signals as the means of transmitting 
data, fibre-optic busses transmit light. BMW uses plastic (POF-polymer optical fibers) 
cables manufactured by Dow-Corning. 

Advantages of Plastic Fiber-Optic Lines 

Because of the large cross section of the fibers, the positioning of the fiber core does not 
present a significant technical problem in production. 

Relatively Low Sensitivity to Dust. Even with the most careful precautions, dust can find 
its way onto the surface and alter the amount of light entering/leaving the optical fibre. Small 
amounts of contamination do not result in communication failure. 


21 

E65 Bus Systems 



Easy to Work With. The fiber (core) is approximately 1 mm thick and easier to handle 
than glass optical fiber with a thickness of approximately 62.5 (j.mm, for example. In com¬ 
parison with a glass fiber-optic cable, it is considerably easier to handle. The simplest way 
of putting it is that glass breaks and plastic doesn't. 

Processing. The optical fiber material used by BMW is polymethyl methacrylate 
(PMMA) which, in comparison with glass optical fibers, is relatively easy to cut, smooth 
down or melt - which offers major advantages with regard to the production of wiring looms 
and in repair work. 

Economical Costs. All of the above characteristics of plastic fiber-optic cables ultimately 
make them relatively cheap to connect to transmitters and receivers (connectors, casings). 
The ease with which the fiber ends can be prepared makes assembly and installation in 
the field in particular very economical to perform. 


Structure of a Fiber-Optic line 


Light source provided 
by control unit transmitter 


1 





2 


3 


KT-7687 



(1) 

Insulation 

(2) 

Cladding 

(3) 

Fiber core 


22 

E65 Bus Systems 


KT-8939 







Principle of Light Transmission 

The electrical signal generated by the control unit is converted into an optical signal by an 
internal transmitter module and sent along the fiber optic bus. The fiber core carries the light 
beam. 


In order to prevent the light escaping, the fibre core is enclosed by a cladding layer. The 
cladding is reflective and reflects the light back into the core, thus making it possible to 
transmit light along the fibre. 


In this way, the light passes along the optical fibre and is ultimately converted back into an 
electrical signal by a receiver module in side the recipient control unit. 



23 

E65 Bus Systems 
















Light Attenuation 

Attenuation refers to the reduction in strength of a signal. The light transmitted along the 
optical fiber becomes weaker the further it has to travel. Attenuation is usually measured in 
decibel units (dB). In fiber optic cables attenuation is measured in terms of the number of 
decibels per unit of length (foot/meter etc.) The less the attenuation per unit distance the 
more efficient the cable. 

Average attenuation in the E65 fiber optic bus lines: 

• ,5dB at each connector 

• ,3dB for each meter of cable 

(1) Transmitter Diode 

(2) Cladding 

(3) Fiber core 

(4) Receiver Diode 



Special considerations when handling fibre-optic cables 

Excessive attenuation can be caused by the following reasons: 

• Bends in the fiber-optic cable with a radius smaller than 50mm. 

• Kinks in the fiber-optic cable. 

• Squashed or compressed fiber-optic cable. 

• Damaged insulation on fiber-optic cable. 

• Stretched fiber-optic cable. 

• Dirt or grease on the exposed cable ends. 

• Scratches on the exposed cable ends. 

• Overheated fiber-optic cable. 


24 

E65 Bus Systems 













Bending radius 

The plastic fibre-optic cable should not be bent to a radius of less than 50 mm. That is 
roughly equivalent to the diameter of a soft-drink can. Bending the plastic fiber-optic cable 
any tighter than that can impair its function or even damage it irreparably. 



Light can escape at points where the 
cable is bent too tightly. 

This is caused by the fact that the light 
beam strikes the interface between 
core and cladding at too steep an 
angle and is not reflected. 


KT-8782 


Fibre-optic cables must not under any circumstances be kinked when fitted because this 
damages the cladding and the fibre core. The light is then partially dispersed at the point 
where the fibre is kinked and transmission loss results. Even just kinking an optical fibre 
once very briefly is enough to damage it! 



25 

E65 Bus Systems 












Compression Points and Stretching 

Compression points must also be avoid¬ 
ed because they can permanently deform 
the light-conducting cross section of the 
optical fiber. 

Light is then lost during transmission. 


KT-8781 



Pulling fibre-optic cables too tight can also cause compression points as it increases the 
lateral pressure on the cable. The effect is exaggerated at higher temperatures because 
the cable straps then become tighter as well. The fiber-optic cable is then constricted, the 
attenuation increases at that point and function is severely impaired. 

Overstretching of fibre-optic cables, 
caused by pulling for example, can 
destroy them. 

Stretching reduces the cross-sectional 
area of the fibre core. Restricted passage 
of light (attenuation) is the result. 


KT-8785 



26 

E65 Bus Systems 











Abrasion Points 

In contrast with copper wires, 
abrasion of fiber-optic cables 
does not cause a short circuit. 


Instead, loss of light or intrusion 
of external light occurs. The sys¬ 
tem then suffers interference or 
fails completely. 


KT-8940 

Dirty or Scratched Fiber-Optic Cable Ends 

Another potential source of problems are dirty or scratched cable ends. Although the ends 
of the cables are protected against accidental contact, they can still be damaged by incor¬ 
rect handling. 

Dirt on the end of an optical fiber will prevent the light entering/exiting the fiber. The dirt 
absorbs the light and the attenuation is then too great. 

Dirty Scratched 




KT-8854 KT-8855 


Scratches on the cable ends scatter light striking them so that the amount of light reach¬ 
ing the receiver is reduced. 


27 

E65 Bus Systems 











Overheated Fibre-Optic Cables 

The demands of the new technology even have to be taken into account in subsequent 
repair work such as painting. As fiber-optic cables are damaged by heat, care must be 
taken to ensure that the maximum permissible temperature of 85 °C is not exceeded when 
drying paintwork. 

Notes on Working With Fiber-Optic Cables 

Extreme care is required when working on vehicle wiring harnesses, unlike copper wiring 
damage does not immediately result in a fault but may come to the owner's notice later. 

Notes on Repairing Fiber-Optic Cables The MOST fiber-optic cable may be repaired 
once between each control unit. The byteflight cannot be repaired at present. A special 
crimping tool will be available to the service department for crimping the new "optical fiber 
sleeves." The precise procedure are described in the instructions for using the crimping 
tool. 


Fiber optic use in the E65 

Two optical bus systems have been developed for the E65: 

• MOST bus 

• byteflight 

The light wavelength is 650 nm (red light). 

In order that the fiber-optic cables for the various bus systems can be distinguished, four 
different colors are currently used: 

• Yellow byteflight 

• Green MOST 

• Orange service replacement line for byteflight (byteflight is not repairable). 

• Black service repair line for MOST. 


28 

E65 Bus Systems 



MOST Bus 

The MOST bus transmits all data required by the 
communication and information systems in the vehi¬ 
cle. MOST stands for Media Orientated Systems 
Transport. 

The connection between the individual control units 
is provided by a ring bus which transports the data in 
one direction only. That means that a control unit 
always has two optical fiber cables - one for the 
transmitter and one for the receiver. 

The MOST control units are linked exclusively by 
fiber-optic connections. Therefore, the transmitter 
and receiver diodes can be positioned anywhere 
within the control unit as optical fibers are used inside 
the control unit as well. 



MOST KT-8788 


example: ASK 



As a result of the receiver modules 
being set far into the control unit, the 
fiber ends can be set back inside the 
wiring loom connector. 

This provides additional protection for 
the delicate fiber ends. 


(1) Fiber optic connector 

(2) Socket on control unit 


The 2-pin fibre-optic module is identi¬ 
cal on all types of connectors. 


(3) Fiber optic “jumper” inside of control unit 


(4) Receiver module with diode 


Component families and connectors 
are defined as standards within the 
MOST® consortium. 

Pin 1 is always assigned to the 
incoming optical fiber and Pin 2 
to the outgoing optical fiber. 


Typical connector used 



KT-8852 


29 

E65 Bus Systems 







































D-BUS 


byteflight 

In contrast with the MOST bus, the byteflight is a star 
bus which transports data in two directions. That means 
that there is only one fiber-optic cable for each control 
unit. 




The transmitter is immediately above the receiver. 

Both are integrated in the control unit's connector strip. 

Due to those differences from the MOST bus, a different 
connector system is required. 

Since the byteflight is connected directly to the diode, 
the protruding fiber end has to be protected by a flap. 

This is automatically opened as the connectors are 
joined up. 








aeaL 





KT-8228 


byteflight Connector for satellite 




30 

E65 Bus Systems 







































MOST bus 


Introduction 

MOST is communications technology for multimedia applications, specially developed for 
use in the automobile. MOST stands for "Media Oriented System Transport". 

The need for increasingly high-quality entertainment services (information and entertain¬ 
ment) makes high demands on vehicle developers. Digital information and entertainment 
services should be available to all vehicle occupants at any time they wish to use them. 
Available services include: 

• Telephone 

• Navigation services 

• Telematics and ASSIST, Internet services (E-mail, web pages) 

• Audio functions (radio, music cassettes, compact discs, CDchangers) 

• Video (DVD) 

The information and entertainment services are required by different vehicle occupants at 
one time. This means they must be able to run parallel and synchronously without disrupt¬ 
ing one another. The data transmission therefore requires a high band-width (data transfer 
rate). 

Approx. 4 years ago, the following companies came together to develop a multimedia net¬ 
work to series maturity: 

• Audi 

• Becker 

• BMW 

• DaimlerChrysler 

In 2001, MOSTCo (Cooperation) has approx. 65 members. In addition to all the European 
and all the American manufacturers of vehicles, the Japanese automobile industry is 
also represented by Toyota and Nissan. This means that MOSTCo unites approx. 90% of 
all the automobile production in the world. A large number of suppliers also work with 
MOSTCo. MOST is on track to becoming the standard for automotive multimedia services. 


31 

E65 Bus Systems 



System Overview 
MOST Technology 

Until very recently, only very few entertainment-related control units were networked. In the 
course of the development, the number of components increased continuously. 

In addition, the scope of functions of individual components has been extended consider¬ 
ably. In particular, however, completely new logical networking means that all the compo¬ 
nents are growing to become a system: individual functions work together and produce a 
high-quality overall system. This results in significant growth in system complexity. 

This new dimension of system complexity can no longer be managed using the existing bus 
systems. 



E65 





MOST Multimedia Network 

MOST technology meets 2 essential requirements: 

1. The MOST bus transports control data as well as data from audio, video, navigation and 
other services (SMS=Short Message Service, TMC ^Traffic Message Channel, in other mar¬ 
kets) . 

2. MOST technology provides a logical framework model for control of the variety and com¬ 
plexity of data: the MOST Application Framework. The MOST Application Framework 
organizes the functions of the overall system. 

MOST is able to control and dynamically manage functions that are distributed in the vehi¬ 
cle. 


32 

E65 Bus Systems 





























Principle of a Multimedia Network 

An important feature of a multimedia network is that it transports not only control data and 
sensor data, e.g. like the CAN bus and I bus (instrumentation bus). A multimedia network 
can also carry digital audio and video signals and graphics as well as other data services. 

Information transmitted on MOST network 



Advantages of the Multimedia Network 

All data can be transported across a shared network. This offers the following benefits: 

• Additional signal wiring harnesses are eliminated. 

• The only addition many control units need is the power supply. 

• As each participant (= each control unit) has access to all the 
data, cost-intensive assemblies for signal distribution can be 
eliminated. 

Different data formats also have different requirements for transmission regarding both 
mechanism (synchronous or asynchronous data) and the required band-width 
(baud or bits/second). The MOST format is able to meet these requirements to a satisfac¬ 
tory extent. 


33 

E65 Bus Systems 





Data Quantities 

The aim is that in the near future all vehicle occupants can call up different services at one 
time, e.g.: 

• The driver calls up navigation information. 

• The passenger talks on the telephone. 

• A rear seat passenger listens to a CD. 

• The other rear seat passenger watches a DVD video. 

The data quantities this requires produce the following example: 


Application 

Band-width 

Data 

Data Format 

Am-FM 

Check-Control 

Audio CD 

Telephone 

SVS 

1.4Mbit/s 

1 channel stereo 

Synchronous 

TV 

1.4Mbit/s 

Audio 

Synchronous 

CD Video 

1.4Mbit/s 

MPEG 1 video 


DVD 

2.8-11 Mbit/s 

MPEG 2 video 

Synchronous and 
asynchronous 

Navigation 

250kbit/s 

Vector data (arrows) 

Asynchronous 


1.4Mbit/s 

MPEG 1 video (Maps) 

Synchronous 


1.4Mbit/s 

Voice commands 

synchronous 

Telematic services 

A few bytes 


asynchronous 


Using MOST, there is already the capability today to transport these large data quantities. 


34 

E65 Bus Systems 





















Functional Description 
Data Transport 

MOST currently offers a band-width of 22.5 Mbits/s . In the next generation, the band-width 
will be increased to 50 and then later to 150 Mbits/s (as of approx. 2002). 

In order to meet the different requirements of the applications regarding data transport, 
each MOST message is divided into three parts: 

• Control data 


• Asynchronous data: e.g. navigation system, arrow 
representation 

• Synchronous data: e.g. audio, video signals 


Data Transport on the MOST 


A 



Different data is “packaged” 
and then sent as one mes¬ 
sage to be “unwrapped” by 
next device on the MOST 
ring. 


Control Data 

Asynchronous 

Synchronous data 

Control Data 

Data 


700 kB/s 

e.g Navigation (arrow 

Audio 

2700 S/S 

CAN bus 

display) 

Video 


KT-9388 


The control data controls the functions and devices in the network. The information can be 
compared to CAN bus data. 


The control data has a band-width of 700 Kbit/s. That corresponds to around 2700 mes¬ 
sages per second. 

For the data transmission of synchronous and/or asynchronous data, there is a total of 60 
bytes. The limit is variable: e.g. 20 bytes of synchronous data and 40 bytes of asynchro¬ 
nous data. 


35 

E65 Bus Systems 






Optical Bus 

The MOST bus is a plastic optical waveguide. The MOST bus is coded in green in the E65. 
The light wavelength is 650 nm (red light). The MOST bus requires the following converter 
components: 

• Optical transmitter 

• Optical receiver 

Each control unit of the MOST framework contains a transmitter and a receiver. The trans¬ 
mitter and receiver have been developed by BMW. The low closed circuit (rest) current 
properties of the transmitter and receiver enable optical wake-up by the MOST bus. 


Optical Transmitter 

A driver is fitted in the transmitter. The 
driver energizes an LED (light-emitting 
diode). 

The LED transmits light signals on the 
MOST bus (650 nm light, i.e. red, visi¬ 
ble light). The repeat frequency is 44.1 
KHz. 


Transmitter 



Light 

<=l 




<=l 


KT-9389 


The sensing frequency on a CD player and for audio is 44.1 MHz; this means than no addi¬ 
tional buffer is required, yet another reason why this bus system is so efficient for multi- 
media. 


Optical Receiver 

The receiver receives the data from the 
MOST bus. The receiver consists of: 

• An LED 

• A pre-amplifier 

• A wake-up circuit 


Receiver 



JW UIIB Ull 

KT-9389 




• An interface that converts the optical signal into an electrical signal 


The receiver contains a diode that converts the optical signal into an electrical signal. This 
signal is amplified and further processed at the MOST network interface. 


36 

E65 Bus Systems 




























































Control Unit/Control Unit Connection 

The MOST ring is composed of optical point-to-point connections between 2 control units. 
Each control unit has a network interface. The network interface consists of: 

Example 

^Navigatioi^^l 

Network interface 

NetServices SW I 


Most 

transceiver 


Optical Optical 

receiver transmitter 


-> -i <-» 

MOST Fiber Optic cable 

KT-9397 

• An opto-electrical converter (optical waveguide receiver, already mentioned). 

• An opto-electrical converter (optical waveguide transmitter, already mentioned). 

• A MOST transceiver (interface between the optical waveguide receiver/transmitter and 
the electronic network driver). 

• A network driver, the so-called NetServices. 

The NetServices run on a microcontroller (main computer in the control unit) 

On the application level, a control unit in the MOST framework contains stand-alone func¬ 
tion units, so-called function blocks. Examples of function blocks include: 

• Tuners 

• Amplifiers 

• CD players 

A control unit can contain several function blocks at one time, e.g. the AVT contains the 
functions: 


svs 


Network interface 

NetServices SW 


Most 

transceiver 


Optical 



receiver 


Optical 
transmitter 


• Antenna 

• Amplifier 

• Tuner 


37 

E65 Bus Systems 









































Interfaces 


P.-CMH s 


The following contains a brief summary of the tasks of 
the connected control units in the MOST framework: 

Control Display 

The Control Display is the system master of all MOST 
bus functions. 

The Control Display is the power master. It wakes up 
the bus and is responsible for switching it off (power 
down). 

Audio System Controller (ASK) 

The audio system controller has the following controller 
functions: 

• Connection master 

• Network master 

• Audio master 



KT-9396 

MOST 


More detailed information can be found in the Entertainment and Communication chapter. 


CD Changer Audio (CDC) 

The CD changer is a slave control unit in the MOST framework. 

Navigation System (NAV 01) 

The control unit of the navigation system has controller tasks and slave functions in the 
MOST framework. 


Slave Control Units 

The following control units are slave control units: 

• Kombi (control unit of the instrument cluster) 

• AVT 

• LOGIC7 

• SVS Speech processing system 

• Telephone 


38 

E65 Bus Systems 

































































Diagnosis 

If faults occur in the MOST network, the corresponding fault code memory entries can be 
read out. 

• Receiver has not accepted a message 
(Error_NAK) 

• Ring break diagnosis carried out 
(Error_Ring_Diagnosis) 

• Requesting control unit receives no reply although the relevant 
control unit is present (Error_Device_No_Answer) 

Ring Break Diagnosis 

When a defect occurs between two controllers, communication on the MOST is interrupt¬ 
ed. This is referred to as a “Ring break”. With a ring break three patterns indicating defects 
can occur: 

• Defective control unit transmission diode, 

• Defective control unit receiver diode, 

• Defective fiber-optic cables. 

These defects can also occur in combination. With a possible ring break, the first two con¬ 
trollers must be found, between those the ring break is present. This is determined with 
the help of the ring break Test Module in the Diagnosis Program of the DISplus/GT-1. To 
clearly locate the ring break, examination with the fiber-optic cable testing set (OPPS) must 
be performed. 


39 

E65 Bus Systems 



Communication Direction in MOST structure 


K-CAN-System 


ZGM 

Central Gateway 
Module 


CD 

Contra Display 


KDMBI 

imstnjirorrt Clustt 


CE 

Audio CD 

>c 

Chongei 



AVT 

Antenna Amplifier 
Tuner 


r 

Logic 7 

AudK) Ampler 

Tbtf hi-fi 


k 

svs 

Speech Por.fis-irQ 
System 


OPPS Connector 


ASK 

Ajc o Syslem 
Controller 


The signal transmission direction of the MOST in a vehicle 
with full equipment takes place starting at the Control 
Display and travels serially towards the CD changer, 
Antenna tuner, Hi-fi amplifier, Speech Processing Module, 
Navigation, Multi-media Changer, telephone, Audio 
System Controller, Instrument Cluster and again back to 
the Control Display. 



NAVI 

Navigation System 



Important!!! The component sequence of the MOST controllers in the ETM is incor¬ 
rect when it comes to signal transmission direction. The correct sequence is indi¬ 
cated above! 


40 

E65 Bus Systems 











































Relative Node Position 11 0 11 

The voltage supply of the MOST controllers is switched off (battery 

disconnected), afterwards again switched on (attach battery), then the MOST controllers 

go into the so-called "ring break mode": 


All MOST controllers send light at the same time to their successor in the ring. Every MOST 
controller then examines whether it receives light at its receiver diode. The controller which 
does not recognize light by its receiver stores the relative node number of 0 in its error 
memory. Thus, the ring interruption lies between the controller with the relative node num¬ 
ber of 0 and the controller that lies before it in the ring. 

Example 1 

In the audio system controller (ASK) is located the relative node position 0. Then the ring 
break lies between the ASK and the controller that is before the ASK in the MOST ring (with 
vehicle fully equipped: Telephone). 

To locate a ring break between two controllers, the controller which registered the relative 
node position 0 must be found. If the Ring break in the MOST group is currently present, 
only the Instrument Cluster and the Control Display can communicate with the diagnosis. 
This is possible because those two controllers are also attached on the K-CAN SYSTEM 
bus. 

Since the signal transmission takes place in one direction, when the ring is interrupted there 
is no communication with the other controllers. Thus, the controller with the relative node 
position of 0 stored cannot be determined. Nevertheless, with a ring break, the two con¬ 
trollers between which the ring break is present may be determined. This is accomplished 
by a further method that is implemented in the MOST controllers: 


The controller that lies after the one with the relative node position of 0 stores the relative 
node position of 1, the next controller in the ring stores position 2, etc. 


Example 2 

If in the Audio System Controller (ASK) is located the relative node position 0. Then the rel¬ 
ative node position 1 is in the Instrument Cluster and in the Control Display would be the 
relative node position 2. The relative node position 2 of the Control Display (MCGW 
MOST/CAN gateway) can be read using the diagnosis. With the help of the relative node 
position in the Control Display and the knowledge of the installed MOST equipment in the 
vehicle, the location of the break can be determined. Simply work backwards: 


41 

E65 Bus Systems 












• Relative node position Control Display: 2 

• Relative node position Instrument Cluster: 1 

• Relative node position Audio System Controller: 0 

(The ring interruption lies between the controller whose stored relative node number is 0 
and the controller that comes before it in the MOST network!) 

Important!!! 

When counting backwards from the Control Display, for the Multimedia Changer and the 
navigation system controllers a counting jump of 2 controllers are made! (Each con¬ 
troller counts as 2 nodes) This is described best with the help of a further example: 

Example 3 

If in the Control Display is stored the relative node number of 9, then based on a fully 
equipped vehicle: 

• Relative node position Control Display: 9 

• Relative node position Instrument Cluster: 8 

• Relative node position Audio System Controller: 7 

• Relative node position Telephone: 6 

• Relative node position Multimedia Changer: 4 (jump 2 nodes) 

• Relative node position Video Module: 3 

• Relative node position Navigation system: 1 (jump 2 nodes) 

• Relative node position Speech Processing module: 0 

(Ring interruption lies between the Speech Processing Module whose relative node 
number is 0 and the Logic 7 amplifier that lies before it). 

Important!!! 

A deviation to the above scenario can arise for the relative node positions of 0 and 2 in the 
Control Display: 


42 

E65 Bus Systems 






Important!! 

The relative node positions are counted starting from the Control Display, backwards to the 
controller with the relative node position 0. For the correct counting method, first it must 
be determined which controllers are installed in the MOST group. 

Example 4 

MOST controllers vehicle equipment: Full equipment without Multimedia Changer and 
Speech Processing Module. In the Control Display is stored the relative node number of 9, 
counting backwards results in: 

• Relative node position Control Display: 9 

• Relative node position Instrument Cluster: 8 

• Relative node position Audio System Controller: 7 

• Relative node position Telephone: 6 

• Relative node position Video module: 5 

• Relative node position Navigation System: 3 (jump 2 nodes!) 

• Relative node position Amplifier: 2 

• Relative node position Antenna Tuner: 1 

• Relative node position CD changer: 0 

(Ring interruption lies between the CD Changer whose relative node number is 0 and the 
Control Display that lies before it.) 


43 

E65 Bus Systems 





Repair of the MOST Fiber-Optic Cables 

The MOST bus may only be repaired (spliced) once between 2 control units, otherwise the 
attenuation may become too much and disrupt communication. 

Central 

Display 



This diagram describes the 
approximate length of the fiber 
optic cable from one controller 
to the next. 

The chart to the right provides 
maximum attenuation values 
based on the cable length. 



The MOST bus may only be repaired using the prescribed special tool (crimping pliers) and 
special connectors. 


44 

E65 Bus Systems 






























byteflight 

Introduction 


O-BUS 


The permanently increasing complexity of in-car electronics 
and the rapidly growing amount of sensors, actuators and 
electronic control units, places higher demands on 
high-speed data communication protocols. 

Safety critical systems need quick “thinking” protocols with 
fault-tolerant behavior. The need for on-board diagnostics 
calls for flexible use of bandwidth and an ever-increasing 
number of functions. 

None of the communication solutions available on the market 
until now have been able to fulfill all these demands. 

To solve these problems, BMW together with several semi¬ 
conductor companies have developed byteflight a new pro¬ 
tocol for safety-critical applications in automotive vehicles. 

The byteflight is the bus system used exclusively for the ISIS 
system. 





SASL 



SASR 


SIM 


5TVL 



STVR 



SSVL 



SSVR 










KT-7785 


Design 

The Intelligent Safety Integration System (ISIS) consists, depending on equipment level, of 
up to 11 satellites (control units), the Safety Information Module (SIM) and the Central 
Gateway Module (ZGM). Seven of the eleven satellites contain crash detection sensors. 


In the event of an accident, the necessary restraint systems have to be activated within a 
fraction of a second in order to provide the maximum amount of protection for the vehicle's 
occupants. 


The system also has to ensure that the restraint systems are not deployed accidentally. In 
order to ensure that the ISIS meets the requirements placed upon it, large volumes of data 
have to be exchanged between the control units. This is achieved by means of an extreme¬ 
ly high data transmission rate. 

The data is exchanged via a bus system. In order to protect the signals traveling along the 
bus system from interference caused by electrical or magnetic fields, the ISIS system does 
not use copper bus wires but optical fibers. 


45 

E65 Bus Systems 





























The layout of the ISIS takes the form of a star pattern. The Safety Information Module (SIM) 
is at the centre of the system. Arranged radially around it are the satellite modules. 

Each of the eleven satellites is connected to the SIM by a fibre-optic cable. Each of the 
satellites contains a transmitter/receiver module. 

The SIM contains twelve transmitter and receiver modules. All information from each of the 
satellites is made available to every other satellite by the SIM. Each individual fibre-optic 
cable in the byteflight bus system is used for bi-directional data transmission. 

Function 

Transmitter/Receiver Module (SE) 

The transmitter/receiver module is a module that can convert electrical signals into optical 
signals and transmit them via optical fibers. Every satellite has an electrical-optical 
transmitter/ receiver module. 


Intelligent Star Coupler 



KT-8948 


The transmitter/receiver modules are connected individually via the byteflight to the 
Intelligent Star Coupler in the SIM. The SIM also contains a transmitter/receiver module for 
each satellite. 


Transmitter/Receiver modules 



KT-8949 


All information transmitted across the byteflight is in the form of data telegrams sent by 
means of light pulses. The transmitter/ receiver modules in the SIM receive the light pulses 
from the various satellites. The Intelligent Star Coupler sends the data telegrams to all satel¬ 
lites. Data transmission is possible in both directions. 


46 

E65 Bus Systems 














Satellites 



The transmitter/receiver (SE) module contains the LED for the driver circuit and the receiv¬ 
er amplifier for converting the optical signals into digital signals. It also has an integral trans¬ 
mission quality monitoring circuit. 

If one of the following faults occurs on one of the fiber-optic cables, the satellite 
concerned is shut down: 

• No optical signal received over a pre-defined period. 

• Transmitter diode sends a continuous light signal. 

• Attenuation on the fiber-optic cable too great. 

The permissible degree of attenuation is stored within the system. If the attenuation 
exceeds the specified maximum level, one of the following faults may be the cause: 

• Kinking in the fiber-optic cable. 

• Compression of the fiber-optic cable. 

• Stretching of the fiber-optic cable. 

• Broken fiber-optic cable. 


Damaged fiber-optic cable. 


47 

E65 Bus Systems 







































Data Transmission 


The ISIS has a number of sensors positioned at strategic points throughout the vehicle. 
They are located in the satellites that are connected to the SIM via the byteflight. All sen¬ 
sors are scanned continuously and the data distributed to all satellites. 


Airbag 


Airbag 


Satellite 

with 

Sensor 




Satellite 

with 

Sensor 



Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the byteflight is carried out using the Diagnosis Program. Since the byteflight 
is a star structure and not a continuous ring like the MOST there is a test module “Data 
transmission to the satellites” that can check communication between each satellite and 
the SIM module. 

Any satellite that does not respond must then be checked individually using a separate Test 
Module. 

Repairs to the byteflight fiber-optic cable are not permitted. However, complete cables 
between the SIM and the affected satellites may be replaced. 


48 

E65 Bus Systems 















Diagnosis bus 

Introduction 


The aim of diagnosis is to enable a Technician to reliably identify a defective component. By 
the use of appropriate hardware and monitoring software, the microprocessor of a control 
unit, for example, is able to detect faults in the control unit and its peripherals. 

Faults identified are stored in the fault memory and can be read out using the Diagnosis 
Program. Data transfer between the vehicle and the diagnosis tool takes place via the 
Diagnosis bus (D bus). The new features of the diagnosis bus are: 



k i.m w 


H C.h¥ ■ 


J-.. i r'. > i V 


KT-8713 


• Faster data transmission speed of 115 kBd. 

• Central diagnosis access point (OBD connector). 

• Single diagnostic cable (TxD II) for the entire vehicle. 

• Omission of the TxDI cable. 

• Access to diagnosis functions requires “Authorization”. 

• Diagnosis protocol "KWP 2000" (Keyword Protocol 2000). 

• Standardized diagnosis structure for all control units. 


49 

E65 Bus Systems 
















































Diagnosis Concept 

The "BMW Fast" (BMW fast access for service and testing) diagnosis concept introduced 
on the E65 is applied. This concept is based on the "Keyword Protocol 2000" (KWP 2000) 
diagnosis protocol defined as part of the ISO 14230 standard. Diagnosis communication 
takes place entirely on the basis of a transport protocol on the CAN bus. 

The Diagnosis bus is connected to the Central Gateway Module. All bus systems apart 
from the MOST bus are connected to the Central Gateway Module (ZGM). 

Vehicle Diagnosis Access Point 

The diagnosis tool is connected to the vehicle by means of the diagnosis connector OBD 
( On-Board Diagnosis ). The connector is located behind a small cover in the drivers side 
kick panel trim. There is a black plastic cap that bridges KL-30 to the D-bus when the con¬ 
nector is not being used. This cap must be removed before installing the diagnosis cable. 

The TxD lead is located in pin 7 of the OBD 
socket and is connected directly to the ZGM. 

The ZGM detects by means of the data trans¬ 
mission speed whether a BMW diagnosis tool 
(DISplus, MoDiC, GT-1) or an aftermarket 
scanner is connected. 

The DME allows access to different data 
depending on the diagnosis tool connected. 



Note: 

When using an OBD scan tool for diagnosis, the transmission speed is 10.4 KBit/s. 


50 

E65 Bus Systems 






Review Questions 


1. How many bus systems is the E65 equipped with? Hint: Don’t forget the sub-busses. 


2. Which modules perform the task of “Gateway”? 


3. How many terminal resistors are located in the PT-CAN? Where are they located? 
What should the total resistance be on the PT-CAN? 


4. What are some of the handling precautions to be adhered to when working with fiber¬ 
optic cables? 


5. What is the difference between the fiber-optic connector of a MOST component and a 
byteflight component? 


6. What test is available in case of an interruption in the MOST circuit? 


7. What is the difference between the D-Bus of the E65 and other BMW models? 


51 

E65 Bus Systems 



