Table of Contents 

iDRIVE: DRIVING AREA 

Subject Page 

Introduction “What is Drive?”.3 

Driving Area.5 

Components.5 

Ignition Switch (CAS/ZAS).6 

Instrument Cluster.6 

Steering Column Switch Center (SZL).7 

Steering Wheel Components.9 

Transmission Shift Buttons.10 

MFL Function Buttons.11 

Steering Column Components.12 

Turn Signal Switch.13 

Transmission Selector Lever..14 

Wiper Switch.16 

Cruise Control Lever. 17 

Steering Column Adjustment.18 

Steering Wheel Heater Switch.19 

Electro-Mechanical Parking Brake.20 

Review Questions.21 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 11/01 





















iDRIVE: DRIVING AREA 
Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 

Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Understand the concept principles of Drive. 

• Recognize the controls contained in the Driving Area. 


2 

Drive: Driving Area 




iDrive 


Introduction 

What is iDrive? 

The number of advanced driver assistance systems, communication and convenience 
functions with new capabilities is continually increasing in modern-day vehicles. That trend 
is set to continue at an ever growing speed, driven on by the digitization of electronic and 
communication technologies. 

Conventional display and control systems are reaching the limits of their capabilities. The 
700 or so control functions that are possible on the E65 would create a totally unmanage¬ 
able conglomeration of switches, controls and displays if the conventional arrangement had 
to be used. iDrive redefines the concept of active driving and specifically, driver-orientated 
ergonomics. 

This new control and display concept enables driver and passenger to access more infor¬ 
mation and functions in spite of the smaller number of buttons and switches. It lends a 
unique and intuitive feel to the process of controlling the E65, thereby increasing safety on 
the road as well as the pleasure of driving. 

The name iDrive does not identify a specific system or component, it is a term which 
expresses BMW's trademark driver's-car image. The letter i in iDrive stands for the 
philosophy of the entire control and display concept: 


• interactive 

• intelligent 

• innovative 

• intuitive 

• integrated 

• informative 

• inspired 



421009 


3 

iDrive: Driving Area 










The Drive concept is divided into two sections: 

• The "Driving Area" (steering wheel and immediately adjacent controls operated by 
driver only); all driver-operated functions are concentrated in the area immediately with 
in the driver's reach. 

• The "Comfort Area" (in the middle of the dashboard) which gives both the driver and 
front passenger easy access to all convenience functions. 



kt-7834 


Tri-Level Function Structure 

1. Basic functions such as gear shifting, windscreen wipers and electro-mechanical 
parking brake (EMF), that are of greatest importance in terms of driving and safety, are 
positioned in the area around the steering wheel within the immediate reach of the 
driver. 

2. Frequently used basic functions such as lights, air conditioning/ heating temperature, 
radio volume and rear window heater are controlled by means of switches on the 
instrument panel in the conventional manner. 

3. The additional convenience, communication and driver-assistance functions are 
operated by means of the Controller (central control device) and displayed on the 
Control Display (central display screen). 


4 

Drive: Driving Area 









Driving Area 
Components 

The following components are within the Driving Area: 


• Ignition Switch (CAS/ZAS) with start/stop button. 

• Instrument Cluster. 

• Steering Column Switch Center (SZL). 

• Multi-function Steering Wheel (MFL). 

• Electro-mechanical Parking Brake button (EMF). 

All important control functions for driving and road safety such as automatic transmission 
selector lever, cruise control switch and turn indicator and high beam switches are arranged 
within the Driving Area. That means that the driver can direct his/her full attention to the 
road and traffic conditions. 



1. Ignition Switch (CAS/ZAS) 

2. Instrument Cluster 

3. Steering Column Switch Center 
(SZL) and Multi-Function Steering 
Wheel (MFL). 

4. Parking Brake Button. 


5 

iDrive: Driving Area 






Ignition Switch (CAS/ZAS) 


The car can be started by means of the start/stop button in combination with the ignition 
switch and key once access authorization has been confirmed (clearance signal from Car 
Access System) and the brake pedal is depressed. 

The start/stop button can also be used to switch off the engine or to select the various elec¬ 
trical system statuses when the brake pedal is not depressed. 


The ignition switch no longer consists of the conventional ignition switch/steering lock and 
matching ignition key. The ignition switch now consists of: 


• Remote control holder unit with electro-mechanical 
lock. 

• Start/stop button. 

• Coil for scanning the transponder and charging the 
battery in the remote control. 

Refer to the chapter “Power Management for more 
information concerning the ignition switch functions. 



Instrument Cluster (refer to separate module) 

As the description of the instrument cluster is very extensive, it has not been included here 
in the module on the "Driving Area." 

Information about the instrument cluster can be found in the separate module, "E65 
Instrument cluster." 



6 

Drive: Driving Area 


kt-8926 






Steering Column Switch Center (SZL) 


The Steering Column Switch Center (SZL) handles all functional components of the Multi- 
Function Steering Wheel (MFL) and the steering column. Those functions include: 

• Audio system, telephone, transmission shift, horn and a freely programmable-function 
button via the MFL function buttons. 


• Direction indicators/high-beam headlights, transmission selector lever, windscreen 
wiper, cruise control via the 4 control stalks on the steering column. 


• Electrical steering wheel adjustment via the button on the left of the steering column. 


• Steering wheel heater via the button on the left of the steering column. 



1. MFL with function 
buttons. 

2. Turn signal/high beam 
stalk. 

3. Transmission selector 
lever. 

4. Wiper switch 

5. Cruise control stalk 

6. Steering wheel heating 
switch. 


7. Steering column adj. 
stalk. 


The electronic control system for the SZL is divided between two electronic modules that 
are integrated respectively in the Steering Column Switch Center and inside the steering 
wheel. 

Signal transmission from the controls of the MFL is passed on to the SZL by means of a 
coil-spring (slip-ring) conductor. 

The steering angle sensor for DSC is also integrated in the SZL. The SZL processes the 
control commands and sends them via the byteflight bus system to the appropriate control 
units (e.g. DSC, LM). 


The E65 is the first model on which a steering column switch center with such an exten¬ 
sive range of functions has been used. 


7 

iDrive: Driving Area 



Integrated Steering Wheel Electronics Exploded view of the SZL and integrated steering 

Module located in steering wheel. angle sensor. 


The steering angle sensor is a component of the SZL module and is integrated inside it. 


&-HU& 



KM- A 


T'Tm 


tlWt Ah 




PT-C*kt-8302 


ahM 


C-NS 


The SZL is a satellite of the overall ISIS system (Intelligent Safety and Integration System) 
on the byteflight bus system. 

More detailed information about the Intelligent Safety and Integration System can be found 
in the chapter "Passive Safety." 

In addition to the bus link, there are also two hard-wire cable connections to the LM and 
EGS systems for (redundancy) safety reasons. 


8 

Drive: Driving Area 









































































































































Steering Wheel Components 


The Multi-Function Steering Wheel (MFL) in the E65 is the most complex steering wheel 
produced by BMW and consists of the following components: 


• Steering wheel 

• Airbag unit 

• Left and right-hand function buttons 

• Shift buttons 

• Steering wheel module (control unit) 



In addition to the MFL buttons familiar from the E38, the transmission can now also be shift¬ 
ed from the steering wheel. The left-hand group of function buttons on the steering wheel 
are used to control the functions: voice input, audio/nav/telephone(volume), telephone 
(send/end call). 


The function buttons on the right operate the functions: “Low” program for the transmis¬ 
sion , station search for radio channels, and an additional programmable function button. 



1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 


kt-7840 


Steptronic Buttons for up-shifting 
(not used for 745i) 

Shift buttons for down-shift. 

“Low” program button. 

Search buttons for audio system. 

“Free” programmable button. 

Telephone send/end button. 

Volume control. 

Voice input (push-to-talk). 


9 

iDrive: Driving Area 







Transmission Shift Buttons 

The transmission shift buttons are integrated in the steering wheel. For reasons of conve¬ 
nience (changing gear one-handed) the switches are duplicated on each side 

“Low” program: Operating the two buttons 
on the face of the steering wheel signals the 
EGS (TCM) to perform a down-shift. 

Before the EGS (TCM) will respond to the 
buttons the “Low” program must be activat¬ 
ed using the “L” button in the right-hand 
MFL button group. 

The shift buttons are Hall-effect sensors. 


D BUS 

Signal Path 

When the shift +/- buttons are pressed, the sig¬ 
nal is sent via the steering wheel electronics 
module and the slip-ring to the SZL 
module. 


From the SZL the signal is passed on to the 

byteflight bus. 


It then travels via the Safety Information Module 
(SIM) and the Central Gateway Module (ZGM) to 
the PT-CAN and ultimately the EGS (TCM) where 
it is processed. 

For safety reasons, there is a hard-wired serial 
data cable available as redundant back-up in 
case of any bus problems. 




10 

Drive: Driving Area 


































































MFL Function Buttons 


Left-Side Function Buttons 

Pressing the voice input button ("push to talk") activates the 
Speech Processing System (SVS). 

The +/- rocker allows adjustment of the volume of audio system, 
telephone and navigation system. The telephone receiver button 
is used to make or end a telephone call or accept an incoming call. 



kt-8304 


Right-Side Function Buttons 

Pressing the L button signals the EGS (TCM) to engage the 
“Limiting program”. The limiting mode is indicated on the instru¬ 
ment cluster display by the letter "L" when active. Pressing the 
button again restores the normal drive program. 

See the chapter “GA6HP 26Z” for functional information. 

Pressing the “up/down” rocker button activates the radio station 
search function. When a compact disc is playing, touching the 
rocker button moves playback to the next/previous track. With a 
telephone, it can be used to scroll through the stored phone book. 

The bottom button is a programmable-function button with Key 
Memory function. The Key Memory function allows the button to 
be programmed differently for different drivers (keys). 

The "Settings" menu in the Control Display offers a choice of func¬ 
tions such as "Automatic Hold" (automatic parking brake opera¬ 
tion) and "Air Recirculation" for which the button can be programmed. 


r\ 



kt-8304 


Those functions are selected using the controller. The button is then assigned the selected 
function. 


11 

iDrive: Driving Area 


Steering Column Components 

The 4 steering column stalks and the steering column module (SZL) are a single unit. 
The steering column stalks of the SZL are: 

• Turn signal and high beam switch. 

• Transmission selector lever. 

• Wiper switch. 

• Cruise control lever. 

r ‘Jt i 

Complete and exploded view of SZL 


T* 



folie2 


On the E65, a new design of steering column stalk has been introduced. 

What is new is that the steering column stalks are now essentially buttons (momentary 
switches). 

That means that they no longer engage in fixed positions for their various functions. 

In order to operate the direction indicators, for example, the stalk is pushed beyond a point 
of resistance (detent). When released, it returns to its center position. 


12 

Drive: Driving Area 


Turn signal, High beam, BC and CC Switch 

The turn signal and high beam switch is a 
button (momentary switch) that is used to 
operate the high beam, direction indica- 
tors and to switch on the parking lights. 

T\ 

The turn signal switch incorporates two 
axial (push button) switches for the On- 
Board Computer displays. 

The top switch (2) activates the board 
computer display on the instrument cluster below the tachometer. This shows information 
such as average fuel consumption and average speed. The lower switch (1) activates the 
On-Board Computer display on the instrument cluster below the speedometer. This shows 
information such as fuel level and range. 

Automatic cancelling of the turn signals is controlled by the signal from the steering angle 
sensor. The SZL sends the command via the bus system to the light module (LM) where it 
is converted. 

Brief operation of the turn signals can be accomplished by touching the stalk as far as (but 
not beyond) the point of resistance. 

The parking light function is switched on by pressing the stalk beyond the point of resis¬ 
tance when the ignition is off. The function is cancelled by pressing the stalk in the 
opposite direction. 

To switch the high beam “ON”, the stalk is tapped forwards, and to switch high beam “OFF” 
or flash the headlights, it is tapped backwards. When the driver operates the turn signal or 
high beam switch, a message is sent to the light module. 

The signal travels from the SZL via the byteflight bus to the SIM. From there is passes to 
the ZGM and onto the K-CAN SYSTEM and the light module (LM). 

The light module simultaneously analyzes a redundant back-up signal from the SZL. This 
is transmitted via a separate lead. This means that the signal is independent of the K-CAN 
SYSTEM and the byteflight bus. 

The purpose of this duplication is to ensure vehicle safety. Even if the bus systems fail, the 
functions can still be operated. 


2 1 



kt-8357 


13 

Drive: Driving Area 


Transmission Selector Lever 


The new automatic transmission for the E65 
has an electronic gear shift system. That 
means there is no mechanical link between 
the selector lever and the gearbox. 

The transmission selector lever is positioned 
on the right-hand side of the steering column 
and like the turn signal switch, is a momen¬ 
tary switch. 



kt-8358 



The selector lever is used to select the transmission modes R - N - D and P. 

Advantages of electronic gear shift system: 

• Greater ease of operation, e.g. the parking lock is engaged automatically when the key 
is removed from the ignition. 

• The components of an electronic gear shift system take up less space. 

• No transmission of noise or vibration as there is no physical connection between lever 
and gearbox. 

• Electronic shift lock prevents unauthorized operation. This means that the steering lock 
is no longer required as an anti-theft feature. 

The transmission selector lever is the main input device for controlling the electronic trans¬ 
mission control unit (EGS). 

The selector lever has 7 Hall-effect sensors that are duplicate-coded in such a way that the 

failure of one of sensors does not result in failure of the complete selector lever. 

The driver's request is detected by the dual-system sensors in the transmission selector 

lever and transmitted by the SZL to the electronic transmission control unit (EGS). 


14 

Drive: Driving Area 



The EGS checks that the gear shift is permissible and initiates the operation via the elec¬ 
tronic-hydraulic control unit that is integrated in the automatic gearbox. 

The currently selected gear and any Check Control messages such as "Press brake pedal 
to engage gear" are displayed on the instrument cluster for the information of the driver. 

The selector lever signals are not carried out unless the EGS has received a clearance sig¬ 
nal from the Car Access System (CAS). That means that an authorized key must have been 
detected in the holder unit of the ignition switch. If the key is removed from the ignition, the 
parking lock is automatically engaged. 

The gear shift "gate" pattern on the selector lever is fitted with locator lighting (controlled by 
terminal 58g). 


When the selector lever is operated, the signal 
is transmitted to the SZL. 

From the SZL the signal is passed to the 

byteflight bus. 

It then travels via the SIM and the ZGM to the 
PT-CAN and ultimately the electronic transmis¬ 
sion control unit (EGS) where it is processed. 

For safety reasons, there is a serial cable avail¬ 
able as redundant back-up in case of any bus 
problems. 


B BUS 



bytefitahl PT-CAN 

kt-8303 


15 

iDrive: Driving Area 


































Wiper Switch 

The wiper switch is also a momentary 
switch. It does not engage in fixed posi¬ 
tions for its various functions. 

The control concept incorporates a 
sequential mode. That means that the 
wiper speed settings are selected by 
tapping the stalk repeatedly the required 
number of times in the desired direction. 

The wiper switch also incorporates an axial (push-button) switch (1). The Rain/Light sensor 
(RLS), system is switched on and off by this switch. The function is indicated by an LED (3). 

When the ignition is switched “OFF”, the wiper and the rain sensor are switched off at the 
same time. 

The rain sensor is activated by means of the push-button switch on the wiper stalk. The 
LED then lights up. 

When the rain sensor is switched on, the windscreen wipers are controlled automatically 
according to how much precipitation (rain or snow) is on the windscreen. 

That includes switching them on and off and selecting the required setting from intermittent 
to continuous wipe. The rain sensor is switched off by touching the push-button switch 
again or automatically when the ignition is switched OFF. 

The adjuster wheel sets the sensitivity of the rain sensor to a choice of 4 levels. 



16 

Drive: Driving Area 


Cruise Control Lever 


1 


The cruise control (FGR) is a function of 
the DME (ECM) and has multi-speed 
storing capability on the E65. 

This new multi-speed function allows the 
driver to program and store multiple 
speed settings which can then be acti¬ 
vated as desired. 



Frequently required speed settings such as 55, 65 or 70 mph can be selected directly at 
the touch of a button without having to drive the vehicle at precisely that speed beforehand. 
This is a considerable added convenience. Those preset cruise control speeds are pro¬ 
grammed by the driver in advance and then activated when driving.The memory can store 
up to 6 preset speeds. 


Information on programming and deleting preset speeds is found in the “ME 9.2” chapter. 



Speedometer display 

Preset speed markers 

Cruise control active 
pointer illuminated. 

Cruise control not active 
pointer dim. 


Function 

Operation 

Engage cruise control 
Accelerate/set 

Push lever forward 

Decelerate/set 

Pull lever back 

Activate Multi-speed function 

Push lever forward past detent 

Select higher preset speed 

Push lever forward past detent 

Select lower preset speed 

Pull lever back past detent 

Cancel cruise control 

Tap lever up/down 

Resume/set/delete preset 
speeds 

Touching lever inwards 


The signal path for the cruise con¬ 
trol switch is from the SZL to the 
SIM to the ZGM via the byteflight. 

The signal then is placed on the PT- 
CAN by the ZGM and received by 
the DME (ECM). 


17 

iDrive: Driving Area 














Steering Column Adjustment 


The E65 is supplied with electrical steering column adjustment. 

The adjuster knob for the adjustment is located on the left-hand side of the steering 
column trim. 



The electrical steering column adjustment incorporates the comfort entry function. The 
steering wheel can be adjusted fore and aft and vertically to suit the driving position. 

The steering wheel position is a car memory function and is memorized together with the 
driver's seat position and stored in the Seat Module (SMFA). 

When the ignition is switched off and the door opened, the steering wheel is moved to its 
highest and most forward position to make getting in and out of the car easier. 

The adjuster button has four possible directions of movement. These enable the steering 
wheel to be moved up, down, forwards or backwards. 

The signal from the adjustment knob is from the SZL to the SIM to the ZGM via the byte- 
flight. The signal then is placed on the K-CAN-S by the ZGM and received by the CIM. 

Control of the electric motors for steering column adjustment is carried out by the Chassis 
Integration Module (CIM) 


18 

Drive: Driving Area 




Steering Wheel Heater Switch 

The steering wheel heater is switched on by a button on the left-hand side of the steering 
column between the two steering column stalks. 

It can be switched on provided the electrical system status is at least terminal 15. An LED 
on the switch indicates when the steering wheel heater is on. 

The steering wheel heater consists of a coil heater element in the steering wheel rim. 

A temperature sensor (PTC sensor) in the steering wheel sends the temperature signal back 
to the steering wheel electronics module. 

Operation of the steering wheel heating is explained in the “Central Body Electronics” Chapter. 


1 



kt-8353 


19 

Drive: Driving Area 


Electro-Mechanical Parking Brake Button 

The parking brake is an automated electro-mechanical parking brake system (EMF) intro¬ 
duced for the first time on the E65. 

When the engine is running, the parking brake system operates the front and rear disc 
brakes via the brake hydraulics. When the engine is switched off, the parking brake is oper¬ 
ated by an electro-mechanical system. Two cables are then used to actuate the rear park¬ 
ing brake drums. 


When the vehicle is stationary with the 
ignition switched on, the parking brake 
is applied or released by pressing the 
button. 

The parking brake can also be applied 
with the ignition switched off. The indi¬ 
cator lamp on the instrument cluster 
lights up briefly. 


The parking brake can only be released 
when the ignition is switched on. 


240.tif 

In an emergency, (e.g. if the brake pedal is jammed by an object), the parking brake can 
also be used as a dynamic emergency brake when the vehicle is in motion. 

The vehicle is then braked by means of the brake hydraulics and the front and rear disc 
brakes as long as the parking brake button is pressed. 

Automatic application of the parking brake, e.g. in stop-and-go traffic or when performing 
a hill start (Automatic Hold), can be activated/deactivated on the Control Display ("Settings" 
menu) using the Controller. Automatic Hold is a key memory function. 

If automatic application is activated, "Auto P" appears on the instrument cluster. 

If the parking brake is released by pressing the button when the engine is running, this also 
deactivates the automatic application function. 



20 

Drive: Driving Area 










Review Questions 

1. List the controls found within the driver area of Drive. 


2. How many control modules make up the Steering Column Switch Center (SZL)? 


3. Which functions of the SZL use a redundant hardwired-data cable for plausibility and 
safety? 


21 

iDrive: Driving Area 



