Table of Contents 

iDRIVE: COMFORT AREA 


Subject Page 

Introduction.3 


Components 

Control Display. 

Brightness Control 
Connectors. 

Controller. 


Generation of Tactile Feedback.1 

Connection to the Controller.11 

Heating and Air Conditioning Control Panel.12 

Audio System Controller Control Panel.13 

Telecommander.14 

Principle of Operafion 

Control Display Format.15 

Work Shop Hints 

Service Mode.27 

Review Questions.30 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 11/01 


LO CD co co o 
















iDRIVE: COMFORT AREA 
Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 


Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize which controls and displays are contained in the Comfort Area. 

• Understand the operating principles of the Controller and Control Display. 


2 


Drive: Comfort Area 




Comfort Area: Control Display and Controller 

Introduction 


Improved display systems and digital technology enable new control functions and display 
options. In addition, the number of vehicle functions is increasing. This growth is likely to 
be concentrated in the area of convenience and communication functions such as multi- 
media applications and information services. 

In order to be able to make use this abundance of functions without having an unmanage¬ 
able array of controls and displays, the following concept has been developed: 

1. Combination of user interfaces into a single multifunctional display in the form of the 
Control Display offering centralized screen-based control of functions. 

2. Screen-based control of functions performed by means of a central operating control in 
the form of the Controller. 

The Control Display and the Controller set new standards in driver-vehicle interface design. 
This is a logical progression from the On-Board Monitor first introduced on the E38. 



420056 


The most important characteristics of the 
centralized control and display system are the 
following: 

• Standardized layout for all functions 

• Standardized control strategy for all 
functions 

• High-quality visualization and ergonomics 

• Possibility for easy modification of user 
interface by software update 


3 


Drive: Comfort Area 



The fundamental component of the Comfort Area is the Control Display and its associated 
operating control, the Controller. 

The Control Display is built into the center of the dashboard. The Controller is on the cen¬ 
ter console, positioned ergonomicly in front of the center armrest. 

All convenience functions are within easy reach of the driver and front passenger. 

The following controls are in the Comfort Area: 

• Control Display and Controller. 

• Air conditioning control panel incorporating switches for hazard warning lights and 
central locking. 

• Control panel for radio and compact disc (optional cassette) player. 

• Telecommander (retractable telephone key pad). 


1. 

2 . 

3 . 

4 . 

5 . 


4 


Control Display 

IHKA panel with hazard light 
switch and central lock button 

Audio System Controller (ASK) 

Controller 

Telecommander 



iDrive: Comfort Area 

















Components 


Control Display 

The Control Display consists of: 

1. Metal casing with integral electronic module 

2. LCD display 

3. Hood with glass cover. 



5 


Drive: Comfort Area 







A 16-bit processor is responsible for communication (gateway function) between the MOST 
and K-CAN SYSTEM bus systems, it also performs the tasks of diagnosis processing and 
illumination dimming. 

A 32-bit processor with 16 MB of RAM and a 16 MB graphics memory is responsible for 
display output and user guidance. 

The Control Display is equipped with a Flash memory module. This means that software 
can be downioaded/updated via the diagnosis interface at any time. 

The text and character sets for the language-specific elements of the user interface (coun¬ 
try coded) are stored in the Flash memory. 

The size of the LCD display is 8.8 inches (diagonal). The complete Control Display assem¬ 
bly is attached to the dashboard by three screws. The LCD display plus the hood and glass 
cover are removable, this means that if the glass cover becomes scratched the LCD dis¬ 
play and hood can be replaced separately. 

The LCD display plus hood clips onto the metal casing. A special tool is required to sepa¬ 
rate the two components. Internally, the LCD display is connected to the electronic mod¬ 
ule by a ribbon cable. 


On the rear of the metal casing there are cooling fins. Next to them is a 5-amp fuse, this 
protects the Control Display against damage from excessive current. 

Brightness Control 

There is a photo-cell on the front of the LCD to the right of the screen for detecting the 
ambient light so that the screen brightness can be adjusted accordingly. 


The screen brightness also responds to manual adjustment of the instrument lighting dim¬ 
mer control. 


Control Display photo-cell location 



kt-8504 


6 


iDrive: Comfort Area 


□ BUS 


kt-8502 




C-t 







1 

L _, 

.UFA f 









IM 1 


r,-„ | 

£|s*Tl 



SMFVii 





HU 


l-U 


H 
] C 


LIC 





i K, ■ It 1 





1 

1 


“IX 



U r 

H siH r 

5,Tv=j 

p 

2 







SIW- 


T?zfJ 


K-C*M f K-C*h 3 MOST brt+tinpii PT-CAH 

The Control Display communicates via the MOST bus system with all other components on 
the MOST bus. 

The Control Display is the system master for the MOST bus. The system master holds the 
knowledge of the complete system and links up the individual modules into a system. 

The Control Display also performs the function of power master within the MOST network. 
That means that the Control Display wakes up all MOST nodes (control units). They then 
register with the Audio System Controller (= connection master, control function for estab¬ 
lishing connection). 

Once all nodes (MOST control units) have registered as awake, a message to that effect is 
sent to the Control Display by the ASK. 

The Control Display is also responsible for sending the MOST nodes to sleep. The MOST 
bus is networked to the remaining bus systems via the K-CAN SYSTEM. 

The Control Display contains the gateway module, MOST-CAN Gateway (MCGW) to func¬ 
tion as an interface between the MOST and K-CAN-S busses. 

The instrument cluster is an exception. It has a separate connection to the K-CAN S. 

The Controller is connected by the K-CAN S via the Center Console Control Center mod¬ 
ule (BZM) to the Control Display. 

The diagnosis interface for the Control Display is the ZGM via the diagnosis bus. 


7 


Drive: Comfort Area 


































































































































Connectors 

The Control Display has a 14-pin (1) and 
a 12-pin (2) connector. 


The 14-pin connector incorporates the 
connections for the MOST (fiber-optic) 
and K-CAN-System bus systems. 

The 12-pin connector provides the 
RGB-format (RGB = red, green, blue) 
video input. 

The Control Display is capable of digitiz¬ 
ing analog video signals and displaying 
them on the LCD screen in full-screen or 
split-screen mode. 



Controller 

The Controller is an evolution of the rotary push button used on the previous On-Board 
Monitors. 

It is the central operating control for all convenience functions and selected options for vehi¬ 
cle functions. The Controller is located in the most comfortable and ergonomic position for 
the user (driver or front passenger). 

It is on the front portion of the armrest between the driver and front passenger seats. 


kt-8506 

8 



Drive: Comfort Area 




Continued development of the practice-proven rotary push button principle has provided 
the Controller with an additional linear movement capability in the horizontal plane. 

The Controller can be moved horizontally from its resting position (center position), to which 
it always returns when released. 

The 8 main menus around the edge of the Control Display are arranged in a pattern resem¬ 
bling the points of a compass. There are 8 main directions in which the Controller is moved 
in the horizontal plane in order to select the main menus. 




Controller direction of 
movement. 


kt-8507 


The 8 main directions of movement of the Controller are scanned by a switch unit. That 
switch unit consists of 8 individual switches. They are positioned at 45 degrees to each 
other. 

If the Controller is moved to one of the main menus (option panels) and released at that 
point/moved back to its center position, the selected menu opens. 


9 

Drive: Comfort Area 















































































Generation of Touch Sensitive Feedback 

Since there are a wide variety of ways in which the Controller can be held and moved, only 
the key movements are signalled to the user by touch sensitive feedback (simulated dial 
clicks). 

The positions/movements for which there is feedback are: 

• Center position 

• 8 main directions of movement in horizontal plane 

• Clockwise/anti-clockwise rotation (with incremental divisions for selection function) 

• Depressed position (confirmation function) 

The touch sensitive feedback for the center position, the main horizontal directions of 
movement and the depressed position are created mechanically. Only the feedback for the 
rotation movement is generated electrically. 

When the Controller is rotated in a control menu it provides touch sensitive feedback for the 
user. This is for the purpose of simulating the familiar mechanical stops of a conventional 
rotary control knob. 

When items on the Control Display screen are selected, there is a difference between the 
strength of the feedback for different items such as lists, function buttons, screen areas and 
end stops. This difference is used as a method of confirmation so that changes in the 
Control Display can be made with a minimal amount of visual distraction 

When the Control Display is switched off, the controller rotates freely without any incre¬ 
mental stops. 

Inside the Controller there is a DC motor which is controlled by pulse-width modulation 
(PWM) signals. That motor generates a rotational force opposite to the direction of rota¬ 
tion. That opposing force or torque is perceived by the user as a mechanical resistance. 


10 


Drive: Comfort Area 



Connection to the Controller 

The Controller is connected directly to the BZM by a 16-wire ribbon cable. 


1. Controller 

2. 16-wire ribbon cable 

3. Connector 

4. Circuit board 



kt-8950 

The BZM is fitted inside the center console underneath the Controller. The control panel 
units for seat adjustment and auxiliary seat functions are also connected to the BZM. 



The BZM has no connection with the functions of the Controller. The bus leads from the 
K-CAN-S to the Controller are simply looped through the BZM. 

1. Controller 


2. Center Console Control 
Center (BZM) 


3. Control panel for auxiliary 
seat functions 


5. 16-wire ribbon cable 


6. K-CAN-System 


7. Control Display 


4. 


Control panel for seat 
adjustment 



kt-8508 


11 


Drive: Comfort Area 

























Heating and Air Conditioning (IHKA) Control Panel 


The heating and air conditioning control panel is part of the Comfort Area. Integrated in the 
heating and air conditioning control panel are the buttons for the hazard warning lights and 
Central Locking. 


12 13 1 2 3 4 5 6 



11 10 9 8 7 


kt-8514 


Index 

Description 

Index 

Description 

1 

Parked car ventilation LED 

Indicator 

8 

A/C Button 

2 

Rotating control knob (endless) for left¬ 
side air volume and off push button with 
status LED 

9 

Central Locking rocker switch 

3 

Hazard switch 

10 

Button for selection of re-circ, fresh air or 
AUC (automatic re-circulation). 

4 

Rotating control knob (endless) for 
right-side air volume 

11 

Left-side Auto button 

5 

Rotating control knob for right-side 
temperature selection and push button 
for Rest function 

12 

Max defrost button for windshield 

6 

Rear window defogger button 

13 

Rotating control knob for left-side 
temperature selection and push button 
for Max A/C function 

7 

Right-side Auto button 




When the hazard warning lights are on, the direction indicator function has priority over the 
hazard warning lights when the electrical system status is at least KL R. 

The Central Lock button is a rocker switch and enables the vehicle to be locked/unlocked 
(doors, trunk lid) centrally from inside. 


12 


iDrive: Comfort Area 




































Audio System Controller (ASK) Control Panel 

The control panel for the ASK is underneath the heating and air conditioning control panel 

on the right and is part of the Comfort Area. 

1. Rotary/push button 
for ON/OFF and 
volume. 

2. Eject button 

3. Rocker button for 
station search, track 
selection or fwd/rwd. 


kt-8515 



The control panel and the ASK control module are a single unit. The control panel incor¬ 
porates the main rotary/push-button control for switching on all audio sources. It is also 
the volume control. 

The control panel also has a rocker button for fast forwarding/ rewinding cassettes/CDs 
and an Eject button for cassettes/CDs. 

Note: The E65 will be equipped with an in-dash CD player as standard. There is a cassette player 
available as a no cost option. 


13 


Drive: Comfort Area 




Telecommander 


The Telecommander is a retractable telephone key pad and is also part of the Comfort Area. 
Pressing on the phone board opens it out. 

It is moved back in by pushing it back into its slot by hand until it locks into place. 

The key pad is a 3 x 5 numeric pad for manual dialing and operating the telephone. All keys 
on the key pad have back lighting. 



kt-8516 


14 


iDrive: Comfort Area 







Principle of Operation 

Control Display Format 


The 8.8" screen with a resolution of 640 x 240 pixels (width x height) can be divided into 
four areas. 


Top status bar 





Control Area 

Assistance 


screen 







Bottom status bar 


kt-8510 


The area on the left between the two status bars is the control area in which the options of 
the selected main menu (e.g. Entertainment) are displayed and selected. 

The area on the right is the assistance screen. This is where individually selected functions 
from the "Vehicle Data" menu such as On-Board Computer, or the route display for the nav¬ 
igation system or the short description and Help info, are displayed. 

The two status bars permanently display the status of the most important functions such 
as outside temperature or time. The top and bottom status bars extend across the entire 
screen. 


15 


Drive: Comfort Area 








The Status Bars 

The status of the most important functions operated by means of the Control Display are 
indicated permanently on the top and bottom status bars once the ignition is ON. 



Index 

Description 

Index 

Description 

1 

Unread e-mail text messages 

9 

Ventilation setting for left zone 

2 

Telephone signal strength 

10 

Entertainment system status 
(radio station, CD track etc.) 

3 

Name of telephone provider or 

Phone number dialed or phone number of 
Incoming call 

11 

Ventilation setting for right zone 

4 

Telephone status: Green=phone on 
Yellow=roam 

Red=no service 

12 

Set temperature for right zone 

5 

Traffic message channel (not used in U.S.) 

13 

Time display 

6 

Vehicle status (Check control and Condition 
Based Service) 

14 

Date display 

7 

Destination when navigation system active 

15 

Outside temperature display 

8 

Set temperature for left zone 




16 


iDrive: Comfort Area 























The Basic Menu 

The basic menu shows a graphical representation of the Controller in the center with arrows 
indicating its directions of horizontal movement for selecting any of the 8 main menus 
arranged around the edge. To the right is the assistance screen. 



The basic menu always remains behind the currently selected menu as a ninth menu and 
can be recalled by moving the Controller in the direction of the active main menu. 

Pressing the Controller when the basic menu is active switches off the Control Display. 
However, the bottom status bar showing the status of the air conditioning, entertainment 
system, time and date remains visible! 

When the Control Display is switched off, pressing the Controller or moving it horizontally 
switches the Control Display on. 

If the Controller is moved in the direction of one of the main menus, this not only switches 
the Control Display on, it also opens the menu that is located in that direction. 

The following actions also cause the Control Display to switch on: 

• Display of a priority 1 message box, e.g. a check control message such as "Engine oil 
pressure too low" 

• Operation of the PDC (Park Distance Control). 

• An incoming/outgoing telephone call or operation of the Send/ End button on the 
MFL/Telecommander 

• Operating the audio system in KL 30. 


17 


Drive: Comfort Area 





























































Help System 

There is a help system for using the Control Display. It is activated by moving the Controller 
towards the bottom right ("south east") to the "Help" menu. 

The help is in the form of short text information. The help provides explanations of the 
selected menu options. When the help is activated, context-related explanations appear on 
the assistance screen according to the position of the highlighted function. 


1 


3 



Uirei'TE 

D2 Pi 7MC 

ft ' I NCH 

Help * 

| Menu 

Pressing brief Info switches 
the display of this brief in 4 o 

\ 

m M 

on and off 

V- 

B ALITOft BAVFftN'5 

0? i>i 20C‘i 10:17 


1. 

2 . 
3 . 


Brief Info 

Menu Name 

Help text on display 
screen. 


2 

kt-8512 


The help is activated by selecting the "Brief Info" button with the Controller and then 
depressing the Controller to confirm the selection. 

If the On-Board Computer or the navigation system road map is displayed on the assis¬ 
tance screen, the “Brief Info” is automatically deactivated. 

It then has to be re-activated by means of the Help menu. 

If "Menu name" is deactivated, touching the controller briefly in a horizontal direction no 
longer highlights the menu button but instead enters directly in to the menu. 


18 


iDrive: Comfort Area 




Menu Selection 

As soon as a certain degree of deflection of the Controller in a particular direction is detect¬ 
ed, a graphical indication of the movement is displayed. 


BMW Assist Communication On board data 


Montvale 


Climate 


, § Press to switch display 
ri off 


Setttngs Entertainment Help 0820 09.10.00 -2&X 


The button for the selected menu is visually highlighted and the menu name displayed in 
the control area. This applies only if the function Menu Name has been activated in the Help 
system or if the Controller is held in the deflected position for more than 1 second. 

Releasing the Controller or returning it to the center position starts the menu selection and 
it is then displayed on the Control Display. 

If the wrong menu is selected by accident (e.g. "BMW ASSIST" instead of "Climate"), this 
is easily corrected. Since the movement of the Controller is not restricted by a rigid "gate", 
the individual menus can be selected successively by moving the Controller around in a 
circle. 

If the Controller is in the center position, the menu corresponding to the last direction it was 
moved in is displayed. 

Additional information from other functions such as On-Board Computer or Help (as in the 
example shown) can be displayed simultaneously on the assistance screen. 


The following pages contain a summary of the remaining menus in clockwise order with 
details of the screen displays for the first page of each menu. 

More detailed information about those menus and the functions they offer can be found in the rel¬ 
evant information chapters and of course, in the Owners Manual. 


19 


Drive: Comfort Area 





Climate 

The various pages of the “Climate” menu contain the following 
functions: 

• Vent position selection 

• Center vent stratification 



• Customization of air volume distribution 


• Parked car ventilation settings 


• Seat heating proportioning (seat bottom/seat back) 



Certain selected climate control settings such as air volume are both available from the 
Control Display as well as the IHKA control panel. 


If a menu has has more than one page, this is indicated by a button in the bottom left cor¬ 
ner. The button is selected rotating the Controller and the selection confirmed by depress¬ 
ing the Controller. 


The next menu page then appears. 

To return to the previous page select the button again. 


20 


iDrive: Comfort Area 





























BMW ASSIST 

"BMW ASSIST" is the menu from which the Service utilities can 
be selected. 

That includes: 


• "BMW Service" (breakdown assistance) with links to the Roadside Assistance, 
“Home BMW center”, BMW center and Emergency Call. 

• "BMW Info" with details of special offers (technical services) from the BMW Service 
department (planned). 

• "Traffic Info" with up-to-date, route-specific traffic news. (Planned) 



• "Information Plus", a more comprehensive information service with up-to-date 

information on topics such as parking availability, news headlines, hospitals, overnight 
accommodation. (Planned) 


1. BMW Service 

12 3 4 



BMW Sumt 


|BMWInfo^ 
j Vprkehninfi 
lAuskunttPI' 


munch tr-j 


Rei eiftfhartsnierist 


... m BMW Assist 
Ihr BMW Handler jncntakta jfnahme 
Nachster Handler | mrt BMV. 

Hoi lie \ 


AJ.U“C 


MMJQO' VI: i/ 


2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 


BMW Information 
Roadside Assistance 
Home BMW center 
BMW center 
Emergency Call 


9 8 7 6 5 

kt-8536 


In the future, this menu will also incorporate "ASSIST Online" offering Internet access and 
e-mail . 


21 


Drive: Comfort Area 













Communication 

"Communication" is likely to be a very frequently used function. 

This menu contains the telephone functions. It allows the user 
to list the phone book entries arranged in various orders, e.g. 
alphabetically or stored order. 



On the next page of the menu (button in bottom left corner) you can view text messages 
(SMS messages) received or incoming calls that were not accepted. 


12 3 4 


1. Top 8 frequently called 
numbers. 



Last (most recent call) 

Search in alphabetical 
order 

Search in stored order 

Phone book display 

Button to display next 
page 


22 


iDrive: Comfort Area 


































On-Board Data (and Vehicle Data) 

The On-Board Data menu contains the following functions: 

• On-board Computer 

• Travel computer 

• Speed limit 

• Stopwatch 

• Check Control 

• CBS data 



1. On-Board Computer 



D2 Priv.it 


B L-n k u n 11 

Limit Muw.HtN 
Iflit i < I • ■. ■ 

C HI. M 

n Ji gkfit 


mGnchen 


Fahretuig 

a ( j- :s la.'DS.Jooi Bordcomp-utet 

n km | 
bSIkm 


10,01/ltO km [ 


lil.lkmyh 


» %!'■' ^tamtNNE: r auiow a>.o"c 


lOjM-SOOHOftJlH 


2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 


6 . 


Travel Computer 

Speed Limit 

Stopwatch 

Move contents of 
control screen over to 
assistance screen. 

Next page 


kt-8538 


The button with the arrow symbol can be used transfer the current display in the control 
area to the assistance screen. 


The button in the bottom left corner is used to go to the next page of the menu. 

There, you can view detailed information relating to the Condition Based Service (CBS) and 
Check Control systems. 


The function "Service" provides more detailed information on the statuses monitored by the 
CBS system. 


The function "Check" provides more 
detailed information about the Check 
Control messages issued. 


Expanded Check Control text. 


© 


02 Fr-'VUt 


. u me 


(©) 


Braki 1 ard d me-con Ira I syslen 
“a Lire. Parting b'akc wrihcul 
fiTiHnywy hr.^ing 1uru*>. hard 

BMW Otmftaf. 


20 f O°C it Auto 


WNVC 


4uto# wrx 


iDrive: Comfort Area 














Navigation 

The Navigation menu provides access to all functions 
necessary to operate the navigation system. 

The road map can be displayed in the control area and it can 
also be displayed in the same scale on the assistance screen 
(though with a smaller visible area). 

This menu contains the following functions: 

• View 

• Destinations 

• Directions 

• Services (possibly traffic info in the future) 

• New route 

1. View 

123 4 5 

2. Destinations 


3. Directions 

4. Services (planned) 

5. Assistance directions 


6. New route 

7. Move contents of 
control screen over to 
assistance screen. 

kt-8539 




Help 

Contents already described on page 15. 



24 


iDrive: Comfort Area 




























Entertainment 

The “Entertainment” menu contains the following functions: 

• Audio functions such as radio, cassette and CD player 

• Memory for storing radio stations and all equalizer and tone 
settings 



• Video functions such as TV and ultimately DVD (Planned for rear Control Display) 


12 3 4 

/_/ / 


T M <// 


MUNCHEN 


I Ta P e > 

j CD 

[ Mennafu 


I \ 

7 6 


f W ARAKE-U A 

nwn^mwrd ^ j baye-rn 1 


I Entertainment 

j Zwiichen 

I gapei cherten und 
ernpfanqibareri 


KM-sendem 


05 HU KADtO 


Id.M.iOOl 


1. 

2 . 

3 . 

4 . 

5 . 


FM selections 

AM selections 

Tape or in-dash CD 

CD changer 

List of stored stations 
using RDS names 

Memory page for 
storing stations and 
settings 

Button for next page 


kt-8540 


Note: enabling of RDS is done in the service function described later in Workshop Hints. 


25 


Drive: Comfort Area 










Settings 

The Settings menu is where the individual user settings are 
made. This menu contains the following functions: 

• Date/time entry and adjustment. 


• Choice of language for Control Display and instrument 
cluster. 

• Choice of units for Control Display and instrument cluster. 

• Additional options such as: 

• Assign function to the “free” programmable button on the MFL 

• Enable/disable automatic parking brake operation ("Automatic Hold") 

• Enable/disable PDC graphic display 

• RDC initialization and monitor display (optional) 

• EDC program selection 

Time/Date/Memo set 

Language selection 

Enable/disable DSC 

Enable/disable DTC 

Enable/disable 
Automatic hold. 

Enable/disable PDC 
graphic display 


EDC program selection 
Comfort or sport 

Assign function to MFL 
programmable button 

Not used in U.S. 

10. RDC initialization and 
display 

11. Display units setting 

12. Displays menu for 
option items 5-10. 


1 2 3 4 5 6 



12 11 10 9 S 7 


kt-8541 


On this menu, you can also switch the DSC on or off and, when 
the DSC is active, switch the Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) on 9. 
or off. 



26 


iDrive: Comfort Area 















Workshop Hints 

Service Mode 

The Controller can be used to gain access to Service mode functions of the Control Display. 
Service mode is a special function that provides information about the status of the display 
and MOST system. 

It is designed for use by Service Technicians and is not intended to be accessible to 
vehicle owners. 

Service mode provides access to details of the hardware/ software versions for the control 
display and the control units in the MOST network. 

As an addition to the Test Modules of the Diagnosis Program, Service mode is a simple 
means of quickly accessing control module data without the need for a diagnosis tester. 

Starting the service mode is somewhat like opening a safe: 

• In the Basic menu display, press down the Controller for approximately 6 seconds. This 
step initializes the tactile feedback of the motor. (Hint: The help text flashes briefly when 
it is ready). 

• Turn Controller 3 increments clockwise (to the right). 

• Turn Controller 3 increments anti-clockwise (to the left). 

• Turn Controller 1 increment clockwise (right). 

• Turn Controller 1 increment anti-clockwise (left). 

• Turn Controller 1 increment clockwise (right). 

• Depress Controller to confirm. 


27 


Drive: Comfort Area 




1 


1 . 


MOST devices menu 



2 




2 . 

3. 

4. 


List of found MOST nodes 
Settings menu 
“Back” button 


4 3 


kt-9039 


The Control Display knows how many MOST nodes there are, i.e. how many MOST nodes 
there are on the MOST ring bus. When retrieving the list of MOST control units fitted, the 
Control Display waits for a response from each MOST node. Every control unit on the 
MOST bus contains a MOST communication chip. 

The navigation system control unit has two internal MOST nodes. The query which pro¬ 
duces the list of MOST control units is answered by only one of the MOST nodes in the 
navigation system control unit. 

The responding MOST node is represented as "Navigation" and the other MOST node as 
"wait." This entry is not an error. 

The function "MOST devices" provides a list of all nodes on the MOST network. 

When a control unit is selected, a scrollable list containing the following information 
appears: 

• Part number 

• Hardware number 

• Coding Index 

• Diagnosis index 

• Variant index 

• Date of Manufacture 

• Manufacturer number 

• Message catalog version 

• Software version 

• Operating system version 
28 


iDrive: Comfort Area 













1 . 



1 


2 


3 


2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 


Settings menu 

Master default 

Enable/disable RDS 

Not used for U.S. 
phone. 

Back-button. 


5 


4 


kt-9040 


The function "Settings" provides access to the following service settings: 

• Reset all Vehicle and Key memory functions to default settings (Master default). 

• Enable/disable audio system RDS (Radio Data System) function. 

• Register/de-register cordless handset (SBDH). (not used in the U.S.) 

The service mode is exited by selecting the "Back" button (arrow symbol) at the bottom left 
of the display or by moving the Controller horizontally. 


29 


Drive: Comfort Area 



















Review Questions 


1. List the components contained in the Comfort Area of Drive. 


2. What is the task of the Control Display on the MOST network? 


3. How does the Controller create a different mechanical detent feeling (tactile feedback) 
depending on the items selected in the Control Display? 


4. If the Control Display is switched off by the user what type of items will automatically 
cause the display to switch back on? 


5. What type of information can be displayed on the assistance screen? 


6. Describe the procedure to switch off the DSC. 


7. How is RDS enabled (activated)? 


30 


iDrive: Comfort Area 



