Table of Contents 

E65 AUDIO SYSTEM 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

Components 

Antenna Tuner with Diversity (AVT).4 

Antenna System.5 

Rear Window.6 

Antenna Diversity Unit (FM).6 

Antenna Amplifier (FM).7 

Antenna Amplifier (AM).7 

Audio System Controller (ASK).8 

Basic Hi-Fi Amplifier..11 

LOGIC 7 Hi-Fi Amplifier..12 

Speakers.15 

Audio CD Changer..16 

Review Questions.17 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 11/01 
















E65 AUDIO SYSTEM 
Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 

Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Explain how audio signals are transported in the E65. 

• Describe the functions of the ASK. 

• Recognize the component layout of the audio system of the E65. 


2 

E65 Audio System 




Introduction 


On previous vehicle models, the radio was always controlled by an integrated control unit. 
This control unit included the tuner, cassette deck, amplifier, display and the operating unit. 

The radio could be equipped as an Hi-Fi audio system by adding further components (CD 
changer) or boosters (Digital Signal Processor etc.). Because of the increasing number of 
functions in a radio and the limited area available in the standard radio chassis, new solu¬ 
tions had to be found for the radio control unit. 

In the E65, the radio control unit is no longer in a single module. The audio system has dis¬ 
tributed functions which are integrated in various control units, e.g. the display and operat¬ 
ing function. 

The radio is operated via the Controller in the center console, the display is produced in the 
Control Display located in the instrument panel and the audio signals are controlled in the 
ASK. 

There are two audio systems available for the E65 from the start of production: A basic Hi- 
Fi and the optional LOGIC 7 Hi-fi. 


System Diagram 


Block diagram of the basic E65 audio system. 

K-CAN S 



3 

E65 Audio System 


















































Block diagram of the Logic7 E65 audio system 


k nijy # 



Components 

Antenna/Radio Tuner with Diversity (AVT) 

The E65 tuner is different from previous radios. The tuner is actually a control unit with a 
MOST port and is placed in a different location than the radio. 

The tuner (2) is now located close to the antennas. The installation location of the anten¬ 
na tuner is in the rear left C pillar. Due to the direct connection of the antenna diversity (1), 
no antenna amplifier is needed on the left-hand side. 

On the right-hand side, there is an antenna 
amplifier which is linked via a coaxial cable to the 
diversity unit. The tuner provides the power sup¬ 
ply to the antenna diversity and the antenna 
amplifier. 

The digital audio signals are transmitted to the 
ASK via the MOST, therefore there is no antenna 
coaxial cable. This avoids signal losses and 
interference. 



kt-9217 


4 

E65 Audio System 




















































The tuner used on U.S. E65s is a world tuner which can receive long wave (LW), medium 
wave (AM), short wave (SW) and frequency modulation (FM), as well as traffic and weather 
forecast information (US). In the U.S. weather forecast information is transmitted on 7 dif¬ 
ferent frequencies 24 hours a day. 

The single tuner is set for all country variants, with the exception of the ECE. It corresponds 
to the former Business Radio. 


Antenna System 


The antenna for radio and remote control services (FBD) on the E65 are located in the rear 
window. They include an AM antenna for LW, MW, and SW and 4 FM aerials for VHF 
reception. The FBD frequency for U.S. vehicles is 868.4MHz 


4 




kt-8677 


Index 

Description 

Index 

Description 

1 

Antenna tuner 

FM3 

Third FM antenna 

2 

Antenna diversity 

FM4 

Fourth FM antenna 

3 

Antenna amplifier 

FM5 

FM antenna for traffic announcements 
(Japan) 

4 

Coaxial cable 

FBD 

Antenna for remote control services 

5 

Suppressors are integrated into the 
Wiring harness. 

PM 

Power Module 

6 

Filter trap 

KL30 

Power supply 

LMK 

AM antenna for long, middle and short 

waves 

KL31 

Ground 

FM1 

First FM antenna 

U ANT 

Power supply for antenna modules 

FM2 

Second FM antenna 




5 

E65 Audio System 































































































































The antennas are switched by the diversity module, which is directly located on the tuner 
and is connected to it by an 8-pin ribbon cable. 


The antennas for telephone and navigation are located in a separate shark fin antenna on 
the roof. 

The advantages of the new E65 antenna system are the following: 


• Powerful AM (LMK) antenna. 

• FM diversity available in the basic audio system. 

• High FM diversity performance due to 4 switchable antennas: FM 1 -4. 

• Modular application of basic system on many system variants, e.g. radio, TV, FBD. 

• The antenna system (tuner) has diagnosis capability. 

The antenna system is made up of the following components: 

Rear Window 

The rear window is made laminated safety glass (VSG) with infrared coating (IR). 

The glass thickness is 4 mm. The antenna consist of leads 0.4 mm wide. The rear window 
is partitioned into three sections. The first part includes the AM and FM 5/FBD antennas. 
The second part includes the FM 1, FM 2 and FM 3 antenna. The lower half includes the 
FM 4 antenna. 

The rear screen defroster uses the central and lower panels of the FM antenna. The heat¬ 
ing power is approx. 300 W. 

Antenna Diversity Unit (FM) 

The antenna diversity is installed in the left C pillar, together with the tuner. It is connected 
to the tuner by an 8-pin ribbon cable. 

The ribbon cable is used to transmit the operating voltage and the switching signals DIAG¬ 
NOSIS, CONTROL, LEVEL, AUDIO from tuner to diversity. The HF signal is transferred from 
diversity to the tuner. 

The antenna diversity is used to define the best antenna signal and controls the changeover 
and the output of the antenna signal on the HF output. 


6 

E65 Audio System 




Antenna Amplifier (FM) 

The antenna amplifier in the RH C-pillar is associated to antennas FM 3-4 and to the FBD 
antenna. The antenna amplifier is linked by a coaxial cable to the antenna diversity unit. 


The FM antennas are switched over by a control 

1. FBD antenna connection 

2. Power input for the rear defroster 

3. Rear defroster grid output connection 

4. Antenna connection (FM1-FM5) 

5. Connection for wiring harness (8-pin) 

6. Antenna amplifier 

7. Rear defroster grid output connection 

8. Filter trap circuit for rear defroster 

9. Coaxial connection to the antenna diversity unit 


signal, fed via the coaxial cable. 



Antenna Amplifier (AM) 

The AM amplifier used for LW, MW, and SW ranges, is located in the diversity unit in the LH 
C-pillar. 


7 

E65 Audio System 



















Audio System Controller 


In the past, each system used its own output media (e.g. gong, dual cone speakers etc) 
which generated a number of different sounds in the car. It was often not possible to 
achieve coordination between these sounds or at best, it could be done only in particular 
cases. 

This created situations where acoustic information for other sources had to be suppressed, 
otherwise the driver would have been faced with a confusing mix of acoustic signals. 

On the E65, a control unit has been developed to control, coordinate and generate acoustic 
signals according to priority: the Audio System Controller, (ASK). 





kt-9177 


The Audio System Controller (ASK) has three main functions. 


• Network master 

• Audio master 

• Connection master 

Network Master 

The ASK performs the role of network master for the MOST bus. The functions of the net¬ 
work master are the following: 

• Wake-up, initialization, power-down 

The network master wakes up the bus and has the task of achieving an orderly 
initialization of the network. The ASK can operate with KLR off. To turn it on, push in 
the volume/ON/OFF knob. Adjustments and control is carried out by using the 
Controller and Control Display. 

Another task of the network master is to control the power-down process. Each power¬ 
down is initiated and started by the ASK. 

• Configuration control 

The network master detects the exact system configuration each time that the network 
is started and compares it to the stored coded configuration. 


8 

E65 Audio System 

















• Control of the network operation 

The network master controls the MOST transceiver of the slave equipment for correct 
operation. The equipment which is not operating properly will be released by a reset or 
switched to low power mode so that they do not affect bus communication. 

• Fault code memory 

The network master includes the fault code memory of the MOST network. It stores all 
the faults occurring during the network operation as well as deviations from the 
nominal configuration. 

Audio Master 

As audio master, the ASK has the task to collect and process all the audio signals of the 
vehicle and to distribute them to their destinations. 

The ASK controls all the acoustic requests from the Control Display. The changes in the 
level of a signal is not sudden, but smooth, e.g. during suppression, insertion and fading 
out or temporary suppression of the signal at the destination: Because of this, a high-qual¬ 
ity acoustic sound is obtained. 

The ASK also assumes the generation and preparation of different acoustic signals, e.g. 
PDC signals and warnings. In the event of a request for a warning or caution signal from 
a control unit, the ASK provides a clean acoustic change of the signals. 

• Audio data 

All audio data from any control unit are converted by the ASK into digital audio AF 
format at a sampling rate of 44.1 KHz. 

• Categorization of audio sources 

All possible audio sources are divided into different groups according to priority. Warning 
signals have priority over any other audio source. Mixing of lower priority audio signals 
(e.g. navigation, radio) is possible. 

• Generation of acoustic gongs 

These are acoustic alarm signals which help the driver perceive sounds according to a 
system. The different sounds, requested by the different control units, (e.g. gongs, PDC, 
etc.), must be generated only in association with a visual indication. These come from 
the instrument cluster and the Control Display. 

The following sounds can be generated in the ASK. 


• Beeping for the PDC. 

• Various Check Control and warning gongs. 


9 

E65 Audio System 



Output of Audio Signals 

The output of audio signals occurs under the following conditions: 


• Two gong signals are never output simultaneously. 

• It is possible to generate a maximum of 3 signals at the same time. 

• If the input includes a fourth signal, the signal at the lowest priority is muted. 

• When issuing the 3 higher priority signals, the entertainment source is suppressed 
(radio). If the entertainment source is a CD, it is stopped and switched off. When the 
CD is reactivated, it restarts from the point where it was stopped. 

Examples of audio output: 

Radio: 

The radio plays in the background, the PDC is active and a navigation message is output. 
If a gong request comes, the radio is muted and the gong is generated. 

Telephone: 

When the hands-free function is activated the loudspeakers are muted. Gongs are mixed 
as required according to their priority. The Speech Processing System is not active when 
the hands-free function is used. 

Speech Processing System: 

When the voice processing system is activated, a general mute suppresses the loud¬ 
speakers. Gongs are mixed as required according to their priority. The hands-free opera¬ 
tion and the navigation messages interrupt the Speech Processing System. 

Connection Master 

As connection master, the ASK must provide channels to the equipment connected to the 
bus and distribute the audio signals on the outputs (loudspeakers). 

The connection master also controls the basic Hi-Fi or the LOGIC 7 Hi-Fi amplifiers. 


10 

E65 Audio System 



Basic Hi-Fi Amplifier 


A hi-fi system is offered as standard equipment and is characterized by vehicle-specific tun¬ 
ing to the interior (equalizing) with balanced acoustics. 


The basic signals delivered by the ASK are amplified in the hi-fi amplifier equipped with 
bridge end stages. The output power is 40 W per channel. Total system output is 180 
watts. 



The hi-fi amplifier is controlled by the ASK. The medium-range loudspeakers and the 
tweeters are directly controlled by the ASK. The large sub-woofers underneath the driver 
and passenger seats are driven by the amplifier. 


The hi-fi amplifier has no diagnosis capability. 



Location of the hi-fi amplifier in the left rear 
corner of the trunk. 



11 


E65 Audio System 



















































































LOGIC 7 Hi-Fi Amplifier (Part of optional sound package) 

To satisfy customers with the more demanding requirements for a low-distortion playback 
even at high levels and non-linear frequencies (e.g. amplified low frequencies), it is neces¬ 
sary to provide a sufficient output power to control the loudspeaker. 

For these reasons, a LOGIC 7 hi-fi system with Surround Sound and 7-band equalizer was 
developed. The main differences from the hi-fi amplifier are the following: 


• Active MOST bus components. 

• Complete control via the software. 

• Extended features versus the hi-fi system. 

• Higher output power in the low-frequency range. 

• More channels available to control additional loudspeakers. 

• Diagnosis capability. 


K-CAN-5 


HTL1 




MTLl 






kt-9208 


12 

E65 Audio System 













































































































The LOGIC 7 hi-fi amplifier includes a MOST bus connection, to produce all audio and con¬ 
trol signals in digital form. A digital / analog converter converts the audio signals and ampli¬ 
fies them in the final stages. 

The output power of the mid-range loudspeaker is 40 W and the woofer is 70 W. Total sys¬ 
tem output is 420 watts. 

Additional features are the central front loudspeaker in the instrument panel, the mid-range 
speakers in the rear doors and the tweeters under the rear shelf. 

Besides the known functions like volume, fader, balance, treble, bass and GAL (speed-sen¬ 
sitive radio volume control) the two amplifiers hi-fi and LOGIC 7 hi-fi achieve the following 
functions: 

• 7-band equalizer (LOGIC 7 hi-fi only) 

The frequency ranges can be adjusted individually by the customer. The adjustment is 
performed by the Controller and the Control Display on the ASK. 

• Surround Sound (LOGIC 7 hi-fi only) 

Can be enabled / disabled by the customer. Surround Sound is the use of at least 5 
channels in the interior. With an additional loudspeaker in the front between the left and 
the right channel, a true spatial sound can be obtained. 

The following functions cannot be controlled by the customer, but they are achieved in the 
amplifier software. 

• Level adaptation 

Switching between different audio sources (e.g. CC-CD) should produce no change in 
volume. For this purpose, all levels in ASK are processed on a standard level. 

• Loudness 

To improve reception at a low-volume setting, the low frequencies are slightly amplified. 

• Vehicle-specific equalizing 

Tuning of the acoustics according to the interior of the vehicle. 

• Speed-dependent equalizing (LOGIC 7-hi-fi only) 

Adjustment of the acoustics to increasing noise emission from moving vehicles. 


13 

E65 Audio System 



• Dynamic compression 

In a moving vehicle, the usable dynamics is limited in the upper range by the output 
power of the amplifier and the load characteristics of the loudspeaker. For this reason, 
a speed-dependent dynamics reduction must be performed. 

• Frequency-dependent delay (LOGIC 7 hi-fi only) 

The frequency-dependent delay is used to introduce time corrections on the individual 
speaker units. This ensures that the audio signals are sent simultaneously to all 
speaker units. 


1. MOST connector 

2. 20 pin connector 



kt-9156 


Location of LOGIC 7 amplifier 
in left rear corner of the trunk. 



14 

E65 Audio System 














Speakers 

The Basic Hi-Fi of the E65 comes equipped with 10 speakers. If the LOGIC 7 system is 
ordered the vehicle has 13 speakers. The speaker locations are as follows: 


• 100mm mid-range and 44mm high range 

speaker in each front door. Rear doors have 
mid-range speakers if equipped with 
LOGIC 7. 



• 210mm sub-woofers located underneath the 
driver and passenger seats. 


100mm center channel mid-range 
speaker located in the center of the 
instrument panel speaker if equipped with 
LOGIC 7. 



• Two 100mm mid-range and two 44mm 
high-range speakers located in rear shelf. 




15 

E65 Audio System 



















Audio CD Changer 


The audio CD changer on the E65 has the same features and mechanical structure as its 
equivalent in E38 / E39, it is produced by Alpine. 



This is a 6-way-changer with magazine (1). It is installed on the passenger side in the 
instrument panel, behind a decorative strip. If you press the eject key and use the powered 
flap control, you can control the insertion and removal of the magazine from the driver and 
the passenger side. 

A new feature of the CD changer is the optical 
connection to the MOST bus. The CD changer 
is controlled via the MOST bus interface and 
sends its digital audio signals over it. 

The audio signals are sent to the ASK which 
transmits them via the amplifier and then to the 
loudspeakers. 

To operate the CD changer, you can use the 
following options: 

• Controller and Control display 



• ASK and MFL 


• Voice input 

The CD changer has diagnostic capabilities in the Diagnosis Program via MOST. 


16 

E65 Audio System 














Review Questions 


1. Which device in the audio system is responsible for receiving the radio signals and 
converting them to digital signals? How are those signals transported? 


2. Which control unit is responsible for producing the audio signals? How many signals 
may be output at one time? 


3. From what terminal (KL) is the audio system operational? 


4. What other component shares the Network Master responsibility with the ASK? 


5. Describe the system differences between the Basic Hi-Fi and the LOGIC 7. 


17 

E65 Audio System 



