Table of Contents 
E65 TELEPHONE 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

System Overview.3 

Components 

Handset.4 

Controller and Control Display..4 

Telecommander..5 

Antenna.5 

Hands-Free Microphone.5 

Multi-Function Steering Wheel.6 

Manual Emergency Call Button.6 

Audio System Controller (ASK).7 

Speech Processing System (SVS).7 

Telephone Control Unit.7 

Review Ouestions.8 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 11/01 
















E65 TELEPHONE 
Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 

Objective: 

After completing this model you should be able to: 

• Understand how the telephone is integrated into the electronics of the E65. 

• Recognize the various methods of controlling the telephone. 


2 

E65 Telephone 




Introduction 


For the E65 the CPT-8000 Timeport R portable phone will be offered as standard equipment. 

To integrate the telephone into the communication network, the telephone control unit 
(TCU) is equipped with a MOST port. All communication with the vehicle occurs in digital 
form via the MOST network. 


The telephone can be operated with the following devices: 


• Handset 

• Controller and Control Display 

• Telecommander 

• Speech Processing System 

• Multi-Function Steering Wheel 


System Overview 


A. Telecommander 

B. CPT8000 

C. Emergency call 
button 

K. Compensator 


MTL1 




U _ ■fer—fcHflpMi _ -L 

I^CaZXZNZZiZOZECKX^OOOCIOOOQ 



I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

i 

i 

I 

i 

i 

I 

i 

i 

i 

t 

i 


ilN 


3 

E65 Telephone 


















































































Components 

Handset 

The telephone to be introduced with the E65 in the United States will be the Motorola R CPT 
8000 tri-mode, dual-band portable phone (810 or 1990 Mhz CDMA/TDMA, or analog). 

The phone is stowed and charged inside of the center console storage area. 



For safety reasons the handset is not operational when the vehicle is in motion. 


Controller and Control Display 

The Control Display operated by the Controller can be used to access stored numbers in 
the address book or view SMS messages. The telephone control unit communicates with 
the CD and Controller via the MOST network. 


1. Top 8 frequently called 
numbers. 

2. Last (most recent call) 

3. Search (alphabetically) 

4. Search (in stored order) 

5. Phone book display 

6. Next page 


12 3 4 



\ - \ 




kt-8537 


4 

E65 Telephone 












Telecommander 


The Telecommander is located on the left of the 
center console close to the ASK. If you press 
on the telecommander it moves outward. 

The Telecommander allows control and dialing 
of the telephone from a 3X5 alpha-numeric key 
pad. 

The ergonomic arrangement in the vehicle 
allows easy operation of the telephone. 

The connection of the Telecommander to the telephone control unit is made via a CAN sub¬ 
bus. 



Antenna 



The telephone antenna always includes a 
multiple-band antenna for the telephone and 
a GPS antenna (Global Positioning System) 
for the navigation system. 

In the U.S. models two telephone antennas 
are installed for ranges of 810 Mhz and 1990 
Mhz as well as a GPS. The U.S. antenna is 
recognizable by its three plug connections. 


Hands-Free Microphone 


In the head liner, two covers (1) for the hands-free microphone 
are mounted on the left and on the right close to the sun 
visors. 



The hands-free microphone is always mounted on the driver’s 
side, the right side cover is a blank (Right side cover is used 
for RHD vehicles). 



The microphone is an active microphone with input sensitivity 
of 75 mV/74 dB. 


5 

E65 Telephone 




















Hands-free operation takes place via the microphone and the audio system via the ASK. 
The ASK provides the audio channels and switches off all other audio sources during 
hands-free operation. 

This is a digital full duplex transmission. It means that the AF (audio frequency) is enabled 
for both parties (speaking and listening simultaneously in both directions). An echo com¬ 
pensation avoids feedback. 


The hands-free microphone is also used for voice input for the Speech Processing System. 
In the telephone control unit, the analog signals from the microphone are converted to dig¬ 
ital signals and forwarded to the SVS via the MOST. 


Multi-Function Steering Wheel 


The left side button pad of the MFL contains controls that can be used 
for the telephone system. The push-to-talk button activates the SVS 
menu. The +/- rocker switch allows adjustment of the telephone 
handsfree volume via the ASK and the send/end (phone icon) button 
allows accepting, initiating or ending a hands free call. 

On the right side button pad the “up/down” rocker buttons allow 
scrolling through the telephone address book. 

Communication with the MFL is via the byteflight-ZGM-K-CAN-CD- 
MOST connection. 



Manual Emergency Call Button 



The manual emergency call button (1) is 
a direct input (hardwired) to the telephone 
control unit. When a call is made the LED 
(2) illuminates. 

Once the call is initiated there is no way 
to cancel. 

The automatic emergency call is made by 
the SIM after a collision, based on the 
severity. The signal from the SIM to the 
TCU is passed on over a dedicated 
circuit. Refer to the ISIS chapter for more 
detail. 


6 

E65 Telephone 




Audio System Controller (ASK) 

The Audio System Controller controls the entire audio system. During hands-free opera¬ 
tion, all audio signals are suppressed (muted) and the audio signals from the caller are deliv¬ 
ered to the front left and right mid-range speakers. 

Speech Processing System (SVS) 

The microphone signal supplied by the TCU on the MOST bus can be used by the SVS. 
The Speech Processing System provides control for different telephone functions. For 
details, see the module on the Speech Processing System. 

Compensator 

A compensator is installed in-line between the vehicle antenna and the Telephone Control 
Unit. The compensator ensures that the antenna signal is not degraded before reaching 
the TCU. The compensator is located in the left side of the luggage compartment. 

Telephone Control Unit 

The telephone control unit is located in the left side of the luggage compartment. It is 
responsible for: 

• Executing the automatic and manual emergency call (integrated with navigation). 

• Controlling charging and cycling of the handset batteries when plugged into the vehicle. 

• Providing the microphone signal as a MOST bus telegram. 

• Integration of the telephone into the vehicle Drive system via the MOST network. 


1. 26 pin ELO 



7 

E65 Telephone 














Review Questions 

1. From what control device can a hands-free call be initiated or accepted? Describe the 
signal path necessary for that function to occur. 


2. How is the hands-free microphone made available to the SVS? 


8 

E65 Telephone 



