Table of Contents 

SPEECH PROCESSING SYSTEM (SVS) 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

System Overview.4 

Components.5 

Principle of Operation 

Operation.6 

General Commands.7 

Full Mode.7 

Quick Mode.7 

Visual Feedback.8 

Functions.8 

Review Questions.12 


Initial Print Date: 


Revision Date: 













SPEECH PROCESSING SYSTEM (SVS) 

Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 

Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the systems that can be controlled using the Speech Processing System. 

• Understand how the SVS operates using the MOST network. 


2 

Speech Processing System 




Introduction 


The Speech Processing System (SVS) of the E65 is an evolution of the SES system famil¬ 
iar from the E38. If compared to the E38 speech processing system (up to 40 commands) 
the customer can now choose from 400 possible commands. 

The SVS is used in the MOST network as a means of control and communication between 
the user and the entire system. It offers improvements in operability of the vehicle and 
increases driver comfort. The safety-related functions of the vehicle are not voice controlled. 

The voice input is always in addition to buttons or Control Display functions. The Speech 
Processing System is standard equipment and works in association with the telephone. 

The microphone of the hands-free telephone equipment is used as the input device for 
SVS. 

The SVS will initially be available in three languages: German, U.S. English and U.K. English. 
Other languages may follow in subsequent years. There are currently hardware differences 
between language versions. 

The Speech Processing System controls the following systems: 


• Telephone 

• Navigation 

• Radio 

• Audio CD Player 

• CD Changer 

• Cassette Player (if installed) 

• Climate Control (planned) 

• Internet Browser (planned) 

• Telematics (planned) 

• On-Board Computer 

• Note Pad (recorder) 


3 

Speech Processing System 




System Overview 



4 

Speech Processing System 


















































































Components 

Speech Processing System Control unit 

The SVS control unit is part of the MOST network. It is a slave component that has no net¬ 
work management responsibilities. The SVS control unit is responsible for recognizing the 
customer’s speech and processing it into a command that is sent out over the MOST. 

The SVS control unit is located in the left rear corner of the luggage compartment. 



kt-9178 


The SVS control unit has one 12 pin ELO connector that supplies KL 30, KL 31 and the 
two MOST connections. 

The remainder of the components needed for the operation of the system are: 

• Push-to-talk switch (part of MFL/SZL) 

• Microphone (hardwired to telephone control unit) 

• Audio output (generated by ASK) 

• Instrument cluster for visual display of selected menus and functions. 

The SVS control unit is diagnosable by the Diagnostic Program via the MOST network. 


5 

Speech Processing System 



Principle of Operation 

The Voice Processing System is a self-learning system. Each command has been learned 
from approximately 100 people with different dialects. Even extreme dialects are covered 
and a high recognition capability is achieved. 

It is important that people speak as naturally as possible. They should not speak too loud 
or whisper. 

Operation 

Start and Cancel, Push-To-Talk button (PTT) 

The system is started using the Push-To-Talk 
button on the multi-function steering wheel. 

In SVS mode, the Control Display requests a 
change in status. The Control Display requests 
two audio channels from the Audio System 
Controller (ASK). One channel comes from the 
microphone to the SVS and the other channel 
from the SVS to the front door-mounted loud¬ 
speakers, left and right. 

The SVS transmits the change in status to the Control Display. There is a chime generat¬ 
ed by the ASK to confirm that the SVS system has been initialized, the recognition dialog 
begins (system waits for command). 

By pressing the PTT button again, the dialog can be ended. The dialog can also be ended 
at any time by voice, using the "Cancel" command. 

Shut-off 

While the dialog is active, the Control Display (as system master) can interrupt it (e.g. for a 
priority audio output). In this case, the Control Display sends the status request "interrupt" 
to the SVS. There can then be no output on the audio channel. 

The Control Display informs the SVS as soon as the recognition dialog can resume. 



6 

Speech Processing System 








General Commands 

General commands are part of all function menus and can always be recognized by the 
SVS. 

The following commands are valid for all function menus: 

• “Cancel” 

The current function is terminated. 

• “Main menu” 

You can access the main menu at any time with this command. 

• “Help” 

This command activates the help mode. The Help mode explains how to operate the 
command. 

• “Options” 

This command issues a list of all possible commands in the menu. 

Full Mode 

Detailed output commands and long forms for voice commands are the features of the Full 
Mode dialog. Full Mode is used to support inexperienced users and help them to perform 
the input required, e.g. "I'd like to Dial a number," or "I would like to listen to KLOS." 

After a number of successful actions, the system invites the operator to switch to Quick 
Mode. 

Quick Mode 

The Quick Mode features commands in short format. The purpose of the Quick Mode is 
to shorten the needed dialog for experienced users, e.g. " Dial number," " Play CD." etc. 

When the SVS operates in Quick Mode, if a command is rejected twice or if a Help func¬ 
tion is needed, the SVS automatically switches back to Full Mode. 


7 

Speech Processing System 



Visual Feedback 


The E65 includes a visual feedback in the form 
of a text output on the display. 

The SVS status message is displayed in the 
top line of the area below the tachometer, 20 
characters are available. 18 characters are 
used in the lower line of the display to indicate 
the user input. 



kt-9219 


Functions 


Telephone 

The following functions are available for voice control of the telephone: 

• “PIN input” 

The user can enter the PIN number of the telephone card by voice. 

• “Switch telephone on” 

The telephone can be activated by voice. 

• “Dial number” 

The user can enter any telephone number by voice. If the number is completely 
detected, the dial-up process is started by voice command. 

• “Store names” (internal to the SVS) 

The user can associate names and telephone numbers by a dialog and enter them into 
the phone book in the SVS. The entries are made in sequence. The overall memory 
capacity is 100 names. When you store names by voice, make sure that a sample 
comparison is made with the names already stored in the phone book. 

• “Select names” 

The names stored in the SVS internal phone book can be addressed by voice. The 
corresponding phone number is then transmitted to the phone and the connection is 
established. 


• “Dial repeat” 

This functions repeats the last number dialled. 


8 

Speech Processing System 




• “Display list of SMS / E-mails” (planned) 

This function displays a list of all SMS (Short Message Service) received by the 
telephone on the Control Display. 

• “Read phone book” (SVS internal) 

The phone book inside the SVS is read sequentially. You can jump back and forth in the 
phone book by voice commands. The user can use a voice command to select the 
entry which has just been read from the phone book. Then the telephone connection is 
established. 

• “Delete a phone book entry” (SVS internal) 

The user can delete a single entry from the phone book. By voice, the user must enter 
the name corresponding to the entry to be deleted. For security reasons, the user must 
confirm it before the entry is really deleted. 

• “Delete a phone book” (SVS internal) 

The user can delete all entries in the directory. For security reasons, the user must 
confirm it before the entry is actually deleted. 

Navigation 

The following functions are available for voice control of the navigation system: 

• “Store destination” (SVS internal address list) 

The user can associate names and destinations by voice and enter them into the 
phone book inside the SVS. The entries are placed in sequence. The overall memory 
capacity is 50 names. When you store names entered by voice, make sure that a 
sample comparison is made with the names already stored in the directory. 

• “Select destination” (SVS internal address book) 

The names stored in the SVS internal address book can be addressed by voice. The 
destination corresponding to the name is then transmitted by voice command to the 
navigation system and the route guidance starts. 

• “Destination input” 

The destination input menu of the navigation system is activated. 

• “Destination Home" 

The navigation system takes the home address as the destination address and starts 
the route guidance. 

• Route guidance on/off 
Controls route guidance display 


9 

Speech Processing System 



• “Information on/off 


• “Map” 

• “Set scale” 

With this function, you can change the scale of the map. The user can define the scale 
directly by entering scale parameters (500ft, 1 mile, 10 miles, 50 miles etc.). He/she can 
also enlarge or reduce the scale step by step with voice commands. 

• “Store position” 

• “Display Point of interest” (POI) 

By voice input, the following POIs can be displayed: Hotels / Service stations / Parking 
at location / Destination. 


• “Display new route” 

• “Display last destinations” 

• “Select highway route” 

• “Select country route” 

• “Select fastest route” 

Radio 

The following functions are available for voice control of the radio system: 

• “Radio on / off” 

• “Radio auto-store” 

• “Select AM/FM” 

• “Select frequency” 

• “Radio station forward/back” 

Audio 

The following functions are available for voice control of the audio system: 

• Audio off 


10 

Speech Processing System 





CD Changer/CD Player 

The following functions are available for voice control of the CD changer: 

• “Select track” 

Cassette player 

The following functions are available for voice control of the cassette deck: 

• “Cassette on / off” 

• “Change side” 

On-Board Computer 

The following functions are available for voice control of the On-Board Computer: 

• “Show board computer” 

Note Pad (SVS-internal) 

The note pad allows recording of voice messages. These are the functions available: 

• “Record messages” 

You can record several messages. They are stored in sequence. The single messages 
are separated by a separator word or a signal. Overall, you have 5 minutes available to 
record messages. 10 s before the memory is full, a visual warning is output on the 
instrument cluster display. Recording stops if you press the PTT button or after the 
system detecting a long pause. 

• “Read messages” 

You can listen to complete Message block or to individual messages. Use the function 
"forward" or "back" to skip between messages. Between the single messages, a signal 
or separator word is output. 

• “Delete message” 

You can delete the complete Message block or individual messages. In particular, you 
can delete the message you just listened to. For security reasons, the user must 
confirm before the message is actually deleted. 


11 

Speech Processing System 



Review Questions 

1. How is an SVS command initiated? 


2. What systems of the E65 have possible voice control? 


3. Describe the communication between control units that needs to occur to successfully 
complete a dialog between SVS and the user. Use the system overview schematic for 
help. 


12 

Speech Processing System 



