Table of Contents 

CENTRAL BODY ELECTRONICS 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

Central Locking and Soft Close Doors .4 

System Overview.5 

Components.6 

Principle of Operation.11 

Power Windows .16 

System Overview.17 

Components.18 

Principle of Operation.19 

Electric Roller Sun Blinds . 26 

System Overview.26 

Principle of Operation.27 

Sunroof (SHD) .29 

Components.30 

Principle of Operation.33 

Workshop Hints.35 

Review Questions.36 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 9/01 




















CENTRAL BODY ELECTRONICS 
Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 

Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Understand how the various functions of the E65 Central Body Electronic system are 
controlled. 

• Recognize the various new features of the E65 Central Body Electronics. 


2 

Central Body Electronics 




Introduction 


The Central Body Electronics functions of the E65 are to a large extent identical to the 
ZKE III centralized system of the E38. To enhance convenience and safety, numerous tech¬ 
nical modifications and innovations have been carried out. A large proportion of these 
improvements are executed in the background and are not immediately noticed by the cus¬ 
tomer. 

A major difference to the E38 is the placement of software for a particular function. The 
software can be located in the associated control unit or distributed to several control units. 
On account of this distribution, each system is described below mainly in its capacity as a 
function. 

The following functions are classified as "Central Body Electronics" of the E65: 

• Central Locking and soft-close automatic doors 

• Power windows 

• Roller sun blinds 

• Sun roof 

• Front seat adjustment 

• Steering-column adjustment 

• Memory seats, door mirrors, steering column 

• Windshield wipe-wash functions 

• Automatic trunk lid lift 


3 

Central Body Electronics 




Central Locking and Soft Close Automatic Doors 

The Central Locking system (ZV) of the E65 controls the: 

• Door locks (optional soft-close). 

• Trunk lid lock and soft close. 

• Fuel tank filler flap locking. 

Various improvements have been made to the system, however the greatest change from 
the previous model is that while the CAS contains the Central Locking Master functions, the 
output operations are de-centralized and carried out by several different modules. 

The Central Locking may be operated from the following locations: 

• Lock cylinder, driver's door. 

• Remote Control (FZV function of FBD). 

• Central locking button (CLB). 

• Passenger compartment trunk lid release button (TOEHKI). 

• Trunk-lid button, inside of trunk lid (TOEHKK, only if equipped with HKL). 

• Outside trunk-lid button (TOEHK). 

• Hotel switch in lockable compartment in center console (hotel). 

Unlocking via the crash sensor and forced double unlocking via the "key-inserted signal" in 
the Car Access System (CAS) and the central locking button are possible. 

The following central-locking functions can be controlled by way of the operating locations: 

• Locking 

• Double locking 

• Selective unlocking 

• Unlocking 

• Soft close (optional for the doors) 

In order to improve anti-theft security, the lock cylinder in the trunk lid is now only used for 
mechanical emergency unlocking. 

The individual components communicate with each other via the K-CAN P and with the rest 
of the vehicle via the K-CAN S (e.g. anti-theft alarm system). 

The FZV is connected by way of a separate unidirectional line to the CAS control unit. 


4 

Central Body Electronics 





System Overview 













































































































































Components 

The Central Locking system of the E65 consists of the following components: 

• Car Access System module (CAS). 

• Door Modules (4). 

• Power Module. 

• Door lock assemblies. 

• Trunk lock actuator and soft close drive assembly. 

• Engine hood contact. 

• Fuel tank filler door actuator. 

• Central locking button (CLB). 

• Passenger compartment trunk lid release button (TOEHKI). 

• Trunk-lid button, inside of trunk lid (TOEHKK, only if equipped with HKL). 

• Outside trunk lid release button (TOEHK). 

• Hotel switch in lockable compartment of the center console (hotel). 

Car Access System (CAS) 

As Central Locking Master (ZV master), the CAS controls all 
the higher-level functions of the Central Locking system. 

It centrally monitors the battery voltage of the ZV (lock actua¬ 
tors) assemblies. 

The ZV assemblies function within a voltage range of 9 V to 
16 V. 

Activation of the ZV assemblies is controlled as follows: 

• For safety reasons, the "crash unlocking" function is 
activated independently of the battery voltage. 

• If the CAS determines a value less than 9 V or greater than 16 V, there is no forwarding 
or implementation of operator prompts by the CAS. 

• The motors in the doors are blanked out based on the evaluation of the local voltage at 
the door modules (motors for Soft Close Automatic and motors for electric opening). 



6 

Central Body Electronics 




Door Modules 

Each door contains a door module (1) for the 
control of all functions contained or attached to 
the door. The door module is located inside of 
the door attached to the inner door carrier. 

The door modules receive the signals for lock¬ 
ing and un-locking requests from the CAS over 
the K-CAN-P. 

1 

The door modules are also responsible for interpreting the signals from the hall sensors in 
the door lock assemblies and providing them to the CAS. 

The output for the ZV drives is controlled by internal final stages. 



Power Module 

Within the Central Locking system the Power 
Module is responsible for the output control of 
the trunk lock actuator, soft close motor and 
the fuel filler flap actuator. 

The Power module is also responsible for 
relaying the signals: 

• Status of the trunk lid open/closed 

• Status of the outside trunk lid button 



• Status of timed-arrest for the trunk and filler flap ZV drives 


7 

Central Body Electronics 













Door Lock Assemblies 

The door lock and ZV drives consist of a single integrated 
unit. The door lock assembly contains two servo motors, 
the locking mechanism and hall sensors for position 
sensing. The hall sensors signal: 

• Door contact (open or closed) 

• Position of mechanical lock (locked/ unlocked) 

If the vehicle is equipped with the optional soft close doors 
there is an additional motor for pulling the door closed as 
well as two more hall sensors. The hall sensors signal: 

• “Stand-by” position 

• “Locking pawl switch” position 

The Drivers lock assembly contains two hall sensors for the signalling of the position of the 
external lock cylinder in the drivers door. The hall sensors signal: 

• Unlock request 

• Lock request 

The rear doors are equipped with child lock out switches preventing the rear doors from 
being opened from the inside. 

Trunk lock Actuator and Soft Close Drive Assembly 

The trunk lock and trunk lock actuator are two separate 
components. The lock actuator is controlled by the PM 
and contains a micro-switch to signal the lock status of 
the trunk. This input is sent via the K-CAN-P to the 
CAS for the monitoring of the trunk (e.g. DWA, CC) 

The signal is also an input to the PM to run the soft 
close motor and to control the trunk lights. 


The soft close motor is carried over 
from the E38. It contains an internal 
micro-switch to signal the PM that the 
motor has completed 180° of rotation. 





8 

Central Body Electronics 

























Engine-Hood Contact 

The engine-hood contact is a simple ground (N/O) contact. This contact is closed when 
the hood is open and is monitored for the purposes of theft prevention and CC messages 
(Check Control). The status is distributed by the CAS to the vehicle electrical system. 

Fuel Tank Filler Door Actuator 

The assembly for unlocking and locking the fuel tank filler door is operated by the Power 
Module. The commands for this purpose are controlled by the ZV master (CAS). The fuel- 
tank flap is only locked with ZV central double locking (ZS). 


Central Locking Button (CLB) 


The Central Locking button is located in the 
Drive Comfort Area as part of the IHKA con¬ 
trol panel. However, the CLB is not processed 
by the IHKA, it has a direct connection to the 
CAS. 

The button is a rocker switch that provides 
two separate signals; one for unlock and j 
another for lock. The signal provided is a f 
momentary ground. 

The operation of the CLB remains the same as the previous E38: 

• Central locking/unlocking of the doors (the fuel filler flap remains open). 

• Removing a vehicle from double lock to central lock (emergency function) 

Passenger Compartment Trunk Lid Release 

The interior trunk release button is located in the 
Drive Driving Area to the left of the steering col¬ 
umn. It provides a momentary ground signal to 
the CAS when pressed. 

The signal is passed on to the PM over the K- 
CAN-P. 

The button is active from KL R when the hotel 
setting is off and the vehicle speed is below 
2mph. 




9 

Central Body Electronics 







































Outside Trunk-Lid Release Button (TOEHK). 


The outside trunk lid release button is a direct 
input to the Power Module. It provides a momen¬ 
tary ground when pressed. 

The button is active when the vehicle is unlocked 
and the hotel setting is off. 


421206 

Hotel Switch 

The Hotel switch is located inside of the lockable 
compartment of the center console. It is a direct 
input to the CAS as a ground signal when the 
switch is in the “lock” position. 


Locking of the compartment is done using the 
mechanical key integrated into the Remote 
Control which the customers then takes with 
them. Only the “electronic key” is then handed 
over to the hotel valet. 

When the setting is “locked”, the interior and outside trunk release button inputs are 
ignored. 

The CAS sends the telegram over the bus that the hotel setting is engaged. This is used,for 
example, by the DWA to continue to monitor the trunk and the hood even though the vehi¬ 
cle is unlocked. 




10 

Central Body Electronics 



















Principle of Operation 
Central Locking System Functions 
Central Locking 

Central locking is activated using the Central Locking button inside of the vehicle. Only the 
doors and trunk are locked, the fuel tank filler door remains open for access by gas station 
attendants. The locking pin in the door lock assembly is not disengaged, therefore the vehi¬ 
cle doors may be unlocked by pulling on the interior handle once. 

Double Locking 

When double locking is engaged, the locking pin in each door is disengaged from the lock 
by a mechanical coupling. It is no longer possible to unlock the vehicle from the inside using 
the handles or from the outside. The fuel-tank filler door is locked. 

Double locking is only possible with terminal OFF and the subsequent opening of one of 
the front doors and with the driver's door closed. With the driver's door open, there is no 
action in response to the double locking operator request. 

Selective Unlocking 

Selective unlocking is activated by means of coding. With selective unlocking, only the dri¬ 
ver's door is unlocked on the first unlocking command via the driver's door operating loca¬ 
tion or the remote control. The other doors move into the locked position. Only with the 
second unlocking attempt is the entire vehicle unlocked. 

Double Unlocking with Valid Remote Control 

With the vehicle double locked, the assemblies are moved from the "double locking" posi¬ 
tion to the "locked" position when a valid Remote Control is inserted in the CAS. The vehi¬ 
cle engine may only be started when the central locking has been double-unlocked. 

The procedure is handled by the K-CAN messages for the central locking control system. 
If a driver has unintentionally locked himself inside his vehicle by means of the Remote- 
Control , forced double unlocking prevents him from driving off in the vehicle while it is dou¬ 
ble-locked and the anti-theft alarm system is armed. 

Double Unlocking via Central Lock Button (CLB) 

An occupant who has accidentally locked himself in is able to get out by operating the CLB. 
This action moves the ZV on a one-off basis from double locked to locked. It is then pos¬ 
sible to open the door through double operation of the inside door handle. 

The DWA is not disarmed in this process so that when a vehicle is opened in this way an 
alarm cycle is triggered when the door is opened. 


11 

Central Body Electronics 



Electric Lock-Out Protection 

With electric lock-out protection, the electronics ensures that the central-locking assembly 
is unlocked again e.g. when the locking knob is pressed down with an open driver's door. 
This protects the driver against being inadvertently locked out. With the driver's door open, 
it is not possible to lock the vehicle with the central lock button. The remote control is like¬ 
wise ineffective. 

Crash Unlocking 

The crash message is transmitted from the Safety Information Module (SIM) via the ZGM to 
the K-CAN-S. The CAS receives the message and passes it on over the K-CAN-P. 

The message is made available to the door modules and the Power Module. A priority 
"unlocking message" is simultaneously created by the ZV master in the CAS and forward¬ 
ed to the door modules and the Power Module. This is to ensure that the system is 
unlocked in each case even if the crash message were to be delayed because of a a cur¬ 
rently active message. Unlocking of the Central Locking system in the event of a crash is 
only permitted under the following conditions: 

• Terminal R ON 

• Terminal 15 ON 

• Vehicle is not in double-locked state, (for theft protection) 

Reactivation of Controls after Crash Unlocking 

The following component signals are disabled after crash unlocking to prevent unwanted 
re-locking due to crash-induced short-circuit faults or damage of the lock mechanism: 


• Lock cylinder, driver's door 

• CLB 

• Remote Control 

These components are re-activated by resetting the CAS-internal crash status. After ter¬ 
minal R "OFF", the following events can reset the crash status after 3 s: 

• Reception of signals "status, crash severity" value 0 (light collision without airbag 
activation) 

• Opening and closing of driver's door 

• Unlocking command at lock cylinder in driver's door 

• Unlocking command via Remote Control 

• Deactivation and reactivation of terminal R 


12 

Central Body Electronics 



Timed-Arrest 

An timed arrest circuit is provided because the assembly motors are always operated up to 
their stops. An internal counter is increased by a value of 1 each time it is actuated. This 
counter is reduced by a value of 1 after a specified period of time. 

The timed arrest circuit engages if the counter exceeds a specified value on account of per¬ 
manent actuation. All the operator prompts for the Central Locking are forwarded but no 
longer executed. 

The door modules and the Power Module signal via the K-CAN P to the Central-Locking 
master in the CAS that an assembly is now in timed arrest status. The ZV master in the CAS 
then outputs an overall status "ZV assembly, timed arrest circuit" for all the users. 

The timed arrest circuit is disengaged by the door modules and the Power Module when 
the signal "ZV assembly, timed arrest circuit" is removed. There is also an timed arrest cir¬ 
cuit for trunk-lid unlocking. The anti-repeat circuit is ignored during the crash unlocking 
function. 

Initiation of Convenience Closing/Opening 

The Central Locking system includes the convenience function for power windows and slid¬ 
ing sunroof. It is possible by means of the lock cylinder in the driver's door or by Remote 
Control to initiate sequential closing (only from drivers door) and opening of the windows 
and the sunroof as long as terminal R is off. 

Convenience closing is initiated if a ZS (double-lock) command is held for an extended peri¬ 
od. The sequence is aborted if the ZS command is cancelled during the closing operation. 
If a ZS command is entered again within a specific period since the cancellation, the 
sequence starts after a brief period. 

Convenience opening is initiated if an ER (unlock) command is held for an extended peri¬ 
od. The sequence is aborted if the ER command is cancelled. In the event of resumption, 
convenience opening follows the same process as convenience closing. 

The Central Locking system forwards the operator prompts to controlling functions in the 
CAS (power-window master) and to the vehicle bus system. 


13 

Central Body Electronics 



Signalling to Anti-Theft Alarm System (via CAN) 

The DWA is not part ot the Central Locking system but it does require commands and sig¬ 
nals from it. For this purpose, the DWA monitors the status of doors, hood, trunk and ter¬ 
minal status. 

The DWA monitors the tilt sensor and the ultrasonic interior protection sensor by itself. 

The DWA is armed by each valid locking (ZS) command. Optical feedback is provided by 
an LED, which signals the status of the DWA. The tilt and interior sensors are deactivated 
if a ZS command is initiated again within a specific period (10 s) after the first arming of the 
DWA. 

The CAS forwards this information to the K-CAN P and K-CAN S. The DWA is disarmed 
by each double-unlocking command. The luggage compartment can also be accessed 
while the DWA is armed via remote control without the alarm being activated. 

The alarm is activated if the trunk lid is opened mechanically using the emergency lock 
cylinder while the DWA is armed. 

Scope of DWA monitoring from the Central Locking system: 

• Door contacts 

• Engine-hood contact 

• Trunk-lid contact 

• Tampering, driver's-door lock cylinder 

Vehicle and Key Memory Individualization 

All the codable functions for Vehicle/Key Memory are activated within the framework of the 
E65 Coding, Individualization and Programming program (CIP). 

These functions can be set using the coding software and are stored in the CAS. They only 
become active when the vehicle has been "double-locked". 

The following central locking functions have been made possible for individualization (4 keys 
+ 1 vehicle coding): 


• Selective unlocking of driver's door. 

• Automatic locking from a speed of 16 km/h (lOmph). 

• Automatic relocking if vehicle unlocked by remote control and no ensuing action in 2 
minutes. 


14 

Central Body Electronics 



Soft Close Automatic Doors (SCA) 

The Soft Close Automatic Doors are optional equipment (part of the convenience package). 

The drive assemblies are integrated into the door locks and are controlled by the individual 

door modules. 

There are 2 additional hall sensor signals for the position detection of the SCA drive: 

1) “Stand-by” position 

2) “Locking pawl switch” position 

• The control system always knows the position of the drive and can, if necessary, 
activate it in order to move it to a defined or “set” position. 

• The "Locking pawl switch" position is set each time the drive is switched on and 
deleted again when switched off in a set position (stand-by or park). The "Stand-by” 
position" is set when the door is opened and deleted when the latch has reached the 
park position. 

• When the door is opened, (recognized by the rotary-latch hall sensor), the SCA drive 
moves into the stand-by position so that it only needs to move half a turn into the park 
position the next time the door is pulled closed. If the door is moved into the main catch 
before the SCA is in operation (slamming shut), the SCA drive remains in the stand-by 
position. The SCA does not move the next time the door is opened. 

• When the door is closed, the sensors identify the catch position from the locking-pawl 
signal and pull the door into the main catch. The SCA drive then remains in the park 
position. 

• If the electronics fails to identify the reaching of the two defined positions, the control 
system assumes a timeout after 5 s and shuts down the SCA drive. An entry is also 
made in the fault memory of the respective door module. 

• The stop conditions are checked every 23 ms while the SCA is in operation. The motor 
is shut down if the SCA is not stopped within 5 s. The motor is switched off when 
reaching the park position. 


Timed Arrest Circuit 

The SCA doors have a timed arrest circuit to prevent the motors and final stages from over¬ 
heating. Operation is staggered until the arrest counter in the door modules returns to zero. 


15 

Central Body Electronics 



Power Windows 


The power windows are controlled by the door modules, (i.e. one door module locally con¬ 
trols one power window). The CAS control unit controls the window functions as the 
power-window master. 

The master controls the convenience functions and the Central locking (ZV) interface. 

List of power window functions: 

• Closing and opening of windows. 

• Toll function (one-touch) in both directions on all 4 windows. 

• Child lock-out. 

• Emergency close. 

• Convenience opening/closing. 

• Timed arrest circuit. 

• Excessive load cutout. 

• Smooth rundown / smooth startup. 

• Synchronous motor operation. 

• Anti-trapping protection. 


16 

Central Body Electronics 




System Overview 






17 

Central Body Electronics 





























































































Components 


Car Access System (CAS) 

The CAS contains the master functions of the power window system. It is also responsi¬ 
ble for signalling the convenience open/closed requests. 

Electric Window Lift Assemblies 

The electric window lift assemblies consist of an electric motor/module with integrated hall 
sensors for distance and speed sensing. The anti-trap strips in the door frame of the pre¬ 
decessor E38 have been deleted. The module integrated into the assembly receives the 
control requests from the door module via a PWM signal, it then provides the appropriate 
voltage to control the operation of the motor within an infinitely variable speed range up to 
full voltage. The window motor/modules must be initialized. 

The window regulators are of the cable operated design as used in the E38. 

Door Modules 

Each door contains a door module for the control of all functions contained or attached to 
the door. The door module is located inside of the door attached to the inner door carrier. 

The door module receives the control requests from the window switches and carries out 
the allowed operation of the motor. The control is based on the status signalled from the 
CAS and the current condition of the window as detected by the hall sensors in the motor 
assembly. 

Window Switches 

The window switches of the E65 are of the press/pull type as first seen on the E46. The 
drivers door switch block is a control unit that communicates with the door module via a 
local P-bus (single wire: 9.6kbps). 


The drivers door module signals the status 
of all of the switches of the drivers switch 
block to the other door modules and the 
CAS over the K-CAN-P. 

The single switches in the passenger doors 
are conventional ground switches that 
communicate 5 statuses over 2 wires as 
used on the predecessor E38. 



18 

Central Body Electronics 





Principle of Operation 

Operating the Windows 

The power windows are enabled and disabled by the power-window master in the CAS. 
Enabling and disabling are dependent on coding and the status of the door contacts and 
the terminal status. 

The power windows can be operated from "terminal R on" and are disabled in the 
crossover into "sleep mode". 

The switch control logic, which was introduced for the first time in the E46, is also used in 
the E65. This prevents the windows from being closed by mistake. 

1. One touch closed 

2. Manual close 

3. Neutral 

4. Manual open 

5. One touch open 

Toll operation (one-touch) takes place in the closing or opening direction immediately after 
the switch position "one touch closed" or "one-touch open" has been reached. The power 
windows are activated in the initial closed/open lock-in positions as long as the button is 
held in this position. Anti-trapping protection is active in both one-touch and manual oper¬ 
ation. 

The function with the highest priority that is started or selected first is executed. However, 
a one-touch function can be cancelled by the local switch. 

In order to prevent damage to the motor, the window travel is subject to a maximum acti¬ 
vation time of 10 s (exception: initialization run). 

If the window glass moves to the upper stop, the drive is activated at full power for the 
blocking time of 0.5 s in order to ensure safe closing. 

The following functions are available thanks to timed activation of the power-window drives 
by means of power final stages: 

• Smooth startup 

• Smooth rundown 

• Speed control (2 speed stages) 



19 

Central Body Electronics 



Emergency Close 

This function is used for deliberate closing of the windows without anti-trapping protection. 
Use of this function may be necessary for example in the event of an attack from an out¬ 
side source or closing a window glass which has frozen solid. 

The entire control sequence is divided into two phases: 

Phase 1: 

The emergency-close mode is activated after 0.5 s when the position "one-touch closed" 
is held. The window is closed at maximum speed and with modified anti-trapping protec¬ 
tion. Releasing the button terminates emergency closing, (i.e. the window proceeds to be 
closed with full anti-trapping protection as with automatic operation). 

Anti-trapping protection remains activated in modified form even during emergency closing. 
If trapping is detected, the window travels back only the short distance of 20 mm. This 
relieves strain on the mechanical system or gives the attacker the option of backing away. 

Phase 2: 

The button must now be released ("zero position") and then pressed again in the position 
"overpressed closed" within 4 s. The window is now closed without anti-trapping protec¬ 
tion with full force. In the event of blocking, the window is powered until the motor thermal 
protection is activated or the window has moved to the upper stop. 

Emergency closing is terminated when the button is released. For safety reasons, it is 
always possible to open the window independently of the thermal protection. 

If there is no renewed activation of the emergency-close mode within 4 s (overpressing and 
holding), anti-trapping protection returns to its normal state. "Emergency close" is not 
operational from a vehicle speed of > 16 km/h (lOmph). 

When the child lock is engaged, the emergency-close function cannot be activated by the 
local switches in the rear doors but only only by the switch block in the driver's door. 

An emergency-closing operation activated by the switch block in the driver's door cannot 
be interrupted by the local buttons in the front passenger door or the rear doors. 

The emergency-close function can be completely deactivated by means of coding. 


20 

Central Body Electronics 



Convenience Opening/Closing 

The convenience function enables the operator to close or open all the windows and the 
slide/tilt sunroof before entering or leaving the vehicle. 

The convenience opening function can be triggered by means of the Remote Control key. 
Both convenience opening and closing can be operated by mechanical key operation in the 
driver's door lock. 

The function is controlled by the power-window master in the CAS control unit. For this 
purpose, a K-CAN-P message is sent from the CAS to the four doors. 

Closing 

The closing operation starts after a delay; for this purpose, the key must be held in the lock¬ 
ing (VR) or double locking (ZS) position during the entire closing operation. The closing 
operation can be terminated at any time by turning the key back. The sequence begins 
again after 0.5 s if a ZS command is entered again within 3 s of the cancellation. 

The individual windows and the sunroof are closed in the following sequence: rear power 
windows (PWs), front PWs and sunroof. The PWs are activated so that two PWs are 
always switched on simultaneously (starting with the rear). The front PWs are started after 
a 1 s delay. The sunroof is closed immediately when all 4 windows are closed or 3.5 s after 
the start of convenience closing. 

Opening 

In the unlocking lock cylinder position (ER), it is possible to initiate convenience opening by 
holding the key in this position. With convenience opening, first the front PWs are opened, 
followed by the rear PWs after a delay of 1 s. The sunroof is opened immediately when all 
4 windows are open or 3.5 s after the start of convenience opening. 

The operation can be terminated at any time by turning the key back. The sequence begins 
again after 0.5 s if an ER command is entered again within 3 s of the cancellation. 

Operation by Remote Control is performed in the same way as operation by lock cylinder. 


21 

Central Body Electronics 



Child Lock-out 

Operation of the two rear power-window buttons is disabled by means of the child-lock 
button in the switch block in the driver's door. When the child lock is engaged, it is only 
possible to operate the rear power windows from the driver's switch block or via the con¬ 
venience function. An LED in the button indicates the current status of the child lock. 

The LED is activated by the power-window master in the CAS. No opening/closing func¬ 
tion is triggered when the child lock is engaged. 

In the event of a fault, the Check Control message "Child lock not functioning" in the instru¬ 
ment cluster is sent by the CAS. 

It is only possible to deactivate the child lock in conjunction with a valid Remote Control in 
the ignition. 

The child lock remains engaged after a CRASH telegram has been received. 

Motor Protection (thermal protection) 

Each power-window motor is provided with its own thermal protection to prevent them 
from overheating. For this purpose, the motor running time is added up in a counter. The 
output value of the counter is influenced by the ambient temperature. 

If the counter exceeds a threshold, new control requests are no longer accepted but a 
movement that is already in process is continued. The counter is reduced again if the 
motor is deactivated. Operator prompts are accepted again when the value drops below 
the threshold. Return window travel in the event of trapping is not obstructed by the ther¬ 
mal protection. 

Load Deactivation 

In order to assist starting, the power windows are not operational with terminal 50 (starter 
motor). Each action, e.g. opening or one-touch function, is terminated immediately and the 
power windows are stopped. Following the starting sequence, the windows are fully oper¬ 
ational again once they have been re-actuated. 

Undervoltage Deactivation 

The supply voltage is monitored locally in the door modules. If the supply voltage is below 
9 V, the power windows are disabled. 


22 

Central Body Electronics 



Smooth Start-up 

Smooth start-up describes a new feature of the E65 which starts the power windows with 
a linear increase in speed up to full speed. Smooth start-up takes place in both the clos¬ 
ing and opening directions. 

Clunking noises are avoided in the door due to the low speed as play in the window lift 
assembly is taken up. 

To ensure that the windows remain quiet during the entire service life of the vehicle, the 
gradient of the first ramp is less steep than that of the second ramp. The total window 
travel until the full desired speed is reached is approx.. 5 mm. 

1. First gradient ramp 

2. Distance traveled during first ramp 

3. Second gradient ramp 

4. Full run speed 


kt-8900 

Smooth Rundown 



2 


Smooth rundown describes running down of the power windows with a linear decrease in 
the infinitely variable speed until the window is at a standstill. This function is used when 
approaching the end positions (in both automatic and manual operation) of the lower and 
upper stops. 


The smooth-rundown travel is about 15 mm 
the upward travel. 

1. Rundown gradient ramp 

2. Start of rundown 

3. End position (open/closed) 

4. Speed in window seal area 

5. Full run speed 


on the downward travel and about 30 mm on 



23 

Central Body Electronics 












Synchronous Motor Operation 


The window speed is kept constant over a wide voltage range by timed activation (PWM) 
of the power windows. 

Blocking Protection 

Blocking protection is based on monitoring of the Hall-sensor signals. With each signal 
change of the active sensor, a time measurement is restarted which triggers the blocking 
reaction when a defined period of time is exceeded (exception: emergency close). 

If blocking protection takes place in an adjustment range protected by closing-force limita¬ 
tion, the window travels back when the closing-force limitation is exceeded. Outside this 
range, the window travels back for 1/4 turn in order to relieve the tension on the mechani¬ 
cal system. 

Anti-Trapping Protection 

Anti-trapping protection restricts window closing force to a maximum permissible value 
(closing-force limitation). Any load in excess of this force causes the window to immedi¬ 
ately stop and reverse. 

The power windows require an initialization procedure during the initial startup. 

The initialization procedure consists of: 

• Standardization 

• Learning of characteristic closing-force curve 

When the window is standardized, the end positions of the window travel are determined 
by a blocking run in the upper window seal and on the lower window stop. When the clos¬ 
ing force is being learned, it is measured over the entire closing travel and permanently 
stored. 

Anti-trapping protection is active and one-touch closing is possible only after initialization 
has been completed. 

Calibration of the triggering threshold begins with a closing force of approx. 500 N. This 
high starting value increases operational reliability so that the windows are closed even in 
the event of stiffness. 


24 

Central Body Electronics 



Manual Initialization 

The power-window system must always be initialized after any repair work affecting the sys¬ 
tem has been carried out. 

Operation sequence: 

• Press the power window switch in the open direction for at least 15 s but no longer than 
25 s. 

• Release the switch and then pull it to the “one-touch” close position and hold it. 
Initialization begins (this step is part of the CAS logic to prevent a trigger of the 
initialization mode if the switch is jammed). 

• Hold the switch in the “one-touch” close position until initialization is completed. 

The windows will open and then return to the closed position to confirm a successful 
initialization. 

• A Check Control message is issued if any of the side-windows are not initialized. The 
message is retracted as soon as all windows are successfully initialized. 


Check Control Message Message displayed in Cause 

displayed in Kombi Control Display 


Power window not initialized! 




“Power window not initialized!” 
Anti-trap protection deactivated. 
Please contact the nearest BMW 
center. 


One or more windows 
have been detected by 
the CAS as not 
initialized 


25 

Central Body Electronics 


















Electric Roller Sun Blinds 


Rear electric roller sun blinds are optional equipment. They are only available in combina¬ 
tion with the rear-window roller blind. Each door has two roller sun blinds: one for the side 
window and one for the quarter window. 

The IHKA contains the master function and the rear-window roller blind control. The oper¬ 
ating switches for the rear electric roller sun blinds are located in the driver's door switch 
block (module) and on the rear switch blocks (module). 

There are buttons for the side-window sun blind, the quarter window sun blind, the rear- 
window roller blind and left/right rear door side selections on each door switch block . 


Both rear door modules contain control outputs and master functions for the rear-com¬ 
partment roller sun blinds. 


System Overview 




26 

Central Body Electronics 


kt-8974 











































Principle of Operation 

To protect the customer against trapping, the 
side-window roller blinds can only be raised 
when the side window is closed. The system 
regards the side window as "closed" up to a 
maximum opening of 10 mm. 

• It is always possible to lower the side 
window roller blinds, even when the 
window is open. 

• It is always possible to lower the window glass, even when the side-window roller blind 
is up. 

When the window is open and a command to raise the side-window roller blind is sent, the 
side-window roller blind starts up briefly and reverses . This indicates that an invalid oper¬ 
ation has been attempted. The roller sun blind cannot be raised until the customer closes 
the window. It is always possible to operate the quarter roller blind, irrespective of the side 
window position. 

Briefly pressing or holding down the control buttons for the side and rear-window roller 
blinds initiates an automatic movement of the roller sun blinds as far as the top or bottom 
stop. 

The left/right slide switches on the rear switch blocks are used to select whether the roller 
sun blinds and the side window on the left or right hand side are to be operated. 

Holding down the rear window roller blind switch activates a special function, which acti¬ 
vates the rear-window roller blind immediately. After 750 ms, all rear-compartment roller 
sun blinds move in the same direction as the rear-window roller blind. 

For example, when the rear-window roller blind is down, both the rear-window roller blind 
and the rear-compartment roller sun blinds move upwards when the button is held down. 



27 

Central Body Electronics 




Undervoltage Protection 

The voltage supply is monitored locally in the door modules. Roller sun blind operation is 
stopped if the voltage is less than 9.0 V. The functions are not available again until the volt¬ 
age exceeds 9.5 V. 

Once a roller sun blind has been set in motion, the operation is completed regardless of the 
voltage level. 

Blockage Detection 

To protect the motor and the control units, the door module has blockage detection which 
switches the motor off after it reaches the upper or lower end position. The deactivation cri¬ 
teria is calculated from the motor starting current. When 75% over the normal motor start¬ 
ing current is reached the control unit switches off the motor. 

Motor activation is also time monitored. The system stops activating the motors after 11 s 
for the rear and side-window roller blinds and 6 s for the quarter window roller sun blind. 

Timed Arrest 

To prevent playing children from overloading the motor by constantly sending commands 
(thermal cutout), a timed arrest feature used. If this counter exceeds a maximum running 
time of 90 s, then no new operating requests will be accepted. If running time of the motor 
exceeds 90 s, the motor operation pauses 270s. 

When timed arrest is active, it is possible to reverse the roller sun blind once downward. 

Child Safety Lock 

The child safety lock function is engaged or released via a button in the driver's door switch 
block. When the child safety lock is engaged, it not possible to operate the rear compart¬ 
ment roller sun blinds and the rear-window roller blind from the rear switches. 

An active roller sun blind function is not interrupted by engaging the child safety lock. 


28 

Central Body Electronics 



Sunroof (SHD) 

Introduction 

The SHD module controls the opening, closing, lifting and lowering of the glass sunroof in 
the E65. 

The anti-trapping protection of the sunroof has been improved considerably. 

The following functions are available for the sunroof: 

• Manual operation 

• One-touch operation 

• Convenience opening and closing 

• Panic close 

• Anti-trapping protection 

• Emergency operation 

• Mechanical operation 

• Generation of CC messages 

• Diagnosis 



System Overview 



kt-7618 


29 

Central Body Electronics 
































Components 

The sunroof consists of the following components: 

• Sunroof cassette 

• SHD Control unit 

• Sunroof switch 

• Vehicle bus interface 

Sunroof Cassette 

The structure of the sunroof cassette is similar to that of the E38/E39. 

The parts that can be 

• Glass panel 

• Floating headliner 

• Wind deflector 

• SHD module 

• Roof gutter 

1. Roof gutter 

2. Mechanism (small items) 

3. Edge trim 

4. SHD module 

5. Sunroof recess 

6. Bracket for sunroof cables 

7. Wind deflector 

8. Floating headliner 

9. Glass panel 

The cables of the sunroof cassette cannot be serviced individually, if they are defective, the 
entire cassette must be replaced. If the sliding/tilt lever is damaged the cassette must also 
be replaced. 

Note: Be careful removing the rubber drain hoses from the cassette because they are bonded to 
the body and are not easily replaced. 


replaced with the cassette still installed in the vehicle are: 



kt-8764 


30 

Central Body Electronics 


SHD Control Unit 


The sunroof module is located, as with other 
models, behind the rear view mirror in the cen¬ 
ter of the roof. It contains the following compo¬ 
nents: 

• DC motor with attached gear reduction 
mechanism. 

• 2 integrated Hall sensors for position and 
trap detection. 

• Control unit 



The DC motor is controlled with a PWM signal to provide a smooth-rundown feature simi¬ 
lar to the window operation. 

This module can only be replaced as a complete unit. 


Sunroof Switch 


The switch is installed in the panel behind the 
interior light, beside the emergency call button. 

Possible directions for movement: 

1. Open 

2. Close 

3. Lift 



SB RHO 




* 


“Pli— 1_1 — 



* 

0 


The operations available from the sunroof switch corre¬ 
spond to the previous E38. 

The sunroof switch provides the SHD module with 
requests for sunroof operation as coded grounds over 
three wires. The ground supply for the switch is from the 
SHD control unit. 



2. 

Terminal 58g 

5EjJ 

3. 

Lift roof 


4. 

Open 

31 

kt-8637 

5. 

Close 


kt-8637 


31 

Central Body Electronics 



















Vehicle Bus Interface 


The communication with the vehicle electronics is via the K-CAN-S connection. 


D BUS 



P 




MOST PytwtKsM 


PT-CJiH kt-8625 


CAS 

The convenience opening/closing commands and the terminal status are received from the 
CAS via the K-CAN S. 


Instrument cluster 

The instrument cluster serves as a display of Check Control (CC) messages for the SHD. 

Control Display CD 

Extended CC messages are displayed in the CD. 

Dynamic Stability Control DSC 

The DSC provides the speed signal over the bus system used for the panic mode and anti¬ 
trapping protection. 


32 

Central Body Electronics 














































































































































Principle of Operation 


The manual, one-touch and convenience open/close features correspond to the previous 
models. 

The following operations are new to the E65 SHD: 

Panic Close 

This function is for deliberate closing of the sunroof without anti-trapping protection. It 
might be necessary to use this function, for example, in the event of an outside attack or if 
the roof is jammed. 

The control procedure is divided into two phases: 

Phase 1: 

Holding the switch position "one-touch CLOSE" activates the panic close mode after 0.5s. 
The sunroof is closed at maximum speed and with modified anti-trapping protection. 
Releasing the button terminates the panic close, which means that the sunroof is closed 
with normal anti-trap. 

Even in the case of panic closing, the anti-trapping protection remains activated in a mod¬ 
ified form. If trapping is detected, the roof only moves back 20 mm. This relieves strain on 
the mechanical system or gives the attacker the option of backing away. 

Phase 2: 

The sunroof switch must be released ("Position zero") and immediately pressed again with¬ 
in 1.5 seconds. The sunroof is now closed at maximum power without anti-trapping pro¬ 
tection. The actuation time of the SHD motor is a maximum of 15 s. In the event of block¬ 
ing, the SHD motor still receives current until the higher-level motor protection of 15s kicks 
in or the sunroof lid is moved into the end position. 

For safety reasons, it must always be possible to open the sunroof. Releasing the button 
discontinues the panic close immediately. 

If the sunroof is in the lift position, the panic close function cannot be triggered. 

As of a vehicle speed of >16 km/h (lOmph), panic close does not function. 


33 

Central Body Electronics 



Anti-trapping Protection 

The SHD has anti-trapping protection for all closing functions. In order to detect trapping, 
hall sensors are integrated into the motor. The sensors provide direct measurement of the 
closing speed and end positions. They are also used for calculation of the sunroof closing 
power. The result of the calculations are stored in the control unit as the “characteristic 
curve”. 

For each closing operation, the required closing power is determined. The characteristic 
curve is then calibrated to this value and as closing proceeds, the currently measured val¬ 
ues are compared. If the measured force increases to a value above the characteristic 
curve by more than the triggering threshold, the sunroof is reversed. 

In compliance with governmental regulations, the maximum closing power should not 
exceed 100 N in the range of 25 mm to 4 mm. The mass inertia of the moving parts makes 
it necessary to reduce the adjustment speed of the roof in this area. This is done by reduc¬ 
tion of the voltage applied to the motor. The voltage is adjusted by pulse width modulation 
(smooth-rundown feature). 

Adjustment of Anti-Trapping Protection to the Vehicle Speed 

The air flow when driving produces a vacuum at the sunroof. This suction is particularly 
strong when the roof is closed from the lift position. 

The SHD control unit is unable to distinguish this rise in force from trapping of an obstacle. 
For this reason, the speed signal is included in the anti-trap protection function. The speed 
signal is provided by the DSC and received by the SHD via the K-CAN-S. 


Emergency Mechanical Operation 

In the event of an electrical defect, the sunroof can be moved by using the hexagon wrench 
from the on-board tool kit. 



34 

Central Body Electronics 



Workshop Hints 

Initialization 

Initialization of the SHD control unit is necessary after: 

• Intervention in the mechanical sequence, e.g. manual operation or roof position 
changed while module was removed. 

• Interruption of power supply while the sunroof was moving. 

• Replacement of SHD control unit or sunroof cassette. 

Disconnection of the battery does not erase the stored positions in the control unit. 

The initialization consists of 2 operations that are required for complete functioning of the 
sunroof: 

1. Standardization: This is when the sunroof module measures and stores the mechanical 
end position of the sunroof in the end position "lift". This end position is used by the 
module to calculate the remaining positions. 

2. Learning the characteristic curve: the sunroof module stores the required force to move 
the sunroof). 

Initialization is performed as follows: 

• Press the operating switch to the "Lift" position and hold it there. 

• After 15 seconds, the sunroof drive runs towards "lift." The end position is saved in the 
module. 

• In the position "Lift," the drive stops for 5 seconds and then runs towards "Close." 

The characteristic curve for "Close from Lift" is learned. 

• The drive then moves to the "Open" end position, turns around and moves towards 
"Close." The characteristic curve for "Close" is learned. 

The switch must remain pressed during the entire procedure. If the switch is released, the 
procedure must be repeated. The anti-trapping protection does not function during initial¬ 
ization. 

A Check Control message is issued by the SHD until initialization is performed. 


35 

Central Body Electronics 



Review Questions 


1. What is the principle difference between the Central Body Electronics system of the 
E65 and that of a vehicle equipped with ZKE III or V? 


2. Which control unit is responsible for performing the central locking and control of the 
soft-close motor for the trunk? 


3. When is initialization of the windows and sunroof necessary? 


4. How does the SCA electronics for the door recognize when it needs to run and when it 
does not (slamming the door)? 


5. What occurs when one of the side window roller sun-blinds is operated with an 
window open? List the control units that are responsible for operating the roller sun- 
blinds. 


36 

Central Body Electronics 



