Table of Contents 

REMOTE CONTROL SERVICES (FBD) 

Subject Page 

Remote Control (FZV) 

Introduction.3 

System Overview.4 

Components 

Remote Controls (Keys).5 

Remote Control Receiver.6 

Operation.6 

Integrated Universal Remote Control .7 

Review Ouestions.9 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 11/01 










REMOTE CONTROL SERVICES (FBD) 

Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 

Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Understand how the radio signals from the remote control are interpreted and 
distributed to the various control units in the vehicle. 

• Describe how to use and program the Integrated Universal Remote Control. 


2 

Remote Control Services (FBD) 




Remote Control (FZV) 


Introduction 

The E65 is equipped with Remote Control Service devices as standard vehicle equipment. 
The services offered at production start are similar in function to the predecessor model 
E38: 

• Remote control of the DWA and Central Locking system (FZV) 

• Convenience open of the windows and sunroof. 

• Integrated universal remote control (covered separately) 

On the E65, the electronic evaluation unit and receiver unit are combined in a single unit 
integrated in the antenna amplifier. 

This has the following advantages for the customer: 

• Higher tamper resistance 

• Greater security 

The radio signals of the Remote Control are encrypted by means of a variable (rolling) code. 
This code prevents the vehicle opening by "monitored and copied signals". 

The frequency range for the U.S. has changed from 315Mhz to 868.4Mhz 

Depending on equipment fitted and encoding, the following functions are possible: 

• Remote control of the central locking system (ZV) 

• Arm and disarm anti-theft alarm (DWA) 

• Deactivate DWA interior protection and tilt sensor 

• Activate panic mode 

• Unlock/lock trunk lid 

• Open trunk lid 


• Switch on interior lights 


3 

Remote Control Services (FBD) 



System Overview 



CAS 


SHD 


DWA 


x/' 


TMFAT 


TMBFT 


TMCATU 




1 1 Mbr 1 n 


HKL 


PM 


x/' 


421200 


4 

Remote Control Services (FBD) 
































Components 

Remote Controls (Keys) 

The Remote Control is comprised of a radio 
frequency transponder (transmitter+receiver), 
an EWS transponder and an electronic evalua¬ 
tion unit. 

The voltage supply of the Remote Control is 
provided by an integrated rechargeable battery 
which is charged during vehicle operation via a 
125 kHz interface in the ignition switch (ZAS 
receptacle) as from terminal R. 


The rechargeable battery voltage is monitored independently by the Remote Control and 
signaled to the CAS. 

Up to four Remote Controls may be assigned to the vehicle for remote services (not EWS 
which may have up to 10). There is no procedure necessary for initialization, once the EWS 
transponder of the Remote Control is identified by the CAS, the radio frequency transpon¬ 
der is also logged in as valid. 

The range of the Remote Control can vary to a great extent. This is dependent on the loca¬ 
tion of the Remote Control in relation to vehicle and other physical conditions. 




5 

Remote Control Services (FBD) 




























Remote Control Functions 

• Double lock/unlock: Press the desired button once. 

• Convenience open: Press and hold the unlock button. The operation of opening the 
windows and sunroof will stop when the button is released. 

• Open trunk: Press the trunk open button. 

• DWA arming/disarming: Automatically performed when locking or unlocking as long as 
the criteria for arming is fulfilled. 

• Disarm interior protection and tilt sensor: Press lock button again within 10s of 
locking/arming. 

• Interior lights on (search mode): Press lock button with a locked vehicle. 

• Panic: Press panic button regardless of vehicle lock status. 


Remote Control Receiver 


The remote control receiver is located in 
the antenna amplifier. 

The receiver is responsible for intercept¬ 
ing the radio signals and converting them 
into a digital signal for the CAS. 

The CAS receives the signals over a ded¬ 
icated serial data wire. 


4 



Operation 

The remote-control telegrams are broadcast as high-frequency signals (HF signals) after 
pressing a button on the Remote Control key. The signals are received by the rear window 
antenna, relayed to the remote control receiver, demodulated and encoded. 

The operator request, e.g. "unlock central locking system" is then transferred to the CAS 
via a separate serial data interface. 

The function requested by the operator is then communicated to the vehicle electrical sys¬ 
tem via the K-CAN S and K-CAN P 


6 

Remote Control Services (FBD) 














































Integrated Universal Remote Control 


The integrated universal remote control replaces 
up to three hand held transmitters for various 
devices, (e.g. garage door/gate openers, alarm 
systems or house lighting systems). 

It recognizes and "learns" the signal transmitted 
by each individual original hand held transmitter. 

The signal of an original hand held transmitter can be programmed to one of the three 
channel buttons. The device is operated with the programmed channel button. The inte¬ 
grated universal remote control uses radio frequencies only (not infrared). Transmission of 
the signal is indicated by the indicator LED. 

During the programming procedure and prior to remote activation of a programmed device 
it is important to ensure that no persons, animals or objects are located within the range of 
the device in question (e.g. garage door) as a precaution against injury. The safety pre¬ 
cautions for the original hand transmitter must also be complied with. 

Original transmitter 

If the symbol depicted to the right is on the packaging or in the instructions 
of the original hand held transmitter, it may be assumed that this original 
transmitter is compatible with the integrated universal remote control. 

Check for random code 

The instructions of the original hand held transmitter describe whether or not the original 
hand transmitter is equipped with a random code system. 

Alternatively, a channel button can be programmed to carry out this check. Hold down the 
programmed channel button on the integrated universal remote control. 

If the indicator lamp on the integrated universal remote control flashes quickly for two sec¬ 
onds and then stays on, this means that the original hand transmitter is equipped with a 
random code system and that the channel buttons can be programmed accordingly. 




7 

Remote Control Services (FBD) 


Programming the integrated universal remote control 

To program a channel button with the signal of the original hand transmitter, proceed as 
follows: 

1. Ignition lock position (terminal 15). 

2. For initial operation, proceed as follows: press the 
two outer buttons (1) until the indicator lamp (on 
the left of the program button) begins to flash, 
then release the buttons. The three channel 
buttons are cancelled. 

3. Hold the original transmitter max. 5 cm (2in) away 
from the channel buttons. 

kt-9355 

4. At the same time, press the transmit button on the original transmitter and the desired 
channel button on the integrated universal remote control. Release both buttons 
when the indicator lamp begins to flash quickly. 

5. To program additional transmitters, repeat steps 3 and 4. 

Programming a random code 

To use the integrated universal remote control with a random code system, additional pro¬ 
gramming steps are necessary. A second person simplifies the programming procedure. 

1. Program the integrated universal remote control as described previously. 

2. Hold down the programming button on the device receiver for approx, two seconds 
until the programming lamps on the device come on. 

3. Press the desired channel button on the integrated universal remote control three times. 

Frequency range 

The system operates in the frequency bands 27-40 MHz and 433.2 MHz. Faults and mal¬ 
functions may be attributed to radio waves emitted by other transmitters at these frequen¬ 
cies. 



8 

Remote Control Services (FBD) 


Review Questions 

1. Which control unit is responsible for distributing the various operational messages 
transmitted by the Remote Control? 


2. What additional steps are required when programming the integrated universal remote 
control with a rolling code transmitter. 


9 

Remote Control Services (FBD) 



