Table of Contents 

AUTOMATIC TRUNK LID LIFT (HKL) 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

System Overview.3 

Components 

HKL Control Unit.4 

Hydraulic Pump.5 

Pressure Valve.5 

Trunk Lid Angle Sensor..6 

Trunk Lid Button.6 

Principle of Operation 

Sequence of Opening Operation.7 

Sequence of Closing Operation.8 

Anti-Trap.8 

Timed Arrest.8 

Emergency Mode.8 

Review Questions.9 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 11/01 
















AUTOMATIC TRUNK LID LIFT (HKL) 

Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 

Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Explain the operational sequence of events that occurs when opening or closing the 
automatic trunk lid lift. 


2 

Automatic Trunk Lid Lift (HKL) 




Introduction 


The Automatic Trunk Lid Lift (HKL) is equipped on E65s ordered with the optional conve¬ 
nience package. It controls automatic opening and closing of the trunk lid using a hydraulic 
pump and piston. The HKL control unit operates closely in conjunction with the Power 
Module and the CAS. 

Operation of the automatic trunk lid lift is only active while the vehicle is stationary. 


System Overview 



3 

Automatic Trunk Lift (HKL) 




Components 


The HKL system consists of the following components: 

• HKL control unit 

• Hydraulic assembly (Pump, pressure valve, lines and piston) 

• Trunk lid angle sensor 

• Trunk lid button S237 TOEHKK (inside the trunk lid) 

The components and principle of operation of the trunk locking system remain unchanged 
from a conventional trunk . 


HKL Control Unit 

The HKL control unit controls the automatic 
opening and closing of the trunk lid. 

It operates in conjunction with the CAS and 
the PM (Power Module) and is networked in 
the K-CAN-P bus. 

The HKL is located in the right rear corner of 
the luggage compartment. 

The Power Module controls the operation of 
the trunk lid lock and the soft close assembly 
as well as signalling (over the K-CAN-P) the requests for opening and closing the trunk from 
the external trunk button. 

The CAS provides the HKL with the request for opening the trunk from the Remote Control 
system as well as the passenger compartment trunk button. 



4 

Automatic Trunk Lid Lift (HKL) 



Hydraulic Assembly 

The hydraulic pump (radial piston) of the trunk 
lid lift is driven by an electric motor which 
operates in two directions of travel. 

The pump is located near the mount for the 
right rear strut. 

It is controlled via a PWM signal from the HKL 
control unit. The signal is varied depending 
on the opening angle of the trunk lid to main¬ 
tain an even closing speed over the entire range. 

An electro-mechanical hydraulic pressure valve is integrated into the hydraulic pump. The 
pressure valve is controlled by a PWM signal from the HKL control unit. The valve is nor¬ 
mally open. 

The hydraulic pressure increases as the valve is powered closed. The hydraulic pressure, 
controlled by the PWM signal affects the trunk lid opening/closing force. 



The maximum pressure produced by the hydraulic assembly is lOObar. 


1. Hydraulic piston (cylinder) 

2. Hydraulic lines 

3. Pump assembly 



The hydraulic piston is attached to the left 
side trunk hinge. 

There is no initialization necessary when 
exchanging hydraulic components. 

The trunk should be operated several times 
to displace any air that may be in the system. 


kt-8970 


5 

Automatic Trunk Lid Lift (HKL) 































Trunk Lid Angle Sensor 

To detect the position, opening angle and 
speed of the trunk lid, an angle Hall sensor 
similar to those used on the E46 convertible is 
used. A voltage value is output depending on 
the opening angle of the trunk lid. 

The angle sensor is attached to the right side 
trunk hinge. 





The lid opening angle is divided into 9 segments. 

These segments are used to determine the required system pressure to maintain a steady 
opening/closing speed. 


Trunk Lid Button S237 (inside of the trunk lid) 

This button can only be accessed after the trunk lid 
is opened. It is a primarily used to signal the HKL 
to close the trunk, however it can signal both an 
open or close request. 

Input to the HKL control unit from this switch is a 
momentary ground signal. The ground is provided by the position contact inside of the 
trunk lock actuator (ZV) only when the trunk is “open” 

An illuminated switch indicates that there is a ground available. 



6 

Automatic Trunk Lid Lift (HKL) 












Principle of Operation 

Sequence of Opening Operation 

When the "Open" request is sent by radio-control key or by a trunk button (TOEHK S117or 
TOEHKI S8), the PM operates the trunk lid lock actuator(ZV). 

The operating command is transferred by the K-CAN-P to the HKL which activates the 
pump in the "Open" direction. The pressure valve is still not activated, so the pressure in 
the hydraulic system is minimal. When the trunk lid lock is fully open, the contact inside of 
the ZV signals the PM. 

This information is also transferred by bus to the HKL. Simultaneously as the SCA motor 
is being operated by the PM the HKL activates the opening operation. The pressure valve 
is closed and pressure is built up. The lid is now opened fully. 

_ „ kt-8969 

The HKL module detects the position of the trunk 
lid using the angle sensor. 

Shortly before reaching the end stop "lid open" 

(transition from segment 7 to segment 8), trunk 
speed is reduced and the lid slowly moves to its 
end position. 

If one of the control buttons is pressed again dur¬ 
ing the opening sequence, the operation is inter¬ 
rupted. Pressing the button once more resumes 
the sequence. 

Operation of the automatic trunk lift is not allowed if the outside temperature (K-CAN-P sig¬ 
nal originated by the Kombi) is below -30°C (-22°F). 



7 

Automatic Trunk Lid Lift (HKL) 






Sequence of Closing Operation 


When the "Close" command is sent by pressing the control button (TOEHK S117 or 
TOEHKK S237 ), the HKL activates the closing operation. 

The pump motor is activated in the "closing" direction by reversing polarity in the HKL con¬ 
trol unit. Shortly before the trunk lid reaches the closed position, the speed of the lid is 
reduced to provide a smooth run-down into the lock assembly. 

Once the contact switch in the trunk lock ZV opens, the SCA runs to bring in the trunk lid 
to the final closed position. 


Anti-Trap 

The trunk lid speed is reported to the HKL control unit by the angle sensor. The speed is 
compared with the time curve stored in the module. If this speed is slower then the stored 
value the trunk lid is stopped. 


Timed Arrest 

An timed arrest function prevents the pump motor from overheating: 

If the pump is in continuous operation for 2 minutes it is shut-off for 6 minutes to allow it to 
cool. 

The pump cannot be operated before the 6 minutes have elapsed. 


Emergency Mode 

If the automatic control malfunctions, the trunk lid can be opened and closed in the same 
way as a conventional, manually operated lid, i.e. without the need for additional measures. 

Slightly more effort is required to open the trunk than for a gas-spring assisted lid. 

After manually opening the trunk lid, it should be opened and closed twice hydraulically. 
This process vents the hydraulic system again. 


8 

Automatic Trunk Lid Lift (HKL) 



Review Questions 

1. How does the HKL control unit control the speed of the trunk lid to provide a smooth 
rundown at the end positions (Fully open/closed)? 


2. At what outside temperature is the HKL no longer operational? Where does this signal 
come from? 


9 

Automatic Trunk Lid Lift (HKL) 



