Table of Contents 

SEAT, MIRROR AND STEERING COLUMN 
FUNCTIONS 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

System Overview.4 

Components.6 

Switch Block, Driver and Passenger..7 

Center Console Control Center (BZM).8 

Seat Modules (SMFA/SMBF).8 

Principle of Operation 

Seat Memory.9 

Seat Heating.12 

Seat Ventilation.16 

Lumbar Support.18 

Active Seat.19 

Exterior Rear View Mirrors.21 

Electric Steering Column Adjustment.25 

Steering Wheel Heating.27 

Review Ouestions.28 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 11/01 


















SEAT, MIRROR AND STEERING COLUMN FUNCTIONS 
Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 

Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Understand the communication path and what modules are used to perform the 
memory functions of the seat, mirror and steering column. 

• Describe how to store and call up memory positions. 

• Explain the new operation and control of the seat heating system. 

• Describe the new functions of the comfort seat. 


2 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 




Introduction 


The E65 can be equipped with several different seat versions. 

Front Seat Versions 

The front seats come in 2 versions: 

• Standard: 14 way Basic Seat (12 way passenger), electrically adjustable with memory 
and 4 way lumbar. The head-restraints of the basic seat are not separately adjustable; 
they are controlled by a cable mechanism automatically when the seat is moved forward 
or backwards. This allows the head restraint to always be in the optimum position for 
safety. Seat heating is available as a stand alone option or part of the cold weather 
package 

• Optional active seat package: 20 way Comfort Seat with memory, 4 way lumbar, seat 
ventilation and active seat feature. The head restraints are controlled automatically with 
forward/backward movement of the seat. However, positioning is done electrically and 
it allows separate electric adjustment of the head restraint. Seat heating is also avail¬ 
able for the comfort seat as a stand alone option or part of the cold weather package. 



Rear Seat Versions 

The E65 comes equipped only with the basic 
rear seat. Head restraint adjustment is auto¬ 
matic if equipped with the rear safety package. 

The rear seats will have optional rear heating 
available as part of the cold weather package. 

There will be a comfort seat with memory for 
the rear when the E66 745Li is introduced later. 



3 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 






















Exterior Rearview Mirrors 

The exterior rearview mirrors are electrically 
adjustable and heated. They are also 
equipped with electro-chromatic auto dim¬ 
ming and are part of the seat memory system. 


Steering Column Adjustment 

Steering-column adjustment is fully electric. 



System Overview 



Block Diagram: Basic seat 
Lumbar components are not shown. 


kt-8722 



■ 



jpn 

afl 1 1 


— loc ; 

— Jr i 

4==_ 


: -tssSJl 

YL&j't 

0- 


Pfc Mi ^.^3— 

8M 1 ‘T 



Index 

Description 

Index 

Description 

BZM 

Center console control center 

SLV 

Longitudinal seat adjustment 

CON 

Controller 

SHV 

Seat height adjustment 

CAS 

Car Access System 

SNV 

Seat inclination adjustment 

SMFA 

Seat module drivers side 

LNV 

Backrest inclination adjustment 

SMBF 

Seat module passenger side 

1 

16 pin ribbon cable 

K-CAN-S 

K-CAN-System 

2 

12 pin ribbon cable 

K-CAN-P 

k-CAN-Periphery 

3 

12 pin ribbon cable 

KL 30 

Terminal 30 

4 

14 pin ribbon cable 


4 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



















































































Block Diagram: Comfort seat. 

Lumbar, ventilation and active seat 
components are not shown. 




Index 

Description 

Index 

Description 

BZM 

Center console control center 

K-CAN-S 

K-Can System 

CON 

Controller 

K-CAN-P 

K-CAN Periphery 

CAS 

Car Access System 

1 

16 pin ribbon cable 

CD 

Control Display 

2 

12 pin ribbon cable 

SMFA 

Seat module, drivers side 

3 

12 pin ribbon cable 

SMBF 

Seat module, passenger side 

4 

14 pin ribbon cable 

KL 30 

Terminal 30 

5 

14 pin ribbon cable 

SLV 

Longitudinal seat adjustment 

LNV 

Backrest inclination adjustment 

SHV 

Seat height adjustment 

LBV 

Backrest width adjustment 

SNV 

Seat inclination adjustment 

LKV 

Backrest head adjustment 

STV 

Seat cushion adjustment 

KHV 

Head restraint height adjustment 

SBV 

Seat width adjustment 




5 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 


































































































































































































System Interface 


The variety of comfort functions are distributed to various control units. Communication 
between the relevant control units is conducted by way of the bus, especially to carry out 
the memory functions. 





H.-rjJtW p 

Components 




MOST 






kt-8676 


Component overview: 

• Switch block, driver and passenger side 

• Center console Control Center (BZM) 

• Car Access System (CAS as gateway)) 

• Seat module, driver and passenger side (SMFA/SMBF) 

• Seat-adjusting motors (memory seats include hall sensors for position detecting) 

• Air pump, bladders and solenoids for lumbar support 

Additional equipment for comfort seats: 

• Active seat unit per seat 

• 9 smart fans per seat for seat ventilation 
Optional equipment for basic or comfort seats: 

• Seat heating elements 


6 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 





































































































































Switch Block, Driver and Passenger 

The controls for the driver and passenger seat have been relocated from the seat side panel 
and are now part of the center console. The switch block consists of two separate switch 
assemblies. 

The forward switch assembly contains a 
control knob and menu buttons in the 
shape of a seat for function selection. 

The rearward switch assembly contains 
the memory function buttons and possi¬ 
bly three more features: 

• Seat heating control 

• Seat ventilation control 

• Active seat control 

LEDs indicate the operating status of each particular seat auxiliary function. 

the switch block via ribbon cables to be 


Selection button for Lumbar and back-width 
adjustment (comfort seat). 

Selection button for shoulder tilting (comfort 
seat), backrest inclination and head-restraint 
height (comfort seat) adjustment. 

Selection button for forward/back (longitudi¬ 
nal) seat height and backrest inclination 
adjustment. 

Seat cushion tilting, Thigh support. 

The selected menu button lights up to confirm the request 

The control knob is a “joystick” that can be pushed or rotated. It is used to control whichev¬ 
er portion of the seat has been selected using the menu buttons. 

The operation of the memory and auxiliary seat function buttons is discussed separately in 
“Principle of Operation”. 


The adjustment request is transmitted from 
processed by the BZM. 

Switch Operation 



kt-8636 



7 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



Center Console Control Center (BZM) 

The BZM is located in the center console direct¬ 
ly below the Controller. The BZM interprets the 
signals from the seat blocks and makes the 
message available to the CAS on the K-CAN- 
System. 

The CAS as the gateway, forwards the mes¬ 
sages to the K-CAN-P where they can be 
received by the seat modules. 



Seat Modules (SMFA, SMBF) 


The Seat Modules are 
located below the driver’s 
and passenger’s seat 
next to the seat satellites. 

They are clipped into a 
plastic carrier. The Seat 
Modules have 10 con¬ 
nectors 

Both the driver’s and passenger’s seat modules are identical. The mod¬ 
ules are recognized by an additional ground on the drivers side module 
at pin 2 of X275 (8-pin). 

The seat module activates the seat-motors directly via final stages. Up 
to 3 motors may be run simultaneously. 

The total running time of each adjusting motor is monitored in order to 
prevent thermal overloading. 

The seats equipped with memory use motors with integral hall sensors 
for position detecting. 

The position of the mechanical stops is stored on initial operation. In the 
following adjustments, the seat stops before this position is reached (soft 
stop). 

(The soft stop can be overridden if the seat is operated in the same 
direction immediately afterwards). 




8 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 






















In the comfort seat, the 4 main seat adjustments are equipped with a smooth startup: 

• SLV: Longitudinal seat adjustment(forward/backward) 

• SNV: Seat-inclination adjustment 

• SHV: Seat-height adjustment 

• LNV: Backrest-inclination adjustment 


Principle of Operation 

Seat Memory 

The seat memory offers the opportunity of storing up to 3 different positions (2 memory pre¬ 
sets and “last position used”) for every Remote Control used. 

This means that if 4 Remote Controls have been assigned to the vehicle, up to 12 different 
positions can be stored in the individual seat module. 

Availability of these 12 positions depends on whether Key Memory is set to “active” or “not 
active”. With Key Memory set to “not active”, only 3 memory positions are available. They 
are assigned to the vehicle irrelevant of the Remote Control being used. 

With Key Memory set to “active”, memory presets stored are assigned to the Remote 
Control that is currently being identified (memory preset 1 and 2 and the “last position 
used”). The number of stored positions then becomes 3 X the number of remote controls 
assigned up to a maximum of 4 (12 positions). 


Remote Control 1 


1 

2 

Key 

Mem. 

1 



Remote Control 3 


7 


Key 


8 


Mem. 

1 


9 


Mem 

2 


Remote Control 4 

10 

11 

12 

Key 

Mem. 

1 

Mem. 

2 


The following components are required for the seat-memory function: 

• Memory buttons, driver’s and passenger’s 

• Center Console Control Center (BZM) 

• Car Access System (CAS) 

• Seat module, driver and passenger (SMFA/SMBF) 

• Seat-adjusting motors with a Hall sensor 


9 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 




















The SMFA/SMBF requires information from the CAS in order to execute the stored seat 
positions: Remote Control number and memory buttons (from the BZM). 

• The information is sent from the CAS via the K-CAN P to the seat module. 

• The seat-adjusting motors are then activated accordingly. 

When using the Remote Control to unlock the vehicle, the seat automatically moves to the 
last position used for that Remote Control. 

If an unlocked car is entered and no button of the Remote Control is pressed, the seat 
moves to the last position stored once the Remote control is identified by the CAS. 

At the same time, the CAS sends the same information to: 

• The front door modules for the mirror-memory position 

• The CIM (Chassis Integration Module) for the steering column memory positions. 

Memory Preset buttons 

The memory buttons are integrated in the memory/auxiliary function switch block (behind 
the adjusting-switch block) and consist of: 

• Pad with 3 buttons (position buttons 1 and 2 and a memory storage button) 

• Indicator LED in memory storage button for memory readiness 

Depending on the special equipment fitted, the buttons for the following functions can be 
integrated in the switch block: 

- Seat heating 

- Seat ventilation 

- Active seat 

The status of the memory button is communicated to the 
relevant seat module over the bus system. 

Signal path: Button - ribbon cable - BZM - K-CAN-S - 
CAS - K-CAN-P - SMFA or SMBF. 

The position of the lumbar support cannot be stored. 



kt-8679 


10 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 




Programming 

Programming of seat positions is only possible from terminal R "on". 

The following operating steps must be performed in order to store a seat position: 

• Press memory button "M": The memory button lights up to acknowledge programming 
readiness. 

• Press position button: adoption of current position of seat, steering column and 
side mirrors. 

• Programming readiness is deactivated if no position button is pressed within 7 seconds 
while it is activated. The function indicator is deactivated. 

• Programming readiness is also deactivated when the memory button is pressed again. 

• If no personalization key is recognized, the programming function is not available when 
the key memory is activated. 

Calling Up Memory Positions 

There are 2 operating modes for calling up stored positions on the driver's seat: 

• One touch mode: touching the desired position button moves the seat automatically up 
to the end setting of the stored positions. The one-touch function is only possible with 
terminal 15 "off" to eliminate any safety hazard caused by accidental touching of the 
button. 

• Continuous hold mode: the seat moves only as long as the desired position button is 
continuously pressed. The motors are shut down immediately if the button is released 
before the target position is reached. Pressing the position button again resumes the 
positioning up to the end setting of the stored position (target position). 


11 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



Seat Heating 


Seat heating is an option or part of the cold weather package. 



kt-8759 


The following components are required for the seat-heating function: 

• Switch block, auxiliary functions, driver and passenger 

• BZM 

• Controller (CON) 

• Control display (CD) 

• Car Access System (CAS) 

• Seat module, driver and passenger (SMFA/SMBF) 

• 2 rapid heating elements per seat 

• 2 regular heating elements areas per seat 

• 4 temperature sensors 


12 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 
































































































The switch block contains the control button and 3 orange LEDs. The LEDs indicate the 
various heating stages. 


The signals for operating the seat heating are transmitted over the buses. 

Signal path: Button - 14-pin ribbon cable - BZM - K-CAN S - CAS - K-CAN P - SMFA or 
SMBF. 


The seat modules incorporate activation and control of seat heating. Each seat has 4 heat¬ 
ing elements, which are sewn into the seat cover: 

• 1 rapid heating element in each inner seat cushion area and in inner backrest area. 

• 1 residual heating element in each outer seat cushion area and in outer backrest area. 
Each heating element is monitored by an NTC temperature sensor. 

1. Rapid heating element 

2. Regular heating element 


kt-9372 




kt-9373 


3. Backrest cover 


4. Seat cushion cover 


o 




kt-9374 


13 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 





Activation of Heating Areas 

When the seat heating is turned on, the rapid heating elements are activated first in order 
to heat up the seats quickly. 


After the initial rapid heating, the regular heating areas are activated in order to ensure a uni¬ 
form distribution of temperature in the seat. 


Seat heating 

OFF 

ON 



Rapid heating 

Regular heating 


Rapid heating 
element 



Regular heating 
element 


kt-8776 


Activation of all the heating elements is PWM so that an established current intensity is not 
exceeded during regular heating. The duty factor is dependent on the selected heating 
stage, the ON period and the heating-area temperatures. 

The function indicators (LEDs) of the seat heating remain on if the heating is briefly deacti¬ 
vated (e.g. during seat adjustment or by power management). 

Operation 

The seat heating can be turned on from terminal 15 and the engine running. Stage 3 (max¬ 
imum temperature) is activated when the button is pressed for the first time. Each subse¬ 
quent pressing of the button selects the next stage lower or "off". The seat heating is 
turned off if the button is pressed for longer than 1.2 seconds. 

The seat heating remains in stand-by (service station feature) for 15 minutes after terminal 
15 is switched off. 


14 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 





















Balance Control 

The vehicle occupant can use a balance controller to adjust a temperature differential 
between the seat cushion and the backrest up to +/- 3 °C. 

The balance controller can be called up in the Control Display and is set with the Controller. 
This setting remains permanently stored specifically to each Remote Control (Key Memory 
activated). 


For balance control, switch to the Climate menu and call up seat heating from the second 


page. Select driver's or passenger seat. 



1. Select second page from climate menu 

2. Select seat heating 



kt-8686 

3. Select left or right seat 


4. Rotate Controller to vary the ratio of heat 
between the backrest and cushion 


The driver's or passenger seat can be selected in this menu. Turn the Controller to vary the 
balance of heat output between the seat surface and the backrest. This change in balance 
is indicated by a red/white coloring of the seats in the Control Display. 


15 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 





Seat Ventilation 


The seat ventilation feature of the comfort seat allows the front seat occupants to cool the 
seat cushion and backrest. 



The following components are required for the seat ventilation function: 

• Switch block, auxiliary functions, driver and passenger 

• BZM 

• Car Access System (CAS) 

• Seat module, driver and passenger (SMFA/SMBF) 

• 9 smart ventilation fans per seat 


16 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 





































































































The auxiliary function switch block contains the control button and 3 LEDs for displaying 
the ventilation stage. 

The signals for operating the seat ventilation are transmitted over the buses. 

Signal path: Switch block - 14-pin ribbon cable - BZM - K-CAN S - CAS - K-CAN P - SMFA 
or SMBF. 

The relevant seat module activates and 
monitors the fans. The fans: 


• Are activated by the seat modules 
supplying voltage. 

• Can be activated separately for back 
rest and seat cushion. 

• Can be operated in 2 speed stages 
(high and low) via a control/diagnosis 
line. 

• Indicate possible jamming for diagno¬ 
sis over the control/diagnosis line. 

Fault code only identifies whether the defective fan 
is in the backrest or the cushion it does not identi¬ 
fy individual fan motors. 



Operation 

The seat ventilation can be turned on from KL 15 "on" and the engine running. 

Seat ventilation has 3 stages but only two fan speeds: 

• Stage 3: High speed backrest, high speed cushion (seat bottom) 

• Stage 2: low speed backrest, high speed cushion 

• Stage 1: low speed backrest, low speed cushion 

Stage 3 is activated when the button is pressed for the first time. Each subsequent press¬ 
ing of the button selects the next stage lower or "off". The seat ventilation is turned off if the 
button is pressed for longer than 1.2 seconds. 

The system switches down automatically from stage 3 to stage 2 after an running time of 
15 minutes. The ventilation remains in stand-by for 15 minutes after KL R off is received. 


17 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



Lumbar Support 


Both seat versions are available with pneumatic lumbar adjustment as standard equipment. 



kt-8763 


The following components are required for the lumbar support function: 

• Switch block, auxiliary functions, driver and passenger 

• BZM 

• Car Access System (CAS) 

• Seat module, driver and passenger (SMFA/SMBF) 

• 2 inflatable air chambers (bladders) and 2 solenoids per seat 

• 1 air pump per seat 

Operation 

Lumbar adjustment is performed by 2 inflatable chambers (air bladders) in the backrest. 
The air chambers are inflated and deflated by 2 solenoid valves. The air pump delivers the 
required air pressure. 

The air pump and the actuators are activated by the seat module based on the commands 
from the seat switch block. 

The signals for operating the lumbar support are transmitted over the buses. 

Signal path: Switch block - 12-pin ribbon cable - BZM - K-CAN S - CAS - K-CAN P - SMFA 
or SMBF. 


18 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 





















































Active Seat 


The active seat was introduced for the first time in the E38 for model year '99. The active 
seats in the E65 have been adapted to the E65 electrical system. 


The active seats relieve the back muscles and spinal column on longer journeys. The seat 
cushion of the active seat is moved up and down in stages. For safety reasons, the active 
seat is paused when the vehicle is cornering. 




The following components are required for the active seat function: 


• Switch block, auxiliary functions, driver and passenger 

• BZM 


• Car Access System (CAS) 

• Seat module, driver and passenger (SMFA/SMBF) 

• 1 active seat unit per seat 


19 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 














































































The signals for operating the active seat are transmitted over the buses. 

Signal path: Switch block, auxiliary functions, active seat - 14-pin ribbon cable - BZM - K- 

CAN S - CAS - K-CAN P - SMFA or SMBF. 

Functional Description 

The system is filled with a glycol fluid. This fluid is pumped alternately into the left and right 

fluid bags (by reversing the direction of pump rotation). 

The following components are required for the active-seat function: 

• Hydraulic pump: the hydraulic-pump motor is activated with alternating polarity by semi 
conductors in the seat module. 

• Hall sensor: a Hall sensor records the revolutions of the hydraulic-pump motor. The 
motor function is monitored with this signal. 

• Solenoid valve: the solenoid valve is installed between the two fluid bags and opens and 
closes the delivery to the fluid bags. The valve is activated by semiconductors in the 
seat module. The solenoid valve is closed when the system is deactivated and in the 
intervals between the adjustments. In order not to irritate the driver when cornering fast, 
the operational sequence of the active seat is stopped immediately at high transversal 
acceleration: the solenoid valve remains closed from a specific transversal vehicle 
acceleration. The yaw-rate sensor telegrams the transversal-acceleration signal 

via the bus system. 

• Vacuum switch: a vacuum switch is installed in each of the fluid bags. These switches 
identify the extent to which the fluid bags are drained. In the event of a fault, the 
system stops or holds in order to avoid further damage. 


20 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



Exterior Rearview Mirrors 


2 electric rearview mirrors are fitted on the driver's and passenger doors of the E65. They 
are activated by the front door modules. 


All the mirror functions are controlled by the buttons in the switch block in the driver's door. 
The mirrors are directly controlled by the associated door module. 



The following functions are possible: 

• Horizontal and vertical mirror adjustment 

• Mirror heating 

• Automatic curb view 

• Mirror memory 

• Electro-chromatic 


Under-voltage deactivation 


21 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



































































































































Horizontal and Vertical Mirror Adjustment 

Both the exterior mirrors can be moved in the 
horizontal and vertical directions. However, 
they can only be adjusted in each case in one 
direction (horizontal/vertical). 

Each exterior mirror accommodates 2 adjust¬ 
ing motors: one motor for each adjusting direc¬ 
tion. Potentiometers are fitted for position 
detection. 

A common control pad for both exterior mirrors 
is located in the driver's door. 



The driver uses a slide switch to select between the two mirrors (right/left). 


Mirror Heating 

The function of the mirror heating is automatically controlled. The mirror heating is supplied 
via PWM signal. 


The current output is dependent on outside temperature and wiper operation. The outside 
temperature and wiper operation are delivered via the K-CAN. 


Temperature in C 

<-10 

-10 to 5 

5 to 15 

15 to 25 

25 to 35 

> 35 

Percentage ON period 

100% 

100% 

75% 

25% 

0% 

0% 

Percentage ON period 
with wiper actuation 

100% 

100% 

75% 

50% 

25% 

0% 


The heat output is increased in wiper mode in order to make any raindrops on the mirrors 
evaporate. 

When the wiper is deactivated, the higher percentage ON period remains active for a fur¬ 
ther 5 minutes. The mirror heating is operational from terminal 15 "on". It is deactivated 
with terminal 50 "on" (load deactivation during the starting sequence). 

The mirror heating is deactivated with priority 4, 5 and 6 for the function "Optimum charg¬ 
ing of Power Module" (see Power Management chapter). 

• Cut-off voltage: 10.8V 

• Cut-in voltage: 11.6V 


22 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 











Automatic Curb View 

When the vehicle is being reversed, the passenger mirror is moved downward in order to 
provide a better view of the curb. Conditions needed are: 

• The exterior-mirror selector switch for operating the driver's mirror is selected. 

• Terminal 15 "on" 

• Reverse gear is selected 

Signal path: EGS - PT-CAN - ZGM - K-CAN S - CAS - K-CAN P - door module. 

• Delay time: 1 second after selection of reverse gear (in order to avoid unnecessary 
activation of passenger mirror when reverse gear is accidentally selected). 

The passenger exterior mirror immediately reassumes its original position: 

• After the reverse gear has been deselected 

• or with terminal 15 "off". 

Manual mirror adjustment is disabled until the mirror reaches its initial position. 


Mirror Memory 

The mirror-memory function is part of the seat-memory function. The current mirror set¬ 
tings on the driver and passenger sides can be stored or mirror settings already stored can 
be re-called using the memory buttons in the vehicle and the Key-Memory function. 

The memory positions are stored in the driver's/passenger’s door modules. 

The potentiometers for position detection are supplied by the door modules with a voltage 
of 5 V. The potentiometers are deactivated in sleep mode. 

The various mirror-adjustments have different priorities. 

• Manual mirror adjustment has priority over all other mirror adjustments. Manual mirror 
adjustment interrupts any memory adjustment. 

• Mirror adjustment by means of the buttons of the memory function has priority over 
mirror adjustment by means of the Key Memory: 

A mirror activation in progress which has been initiated by the Key Memory is cancelled 
when the memory buttons are operated. 


23 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



Electro-chromatic Exterior Rearview Mirrors 

Electro-chromatic exterior rearview mirrors ensure that the driver is not dazzled by the 
headlights of vehicles from behind. 

The exterior mirrors are automatically dimmed when a light source coming from the rear is 
detected. The sensor and control electronics for this function are integrated in the inside 
rearview mirror. 

• A photo sensor in the inside rearview mirror measures the amount of light coming from 
the rear of the vehicle as opposed to the front. 

• The control electronics calculates the amount of dimming required for this incidence of 
light. Stronger or weaker dimming of the exterior mirrors is performed depending on 
the degree of potential dazzling. 

The control signals are transmitted from the inside rearview mirror via the front door mod¬ 
ules to the exterior mirrors. 


Under-voltage Deactivation 

Under-voltage deactivation ensures that primary electrical-system functions take priority 
over the mirror functions. 

The supply voltage is monitored locally in the door modules. All the mirror functions are dis¬ 
abled if the supply voltage drops below 8.5 V. 

Once the voltage has dropped below this limit, the mirror functions are not available again 
until system voltage increases over 9 V. 


24 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



Electric Steering-Column Adjustment 

The electrically adjustable steering column is adjusted (inclination and length) with the steer¬ 
ing-column adjusting switch on the left side of the steering-column cover. 

Electric adjustment of the steering column is effected by the Chassis Integration Module 
(CIM). The CIM controls the motor gearbox unit for adjustment. 

The motors are activated internally by a power semiconductor. The steering column is 
moved into the upmost position for entry and exit purposes (automatic entry facility). 






kt-9368 


25 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 













































Automatic Entry 

The electrically adjustable steering column is moved into the upper-most position for entry 
and exit purposes. The automatic entry facility is activated when: 

• Terminal 15 "off" and terminal R "off". 

• Terminal 15 "off" while driver's door is open. 

• Driver's door is opened after terminal 15 "off", also when terminal R is still activated. 

The automatic entry is deactivated when terminal 15 is re-activated; the return position is 
approached. Automatic operation stops if the control switch for steering-column adjust¬ 
ment is operated during automatic entry. 

The previous return position is overwritten if automatic entry is interrupted by operation of 
the steering-column adjustment control switch. 

The return position is retained if while the automatic entry is active, the control switch 
inputs: "steering column up" (towards headliner) or "steering column forward" (towards 
instrument cluster) are operated. 

If the memory is called up while automatic entry is active, the memory steering-column 
position is assumed only after the automatic entry has been completed. The normal return 
position is substituted by the called-up memory position. 


Soft Stop 

If the steering column reaches a mechanical stop during adjustment, this position is per¬ 
manently stored. Starting out from this value, the adjustment travel for future adjustments 
is restricted to eliminate any future mechanical blocking. 

This soft stop can be manually overridden if the column is operated in the same direction 
immediately afterwards. 


Steering-Column Memory 

A Hall sensor is fitted in each of the adjusting motors. The Hall sensors record the steer¬ 
ing-column position for the memory functions. 2 different positions can be stored by means 
of the seat-memory buttons in the switch block. 

The memory positions are stored in the driver's seat module (SMFA). Automatic operation 
stops if the switch for steering-column adjustment is operated during activation of the 
memory steering-column position. 


26 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



Steering Wheel Heating 


The steering wheel heating is available as an option or as part of the cold weather pack¬ 
age. 


It is operational from terminal 15 "on". It is activated and deactivated by pressing the but¬ 
ton on the left side of the steering-column cover. The LED indicator light in the button illu¬ 
minates when the steering wheel heating is activated. 


The temperature in the steering wheel is monitored by a sensor and maintained at 36 °C. 
The control electronics are in the SZL. The load current is passed on by the coil spring and 
the steering wheel electronics module. 



Index 

Description 

Index 

Description 

S3 

Control button 

NTC 

Temperature sensor 

SZL 

Steering Column Switch Center 

LHZ 

Steering wheel heating 

WF 

Coil spring (contact ring) 

LSE 

Steering column electronics 

LRE 

Steering wheel electronics 




Diagnosis of Steering Wheel Heating 

In the event of a fault, the steering wheel heating (LHZ) can no longer be activated (if the 
fault is currently present). Faults can only be diagnosed after terminal 15 "on" and an 
attempt to activate the steering wheel heating has been made. The following fault memo¬ 
ry entries are available to diagnose the steering-wheel heating: 


• Steering-wheel heating, heating mat, short circuit to terminal 31 

• Steering-wheel heating, heating mat, short circuit to terminal 30 

• Steering-wheel heating, temperature sensor faulty 


The resistance value of the temperature sensor can be read out in the Diagnosis Request: 
"LHZ status". 


27 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



































































Review Questions 


1. Which control unit is responsible for converting the seat switch signals into bus 
telegrams and broadcasting them over the bus system? Where is this control unit 
located? 


2. Up to how many memory positions may be stored in the seat modules? What needs 
to set in VKM before all the possible memory locations can be stored? 


3. What are the differences in the way seat heating operates and is controlled compared 
to the previous model (E38)? 


4. Why are the fan motors of the ventilated seats referred to as “smart fans”? 


5. Where are the memory positions of the exterior rear view mirrors and the steering 
column stored? 


28 

Seat, Mirror and Steering Column Functions 



