Table of Contents 


E65 VEHICLE LIGHTING SYSTEMS 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

External Lighting 

System Overview.3 

Components 

Light Module.5 

Light Switch.6 

Brake Light Switch.7 

Hazard Warning Button.7 

Steering Column Turn Signal ad High Beam Stalk.8 

Rain/Light Sensor.9 

LWR Ride Height Level Sensors.9 

Exterior Lighting Components.10 

Principle of Operation 

Lamp Control and Monitoring.14 

Automatic Driving Light Control (FLC).15 

Headlight Vertical Aim Control (LWR).16 

Internal Power Management.18 

Emergency Functions.19 

Interior Lighting 

Introduction.20 

System Overview.20 

Components 

Central Light Source.21 

Interior Lights.21 

Front Interior Light Roof Console.22 

Rear Interior Light Roof Console.22 

Door Trim Panel Illumination.22 

Interior Lighting Switch Criteria.23 

Review Ouestions.24 

Initial Print Date: 10/01 Revision Date: 11/01 



























E65 VEHICLE LIGHTING SYSTEMS 
Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 

Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Understand which components control the different lighting circuits of the E65. 

• Explain the function and operation of Automatic Driving Light Control (FLC). 

• Understand the operation of the bi-xenon lights. 


2 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 




Introduction 


The vehicle lighting is split into exterior and interior lights. The exterior lights are controlled 
by the Light module. The interior lights, in contrast, are controlled by the Power Module. 


EXTERNAL LIGHTING 


System Overview 



kt-9328 


3 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 

































































































































































I.P.O 


US 

I-&■ 


JJIV 


•y i 



n.L 




i-& 

i S' 
HS- 


C-L K L¥J' 


lijtf L 


"Z-!i 



RT5 L 




*■ ■ 1 




& &L ■■ Z 


hfo^- 



1M I 


ftl K l li 




C-L ,L4 


A 

A 


■ILUflU-SL 




V4C.JLJJ L V 




I ■■■■Ti:irTj>l 


IttiEhR.L.H 


PO^I kV 


KL I4 


am 


CAM I 


ML* *i 3 
— ■! 


*** ** 


Hi j A 


K i s;p 




1 

191- 

*3 

I 92 

IF- 

nf 

lU 

ill 

23 

ill 

M 

i 4-1 

£ 

za 


Ml 

24 

1 

-TH 

u 

U 

if* 

ft 

ij 

:'■] 

|J1 

a? 

i i 

4" 

i ZD 

1 

itt 


1 

ZD 

i^T 

7 li 

i**' 

ir 

i44 

44 

iZ 

21 

lE* 

ni 

i ir- 

74 

lU 

W 

l 31 

44 

134 

■■7 

i 'i 


i 19 


■n 

24 

n? 

El 

i7ft 

41 

in 

44 

i n 

Ti 

lU 

T2 

h 

14 

iii 

A* 

i# 

44 

id? 

47 




—I 


at. m. 1 


fr 


n n 



Rl k H».'i 


HIK B*.' * 


ftW* Fi 



BLtif ft 


*Fi* 


K21 R 


EL n.i 



HI P 2 


cl n 


F-GI T: 


niK mi 


*$4SH 

-®—I 


SH 


SL4.li 


I—SH 


ZL12IL 




OnFl 


Jj© 


tizip 


U72ft 


ijiiP 


n© 


Si 3ft 







L ilhlh'i ■ 'i- 




j 


a pl 



1 







fC-aci-^1 


pfiovt 


WftjfttfTz 


RCa::4T j 


flj J rfr. ~u -1 


4 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 





























































































































Components 


Light Module (LM) 

The Light Module (LM) controls and monitors all 
of the exterior lights as well as controlling the 
LWR headlight aiming function. It is also the 
dimmer master for instrument and panel lighting 
and includes emergency functions in case of 
malfunction. 

The Light Module is connected to the K-CAN-S 
for communication with the Rain Light Sensor 
(RLS) and the rest of the vehicle including diag¬ 
nosis. 



The LM has one 76 pin connector (XI2). The case is ventilated to dissipate heat from the 
final stage semi-conductors. 



The light module is located below the drivers 
side of the instrument panel, to the left of the 
steering column and behind the sheet metal 
support for the dashboard. 

To remove the module it is not necessary to 
remove the drivers side knee airbag. 


5 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 















Light Switch 


The light switch is located to the left of the 
steering column. It is a single component 
and includes the following controls: 

• Rotary knob light switch (including 
Automatic position). 



• Fog light push button. 


421300 


• Dimmer potentiometer thumb wheel. 


Button for EMF (parking brake). 
Button for opening trunk (TOEHKI). 



The switches for trunk opening and 
EMF are interpreted separately by 
their respective control units. 

The light switch uses a 5 volt refer¬ 
ence supplied by the LM and provides 
the position of the rotary knob light 
switch over two wires. 

When the switch is open, the LM 
reads 5V. When the switch is closed, 
the LM reads 2.5V. A value of over 
6.75 volts represents a fault and acti¬ 
vates the emergency operation of the 
LM. 

Interpretation of the 4 light switch 
positions is based on the switch logic 
over the two wires. 

1=switch closed 
0=switch open 

The foglight switch is similarly inter¬ 
preted as a high low signal over its 
own wire. 


LIGHT SWITCH 



S SL 

S AL 

S NSW 

Switch position: Automatic 

1 

0 

- 

Switch position: OFF 

1 

1 

- 

Switch position: Parking lights 

0 

1 

- 

Switch position: headlights ON 

0 

0 

- 

Foglight ON (lights must be on) 

- 

- 

1 

Foglight OFF 

- 

- 

0 

Failsafe 

0 

0 







6 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 
















































Brake Light Switch 

Similar to previous models an electronic 
brake-light switch (Hall-sensor) is used. It is 
powered from KL R ON. Its signal is provid¬ 
ed as an analog input. 

The brake switch has a level of 0 volts in the 
non-actuated state and approx. 8 - 9 volts 
when the brake is depressed (dependent on 
the system voltage). 

Fault Detection 

There are two different fault scenarios for the brake-light switch: short circuit to ground and 
open circuit. 

Short circuits to ground can only be safely detected with terminal R OFF. If a low level is 
detected instead of the anticipated high, there is a short circuit and the brake-light switch 
is determined to be faulty. This self-diagnosis is only performed after entry into power-down 
mode so long as no light function is activated while the K-CAN-S bus is inactive. 

A possible open circuit is not electrically distinguishable from an actuated brake. With ter¬ 
minal 15 ON and information on brake pressure (DSC - PT-CAN - ZGM - K-CAN-S - LM) 
but no detected brake-light-switch actuation, the brake-light switch is also condemned as 
faulty. The fault entry "Brake-light switch faulty" is made in both cases. 

Limp-Home Functions 

The function of the brake light is assured even when the LM is in limp-home mode. Internal 
circuitry connects the brake-light-switch output directly to the lamp drivers. The function 
rules out the possibility of PWM operation. 



Hazard-Warning Button 

The hazard-warning button has a level of approx. 4.7 volts in the "hazard-warning button 
not pressed" state and 0 volts in the "hazard-warning button pressed" state. 

The hazard-warning button is located in the IHKA control panel and is a direct input to the 
LM. 


7 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 



Steering Column Turn Signal and High Beam Stalk 


Driver request signals from the steering column stalk are 
received by the LM as K-CAN-S messages. In the event 
of a bus fault, the signals are interpreted as analog values 
over a separate input line. The following functions are 
evaluated as CAN messages: 

1) Single-touch flashing, left or right 

2) Continuous flashing, left or right 

3) High beam on 

4) High beam off or headlight flasher 



kt-8357 


The command for cancelling of the turn signals comes from the steering angle sensor of 
the SZL. 


n bus 



Fault Detection 

If no K-CAN messages are received from the steering-column stalk for a period exceeding 
20s, the stalk is determined to be faulty. K-CAN communication continues to be attempt¬ 
ed, although the light functions are then determined by the analog data line input. The fault 
status is terminated by newly detected K-CAN communication. 


The following functions are determined as analog values over the data line in the event of a 
fault: 


1) High mode on/off or headlight flasher 

2) One-touch flashing, left/right 

3) Neutral position 


8 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 


















































































































































Rain/Light Sensor 


The Rain/Light Sensor is attached to the windshield. It records: 

• The rain intensity for controlling the wiper intervals 

• The surrounding and frontal brightness for controlling "automatic-light control" 

2 additional optical sensors are evaluated in the RLS. 

If there is a switch-on requirement, this is transmitted 
by a K-CAN message to the Light Module. 

If the rotary knob light switch is in the "automatic light 
control" position, the headlights lights are activated 
and an LED on the light switch is switched on. 

LWR Ride Height Level Sensors 

The E65 headlight system also includes headlight vertical aim control (LWR). This system 
is very similar to the LRA function incorporated into the LSZ of the E46. 



The servo-motor for control of vertical adjustment of the headlight is controlled directly by 
the Light Module. 


Similar to the E38, angle-hall sensors (1) used to detect changes in vehicle loading are 
mounted on the front and rear right side axles. 



9 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 




Exterior Lighting Components 


The external lighting system consists of the following components: 

• Front headlight assemblies (parking, Low beam, high beam, turn indicators) 

• Fog lights 

• Tail light assemblies (tail light, brake lights, turn indicators, reverse lights and license 
plate lights) 


Front Headlight Assemblies 

The new headlights with integral turn indicators 
are in the BMW tradition of being four round 
lights. The turn signal indicators are now above 
the lights, giving them the appearance of “eye 
brows”. 

The E65 is equipped with new “Bi-Xenon” lamps 
as standard equipment. The inboard lamps are 
conventional halogen bulbs. 


A sidemarker (U.S. version) is integrated into the turn signal indicator. 




The parking light is an optical-wave guide 
ring around each high-beam and low- 
beam headlight, similar to the 2001 E39. 


kt-8314 

1. Xenon bulb 


All other bulbs can be replaced without 
removing the headlights. 


The headlight assemblies are a sealed 
integral unit. The replacement of the bi¬ 
xenon bulb and the control unit require 
that the headlight assembly be removed 
from the vehicle. 


2. Control unit for xenon light 
(Hella 4th generation) 


In order to remove the front headlight 
assemblies, the front bumper must first be 
removed. 


10 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 

















1 2 3 2 



6 5 4 

kt-8317 


1. Bi-xenon low beam and shutter 
mechanism 

2. Turn signal bulb 

3. Light source for parking light rings 

4. High beam, halogen bulb 

5. Not used 

6. Servomotor for LWR (Headlight vertical 
aim control) 



There are holes for easy access to the screws 
for height adjustment and lateral adjustment of 
the low-beam and high-beam headlights. 


The outer adjusting screw (1) is for lateral 
adjustment of both lights. The inner adjusting 
screw (2) is for vertical adjustment of the high- 
beam and low-beam headlights. 


Bi-Xenon Lights a 0 

“Bi-xenon” means that the xenon lights can be switched over from low-beam to high-beam. 


When the low beams are “on”, the lower part of the light beam is blocked by a shutter that 
is directly in front of the reflector. 



Low-beam: shutter vertical High-beam: shutter opened 


When high beams are switched “on”, an electro-magnet is energized by the LM. The elec¬ 
tro-magnet “flips” the shutter open, allowing the entire beam of light generated by the 
xenon bulb to be part of the high-beam. 


11 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 




















Fog Lights 

The fog lights of the E65 are small ellipsoid lights 
similar to the E39. 

A single screw secures each fog light in position. 

The snap-fit horizontal grille insert has to be 
removed in order to gain access to this screw. The 
screw for vertical adjustment is freely accessible. The fog light has to be removed in order 

for the bulb to be replaced. 

Tail Light Assemblies 




The rear light assemblies are integrated into 
the rear quarter panels and into the luggage 
compartment lid. 

The tail light, brake light and turn indicator 
lights are located in the rear quarter panels. 

An additional tail light is integrated into the 
luggage compartment lid, along with the 
rear fog light, reverse light and license plate 
light. 

Tail lights and brake lights are 3D brilliant 
type (light sources are LED illuminated). 

The third brake light below the rear shelf is 
also an LED assembly that can only be 
replaced as a complete unit. 



1. Tail light 

2. Brake light 

3. Direction Indicator 

4. Tail light 

5. Rear fog light 

6. Reverse Light 


12 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 































Incandescent bulbs are used for the turn 
indicators (2). The brake lights and tail lights 
are lit by LEDs. 

In the U.S. version, the tail lights light up 
along with the brake lights when the brakes 
are applied. 

If a tail light or brake light fails, the entire rear 
light assembly has to be removed so that 
the LED controller (1) can be replaced. 



A three-part light assembly is integrated into the luggage compartment lid. 


1. Tail light/rear fog light 

2. Plastic rear trim panel 

3. Center light group: 
Reverse lights and 
license plate lights 

kt-8305 

These three lights are secured to the rear lid trim panel on the luggage compartment lid by 
screws. 

There is a non-reflective design area between the two reversing lights. 

The reverse lights, the rear fog lights and the license plate lights all have incandescent 
bulbs, whereas the tail lights, like those in the side panels, are LED lights. 

The interior trim of the luggage compartment lid behind the light clusters has to be removed 
to replace the bulbs. 

1. Bulb for rear fog light 

2. LED controller for tail light 




13 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 













Principle of Operation 

The following tasks are performed by the Light Module (LM): 

• Control and monitoring exterior vehicle headlights and lamps. 

• Function of dimmer for instrument and control panel lighting (KL 58 g). 

• Automatic Driving-Light Control (FLC). 

• Control of the headlight-vertical aim control system (LWR) with dynamic control. 

• Internal power management (sleep mode) 

• Emergency functions. 

• Redundant data storage 


Lamp Control and Monitoring 
Power Limitation 

In order to increase their service life, the incandescent vehicle lamps are activated using 
PWM once the system voltage rises above a coded value. 

Any further increase in the system voltage results in constant voltage operation not to 
exceed 13.5 volts. 

Dynamic PWM correction 

The short-term peak loads of the Valvetronic unit create voltage dips in the vehicle electri¬ 
cal system, which in turn can result in fluctuations in the vehicle lighting. In order to reduce 
this effect, the LM incorporates adapted measures which compensate for this by perform¬ 
ing a fast PWM correction. 

Bulb Monitoring 

All bulbs with the exception of the LED brake/tail lights and the xenon headlights are cold 
monitored. The LEDs and bi-xenon lights are warm monitored along with the rest of the 
bulbs. 

The LM signals the instrument cluster if a bulb has failed so that it can display a Check 
Control warning to the driver. 

See the E65 Instrument Cluster module of the iDrive chapter for detailed descriptions of the CC 
warning messages. 


14 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 




Brake Force Display 

As an indication of heavy vehicle braking or when the ABS is in regulation, the tail lights 
lights mounted on the luggage compartment lid illuminate at the same intensity as the brake 
lights. 

It is activated by the LM recognizing a rapid change in acceleration and ABS operation. 






IWj 

mass 






Sian da rd b remsu ng 
Stufe 1 (SAE) 


Regular brake display 


k: 


wnmw 

87 


E 6 


i 


w.m m ii i a ra m .w aj 11 * 


Gefah re nbre m sun g 
Stufe 2 


Heavy braking display 


Automatic Driving Light Control (FLC) 

Automatic Driving Light Control is a new function that is con¬ 
trolled by the LM. 

In order to operate the system, the rotary knob light switch 
must be placed in the automatic position. An LED illuminates 
on the switch to indicate that the system is on. 



The Rain/Light Sensor detects the surrounding and frontal brightness using two photo¬ 
transistors. 



1, The surrounding-light sensor records the 
light intensity in a wide angle above the 
vehicle. 

2, The frontal-light sensor records the light 
intensity in a narrow angle in front of the 
vehicle. 


kt-9345 


15 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 
















An internal processor calculates from the measured data if a switch-on situation is needed. 
The following switch-on situations can be detected: 

• Dawn/dusk 

• Darkness 

• Driving into an underground car park 

• Driving through a tunnel 

• Precipitation such as rain or snow 

If a switch-on situation is needed, this is communicated to the Light Module (via the K-CAN- 
S bus). 


Headlight Vertical Aim Control (LWR) 

Headlight Vertical Aim control is used to adapt the position of the headlights automatically 
to the vehicle load condition. 

Headlight Vertical Aim Control has the following features: 

• 1 stepper motor for each left and right headlight assembly. 

• Activation of stepper motors in parallel on left and right sides (common driver 1C). 

• Possibility of diagnosing missing connections to stepper motors (line break) and short 
circuits in windings (motor fault). 

Referencing of Stepper Motors 

The position of the stepper motors is initially uncertain after LWR is activated. First of all, a 
reference run is carried out which takes place in two phases for the purpose of improving 
accuracy. The object of the reference run is to guarantee a fixed initial position (calibration) 
for the headlights. 

Automatic Setpoint Generation 

Automatic LWR derives the setpoint for the headlight range from two ride-level sensors. 
These sensors are mounted on the front and rear axles. They are used to determine the 
difference in ride height between the front and rear axles. 

The input signals (0.3 - 4.7 V) of the ride-level sensors are measured with the engine run¬ 
ning or lights ON cyclically at intervals of 20 ms. Voltage values < 0.3 V and > 4.7 V are 
interpreted as faults. The LM registers a fault entry "Sensor, ride level, front, faulty" or 
"Sensor, ride level, rear, faulty". 


16 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 




Dynamic Headlight Vertical Aim Control 

The effect of dynamic LWR, is that the headlight aim is corrected immediately in critical dri¬ 
ving situations (extreme braking; heavy acceleration). 

In this way, reduced headlight aim under certain circumstances (e.g. during braking) is 
immediately corrected by the process of the head lights being "raised". 

Also, the dazzling of other road users is eliminated during acceleration by the process of 
the headlights being "lowered". 

The problem of incorrect interpretations (e.g. irregular road surface) is avoided by the use 
of more signals than just the ride-level signals. 

It can usually be assumed that a braking operation is always accompanied by a simultane¬ 
ously actuated brake-light switch. However, the brake-light switch is not actuated during 
acceleration. The vehicle speed is included in the correction calculation. 

Dynamic Compensation During Braking: Because of the "system knowledge" that 
compensation of the headlight aim during braking is particularly more important when brak¬ 
ing at high speeds, dynamic LWR can dampen compensation of the headlight aim at low 
speeds. 

Dynamic compensation during braking begins "gradually" above the minimum speed of 
approx. 40 km/h (25mph) and reaches its full effect from a speed of approx. 80 km/h 
(50mph). 

As long as the brake light switch is not actuated, there is no dynamic compensation for 
braking. 

Dynamic Compensation During Acceleration: Acceleration is more "probable" the 
lower the initial speed is. Absolute accelerating performance decreases as speed increas¬ 
es because the vehicle is being driven in higher gears and therefore less torque is available. 

Complete dynamic compensation takes place during acceleration as long as the speed is 
less than approx. 50 km/h (31mph). The effect of dynamic compensation decreases 
increasingly above this speed and disappears from a speed of approx. 110 km/h (68mph). 

When the brake light switch is actuated, there is no dynamic compensation for accelera¬ 
tion. 


17 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 



Activation of Stepper Motors 

Functions of the software driver for activating the stepper motors: 

• Positioning of stepping motors (powering, acceleration and deceleration). 

• Carrying out a reference run (each time LWR is activated). 

• Inclusion of current actual step counter. 

• Setpoint/actual-value comparison of step position. 

• Activation of stepping-motor driver. 


Internal Power Management (Sleep Mode) 

Because the LM's operating current consumption would place unwanted load on the vehi¬ 
cle battery during long periods of parking and when its functions are not needed, it is pro¬ 
vided with mechanisms for identifying out-of-service periods and reducing the power 
requirement while retaining wake-up readiness. 

The micro-processor of the LM functions with nominal operating current when: 

• The CAN is active. 

• Terminal R (input) is active. 

• Terminal 15 (input) is active. 

• Lamp functions are active. 

• Anti-theft alarm-system alarm is active. 

• The follow-me-home light circuit is active. 

If none of the above conditions apply, the LM transmits it’s sleep readiness and then switch¬ 
es into sleep mode. It also switches into this mode when the sleep conditions are in place 
and the sleep acknowledge bit has been received from another bus user. 

After approx. 30 s the current consumption drops from approx. 120 mA to below 1 mA. 
The LM awakens cyclically and input signals are monitored so that the system can respond 
to possible changes in the switch states and the external inputs. 

A CAN telegram received during this power-saving mode results in system wake-up. 
Following a wake-up period of max. 100 ms, the LM is again ready for communication, rel¬ 
evant telegrams are fully received and evaluated in each case so that no bus information is 
lost. 


18 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 





If no wake-up condition occurs for a period exceeding 390 s, the switch inputs are no 
longer monitored and the zero-signal current is reduced further. 

System wake-up is possible by CAN telegrams, an activated terminal 15 or the hazard¬ 
warning button. 


Redundant Data Storage 

The LM shares responsibility with the CAS for the storage of the Vehicle Identification 
Number and the FA (Vehicle Order). 


Emergency Functions 

The system is equipped with hardware that is completely independent from the processor 
in order to safeguard the functions needed for driving safety should the processor or one 
of its elements malfunction. 

Emergency operation provides the following functions: 

With terminal 15 ON, the following components are activated regardless of the position of 
the light switch: 

• Low-beam headlights, left and right 

• Rear lamps/brake lights, left and right (outer) 

With terminal 15 ON and actuated brake-light switch: 

• Brake lights, left and right 

Turn-signal and hazard-warning flashers, high beam, headlight flasher, front fog lamps, rear 
fog light and the 3rd brake light cannot be activated. Communication via K-CAN-S is not 
possible. 


19 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 



INTERIOR LIGHTING 


Introduction 


The interior lighting master functions are controlled by the Power Module. The Power 
Module divides the entire interior lighting (IB) into 3 circuits: 

• IB: interior lighting 

• VA-D: consumer deactivation circuit, roof 

• VA-K: consumer deactivation circuit, body 


System Overview 


r{®} 


: .' | [Tj [" { r~Tj 1 







20 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 



































































































System Overview Index 


Index 

Description 

Index 

Description 

1 

Footwell lamp 

TMBFT 

Door module, passenger door 

2 

Make-up light 

TMBFTH 

Door module, passenger door rear 

3 

Door exit light 

TMFAT 

Door module, driver’s door 

zv 

Central locking 

TMFATH 

Door module, driver’s door rear 

K-CAN-P 

K-CAN Periphery 

IB II 

Interior lighting II 

30 

Terminal 30 

PM 

Power Module 

58g 

Terminal 58g 




Components 

The interior lighting includes the following lights: 

External Door Handle Lighting (Visual Entry Aid) 

A "central light source" module with a lamp is 
located in each of the doors. With the aid of an 
optical fiber conductor, this module illuminates 
the entrance area of the vehicle and also lights up 
the exterior door handles. 

The central light sources are controlled by the 
individual door modules. 


The door modules communicate with the PM via the 
K-CAN-P for instructions when to activate and 
deactivate the light source module. 

The CAS provides door opening, remote control 
operation and terminal status to both the PM and 
door modules. 




Interior lights 

A total of seven interior lights are provided: at the door entrance (all four doors), in the front 
right and left footwell as well as in the glove compartment. 

The door entrance lights are controlled by the respective door modules. The footwell light¬ 
ing is controlled by the IB circuit and the glove box light by the VA-K circuit of the Power 
Module. 


21 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 
















Front Interior Light Roof Console 


The interior light (2), two separately controlled reading 
lights on the right and left (3) as well as two LEDs for 
ambient lighting (1) are contained in the front light unit. 

The interior light is controlled by the IB circuit and the 
reading lights are part of the VA-D circuit of the Power 
Module. 

The contact for turning on and off the interior light is a 
momentary contact to the Power Module. The operation 
is the same as previous models including the “workshop 
mode” (hold for longer than 3 s, lights remain off). 

The ambient lighting LEDs are supplied power by the KL-58g circuit of the Light Module. 



Rear Interior Light Roof Console 

An interior light roof console is also provided in 
the rear seating area. 

It also contains an interior light, two separately 
controlled reading lamps on the right and left, a 
make-up mirror with two make-up lights as well 
as two LEDs for ambiance lighting. 

The interior, reading and ambient lighting are 
controlled on the same circuits as the front with the exception of the lights for the make-up 
mirror which are controlled by the VA-K circuit. 




Door Trim Panel Illumination 

The grey decorative strip of the door trim panel 
also houses a fiber optic conductor that illumi¬ 
nates the inside door handle and switch 
blocks. 

The light source is provided by a LED and con¬ 
trolled by the respective door module after 
receiving the KL58g signal over the K-CAN 
from the LM. 


22 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 











Interior Lighting Switching Criteria 

Switch-On Criteria: 

• Door open 

• Terminal R off if KL 58g is active or has been active in the past 32 s. 

• IB on by remote control (8 s search function). 

• ZV unlocked by the crash sensor. 

• ZV unlocked by remote control. 

• By pulling on external door handle with terminal R off. 

Switch-Off Criteria: 

• All doors closed with terminal R or 15 on. 

• All doors closed after 20 s switch-off delay with terminal R off. 

• Terminal R off (if KL 58g has been active at least once inside the last 32 s) after 20 s 
switch-off delay. 

• IB on by remote control (search function) after 8 s. 

• IB on by remote control unlocking after 20 s. 

• With door permanently open after 16 min. 

• With all doors closed and ZV locked. 

• Interior-light switch OFR 


23 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 





Review Questions: 


1. What is the communication path used to inform the Light Module of a turn signal 
request? How are the turn signals cancelled? 


2. What is the difference between a xenon light and a bi-xenon light? 


3. How is the FLC system activated? How is a switch on request received by the LM? 


4. Which control unit controls the LWR function? What makes this a “Dynamic” system? 


5. Describe the communication and control unit operation required to turn on the interior 
lights when unlocking the vehicle via the Remote Control. 


24 

E65 Vehicle Lighting Systems 



