Table of Contents 


TIRE PRESSURE CONTROL (RDC) 


Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

System Overview.3 

Components 

RDC Control Unit.4 

Receiving Antennas.4 

Wheel Transmitter Modules.5 

Principle of Operation 

Initialization.6 

Tire Pressure Monitoring.7 

Tire Failure Warning.8 

Self Diagnosis.8 

Review Ouestions.9 


Initial Print Date: 10/01 


Revision Date: 11/01 













TIRE PRESSURE CONTROL (RDC) 

Model: E65 - 745i 

Production Date: 11/2001 - Start of Production 


Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the components used in the RDC system. 

• Explain when the initialization process is necessary. 

• Understand the different criteria the RDC uses to distinguish a poorly inflated tire from 
a flat tire. 


2 

Tire Pressure Control (RDC) 




Introduction 


RDC is an available option for the E65. The system monitors the tire inflation pressures, 
both when the vehicle is being driven and when it is stationary. 

An electronic transmitter module mounted inside each tire measures the tire pressure and 
temperature at regular intervals and transmits the information by radio frequency to the 
RDC control unit. 

The driver is warned with a Check Control message of a tire that needs inflation or a pos¬ 
sible flat tire. 

System Overview 




3 

Tire Pressure Control (RDC) 


KT-7875 
























Components 

RDC Control Unit 

The RDC control unit is located behind the glove box on the equipment carrier above the 
ZGM. 



The RDC control unit is responsible for monitoring the individual pressures and tempera¬ 
tures of the tires (including the spare). If one of the tires inflation pressure falls below a spe¬ 
cific threshold then the RDC generates a CC warning and telegrams it over the K-CAN-S. 


The Instrument Cluster displays the check control warning icon and text message accord¬ 
ing to the message sent. The Control Display is informed by the Instrument Cluster of the 
required extended message. 


Receiving Antennas 

The RDC antennas are located behind the 
splash shield of each of the four wheel houses. 


The antennas receive the radio signals from the 
RDC transmitters and pass the signals along a 
shielded cable to the RDC control unit. 




4 

Tire Pressure Control (RDC) 













Wheel Transmitter Modules 

The transmitter modules are located inside the tire 
attached to the valve stem. The modules contain a 
pressure and temperature sensor, a long life 3.6V 
lithium battery and a radio transmitter. 

• Operating frequency for the U.S. : 315Mhz 

• Battery life: 5 to 7 years 



The transmitter modules are active in an energy saving mode even when they are sitting as 
spare parts on the shelf. 


Each transmitter module has it’s own unique I.D. code. The I.D. code is assigned to a posi¬ 
tion on the vehicle (Right rear, left front etc.) after a successful initialization has been com¬ 
pleted. 


The radio signal transmitted by the wheel modules is received when the tire passes close 
to the antenna. The valve stem of the spare tire should be pointed towards the right rear 
wheel house because the spare is also included in the monitoring (although it is not dis¬ 
played on the CD). 


The wheel transmitter module measures its ambient air pressure every minute. If the air 
pressure increases by 0.5 bar between measurements , the transmission rate increases to 
every 0.8 seconds. 


If the increase in air pressure is detected for approximately 216 seconds, the full function¬ 
ality of the wheel module is activated. If the higher pressure then continues, the module 
remains permanently active and measures the air pressure and temperature every 0.3 sec¬ 
onds and transmits the information by radio signal every 55 seconds. 

At temperatures over 120°C the transmitter modules are switched off. Once the transmit¬ 
ter cools to below 110°C operation resumes. 


5 

Tire Pressure Control (RDC) 



Principle of Operation 

Initialization 

After the tires are replaced, rotated or if their inflation pressures are adjusted, then the wheel 
transmitter modules must be initialized using the RDC function in the “Settings” menu of the 
Control Display. 

During initialization the following processes are performed: 


• Individual wheel recognition (Identification of wheel transmitter modules). 

• Wheel position assignment. 

• Plausibility check (setpoint pressures checked). 

• Adoption of setpoint pressures as specified pressures. 

The RDC then learns the wheel transmitter module position. 

The minimum air pressure accepted by the RDC on initialization is 1.7 bar (24.7psi). If the 
tire pressures deviate more than 0.4 bar (6psi) per axle the initialization is rejected after a 
plausibility check. 

1.3 bar is the lowest pressure detected by the wheel transmitter module. At that point, a 
tire failure warning will always be issued. 

Complete initialization can take up to 30 minutes. Only the actual driving time over 6 km/h 
is taken into account. During initialization, the CC message “Initializing RDC!” is displayed 
on the Instrument Cluster. 


Check Control Message Message displayed in 

displayed in KOMBI Control Display 


Initializing RDC! 



“Initializing RDC!” RDC tire 
pressure monitor not available 
for 15 to 30 min. System is 
temporarily unable to detect 
flat tires. 


6 

Tire Pressure Control (RDC) 





When the initialization from the Control Display is activated, the wheels appear black and 
the pressures are not shown. 



KT-8983 

Once initialization is complete, the tires of the car on the graphic turn green and pressure 
values are shown for each tire. 

Tire Pressure Monitoring 

During monitoring, the RDC control unit takes the measured temperature and pressure and 
determines a target pressure value. 

If the tire pressure being monitored falls below the required level by 0.2 bar for more than 
8 minutes, a CC message appears on the instrument cluster after the car is started. The 
driver is prompted to to check the tire pressure. 

• “Autumn warning”: If the tire temperature is 20°C lower for 14 days than the 

temperature was when the RDC was last initialized the RDC will also warn the driver to 
check the tire pressures. 


Check Control Message 
displayed in KOMBI 

Message displayed in 

Control Display 

Check tire pressures! 

“Check tire pressures!” Check 
tire inflation pressures; refer to 
owners manual or inflation chart. 


When the RDC menu on the Control Display is activated, the car is shown with yellow tires. 
The tire pressures must be adjusted and an initialization carried out. 


7 

Tire Pressure Control (RDC) 






Tire Failure Warning 


If a tire being monitored falls below the specified level by 0.4 bar after temperature calcula¬ 
tion or 16% of the inflated pressure then a CC message appears on the instrument cluster 
with an audible warning tone. A message also appears on the Control Display. 


Check Control Message 
displayed in KOMBI 

Message displayed in 

Control Display 

Flat tire! stop vehicle 

Left front tire is flat, refer to 

carefully 

owners manual or contact 

[0 

BMW Roadside assistance. 


When the RDC menu on the Control Display is activated, the car is shown with the defec¬ 
tive tire in red. In the case of a spare tire failure, all wheels are shown in red. 

Once the tire pressures are restored to the setpoint in the RDS control unit the tires of the 
car graphic in the Control Display return to green and the Check Control message is with¬ 
drawn. 

See the chapter “E65 Instrument cluster” for details on additional Check Control messages. 


8 

Tire Pressure Control (RDC) 






Review Questions 


1. Where are the transmitters and antennas located for the RDC system? What is the 
operating frequency for the U.S.? 


2. What conditions cause the wheel transmitter units to go from energy saving mode to full 
functionality? 


3. When adjusting tire pressures on a vehicle equipped with RDC, what is the maximum 
difference between tires of the same axle allowed by the system? 


4. When is initialization of the RDC system necessary? Explain briefly what the system is 
doing during the learning process. 


9 

Tire Pressure Control (RDC) 



