Table of Contents 


Active Cruise Control Workbook 


Subject 


Page 


Purpose of the System .3 

System Components. 

Instrument Cluster Display 

Principle of Operation .... 

Operation. 

Deceleration. 

Side Visual Range. 

Lane Prediction. 

Limitations . 

Activation Conditions . . . 

Deactivation . 

Lens Heater . 

Alignment. 

Preconditions. 


Work shop Hints .10 

Alignment Procedures.12 

Measuring left side of vehicle .13 

Measuring Right side of vehicle .13 

Adjusting the Mirror .13 

Adjustments required.13 


Initial Print Date: 1/03 


Revision Date:04/03 


CO^ - ^LOCDCONNOOOOOO 0)0} 























Active Cruise Control 
Model: E65/E66 

Production: Start of Production MY 2003 

The intent of this workbook is to assist you with key components, operation and alignment 
of the ACC System in addition to the detailed information found in the Repair Instructions, 
Technical Data and Tightening Torques from the latest TIS information. 

This section will be instructor led for a brief review of the ACC. You are encouraged to use 
this workbook with the latest TIS information to make notes during the alignment exercise. 
This will be valuable to you as supplementary information or a memory refresher when per¬ 
forming repairs in the future. 

Note: The component information in this workbook is a brief refresher from the Training 
Manual. For more in depth and detailed information about the ACC, refer to the ST047 
2003 Systems Diagnosis Training Manual. 

For additional and updated information, always refer to: 

www.bmwcenternet.com 

- TIS information/updates 

- Service Information Bulletins 

- DCS messages 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you should be able to: 

• Properly operate the ACC system. 

• Explain the operation of the ACC system. 

• Perform the alignment procedure for the ACC Control Unit. 


2 


ACC Workbook 




Updated 

Information 


Purpose of the System 


Active Cruise Control (ACC) is an extension of conventional cruise control. ACC is a com¬ 
fort system which assists the driver when traveling on open highways. A radar sensor mon¬ 
itors the distance, angle and speed of moving objects in front of the vehicle and strives to 
maintain a fixed distance behind the object. Vehicle ranging and speed control are 
achieved by means of engine management (Cruise Function of DME) and brake interven¬ 
tion (DSC). 




The driver can preselect a desired speed and choose between 4 following distances 
(expressed in time intervals). 


Note: Vehicles with ACC do not have “Normal” Cruise control. If the ACC system fails or 
enters a fault mode the vehicle does not default to “Normal”Cruise. 


Safety Note: 


ACC is not an impact protection system and CANNOT warn against or prevent 
coiiisions. 

The driver must continue to intervene in critical situations. 


System Components 

The ACC system consists of the following components: 

• Sensor-Control Module Unit 

• Steering Column Stalk Switch 

• Instrument Cluster Display 



3 


ACC Workbook 










Instrument Cluster Display 

The instrument cluster display is responsible for visual indication of ACC operation. 


1. Indicator for stored Desired speed. 

2. Indicator for detected vehicle. 

3. Indicator to show selected follow distance. 

4. Digital speed display. 

Note: 

1,2, and 3 are shown when the system is 
active. 

4 is shown for a short time when the desired 
speed is input. 



Vehicle in display is outlined: 

System is active and no vehicle in 
front is detected. 

Principle of Operation 



Vehicle in display is solid: 

System is active vehicle in front is 
detected. 



Take Over Request 

Vehicle in display is in triangle and 
Flashes: 

Driver should intervene by braking 
or taking evasive action as 
required. ACC cannot set following 
distance. 


ACC is a Comfort Function and NOT a Safety function. 

The driver alone is responsible for the use of the ACC system including: 
• Speed Selection 


• Following Distance 

• Acceptable weather conditions including visibility and road conditions for cruise 
operation 


4 


ACC Workbook 










































Updated 

Information 


The system can be overridden at any time by the driver. Accelerating does not deactivate 
the system. Braking results in system deactivation. 

All stored information, speed and following distance, are reset with every key activation. 
ACC is also reset in the case of non ACC requested DSC intervention. 

The ACC system controls the following distance and cruise speed when the vehicle is trav¬ 
eling between 20 mph and 110 mph. 

Operation 

If there is no object in front of the vehicle, the ACC system operates as a normal cruise con¬ 
trol. The desired speed input by the driver is regulated. 

When an object is detected within the lane the ACC illuminates the object sensed indica¬ 
tor. If the object being followed is traveling at a slower speed than is set by the cruise con¬ 
trol, the vehicle speed will be adapted (slowed) through either DME or DSC intervention to 
maintain the requested follow distance (timed in seconds). 

The distance to the lead object will vary with the time interval chosen by the driver and vehi¬ 
cle speed. The speed of the vehicle will never exceed the preset cruise request of the dri¬ 
ver. 


When the object is no longer in front of the vehicle, the preset speed request will be 
resumed. 

Note: 

The ACC will only detect moving objects. Objects that are stationary (stopped) will 
be ignored. 


35 MPH 

1.8 seconds 





55 MPH 

1.8 seconds 



Constant interval based on seconds, distance changes based on speed. 


5 


ACC Workbook 














Updated 

Information 


To maintain proper follow distance the ACC system must be able to perform the following 
tasks: 


• Detect lead objects by radar sensing up to a distance of approx. 120m. 

• Measure the distance, angle and relative speed of the lead object. 

• Calculate in advance the presumed vehicle course. 

• Select the relevant lead object for vehicle to object ranging. 

• Adapt the actual vehicle speed to that of the lead object by: 

Accelerating (Maximum acceleration rate 1.2 m/s 2 . 

Decelerating (Maximum deceleration rate 2.0 m/s 2 . 

• Monitor Lateral Acceleration (Maximum lateral acceleration 3.0 m/s 2 . 


Deceleration 


The ACC is only able to make limited relative speed corrections. The Maximum decelera¬ 
tion rate is 2.0 m/s2 (about 20% braking capacity). When the system has reached its 
function limits, the driver is requested to intervene by the flashing indicator. 





Side Visual Range 


Because of the limited side visual range, the leading object may be lost around curves. The 
ACC vehicle will not accelerate to the preset requested speed as long as the steering wheel 
is turned and curve recognition is active. After exiting the curve a time delay is in effect to 
prevent rapid overtaking of the lead object. 



6 



ACC Workbook 


























Lane Prediction 


In order to select the correct lead object for vehicle to vehicle ranging, the ACC must pre¬ 
dict the future lane or path of the vehicle (ACC vehicle). 

Lead objects are then relevant to a control operation when they are located in the actual 
lane. Lane prediction is an advance calculation of the actual lane of travel. 

The DSC unit provides vehicle speed and the Yaw sensor driving dynamics for the advance 
calculation. 

Limitations 

The following limitations are in effect during ACC operation: 

• Operation possible only between the speeds of 20 mph and 110 mph. 

• Maximum deceleration rate 2.0 m/s 2 . 

• Maximum acceleration rate 1.2 m/s 2 . 

• Maximum transversal acceleration rate 3.0 m/s 2 . 

ACC reaches its limitations in the following situations: 

• The sensing range of the radar sensor limits the detection of objects that are traveling 
in front in different lanes or around curves. 

• An object cutting in results in delayed ACC responses. Do not use ACC on winding 
roads or if frequent lane changes occur. 

• High speed differences cannot be corrected. 

• ACC cannot brake the vehicle to a complete standstill. The driver must assume control 
of the vehicle by braking. 

• ACC must only be used when visibility is adequate. 

• If the time gap to the lead object is less than 1 second, especially in the case of the 
lead object cutting in close to the front of the vehicle, ACC may not sense the lead 
object in time for intervention, driver intervention is required. 


7 


ACC Workbook 



Activation Conditions 


The following preconditions must be met for ACC to become operational: 

• Engine speed >512 RPM 

• No failure of Irreversible faults present in ACC 

• ACC system “ON” 

• Driving Speed > 20 MPH 

• Park, Reverse or Neutral not engaged 

• Parking brake not engaged 

• DSC not active 
Deactivation 

The ACC is deactivated in several ways: 

• Raising or lowering of the Stalk Switch 

• Pressing the brake pedal 

• Placing the transmission in Neutral 

• Deactivating the DSC System 

• Failure of one of the subsystems (Automatic Deactivation) 

• Sensor Blindness (Automatic Deactivation) 

• Vehicle speed drops below the minimum operating range (Automatic Deactivation) 

• The DSC is active beyond a preset time threshold (Automatic Deactivation) 

Lens Heater 

The lens of the ACC sensor is heated to ensure better operation in winter and adverse con¬ 
ditions. The heating coil is integrated into the plastic lens body. 

Lens heating is temperature dependent as measured by an internal temperature sensor in 
the ACC unit. 

Despite the heater it is not possible to prevent sensor “Blindness” in all conditions. 

Faults with the lens heating system are registered in the ACC unit fault memory. 


8 


ACC Workbook 





Updated 

Information 


Alignment 


It is essential that the sensor be correctly aligned for proper system operation. Horizontal 
mis-alignment will result in erroneous reaction to objects in a neighboring lane or a delayed 
reaction to objects in the same lane. 




ACC can compensate for minor horizontal misalignments up to 1 , with slight function 
impairments. In the event of more serious deviations, ACC will shut down and not be avail¬ 
able for operation. 


The alignment procedure is only possible with the DISplus or the GT1 and the special 
tools for ACC adjustment (PN 81-10-0-021-292). Also needed is 90 88 6 361 100 KDS 

adapter. 

Note: The tool is used in conjunction with other BMW special tools. Refer to SIB 
B04 03 02. Always refer to the latest bulletins and repair instructions. 


ACC sensor requires alignment if customer complaints are received regarding target aqui- 
sition, an alignment error is stored in the fault code memory or the sensor has been 
replaced. 


Preconditions 


Before the alignment procedure may be carried out, certain preconditions must be met. 

• Guides Rails mounted to floor for mirror positioning. 

• ACC is ONLY aligned with the BMW special tool package for ACC alignment. 

• Vehicle must be proper distance from mirror, 

• Vehicle chassis must be in proper alignment (Particularly in case of accident repair). 

• Tire pressures must be set to proper specification. 

• Ride height must be in nominal specs. 

• ACC sensor must be clean. 

• Guide Rails must be free of dirt. 

• Battery charger must be connected to vehicle. 


9 


ACC Workbook 



Work shop Hints 


• Mark the floor for the vehicle positioning with lines for the front tire, both fore and aft and 
side to side. This will save time and trouble. 

• Floor rail should be mounted carefully with flat head screws not round head. Round 
head screws interfere with the mirror unit. 

• Slotted target is adjusted by the rear wheel with the slot adjusted to the height of the 
wheel center (using the BMW cross-hairs). 

• Make certain that the alignment holes in the BMW wheels are clean and free of debris. 

• If aftermarket wheels are mounted on the vehicle that do not have the alignment holes, 
stock BMW wheels and tires must be mounted on the vehicle prior to ACC alignment. 

• All 4 wheels and tires must be factory spec sizes. 

• All tires must be inflated to factory specs. 

• Mount the wheel adapter securely and make sure it is straight. 

• Any time the mirror unit is moved it must be leveled. 

• The directions in the software refer to "front, middle and rear" mirror positions. This 
refers to the top mirror adjustment, which tilts the mirror. 

• Read the scales carefully. A mistake here will require a complete re-do. 

• Only use DISplus or GT1 CD32 and newer. Older versions will not operate correctly. 

• The track must be clean for the process, which allows the mirror unit to sit properly. 

• Adjustment of the sensor requires a long handled T15 torx driver. 

• Adjustment increments are in 0.1 of a turn. Small adjustments work best. 

• Do not lean on the vehicle at any time during the process. This could alter the results of 
the procedure. 

• To start the test, select Service Functions, Active cruise control, Adjust ACC sensor and 
Test Modules. 



ACC Workbook 




Updated 

Information 


When asked to enter values the return (enter) button must be pressed to accept the 
value. 


• Do not let the language of the text confuse you. The top scale is for the vertical axis and 
the side scale is for the horizontal axis. The test may ask you to read off the top scale, 
which "swivels about horizontal axis". Simply put this means that the vertical axis is 
adjusted by swiveling about the horizontal axis. 




Adjustment of the ACC sensor is the last step of the procedure. It takes 3 or 4 "Loops" 
to adjust the sensor to a 0 reading on the vertical and horizontal axis. A "Loop" is 
defined as one complete adjustment of both the vertical and horizontal axis. 


L J 



Note: 

The Coarse Setting Tool is 
no longer used for the 
coarse adjustment 


1. Coarse Setting Device 

2. Rail 

3. Mirror 

4. Slotted Cover 

5. Wheel Laser 

6. KDS Clamp 



1. On/Off Laser Switch 

2. Outlet aperture for Laser 

3. Locking Screw 

4. Screws for battery compartment 



1. Axle for Clamp 

2. On/Off Laser Switch 

3. Cover for Battery 

4. Outlet aperture for laser 

5. Projection surface w/ crosshairs 



1. Height adjustable slotted cover 

2. Setscrew for cover 

3. Baseplate 


ACC Workbook 













































































Note 


The function of the ACC system depends greatly on the exact setting of the ACC sensor. 
Meticulous care must be taken when carrying out the setting according to the instructions 
provided in the Test Plan. The permissible tolerance in the horizontal and the vertical direc¬ 
tion is 0.2 Degrees. 

Once the procedure has begun DO NOT lean on the vehicle. 

Alignment Procedures 

With the vehicle properly positioned in the service bay, 
measure the distance from the mirror to the ACC sen¬ 
sor. 

What is the specification for this distance? 



What is the tire pressure? Specification? 





RR 


Adjust the laser and mirror as directed and begin making measurements. 



ACC Workbook 




Measuring left side of vehicle 


Check List 

Mirror Level Set_ 

Measurement of Slot Shutter Level 

Value on top scale_ 

Value on side scale_ 

Measuring Right side of vehicle 
Check List 

Mirror Level Set_ 

Measurement of Slot Shutter Level 

Value on top scale_ 

Value on side scale_ 

Adjusting the Mirror 

Mirror in front of ACC Sensor_ 

Setting on Top Scale_ 

Mirror positions set properly_ 


Slot Shutter Set to Correct Level 

Measured from?_ 

Value entered_ 

Value entered 


Slot Shutter Set to Correct Level 

Measured from?_ 

Value entered_ 

Value entered 


Mirror Leveled_ 

Setting on Side Scale 


Adjustments required Vertical _ Horizontal 



ACC Workbook 



