Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

IHKA Automatic Heating and Air Conditioning System 

Objectives of the M odule .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Overview .5 

Air Conditioning System 

System Components.11 

Principle of Operation.15 

Workshop Hints.17 

Heating System 

System Components.18 

IHKA Heater and Air Conditioner Housing 

System Components.19 

Control Panel/Control Module 

Detailed Controls.23 

Temperature and Air Flow Control 

Principle of Operation.27 

Air Distribution 

Principle of Operation.35 

Stationary Functions 

Principle of Operation.45 

Non-Air Conditioning Functions 

Rear Roller Blind Control.48 

Coding 

Key Memory.50 

Vehicle M emory.51 

Workshop Hints.54 


Review Questions 


55 



















IHKA Automatic Heating and Air Conditioning System 

Model: E65 - 745i / E66 - 745Li 

Production Date: 11/2001 - E65, 01/2002 - E66 


Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

List the gasses detected by the AUC-2 sensor. 

Explain how the refrigerant compressor output is varied. 

List the refrigerant compressor "Run In" procedure. 

Locate the blower motor and blower control module. 

Describe the control panel functions. 

Explain the "Y" factor. 

Explain how the temperature is increased during air conditioning operation 
List the functions that apply to heater operation when the coolant is cold. 
Demonstrate M anual Air Distribution individual adjustments. 


2 

E65 IHKA 




IHKA Automatic Heating and Air Conditioning System 

Purpose of The System 

The E65 IHKA automatic heating and air conditioning system is designed with technologi¬ 
cal improvements and new or modified functions. The design objectives for the E65 IH KA 
system meets the requirements of customers worldwide for heating and cooling capability. 
The control display provides indication and operation. 

Important primary functions are 
controlled by basic knobs and 
pushbuttons on the control panel 
which includes: 


Temperature control 
Blower speed 
Recirculating air 
Defrost 

Maximum Air Conditioning 
Rear window defogger 
Automatic functions 

I > • 42-14-01 

1. IHKA Control Panel/Module 4. Face Vent Outlets 

3. Upper Air Flow Outlets (defrost) 5. Front Footwell Outlets 

Customer Benefits: 

Straightforward understandable operation. 

Individual adjustment is possible using the virtual controls in the control display. 
Individual settings are stored in memory. 

The rear seating area has air inlet grilles in the center console and in the B pillars. 

The design allows direct and indirect air flow to all occupants. 

Individually adjustable temperature stratification (warm/cold). 

Consideration for warm and cold air distribution (head, chest and leg regions). 

The system prevents drafts. 

Primary function controls are grouped in a single unit that is readily visible and accessi¬ 
ble to the driver and front seat passenger. 

The temperable ventilation (air stratification) is controlled by adjusting elements in the air 
inlet grilles and the control display. 



1 — 




iOv t 


3 

E65 IHKA 
















IHKA automatic heating and air conditioning system features: 

Activated charcoal inlet air micro-filter 
Recirculation air filter 
Residual heat 
Independent ventilation 

AUC-2 sensor (gas sensor for automatic recirculation air control) 

2 separate drives for outside air/recirculated air 
Air outlets in the B-pillars for rear passengers 
Solar sensor 

Vehicle and Key M emory for blower and temperature 
Dual temperature control (left/right) 

Automatic air distribution 
Airflow control 

Ventilation temperature stratification using the Controller in the Control Display menu 
Rear seat ventilation temperature control by the knurled knobs 


E65 innovations: 

Refrigerant Circuit 

Clutch-less refrigerant compressor is regulated externally by a pulse width modulation 
(PWM signal). 

Dryer integrated into condenser. 

Heater Circuit 

Auxiliary water pump is separate from dual water valve and installed in a remote position 
(easier to fill and bleed). 

Heater supply is from upper radiator hose for better accessibility and pressure limitation. 

IHKA Air Conditioner 

Layout with offset positioned blower unit. 

M odified functionality of the flap system for air flow control and stratification. 

Blower with single fan impeller. 

Blower control module (clock regulator with K-Bus and diagnosis capabilities). 

Flap drives (stepper motors) with blockage recognition. 


4 

E65 IHKA 


System Overview 


The heating and air conditioning system spans the entire vehicle. The major component 
locations including the optional rear air conditioner (E66) with cooler box is shown below. 



KT-7780 


1. Heater and Air Conditioner housing assembly 

2. Rear air conditioner with cooler box (E66 only) 

3. Condenser 

(Not shown: refrigerant compressor and auxiliary fan) 


Overview of System Components 

Refrigerant System: The refrigerant system components include the following 

1. Auxiliary fan with shroud 

2. Condenser (2a) with integrated dryer (2b) 

3. Refrigerant compressor 

4. Pressure sensor (in the line) 

5. Fill adapter pipe 

6. Interface connection at bulkhead 

7. Evaporator (inside the housing) 

8. Shutoff valve (rear AC - E66) 

9. Expansion valve 

10. Pressure and suction lines for IHKA 


The layout includes two shutoff valves (one at the front for IH KA and one at the rear for E66 
IHKA) and an additional evaporator with expansion valve. R134a refrigerant is used in the 
E65. The system capacity is 1.78 +/- .02 lbs (810 +/-10 grams). 

5 

E65 IHKA 




Heating System: Components of the heating circuit (coolant) with the N62 engine include 


1. Return hose 

2. Heat exchanger 

3. Supply hose 

4. Supply hose 

5. Dual water valves 

6. Electric auxiliary water pump 

7. Supply hose 

8. Hot coolant supply hose 

9. Radiator 




8214 


Air Ducts: Air ducts refers to all components that distribute the air supplied by the fan to 
the outlets. The ends of the air ducts are fitted with directional grilles. 


1. Air intake/filter housing 

2. Defroster ducts 

3. Ventilation ducts 

4. B-pillar ventilation 

5. Front footwell ducts 

6. Outlet ducts in the instrument panel 

7. Ventilation for rear seating area 

8. Heating ducts for rear seating area 

9. Side window air ducts 

10. Heater/Air Conditioner housing 



Heater and Air Conditioner Housing: The IH KA housing is secured to the middle of the 
engine compartment bulkhead, underneath the instrument panel. The blower is mounted 
inside the passenger compartment offset to the passenger's side (in front of the glovebox). 


6 

E65 IH KA 

















The IHKA housing is the central unit in the heating and air conditioning system, it performs 
the following functions: 


Create and control airflow 
Distribute the air 
M ix the air (air stratification) 

Dehumidify the air 

Convert the energy supplied by the cooling system 
Transfer the refrigeration power of the refrigerant system 



8011 


Layout of the IH KA major components (as viewed from the back) 


1 . 

Defroster duct 

11. 

Blower motor 

2. 

Drive, warm air left 

12. 

Blower control module 

3. 

Ventilation, left 

13. 

Evaporator 

4. 

Heating exchanger 

14. 

Condensation drain 

5. 

Drive, defroster 

15. 

Drive, footwell 

6. 

Drive, cold air right 

16. 

Drive, rear compartment ventilation 

7. 

Drive, warm air right 

17. 

Rear seat area duct, left, ventilation 

8. 

Drive, recirculated air 

18. 

Footwell/rear seat area outlet, left 

9. 

Drive, fresh air 

19. 

Footwell outlet, front left 

10. Recirculated air flap 

20. 

Drive, cold air left 


7 

E65 IHKA 














Control Panel/Control Module: The control panel is a dashboard insert with integrated 
electronic controls. The electronic circuits monitor and control the entire IH KA system. The 
control panel provides the essential basic controls. Precision adjustments are made using 
the Controller and the Control Display menu settings. 

IHKA control panel front view 



There are also controls for the hazard warning lights and central locking (Centerlock) func¬ 
tions (not part of IH KA system, only for location convenience). 


Functional Overview: 


DME (ECM)- Digital motor electronics 

PT-CAN - Bus cable 

K-CAN - Bus cable 

ZGM - Central gateway module 

MMI - control display 

TM - Door module 

SH ZH - auxiliary heating 

IHKA - E66 rear air conditioner 

PM - power module 

CAS - car access system 

ECU - IHKA control module 

LSZ - light switch center 

M PWR - stepper motors 

HR - rear window roller blind 

I/Os - inputs/outputs 

S-Sen - solar sensor 

AUCI/ll-Sen - AUC I and AUC II sensors 

B-Sen - fogging sensors (future) 

SI - limit position switch 
Poti - adjusting potentiometer 


8 



KT-8202 


E65 IHKA 




















































Additional Sensors and Actuating Components: The system includes other compo 
nents in addition to those previously listed. 

AUC-2 sensor for automatic recirculated air control 
One solar sensor for each side 

One temperature sensor on each side in the center vent outlets 

One potentiometer on each side in the rear center outlets (for adjusting air stratification) 

One limit position switch on each side in the rear compartment center outlets 


AUC-2 Sensor: The AUC-2 sensor provides an input to the IHKA module that will auto¬ 
matically activate recirculation mode when excessive ambient pollution is detected. This 
sensor detects pollutant gases emitted by gasoline and diesel engines that include the fol¬ 
lowing: 

Hydrocarbons 
Carbon monoxide 
N itrogen oxides 

The heating and electronic analyzer (and software) are 
integrated into the sensor (located on the fan shroud). 

The sensor signal is pulse width modulated (PWM) to 
the IHKA control module. 

The sensoris self diagnosable. Within the first minute of 
operation it determines if there is a fault in the sensor 
electronics. A fault will be set in the IH KA control mod¬ 
ule when a fault is detected. 



Solar Sensor: The solar sensor is mounted on the dashboard top center grille. The black 
cap is visible which masks the diffuser and two (left and right) photo resistors. The cap only 
allows infrared light to pass through. 


The solar sensor supplies the control module with a separate 
signal for left and right. These signal levels depend on the 
intensity of the sunlight striking the sensor. The solar sensor 
influences: 

Blower output 

Opening angle of the ventilation flaps 

Air stratification temperature 



KT-8037 


9 

E65 IHKA 


Temperature Sensors: The various temperature readings used by the IHKA control mod¬ 
ule are supplied from the following sensors: 

In the Heater and Air Conditioner Housing 

Evaporator temperature sensor 
Two heat exchanger temperature sensors 

In the Control Panel 

Interior temperature sensor with blower 

On the Vehicle 

Exterior temperature sensor (signal provided 
overthe K-CAN bus) 

Center air outlet grill of the dashboard (one 
temperature sensor for each side, 1 right) 

Each temperature sensor consists of a Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) unit in a 
plastic housing with injection molded connectors. The IHKA control module interprets the 
varying analog voltage signals as changing temperature. The NTC units used for evapora¬ 
tor and heat exchanger have different resistances, so the holders are mechanically coded 
to ensure that the sensors cannot be installed in the wrong location. 



Microfilter System (Air Intake): There is a microfilter in each of the two air intake filter 
housings. The microfilters are a combination of particle filter and activated charcoal filter. 
The activated charcoal filters out unhealthy and noxious gases from the intake air before it 
enters the heater and air conditioner housing. 

The service life of the filter depends on the degree of air pollution in the operating environ¬ 
ment. The automatic recirculated air control function (AUC) with the filtration system pro¬ 
vides optimum protection forthe occupants of the car. The AUC function also prolongs the 
service life of the filter. 


1. Inducted particles and gases 

2. Particle filter (prefilter) 

3. M icro-fiber matting 

4. Carrier material 

5. Activated charcoal filter 

6. Covering layers, activated charcoal 



10 

E65 IHKA 


KT-8201 








I 


Air Conditioning System 

System Components 


Refrigerant Compressor (KMV): The refrigerant compressor compresses the refrigerant 
gas inducted from the evaporator and forces it to the condenser. The compressor does not 
have a clutch and it always operates when the engine is running. The compressor output 
is variable and is controlled internally by signals from the IHKA control module. 


Delivery rate and pressure is produced by 
seven pistons. The piston stroke is influenced 
by a swash plate. 

1. Solenoid valve 

2. Hollow piston (Teflon coated) 

3. Swash plate (M 0 S 2 coated) 

4. Belt pulley 

5. Rubber elements 



KT-8339 


Clutchless Drive Advantages 


Application and Function 


Compact 
Saves Weight 

No electric power consumption 


The illustration (right) shows the design of the 
refrigerant compressor drive with rubber ele¬ 
ments. 

1. Splines in the drive hub 

2. Drive hub contour 

3. Splined shaft 

4. Rubber elements 

5. Belt pulley 

The rubber elements mesh with drive hub con¬ 
tour and will deform to give way (slip) if the 
compressor seizes. 


Vibration damping function 
Torgue transmission 
Protective function in the event of a 
blockage 



KT-8338 


11 

E65 IHKA 






The position of the swash plate is varied by the internal pressure which is controlled by the 
electric control valve integrated into the compressor. The control valve influences the force 
at the swash plate by changing the crankcase chamber pressure (Pc). When de-energized 
(control valve open), the swash plate is almost vertical and not deflected. The compressor 
output is approximately 0 - 2% which is required to maintain internal lubrication. 

The IH KA control module sends a pulse width modulated signal (12V, 0.85A at 400 Hz) to 
close the control valve. This causes the pressure in the crankcase chamberto diminish. The 
swash plate is deflected (angled) and the compressor output increases (variable between 
2 - 100 %). 



KT-8279 


1. Orifice between crank case chamber 
pressure Pc and intake pressure Ps 

2. Crankcase chamber pressure Pc 

3. Gas flow 

4. Spring 2 


5. Coil 

6. Valve tappet 

7. High pressure Pd 

8. Bellows with spring 1 

9. Intake pressure Ps 


Condenser with Dryer: Compressing the refrigerant gas in the compressor causes the 
temperature to rise. This heat energy is dissipated to the environment by air cooling the sur¬ 
face of the condenser, which causes the refrigerant to condenses and become liquid. 


12 

E65 IH KA 




























Any moisture that might be present in the sys¬ 
tem is trapped in the integral dryer to avoid cor¬ 
rosion damage in the refrigerant system. 

The dryer insert (1) is replaceable. The granulat¬ 
ed desiccant can absorb up to a maximum of 8 
grams of water. 

It is important to keep the refrigerant system 
sealed for as long as possible when performing 
repairs. 


Auxiliary Fan (ZL): The auxiliary fan (approx. 420 mm diameter) has 5 asymmetrically rear¬ 
ward curved blades. The motor is the brushless type with electronic commutation (no 
brushes to wear). The fan speed is variable from 30 to 100%. The required fan speed is 
requested by the IH KA to the EC M over the CAN bus. 

The ECM sends a PWM control signal to the fan motor final stage (integrated into the fan 
housing). At lower speeds and standstill (engine idling) cooling is assisted and maintained 
by the auxiliary fan. 

The auxiliary fan is deactivated at vehicle speeds > 80 km/h (fan stage 0 is output). At high¬ 
er vehicle speeds, ram air is sufficient to cool the condenser. The auxiliary fan is activated 
when the vehicle speed drops below 70 km/h. The operating stage depends on the refrig¬ 
erant pressure. There are 15 possible speeds depending on refrigerant system pressures. 



KT-8204 


Pressure Sensor: The pressure sensor is in 
the pressure line between condenser and the 
evaporator. 

The sensor sends the IHKA control module an 
analog signal between 0.4V and 4.6V as a rep¬ 
resentation of system pressure. 

The 5V supply is provided by the IHKA control 
module and the sensor current consumption is 
< 20 mA. 



KT-8205 


13 

E65 IHKA 




Expansion Valve: The block type expansion valve in the E65 functions the same 
els currently in use. The expansion valve is mounted directly on the evaporator 
conditioner housing (accessable from the driver's side) and controls the inlet rate 
fied refrigerant into the evaporator. 


This ensures that the evaporator receives only as 
much liquefied refrigerant as it can evaporate 
(supply side = liquid/blue, outlet side = gas/red). 

1. From evaporator 

2. To evaporator 

3. From condenser 

4. To refrigerant compressor 



as mod- 
in the air 
of lique- 

1 


KT-8207 


Evaporator: The evaporator is an aluminum 
plate type surface that consists of 27 plates 
with a total surface area of approximately 5 
square meters. To avoid corrosion, the evapo¬ 
rator has a very thin coating to speed conden¬ 
sation drain off. 

Cooling the air causes some of the contained 
moisture (humidity) to condense, so the evapo¬ 
rator control is set not to drop below approxi¬ 
mately 2 2 C in orderto prevent ice from forming. 
The temperature is monitored by the evaporator 
temperature sensor. 



KT-8212 


Notes: 


14 

E65 IHKA 















Principle of Operation 

Evaporator Temperature Control and Refrigerant Circuit Monitoring 

The evaporator temperature control keeps the evaporator temperature at a constant 2 2 C 
and operates independently of the other control circuits. The variable output to the refrig¬ 
erant compressor is derived from or limited by the following criteria: 

Difference between requested setting and actual value of the evaporator temperature 

Compressor speed 

Coolant temperature 

Compressor load torque 

Torque limitation 

Refrigerant pressure limitation 

Kick down (vehicle acceleration) 

Battery voltage 


Requested Setting and Actual Evaporator Temperature Difference 

The cold air exiting from the evaporator is reheated to the desired temperature by the heat 
exchanger. To control ventilation, the measured evaporator temperature is used as an influ¬ 
encing variable to compute the angle of the cold air flap. 


Refrigerant Compressor 

The compressor is activated on demand when all switch on criteria is met. It is an internal¬ 
ly regulated and externally controlled compressor. The control valve is the manipulated by 
a variable PW M (400 Hz) signal to ensure that only the refrigeration required at a given time 
is generated by the compressor. This reduces the load when full cooling power is not need¬ 
ed. 


Compressor Speed 

K-CAN messages provide the IH KA with engine speed information (from the ECM) which 
represents compressor speed. 


15 

E65 IH KA 


Compressor Load Torque 


The variable load torque is derived from the evaporator temperatures (requested setting 
and actual) by the IH KA to generate the PW M signal for the solenoid valve to deflect the 
swash plate. The physical compressor load torque requirement is calculated by the IHKA 
control module and sent to the ECM overthe K-CAN Bus. 


Torque Limitation 

The IHKA receives a K-CAN message from the ECM containing a maximum specified 
torque. Under full throttle/kick down and at high coolant temperatures, the EC M uses this 
signal to restrict the maximum possible compressor load torque. 


Refrigerant Pressure Limitation 

The refrigerant pressure is monitored through the pressure sensor to avoid excessive sys¬ 
tem high side pressures. The IHKA limits refrigerating power linearly from 100% to 0% 
(shutdown) between 22 to 28 bar of pressure. 

The compressor is deactivated when the pressure is < 1.8 bar. The compressor is reacti¬ 
vated when the pressure is > 2 bar, provided that all the other switch on criteria is met. 


Compressor - Running In 

When the compressor is operated forthe first time it must be run in to ensure proper lubri¬ 
cation (oil distribution). During the Running In procedure the compressor must be operat¬ 
ed at speeds between 300 to 1200 rpm. 

If the speed drops below 300 rpm or rises above 1200 rpm during the Running In phase, 
it is interrupted and automatically resumed after a delay of 5 seconds (refer to Service 
Functions). 


Communication between IHKA and the ECM 

The IHKA notifies the ECM of the request for compressor activation in a K-CAN message 
(Control A/C ready). 


16 

E65 IHKA 


In anticipation of the compressor load and based on the outside temperature, this is 
accomplished by increasing engine idle speed from 550 to 750 rpm. 

There are three different switching criteria: 

0 = No air conditioning required, system ON 

1 = Air conditioning required, system ON without speed increase 

2 = Air conditioning required, system ON with speed increase 

The ECM provides the IHKA with a torque of 30 Nm, provided that deactivation criteria 
does not apply (high coolant temperature, kick-down, etc.). The IHKA will activate the 
refrigerant compressor in the permitted torque range and reports the actual torque applied 
back to the ECM . 


Limitation of Compressor activation by the ECM 

The ECM sends a K-CAN message notifying the IHKA of the maximum available torque. If 
this maximum available torque is less than the current compressor load torque, the valve 
signal is reduced until the load of the compressor drops to or below this value. If this can 
not be accomplished by the minimum valve signal, the compressor is shut down. 


Workshop Hints 

Initial Operation after Replacing the Refrigerant Compressor 

When the compressor is operated for the first time (after replacement) it must be run in to 
ensure proper lubrication (oil distribution)! 

Procedure: 

1. Set all air vents in the instrument panel to "OPEN". 

2. Start the engine and wait until it stabilizes at a constant idle speed. 

3. Set the speed blower to at least 75% of the maximum output. 

4. Switch on the A/C system and allow it to operate for at least 2 minutes at idle speed 
(risk of damage at higher speed). 

Note: The engine speed must not exceed 1200 rpm. If it does, the procedure will auto¬ 
matically abort and must be repeated. 

Consult the Repair Information (in TIS) for the correct compressor oil filling procedure and 
the Running In phase that allows thorough and uniform mixing with the refrigerant. 


17 

E65 IHKA 


Heating System 

System Components 

Auxiliary Water Pump (ZWP): The ZWP is a rotary pump with an electronically commut¬ 
ed direct current motor. The pump housing is sealed from the motor. Drive from the motor 
is transmitted to the impeller through the sealing partition. 

The ZWP is protected against blockage and reverse polarity. 

In the event of a thermal overload, power is reduced down to 
intermittent operation. 

The ZWP enhances hot water flow (1 - outlet, 2 - inlet) and 
ensures the minimum flow rate, particularly when the engine 
is idling or off (residual heat function). 


Dual Water Valve (WV): The dual water valve operates electro mag netically to meter the 
volume of coolant flow to the left and right heat exchangers. 

This function is performed by an open/close ratio that the 
IHKA control module varies according to the demand. The 
valves are sprung open when de-energized. 

1. Left heat exchanger circuit 

2. Hot coolant inlet 

3. Right heat exchanger circuit 

Heat Exchanger (WT):The aluminum heat exchanger is the flat tube type consisting of 
two halves (left and right) with one inlet for each and a common outlet. It transfers the ther¬ 
mal energy supplied by the flow of heated coolant to the air flowing through. 

Under ideal conditions as much as 10 kW of heating power 
can be produced. 

There are two heat-exchanger temperature sensors located in 
the air stream (left/right) that measure the exiting air tempera¬ 
ture. 


18 

E65 IHKA 



KT-8210 



2 

KT-8206 





IHKA Heater and Air Conditioner Housing 

System Components 


The Heater and Air Conditioner Housing consists of the following components/functional 
units: 


Evaporator/evaporator sensor 
Heat exchanger/sensor 
Blower 


Blower speed control module 
Flaps/flap actuating mechanism 
Flap drives/stepper motors 


Flap Drives: 

1. Warm air left 

2. Defrost 

3. Fresh air 

4. Recirculated air 

5. Warm air right 

6. Cold air right 

7. Footwell right 

8. Rear seating area right 

9. Rear seating area left 

10. Footwell left 

11. Cold air left 



9S7 


KT-8376 


Blower: The blower assembly is a radial flow 
blower with a fan impeller on one side. It is 
mounted with the blower motor in a sound 
proofed housing (1), offset to the passenger's 
side. The blower control module can be sepa¬ 
rated from the motor. 

The blower produces the required air mass 
flow and under ideal conditions can achieve a 
maximum flow rate of approximately 9 kg/min. 



KT-8346 


19 

E65 IHKA 





Depending on the positions ofthe airflow control flaps, the required quantity of airis induct¬ 
ed either through the fresh air filters or through the recirculated air flap depending on the 
operating status. 

Technical data of the blower motor: 

Type Permanent Direct current motor 

Voltage 12 V 

Rated speed 3350 rpm 

Rated current consumption 27 A 


Blower Control Module: The blower control module is 
mounted directly on the blower motor housing. It has self 
diagnosis capabilities and is addressed by the IHKA control 
module over the K-bus (view from below inside open IHKA 
housing). 

1. Blower control module 

2. Blower 



KT-8208 


The blower control module uses a "clocked" regulator which 
reduces control power losses. This significantly saves energy 
and requires a smaller heat sink. 

The diagnostic information is transmitted to the IHKA control 
module for processing. If a fault is detected in the regulator or 
blower that would cause an overload (overheat), current is 
reduced or the blower is temporarily shut down. 


Flaps/Flap Actuating Mechanism: The flaps distribute the air and mix cold air with warm 
air. The flap actuating mechanism includes the flaps, corresponding shafts with lever 
assemblies and the drive motors. 

The flaps in the IHKA are as follows: 

Fresh Air Flap: This flap regulates the quantity of fresh air inducted by the blower. It is actu¬ 
ated by a rapid action drive to close quickly when the system is operating in automatic 
recirculation air mode (AUC mode). This flap also acts as a dynamic pressure compen¬ 
sator. 



20 

E65 IHKA 





Recirculation Air Flap: This flap is a three vane 
louver (1). 

The recirculation air flap regulates the volume of 
recirculated air inducted into the system. 

The recirculating air filter is located directly 
above it. 

FootweliFlap: These flaps (separate for left and 
right) control the flow of air to the front and rear 
footw ells. 

Rear Seating Area Ventilation Flap: These flaps regulate the volume of airflow and the 
temperature (air stratification) from the rear ventilation outlets (separate flaps for left and 
right). 

Defrosting Flaps: These two flaps are coupled together to regulate the air flow against the 
windshield. In all adjustment and control functions, these two flaps are controlled from the 
driver's side only. 

Warm Air/Cold Air Flap: These flaps control the airflow/temperature stratification to the 
outlets in the dashboard and B pillars (separate flaps for left and right). Each pair of flaps 
(warm air/cold air) regulate the airflow and the temperature at the same time. 



KT-8347 


Flap Drives/Stepper Motors: All flap drives are designed basically the same, including 
the following components: 

Stepper motor 
Plug housing 
Reduction gearing 

The external distinguishing features are the dif¬ 
ferent types of levers and rods and the physical 
configuration (alignment) of the connectors. The 
drives are decured by clips. 

IH KA has a total of 11 stepper motors: 


10 Stepper motors for all other flaps 



21 

E65 H KA 


1 Rapid action motor for the fresh air flap 




Rapid Action Motor (Fresh Air Flap): The windings of this drive are actuated directly by the 
IH KA control module at a stepping freguency up to 500 Hz. The rapid action motortorgue 
depends on the stepping freguency, not on the supply voltage. 

Stepper Motors (All Other Flaps): Each of these motors contain an integrated circuit (M UX- 
4 chip) in the plug connection housing. This 1C controls the windings of the motor and is 
linked by a motor bus with diagnosis capabilities. 

All stepper motor drives are controlled by the IH KA control module over the motor bus. 
Each drive has a permanent address (stored on the chip) which is a unigue identifier for 
the individual motor (for bus communication). The stepper motors are all different and are 
not interchangeable. 

Faults (blockages) reported by the drives are stored in the IH KA control module, which 
responds by discontinuing control signals to the motor in guestion. 


Notes: 


22 

E65 IH KA 




















Control Panel/Control Module 


i 



KT-8297 


The IHKA detailed controls are: 

1. AUTO left button (LED: green) 

2. Recirculated air/AUC button (LED: both green) 

3. DEFROST button (LED: orange) 

4. TEMPERATURE left knob 

5. MAX AC button (LED: green) 

6. AIR VOLUME left knob 

7. System OFF button (LED: orange when system is switched off) 

8. AIR VOLUME right knob 

9. TEMPERATURE right knob 

10. REST button - residual heat mode (LED: green) 

11. Rear window defroster button (LED: orange) 

12. Air Conditioner button (LED: green) 

13. AUTO right button (LED: green) 

14. Air grill for interior temperature sensor 

15. Parked-car ventilation system indicator (flashing when activated) 


23 

E65 IHKA 













Function Operations Based on Ignition Switch Positions 


Terminal 30 (Ignition OFF) 


Terminal 15 


Terminal R (Accessory Position) 


Residual heat (Rest function) 

Parked-car ventilation 

AUTO (residual heat/parked-car ventilation) 
OFF (residual heat/parked-car ventilation are 
deactivated when "OFF" is selected) 


Residual heat (Rest function) 
Parked-car ventilation 


Parked-car ventilation 
AUTO Driver 
AUTO Front passenger 
AC 

DEFROST 
MAX AC 
Recirculating air 


AUC 

HHS (rear window defroster) 
OFF 


Communication Between IHKA and Control Display 

The following messages are interchanged between the IH KA and the Control Display over 
the K-CAN bus: 


From Control Display to IH KA: 

Operation of air conditioner, front 
Operation of air distribution, driver's side 
Operation of air distribution, passenger's 
side 


From IHKA to Control Display: 

Status of air conditioner, front 
Status of air distribution, driver's side 
Status of air distribution, passenger's 
side 


Functions of Other Buttons on the Control Panel 

CENTERLOCK: The status of the CENTERLOCK button is looped through the IHKA to the 
appropriate control module. 

HAZARD WARNING LIGHTS: The status of the HAZARD WARNING LIGHTS button is 
looped through the IH KA to the appropriate control module. The hazard warning lights indi¬ 
cator LED is activated by the lights switching center. 

Connected Loads 

The power requirement of the control module is 16 Amp (max.). 

24 


E65 IHKA 





Connections at the Back of the Control Panel/Control Module 


The rear of the control panel accommodates 


All plug in connections to the vehicle electrical supply and to the heater/air conditioner 
components 

Connection to the K-CAN bus 

Replaceable sensor blower (directs air onto the integrated interior temperature sensor) 


Rear View of the Control Panel: 

1. Replaceable sensor blower 

2. Pin receptacle 04, 3-pin, black 

3. Pin receptacle 03, 12-pin, blue 

4. Pin receptacle 01, 12-pin, black 

5. Pin receptacle 05, 5-pin, black 

6. Pin receptacle 02, 26-pin, blue 



Notes: 


25 

E65 IHKA 



















M1 to M10 - Flap drives (stepper motors) 
BEL AB - Ventilation for storage box (future) 
WHZG - Wiper parked zone heating 
Mil - Fresh air flap 
PM - Power module 
WTFL - Pleat exchanger temperature 
sensor, left 

KMV - Refrigerant compressor 
WTFR - Pleat exchanger temperature 
sensor, right 

HSR - Rear window roller blind 
VDF - Evaporator temperature sensor 
KL30 - Terminal 30 
F2 - Fresh air grill, front 
GEB - Blower 

DSEN - Refrigerant pressure sensor 
CON - Controller 

AUC - Automatic recirculated air control 
BZM - Center armrest control console 
WV - Water valve 
CD - Control Display 
ZWP - Auxiliary water pump 
DME - (ECM) Digital engine electronics 
LM - Light module 
ZGM - Central gateway module 
WB - Plazard warning lights system 
SP - Blocking circuit 
CTL - Centerlock 
HHS - Rear window defroster 
CAS - Car Access System 
AT - Antenna tuner 
SSEN - Solar sensor 
PT-CAN - Powertrain bus 
FI - Fresh air grill, rear seating 
K-CAN S - Body controller area network 
system 

BSEN - Fogging sensor (future) 


Functional Circuit Diagram 



26 

E65 IHKA 













































































































































































Temperature and Air Flow Control 


Principle of Operation 
Temperature Control 

The basis of the temperature control system consists of the left and right master controllers 
(Y Factor). These controllers compare the interior temperature actual value with the occu¬ 
pant's requested temperature settings for left and right. The control obtains a differential 
signal, which it uses to generate the variable Y (factor). 

The operating range of the master control is from - 200% to + 311.5% Y. A wide variety of 
functions in the IHKA are influenced by this, for example: the flap and automatic blower 
control. The subordinate systems include two auxiliary regulating circuits for the left and 
right heat exchangers to suppress the temperature fluctuations in air throughput or water 
flow. 

Two other independent loops control the ventilation temperature for left and right, thus 
allowing stratification of the air temperature between the footwell outlets and the ventilation 
outlets. 


Passenger Compartment Control (Master Controller) 

The passenger compartment controller is proportional (linear). The temperature range that 
the vehicle's occupants can select is from approx. 61 s F to 90 s F (16 s C to 32 s C). 

The step interval is: 

Temperature 2 F in increments of 1.0 2 F 
Temperature 2 C in increments of 0.5 2 C 

42 - 14-11 



MAX Heating Function 

When the setpoint is 32 2 C, MAX heating is activated for left and/or right individually. The 
interior temperature controller is overridden. The temperature of the heat exchanger is 
brought up to the maximum of 90 2 C. The variable Y is set to maximum heating (true 
311.5%). 

Exception: The water valves will remain closed in the parked-car ventilation mode, so the 
MAX heating function is cancelled. 

27 

E65 IHKA 


MAX Cooling Function 


When the setpoint is 61 s F, MAX cooling is activated for left and/or right indi¬ 
vidually. The interior temperature controller is overridden. The heat exchang¬ 
er temperature is reduced to the minimum of 5 2 C and the water valve(s) is 
closed. The variable Y is set to -200% (maximum cooling) and the recircu¬ 
lation mode automatically takes place. 



42 - 14-11 


Correction for Setpoints 

Outside Temperature Influence: The outside temperature is registered by a sensor at the 
bumper and is sent to the IH KA over the K-CAN bus. The setpoint is corrected to com¬ 
pensate for the effects on the vehicle's occupants from radiant heat. The outside temper¬ 
ature influence and the associated setpoint increase can be between +12 to -2 2 C. 

Interior Temperature Sensor: The temperature sensor measures the temperature inside the 
passenger compartment. This temperature sensorfurnishes the most important, the sen¬ 
sor value is monitored and processed at a very high resolution (0.1667 2 C). 


Heat Exchanger Control 

The temperature of the heat exchangers is monitored by temperature sensors situated 
directly in the discharge air flow (left and right). The heat exchanger setpoint is calculated 
on the basis of the master controller's variable Y to correct fluctuations in heat exchanger 
temperature. 

Exception: If the variable Y factor is < 0%, the water valve of the heat exchanger(s) is 
closed. 


Heat Exchanger Characteristic Map 

The duration of water valve(s) opening compensates temperature control based on a speed 
dependent heat exchanger characteristic map for various engine speeds. 

Pulse width modulation from the IH KA controls the water valves to open longer for lower 
engine rpm and open shorter for higher rpm. 


28 

E65 IH KA 


Filling Station Effect 


The filling station effect occurs when the valves are de-energized (sprung open), allowing 
the heat exchanger to filll with hot coolant. This is avoided by maintaining the power sup¬ 
ply to the water valves for 3 minutes after KL15 is switched "OFF". 


Engine Characteristic-Map Cooling 

To avoid damage to the heater and air conditioner, the heat exchanger temperature is lim¬ 
ited to a maximum of 90 2 C. If a defective water valve causes the temperature in the heat 
exchanger to rise too high (> 98 2 C), a K-CAN message is sent to activate the 
Characteristic-Map cooling in the ECM . 


Auxiliary Water Pump 

The electric auxiliary water pump ensures that the requested water flow rate is maintained 
even at low engine speeds. 

ON: Residual Heat Function 

or 

KLI5 ON and 

Engine temperature > 0 2 C and 
Blower not on zero setting and 

Variable Y (driver or passenger) > 5% 

or 

DEFROST 

or 

MAX heating 

OFF: Residual heat function not active and 
KL15 OFF 

or 

Engine temperature < 0 2 C 

or 

Blower setting on zero 

or 

Variable Y (driver or passenger) < 0% and 
DEFROST not active and 
MAX heating not set 


29 

E65 IHKA 


Face Vent Outlet Stratification 


To achieve the air temperature and airflow rate, output is calculated taking the following 
variables into account: 

Temperature setting selected by the occupants (variable Y) 

Air stratification setting using the Controller in the Control Display settings menu 
Ventilation temperature (actual value) 

Solar sensor 

Outside temperature 

Flap characteristics for the footwell 

DEFROST ON/OFF 

Correction factors 

Temperatures of evaporator and heat exchanger 


Once the face vent outlet stratification is set, characteristics are applied to correct the posi¬ 
tions of the cold air and warm air flaps (air mix) to achieve the desired flow rate and tem¬ 
perature at the ventilation outlet. 




The proportions of the warm and cold air flow deter¬ 
mines the ventilation temperature. This affects the tem¬ 
perature and the airflow rate in the entire system each 
time the angle of a flaps is changed. 

1. Face vent outlet duct 

2. Airflow to ventilation (ventilation temperature) 

3. Cold air flap position 

4. Cold airflow (evaporatortemperature) 

5. Warm airflow (heat exchanger temperature) 

6. Warm air flap position 



KT-7792 


Ventilation Control (Stratification) Front 

The inputs used to generate the setting for the face vent temperature are 
Temperature variable (Y) 

Stratification using the Controller in the Control Display settings menu 
Solar sensor value 
Outside temperature 


30 

E65 IH KA 




The setpoint calculation for the ventilation temperature is based on the heat exchangerand 
evaporator temperatures. The calculation provides the approximated flap angles to pro¬ 
duce the ventilation temperature. 

There are ventilation sensors (left and right) to monitor the ventilation temperature. These 
sensors allow the IHKA to monitor the true ventilation temperature which is compared to 
the requested ventilation temperature. The IHKA will "fine tune" the flaps to decrease the 
difference. 

The angle of the footwell flap is taken into account as a factor for the volume of air that is 
lost when the footwell flap is open. The variable (Y) function is added to force the warm air 
flap open in cooling mode (heat exchanger cold) to increase the air volume flow. 


1. Evaporator 

2. Heat exchanger 

3. Warm air flap 

4. Cold air flap 

5. Flap for rear seating ventilation 
(warm air, cold air and shut off) 



KT-8345 


Ventilation Control (stratification) Rear 


The air stratification flaps forthe rearof the passengercompartment (left/right are separate) 
discharge perform two functions: 

Shut off the flow of air to the vents (shut off flaps at the vents are closed manually) 
Control the discharge temperature by mixing warm air and cold air (flap 5 above) 

The limit position switches atthe shut off flaps ofthe center vent will signal a requestto the 
IH KA to closed or open the supply flap (flap 5 above). 


31 

E65 IHKA 











Air Flow Control 


Automatic Blower and Flap Control 



42-14-06 


When the "AUTO" button (left or right) is pressed ora request is made by using the Control 
Display, the automatic blower and flap control is activated (depends on variable Y) and the 
"AUTO" LED is illuminated. When the blowercontrol knob is turned, automatic blowercon- 
trol (forthat)side is deactivated. Automatic flap control remains active. Pressing the "AUTO" 
button again reactivates automatic blowercontrol. The current blower output is displayed 
on the Control Display in manual mode only. 


Dynamic Pressure Compensation 


As vehicle speed increases, the increase in "ram air" is controlled by Dynamic Pressure 
Compensation to maintain consistent airflow volume. The ram air is compensated by clos¬ 
ing down the fresh air flap to restrict the air intake duct in response to the road speed sig¬ 
nal (over K-CAN). To prevent the flap position from being changed continuously in response 
to minor changes in road speed (overcompensation), buffering is included in the calculation 
for the desired flap position. In the 80 to 180 km/h speed range, the fresh air flap angle is 
reduced from 100% to 30%. 


Manual Blower Adjustment 



42-14-09 


Turning the control knob(s) clockwise increases blower output and counter clockwise 
decrease output. The knobs do not have limit stops and detente in stages from 1 - 14 
(power is increased ordecreased one level foreach click). Bloweroutput is visualized in the 
bar indicator in the Control Display. 

Once the maximum or minimum set¬ 
ting is reached, turning the poten¬ 
tiometer further in the same direction 
has no additional effect and output 
remains at the MAX or MIN setting. 

The new blower value is immediate¬ 
ly transmitted to the Control Display. 

A. Manual blower setting 

B. Bloweroutput 

C. Potentiometer detent position 

D. Blower stage 


A 



32 

E65 IH KA 

















Automatic Blower Boost 


Automatic blower boost is avail¬ 
able when the flaps are adjusted 
manually or automatically. 


A. - Blower output 

Y. - FA variable, driver's side 



tw -i» m *» «c 1&9 IK ho an 

V- FA 

——————— 


To expedite cooling or heating to counter extreme cabin temperatures, the normal range of 
adjustment (Y) is increased to - 200% ... 310%. Automatic blower control only responds to 
the driver's side value. 


Limitation in Cold and Warm Ranges 


When the variable (Y) > 10%, 
maximum bloweroutput is limited 
as a function of coolant tempera¬ 
ture. 

This avoids unwanted cold air 
drafts until warm air can be pro¬ 
duced. 

A. Limitation in cold/warm ranges 

B. Coolant temperature 

C. Maximum blower output 




A (V > 10 %| 


y: ‘ 




C {%) 

rci H 




p 

in 


M 40 



3 rq 

KT-8738 


Blower Control Function Based on Electricity Supply 


When the power module triggers a consumer shutdown over the K-CAN bus, the follow¬ 
ing applies: 

Blower Output Prioritv Level 


OFF 1 

50% 4 

100% >4 


33 

E65 IHKA 













Note: The reduction in bloweroutput orshutdown for priority level 1 or4 does not apply to 
the "DEFROST" function. 


Blower voltage is reduced in the same ratio as the vehicle voltage from 12.0 V downward 



Effect of Terminal 50 (Start Signal) 

During engine starting, the battery is not subjected to the extra load by the blower current 
consumption. As long as "KL50 logically on" remains (starter motor), the blower control 
voltage is held at OV (blower off). 

Fault Handling, Terminal 50: A communication defect affecting the "terminal 50 logically 
on" bus message will shut down the blower and the duration of the active state (KL50) is 
monitored. 

The "Terminal 50 Logically On" Status is overridden When: 

KL50 active for longer than 30 seconds 

Engine speed >500 rpm 

"Engine running" K-bus message is received 

The original KL50 status is considered invalid, and although no fault message is in memo¬ 
ry the function is "logically off". The blower circuit remains inactive until KL15 is switched 
"OFF". The blower circuit is reactivated by the next KL15 ignition "ON" status. 


Notes: 


34 

E65 IH KA 











Air Distribution 


Principle of Operation 

There are a number of ways to select the air distribution mode: 

Automatic program - selectable by the button on the control panel or the air condition¬ 
ing menu on the Control Display. 

Prioritized programs - selectable by the buttons on the control panel. 

Manual air distribution programs - selectable by the air conditioning menu on the Control 
Display. 

INDIVIDUAL settings (no program) - selectable by the DUAL function in the air condi¬ 
tioning menu on the Control Display (future). 

The air distribution status is always transmitted to the Control Display for the flap range 
from 0% (flap closed) to 100% (flap open). 


Flap Positions 

The flaps are positioned according to the driver's side control setting (including Y). The 
LHD/RHD ID is needed forthis purpose when coding. The flaps and positions that are acti¬ 
vated (together) for both sides of the heater and air conditioner unit are: fresh air, recircu¬ 
lating air and Defrost. 


Flap Position Priorities 

The initial position of each flap is defined in according to the following priorities 

Calibrating run (after connection of the battery) 

Parked-car ventilation OR utilization of residual heat (Rest feature) 

Position run (when KL15 is switched OFF) 

DEFROST program 

MAX-AC program 

OFF mode (blowerzero position) 

Cold starting interlock 


35 

E65 IHKA 


If one of these functions is active, the nominal positions of the motors are used. If none of 
these functions are active, the nominal position is recalculated for each flap, taking into 
account the button selected (flap program). 


Calibration Run 

The stepper motors do not have a "feedback" function to recognize the actual positions, 
they always move to a reference position. The reference position is the flap limit positions 
0% or 100%. 

The flaps always move to a limit position for each "power-on reset" (reconnect battery). This 
allows the IHKA to start from the reference to properly position the flaps during normal 
operation. A calibrating run can also be initiated by the DISplus. 


Overflow 

When at the limit position (0% or 100%), the fresh air flap is subjected to an OVERRUN 
(precautionary measure). In OVERRUN, the stepper motor is sent "10 overrun steps" every 
20 seconds. The fresh air motor is sent overrun steps in the CLOSED direction (so flap is 
sealed correctly) and in the OPEN direction (correction if the flap is frozen closed). 


Position Run 

When the ignition (KL15) is switched "OFF", the fresh air/recirculated air flap is moved to 
the "fresh air position". This ensures the supply of outside air to the passenger compart¬ 
ment in the event of an IH KA failure. 


Manual (Individual) Air Distribution 


Manual air distribution is controlled through the 
Control Display. 

The IHKA provides separate individual air distri¬ 
bution settings to increase /decrease airflow for 
the driver's and passenger's side. 



36 

E65 IHKA 


42-14-17 



Automatic Program 


Defrosting flaps 


To avoid post start fogging, the defroster flap remains closed for 12 seconds after the 
engine is started, before operations return to normal. When the DEFROST function is can¬ 
celled, the defroster flap is moved to the new flap position (after a slight delay). When the 
AUTO button on the driver's side is pressed, the defroster flaps are opened or closed 
according to program variable (Y). 


The AUTO button on the passen¬ 
ger's side does not effect the posi¬ 
tion of the defroster flaps. 

A. Variable Y 

B. Flap aperture 


Footwell Flaps 

When the AUTO button on the dri¬ 
ver's or passenger's side is 
pressed, the footwell flaps are 
opened or closed according the 
the variable (Y) program. 

A. Variable Y 

B. Flap angle 



KT-8743 


Settings for the "INDIVIDUAL" Program 

The flaps that can be set individually by the Control Display are 

Drivers Side Passenger's Side 


37 

E65 IHKA 


Defroster flap 
Virtual flap 
Footwell flap 


Virtual flap 
Footwell flap 
































When the positions of the flaps on the left side 
are changed, the program set for the right side 
is deleted. 

The individual settings allow the flaps on the left 
and right sides to be opened or closed sepa¬ 
rately in steps of 10%. 

The correct flap positions are held and can be 
called up with the INDIVIDUAL program. 



Special Case: When a special program is active (MAX-AC, DEFROST, etc.) the program 
selected beforehand is reselected initially if an individual air distribution setting is selected. 


Cold-Starting Interlock 

Cold-starting interlock avoids unwanted cold air drafts until warm air can be produced and 
is activated with the following conditions: 

ON: Variable (Y) DRIVER setting = 100% and 
AUTO program selected and 
Heat exchanger temp, driver's side < 30 2 C 

Cold-starting interlock is deactivated when any one of the three conditions is not met. The 
flap positions for cold-starting interlock depends on the outside temperature. If outside 
temperature is < 0 2 C, the defroster flap is OPEN and the footwell flaps CLOSED. The 
opposite applies for outside temperatures > 0 2 C. 


MAX-AC Function 

The MAX-AC function enables the user to select the maximum cooling 
powerby a single touch of a button on the control panel. The MAX-AC func¬ 
tion has the highest priority after the DEFROST function. 

All functions including DEFROST are deactivated when the MAX-AC button is pressed and 
the air conditioning function is switched on. The air conditioning function will remain active 
when the MAX-AC function is terminated. 



42-14-11 


38 

E65 IH KA 




The MAX-AC function is terminated when any button on the control panel is pressed ora 
change made to the settings on the Control Display. The newly selected function becomes 
active and the settings selected before the MAX-AC function are reactivated (except 
DEFROST). Pressing the MAX-AC button while the MAX-AC function is active also termi¬ 
nates the MAX-AC function. 

Special functions in conjunction with the MAX-AC function 

M ulti-function steering wheel (MFL) actuation: When the MAX-AC function is active there 
is no reaction to the MFL controls. 


DEFROST Function 


The DEFROST function is a priority function in air distribution. DEFROST is 
activated by pressing the DEF button. The DEFROST function is the highest 
priority function after the OFF function. When the DEFROST function is acti¬ 
vated all the function LEDs go out, with the exception of the rear window 
heating LED is active (if selected). The blower can be adjusted while the 
DEFROST function is active. 


I W 


42-14-08 


Additional Outside Temperature Influence for DEFROST 



The corrected setpoints are increased in accordance with the curve above 
Heat exchanger temperature is brought up to maximum value. 

Controlled DEFROST function: Outside temperature > - 5 2 C 
The corrected setpoints are increased in accordance with a curve above. 
The heat exchanger setpoints are increased to at least 30 2 C. 


39 

E65 IHKA 








Reactions to Termination of DEFROST Function 


When the DEFROST function is active, only the rear window defroster, A/C functions and 
the temperature settings can be changed without switching off the DEFROST function. The 
DEFROST function is deactivated by pressing any button (except: temperature control 
knob, rear window defroster and REST buttons). When the DEFROST function is terminat¬ 
ed by pressing the DEFROST button, the control panel settings (stored in memory) are 
reactivated. 

A recirculated airfunction activated priorto DEFROST is deactivated, because recirculation 
and automatic A/C mode cannot be activated at the same time. This measure prevents the 
windows from fogging when the DEFROST function is switched off and further assisted by 
a delayed closure of the defroster flap. 

If the system is coded fora hot climate, the recirculated airfunction is stored in memory 
along with the other settings (if selected prior to the DEFROST function). 


Solar Sensor Effect 

The solar sensor allows the IH KA to compensate for sunlight that affects the temperature 
inside the vehicle. The solar sensors have an effect on air conditioning control. An increase 
in sunlight produces a shift in the functions listed below. The effect is opposite at night or 
when the vehicle enters a tunnel. 

The solar sensor consists of two photo resistors (left and right), which register the varying 
intensity of the light rays. The sensorsignals are interpreted in the solar sensor module and 
output to the IH KA control module (voltage range from 0 to 5V). 

The effect of the solars sensor separately affect the driver's and passenger's side to influ¬ 
ence the following air conditioning components/functions: 

Blower: The blower control curve is shifted (increased airflow compensation) 

Air stratification: The stratification temperature is shifted (increased temperature com¬ 
pensation) 

Flaps: The angle of the virtual flap is corrected (increased airflow/temperature compen¬ 
sation) 


40 

E65 IH KA 


Rear Window Defroster (HHS) 


Pressing the HHS button activates the rear window defrosting and the function LED illumi¬ 
nates. The system is deactivated by pressing the button fora second time, or automatically 
when the defrosting period (10 or 17 minutes) expires. Pressing the button during cyclic 
operation starts the post-defrosting phase (5 minutes). The HHS function is independent of 
the other button activated functions of IH KA with the exception of the "OFF" function. 

Defrosting Phase: After KL15 is switched "ON", the time period to optimize the rear win¬ 
dow defrosting is set as follows: 

Outside Temperature Heating Period (,Defrosting Phase) 

>-15 2 C 10 minutes 

<-15 2 C 17 minutes 

The function LED remains on for the duration of the heating period. 

Cyclic operation: The defrosting phase is followed by cyclic operation with 1/4 power for 
30 minutes. This is cancelled by switching KL15 "OFF". 

3 seconds ON / 9 seconds OFF. 

The function LED remains OFF during cyclic operation. 


Reactivation: If the rear window does not remain clear during cyclic operation, pressing the 
button again activates the defroster at full power for another 5 minutes. The function 
LED lights up. This post-defrosting phase is followed by cyclic operation. 

As of priority level 5 of the K-CAN message, low-voltage cutout by the power module is 
possible (protection effect of the power module). The HHS is controlled by the IH KA con¬ 
trol module. 


Fault handling KL50 

The communication defect "KL50 logically on" bus message will shut down the rear win¬ 
dow defrosting and the duration of the KL50 active state is monitored. After 30 seconds of 
"physically on" this status is considered invalid and no fault message is entered in memo¬ 
ry. The function will be "logically off" and the HHS circuit remains inactive. 


41 

E65 IH KA 




Rear Window Defrosting - ON/OFF Criteria During Starting 

During starting (KL50 active), the rear window defrosting is "OFF". The status of the rear 
window defroster is transmitted by the IF! KA control module overthe K-CAN bus because: 

The power module switches the heated rear window on and off. 

The door modules control the outside mirror heating parallel with activation of the rear 
window defrosting. 

The navigation system requires the current flow status of the rear window (effects of the 
magnetic field). 


Wiper Parked Zone Heating 

In order to prevent the wiper blades freezing to the glass at low outside temperatures, the 
wiper parked zone heating is activated depending on the outside temperature. 

< 3 2 C Wiper parked zone heating ON 
> 6 2 C Wiper parked zone heating OFF 

Low voltage cutout of the wiper parked zone heating by the power module is possible. 
Switching conditions for shutdown are applied as of priority level 5 (K-CAN message). 


OFF Function 

The OFF Function is activated by pressing the left air volume control knob. The functions 
switched OFF (current status is saved) when the button is pressed are: 

Function LED in OFF button comes on, all others off 
OFF at Control Display 
All flaps to 0% 

Refrigerant system switched off 
Blower off 

Auxiliary water pump off 
Temperature control switched off 
Interior sensor blower continues to run 
Sensor value is retained 

Water valves receive power to maintain the closed position 



42 

E65 IH KA 


Recirculated Air / AUC / Auto Recirculated Air 


The RECIRCULATED AIR/AUC button has two functions. 

Changeover from RECIRCULATED AIR to AUC and vice verse 
Switch off RECIRCULATED AIR/AUC function (fresh air mode). 


FI 


42-14-09 


Changeover from fresh air mode to AUC or RECIRCULATED AIR: 


RECIRCULATED AIR /AUC Button 


Function 


Press once 


AUC function is activated - 

AUC LED "ON" and RECIRCULATED 

AIR LED "OFF" 


Press twice 


RECIRCULATED AIR function is 
activated - AUC LED "OFF" and 
RECIRCULATED AIR LED "ON" 


Press three times 


Return to fresh air mode - AUC 
and RECIRCULATED AIR LEDs 
both "OFF" 


To avoid whistling noises from the IH KA, closure of the fresh air flap is delayed for 0.5 sec 
and the stepper (MUX) motor for the recirculated air flap is activated. 


Recirculated Air Mode 

The recirculated air function can be used to preserve the air quality inside the cabin in sit¬ 
uations of poor outside air, when the vehicle is stopped in traffic, or when driving through 
tunnels. The recirculated air function is activated when the RECIRCULATED AIR/AUC but¬ 
ton on the control panel is pressed or when AUC detects a recirculated air condition. The 
fresh air flap closes within a maximum of 1 second; the recirculated air flap opens in 
approximately 4 seconds. 

The recirculated air function is not saved before the control module enters sleep mode, the 
function is not active following a reset. 

Note: When in the recirculated air mode, the air conditioning is not automatically activated. 


43 

E65 IH KA 






Automatic Recirculated Air Control (AUC) 


The IHKA measures air quality by analyzing the AUC-2 sensor signal. The AUC-2 sensor 
provides a PWM signal corresponding to the noxious-gas content. The sensor is provided 
5V to activate the heating circuit (approx. 500 - 800 mW). 

Each time the vehicle is started, the fresh air position is actuated for 30 seconds to allow 
proper sensor heating. Sleep mode does not cancel the AUC function. 

Relative humidity inside the car can increase during a recirculated air phase, because the 
proportion of fresh air is low. This can cause the windows to fog, therefore recirculation in 
the AUC function is limited. The limitation time depends on whether the system is in heat¬ 
ing or air conditioning mode: 

Heating mode - The recirculating airtime period is limited to 4 minutes at outside tem¬ 
peratures > 6 2 C and is followed by 1 minute of fresh air. 

A/C mode - The recirculating airtime period is limited to 12 minutes at outside temper¬ 
atures > 6 2 C and is followed by 1 minute of fresh air. 


Automatic Recirculated Air 

This special function rapidly cools the interior of the vehicle. When the occupant requests 
maximum cooling power from the air conditioning, cool air from inside the cabin is drawn 
back through the evaporator again. This results in a quicker temperature drop inside the 
vehicle. 

This function initially operates for 12 minutes in the full recirculation air mode and then in 
partial recirculation air mode (fresh air 30% / recirculated air 100%). If this function is can¬ 
celled within the initial 12 minutes and reactivated, the function operates in the partial recir¬ 
culation air mode. The automatic recirculated air function is switched ON and OFF accord¬ 
ing to the following: 


ON 


OFF 


A/C mode selected and the 
variable (Y) < -20% 


A/C mode is terminated 
The variable (Y) > -5% 


44 


E65 IHKA 



Stationary Functions 

Principle of Operation 

The IHKA will operate features (when programmed) to enhance cabin comfort based on 
exiting heating and air conditioning systems and components. The IHKA Stationary 
Functions include: Residual Heat (rest) and Parked-car Ventilation. 


Residual Heat 

The Residual Heat (rest) function uses the residual engine heat after it is switched off to heat 
the passenger compartment. When the REST button is pressed, the Residual Heat func¬ 
tion is activated when KL15 is switched "OFF" and KLR is "ON". The auxiliary water pump 
is activated to circulate the hot coolant. The maximum "ON" time is 15 minutes. 

The Residual Heat function active when: 

REST button is pressed 
Outside temperature < 15 2 C 
Engine coolant temperature is > 70 2 C 
Ignition switch is in position R (KL15 OFF) 42 - 14-13 

15 minutes has not elapsed since KL15 was switched "OFF" 

This function is deactivated when KL15 is switched "ON". When KLR is "ON", the AUTO 
buttons can also be pressed. The AUTO function is cancelled when KLR is switched "OFF", 
but the Residual Heat function will still remain active. 



Settings with "ignition Lock in Position R": 

Control panel remains active 

Temperature can be controlled 
Flap program available 
Blower speed adjustable 
Function lighting ON 

DEFROST, HHS, RECIRCULATED AIR/AUC and M AX-AC functions are not active 


45 

E65 IHKA 


Settings with the "Ignition OFF": 

Control panel is inactive 
Temperature control is held 

Flap program and blower setting of independent heating are held 
REST function lighting is active 


Parked-car Ventilation (SL) 

The Parked-car Ventilation blows ambient air into the passengercompartmentto lowerthe 
interior temperatures. The air enters the passenger compartment through the vent outlets 
in the instrument panel, which can be adjusted for both direction and flow (must be open 
for the system to operate). The system remains on for 30 minutes. The system can be 
switched on and off manually. 

The outside temperature must be > 50 C to activate this function. Using the Control 
Display, the Parked-car Ventilation function has 2 control options: Direct (manual) operation 
and Timer programming. 

Activating and Deactivating Manually: 


Ignition in position "KLR" 

Select "Indep. vent." on the second page of 
the "Climate" menu and confirm to activate 

Select "Indep. ventil." a second time and 
confirm to deactivate 

Timer Programming (two available times): 

Ignition in position "KLR" 

Select "Indep. vent." on the second page of 
the "Climate" menu and confirm 

Select "Set timel" / "Set time 2" and confirm 


Enter the desired time by turning the Con¬ 
troller and press to confirm 



46 

E65 IH KA 


42-14-22 














To Activate Timer: 


The Parked-car Ventilation is only available for 
activation within the subsequent 24 hours. After 
this the time will have to be reconfirmed. 


Select "Switch time 1" / "Switch time 2" and 
confirm 



42-14-23 


Terminal R "ON" (Control Panel is Active): 

Temperature control OFF (water valves closed) 

Flap program manually selectable 
Blower manually adjustable 
Function lighting ON 
Function buttons not active 

Terminal 15 "OFF" (Control Panel is Inactive): 

Temperature control: OFF (water valves closed) 

Flap program (0% = flap closed / 100% = flap open) 

- Warm air left and right 100% 

- Recirculating air 0% 

- Defrosting 0% 

- Footwell left and right 0% 

- Cold air left and right 100% 

- Rear seating area left and right 0% 

- Fresh air 100% 

- Blower set to 50% 

Function lighting OFF 


Note: The stationary functions are registered with the power module and are subject to 
deactivation bythe powermodule (priority leverconsumershutdown >6). The power mod¬ 
ule continuously monitors the battery state of charge while the Parked-car Ventilation func¬ 
tion is active. When the power module issues the shutdown signal forthe independent con¬ 
sumers, the IH KA will shut down the Parked-car Ventilation and it will not be reactivated. 

The IH KA will send a CAN message "status air conditioner Parked-car Ventilation" with the 
"INDEPENDENT VENTILATION not active" information to the Control Display. The Control 
Display responds by updating the on screen display. 


47 


E65 IH KA 






Non-Air Conditioning Functions 

Rear Window Roller Blind Control 

The IHKA controls the roller sun blind for the rear window and provides the OPEN/CLOSED 
information to the side window roller sun blinds. 

Principle of Operation 

The rear window roller blind is controlled by K-CAN messages sent by one of the door 
modules. The IHKA distinguishes between short and long actuation of the button. 

Short actuation of the button (< 750 ms) will cause the rear window roller blind to be acti¬ 
vated. If the button is pressed longer, a request is sent to the door modules to move the 
side window roller blinds in the same direction as the rear window roller blind. 

When the motor of the rear window roller blind is stopped short, the motor will move in the 
opposite direction (OPEN or CLOSE), depending on the previous detected limit position. 
The direction of motor rotation is reversed when the button is pressed while the motor is in 
operation. The motor continues to receive the drive signal until it stops. 

The first time the button is pressed after the engine is started (and KLR active), the motor 
will attempt to move the roller blind down, because the current position is not known. If the 
motor immediately blocks, the direction of rotation is reversed. To protect the motor, the 
drive signal is cancelled after 15 seconds (or current draw exceeds 8 amps). 

Actuation and Fault Recognition 

The illustration shows the motor of the rear window roller blind. 


S - Switches in doors 

TM - Door module 

CAS - Car Access System 

K CAN P - K bus periphery 

K CAN S - K bus system 

mC - Micro-controller 

ECU - IHKA control module 

D - Diagnosis output 

S1...S4- Electronic switches 

A - Rear window roller blind "OPEN" signal 

B - Rear window roller blind "CLOSED" signal 



48 

E65 IHKA 


















The following faults can be recognized: 

Short circuit to B+ or open circuit: A fault is detected as long as the motor is actuated 
and the current is below the threshold. The motor is de-energized. 

Short circuit to ground: A fault is detected when one of the outputs is actuated and the 
current is above the threshold. The motor is de-energized. 

Excessive temperature: The internal temperature monitor deactivates the outputs. 

Overvoltage, undervoltage: The outputs are switched off in response to overvoltage or 
undervoltage. 


Notes: 


49 

E65 IHKA 

























Coding 

The following coding information is factored into the IHKA control module: 

Vehicle type variants 
Engine versions 

Specifications for national markets 
Special equipment 

Control module variants (independent heating, RHD/LHD cars) 

The coding data is uploaded to the memory (EEPROM) of the IHKA control module, but is 
not active until the control unit has been reset. 


Control Module Identification 

The data written into the memory chip for control module identification is 


BMW part number 

BMW control module version number 
BMW coding index 
BMW diagnosis index 
BMW variant number 
Manufacturer's date of production 


Overview of B M W control module versions: 

Version for IH KA M anufacturer 

IH KA High without roller sun blind 
IHKA High with roller sun blind 


M anufacturer's catalogue of messages 
Manufacturer's software version 
Manufacturer's standard core version 
Manufacturer's reserve 
BMW change index 
BMW test stamp 


Control Module Number 

03 

04 


Key Memory 

The custom settings of four different radio control keys can be saved in memory (EEPROM) 
after KL15 is switched "OFF". One of these four sets of settings is reactivated when KL15 
is re-energized with the corresponding key. The last setting is activated either when the 
engine is started with the workshop key or if the information for the key number is incor¬ 
rect. The information for the key number is sent as a K-CAN message. 


50 

E65 IH KA 




Following a reset (KL15), the IHKA sends a message to the CAS requesting what key is 
currently in the initialization phase. Driver specific data is stored in memory blocks (EEP¬ 
ROM) for the total of four distinctive radio control keys. 


When one of these radio control keys is used, the appropriate memory block is called and 
the contained settings are activated. A fifth memory block contains default settings (in case 
a valid key is not recognized). 

The following data is stored in each of the five memory blocks: 


Temperature, left 

Air distribution program, left 

Air distribution, bottom left 

Air distribution, top left 

Blower, right 

Air stratification, right 

Air distribution, middle right 


Blower, left 

Air stratification, left 

Air distribution, middle left 

Temperature, right 

Air distribution program, right 

Air distribution, bottom right 

Air distribution, top right 


Active function: 

Always saved: AUC, AC, OFF 

Can be activated by coding: 

- Start with AUTO 

- Start with AC 

- Higher/lower blower characteristic 


Vehicle Memory 

Vehicle M emory includes all actions permanently saved in the IF! KA before the control mod¬ 
ule enters sleep mode and are reactivated after a reset (KL15). 

Saving Control Panel Status 

Terminal 15 ON, engine stopped. Each change to the control panel settings is saved 
approximately 1 second later in the control module. 

Terminal 15 ON, engine running. Each change to the control panel settings is saved 
approximately 10 seconds later in the control module. DEFROST, MAX AC, RECIRCU¬ 
LATED AIR and HHS are cleared when the consumer is switched off. 


51 


E65 IHKA 


Exception: Hot-climate version (can be coded). The RECIRCULATED AIR or MAX AC func 
tion, if activated before shutdown, is saved with the other settings. 


Coding Variants for Control Panel Functions 

Hot-climate version. When this version is coded the recirculated air function (if active) it 
is saved to memory (EEPROM)along with the otherdata when the control module enters 
sleep mode and is immediately available the next time the engine is switched on. 

Off lock. When this version is coded the OFF function is deleted when the control mod¬ 
ule enters sleep mode, the next time the engine is switched on the functions active 
before the OFF button was pressed are automatically reactivated. 

Automatic variants and automatic air stratification. The IHKA offers three variants for 
handling the AUTO function. There are also three different modes of setting air stratifi¬ 
cation to 50% when the AUTO function is switched on. 


Custom Settings 

The INDIVIDUAL program (EEPROM) can be used to save a data set with the following 
user-configurable flap settings for each side: 

Air distribution, head 
Air distribution, chest 
Air distribution, feet 

The data sets forthe INDIVIDUAL program are saved when the "NO PROGRAM" option is 
active and the memory button is pressed. The flap position settings are reactivated as soon 
as the user selects the "INDIVIDUAL" setting on the Control Display. 


Power Module Influence 

The power module uses the CAN message (power management) battery voltage signal 
"Control peak-reduction priority" to control consumershutdown by priority levels. The IH KA 
system responds to these priority signals by implementing the following measures: 

Priority 6 measures 

- Wiper parked zone heating OFF 

- Rear window defrosting OFF (applies to normal operation only, not in cyclic operation) 


52 

E65 IHKA 


Priority 5 measures 

- Wiper parked zone heating OFF 

- Rear window defrosting OFF (applies to normal operation, not in cyclic operation) 

Priority 4 measures 

- Blower set to max. 50% 

Priority 1 measures 

- Wiper parked zone heating OFF 

- Rear window defrosting OFF (applies to normal operation, not in cyclic operation) 

- Blower set to max. 25% (at this time the blower is shut down) 

When the "Status of independent consumers" is received = SHUTDOWN 

- Parked-car Ventilation OFF 

- Residual heat OFF 

Note: The DEFROST function always has 100% blower power available (safety relevant 
function). 


Sleep / Wait / Power Down Modes 

Sleep Mode 

To achieve the IH KA control module required standby current consumption (< 100 mA), 
network management forces it to enter sleep mode by isolating it from terminal 30. 

Wait Mode 

Conditions for wait mode: 

The control module run on time must be expired, 2 run on times are possible. 

Run on time of the control unit Terminal 15 Conditions for Residual Heat 
3 minutes OFF not satisfied 

15 minutes OFF satisfied 


The run on time for the water valves must be expired (fuel station effect can be coded) 
The control module enters a wait routine and is de-energized when all run on timers 
have timed out. 





Individual Sensor Values / Actuator Outputs 


Interior temperature sensor 
Heat exchanger temperature sensor 
Evaporator temperature sensor 
Ventilation temperature sensor 
Pressure sensor 

The pressure sensor outputs a voltage that 
to 4.6 V range). The refrigerant compressor 


Failsafe value: 20 2 C 

Failsafe value: 55 2 C 

Failsafe value: 2 2 C 

Failsafe value: 20 2 C 

Voltage supply: 5 V ±0.25 V 
Output voltage: 0 V...5 V 

linear to the refrigerant pressure (from 0.4 V 
switched off if pressure is excessive. 


Solar sensor 


Voltage supply: 5 V ±0.2 V 
Output voltage: 0 V...5 V 


AUC-2 sensor 


Voltage supply: 5 V ±0.25 V 
Output voltage: 0 V to 5 V 


Refrigerant compressor control valve 

Resistance of control valve at +20 2 C: 10.6 W ±0.5 W 

Resistance of control valve at +70 2 C: 14.5 W ±0.5 W 


Auxiliary water pump 
Switch on current: 
Rated current: 


approx. 5.0 A/100 ms 
1.5 A 


Fresh air flap / rapid action motor 


8 ohms ±7% (500 Hz) 


Bus stepper motors 


100 ohms (200 Hz) 


54 

E65 !HKA 


Review Questions 

1. List the gasses detected by the AUC-2 sensor. 


2. Explain how the refrigerant compressor output is varied 


3. List the refrigerant compressor "Run In" procedure 


4. Where is the blower motor and blower control module located 7 


5. What are the "M aster" function controls on the control panel 7 


6. Explain the "Y" factor. 


7. How is the temperature increased during air conditioning operation 7 


8. List the functions that apply to heater operation when the coolant is cold 


55 

E65 IHKA 


























