Table of Contents 


Diagnostic Equipment 

Subject Page 

Group Tester One (GT1) .3 

Components.4 

Control Panel.5 

Monitor.5 

Control Panel Connections.6 

Power Supply.6 

DVD Drive.7 

Docking Station.7 

Bench Power Unit.8 

Optical Keyboard.8 

LAN Control Panel Cable (Crossed).9 

LAN Control Panel Cable (Uncrossed).9 

LAN Control Panel Cable (Diagnostic Head).9 

MFK1 and MFK2.9 

Touch Pen.10 

Diagnostic Cable.10 

Diagnostic Head..10 

Optional Cables.11 

Battery.12 

Operation.13 

Faults.14 

OPPS. 19 

Specifications & Included Components.20 

Cabling Setups.20 

OPPS Connections.25 

OBD Connections.26 

CIP Programming Setup.27 

Optical Bus & Harness Testing Setup.28 

Review Questions .31 
































Group Tester One and OPPS 


Model: All 

Production Date: All 


Objectives of The Module 

After completing this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the components of the GT1. 

• Demonstrate diagnostic operations using the GT1. 

• Perform changes to VKM settings. 

• Understand how to change batteries in the GT1. 

• Understand what the OPPS Tester is used for. 

• Correctly Identify the OPPS Harnesses and Connectors. 


2 

Diagnostic Equipment 




Group Tester One (GT1) 



43 - 04-01 43 - 04-01 


The GT1 (Group Tester One) replaces the MoDiC series of portable diagnostic tools. It has 
the same processor as the DISplus; a Pentium III, with 256 MB RAM and a 20 GB hard- 
drive. Other features include: 

• DVD ROM Drive - 14 GB storage capacity 

• 12.1” TFT color display, 1024 x 768 resolution 

• Integrated PCMCIA card reader 

• Integrated chip card reader 

• Touch screen - same as DISplus 

• Workshop grade case 

• ASM-technology motherboard 

• Temperature operating range from 35°F to 105°F 

• 2.5 hours of operation with a fully charged battery. 

• Can be powered by vehicle battery. 

• Weighs 7.7 lbs. 


3 

Diagnostic Equipment 



























Components of the GT1 


43 - 04-08 


1. Control Panel 

2. Docking Station 

3. Bench Power Unit (supplied only if no docking station has been supplied) 

4. Optical Keyboard 

5. LAN Control Panel Cable (Crossed) 

6. LAN Control Panel Adapter (Uncrossed) 

7. LAN Control Panel Cable (same design as 10.) 

8. Multifunction Cable MFK 1 

9. Multifunction Cable MFK 2 

10. LAN Docking Station Cable (Same Design As 7.) 

11. Touch Pen 

12. Diagnostic Cable - OBD 


13. Diagnostic Head 

14. LAN Diagnostic Head Cable 

15. Diagnostic Cable - 20 pin BMW 

16. Vehicle Battery Adapter Cable 

17. Size 2 Adapter 

18. Ammeter Clip 50 A 

19. USB/Centronics Adapter 
(Not Shown, available from 

specialized dealers) 


4 

Diagnostic Equipment 












Control Panel 


The control panel is the central component of the GT1. The operating system and the appli¬ 
cation programs are stored here. 



Located on the front of the Control 
Panel: 

- PCMCIA interface (radio card slot in left 
handle) 

- Monitor with touch capabilities 

- Control Block 

- Battery Compartment (in right handle) 


Monitor 

The surface of the monitor is covered by a touch-sensitive plastic sheet that senses the 
pressure of a finger or the touch pen and transfers it to the system. 

Note: Use only your finger or the touch pen supplied to operate the touch screen. If other 
objects are used, it may damage the GT 1 Screen. 


Control Block 

The main control block of the GT1 control panel is located under the center of the touch¬ 
screen. It consists of 1 on/off switch, 3 LEDs and the infrared receiver port. The infrared 
port is the connection to the wireless keyboard used during programming. 

The On/Off switch is used to switch the control panel on and off or to initiate a forced 
switch-off. If a fault occurs that causes the unit to “lock-up”, you can shut down the unit by 
holding down the on/off button for 5 seconds. This may cause the loss of operating soft¬ 
ware, necessitating a reinstall (use only in an emergency). 


The status of the switch does not affect the charging operation. 


5 

Diagnostic Equipment 



1. IR Interface 

2. Temperature LED 

3. Battery LED 

4. Operation LED 

5. ON/OFF Switch 

43 - 04-10 

The “temperature” LED will glow red when the control panel is overheated. The control 
panel will shut down approximately 10 seconds later. See the Owner’s Manual for restart 
procedures. 

The “battery” LED will glow yellow during charging. It will switch off to signify the battery is 
fully charged. It will flash yellow if excessive temperatures continue. 

The “operation” LED will glow green when using an external power source, glow orange 
when using the internal battery. A flashing orange LED signifies a discharged battery. 

Alternately flashing orange/green LED denotes that the internal battery is defective or has 
been removed. 

Control Panel Connections 



TOP 


Bottom 



43 - 04-10 1 2 3456789 


1. DVD drive - DVD and CD-ROM compatible 

2. VGA - external monitor connection 

3. COM - future application 

4. LAN - network or diagnostic head connection 

5. USB (2) - future applications (approved PostScript printer) 

6. Audio in - microphone 1 . 

7. Audio out - speakers or headphones 2. 

8. Firewire - multimedia functions, future applications 

9. Base Measurement - MFK 1 and MFK 2 or 
External power supply from vehicle electrical system 



2 

“ 43 - 04-12 


Docking station interface 
Bench power supply connection. 

An optional power supply when not 
using the docking station 


Power Supply 

The control panel is supplied power from one of three voltage sources: 

• Internally from the battery (approximately 2.5 hours of operating time). 

• Externally from the bench power unit or the docking station. 

• Externally from the vehicle electrical system. 


6 

Diagnostic Equipment 















DVD Drive 


The DVD Drive is accessible from the top of the control panel. It accommodates DVD’s and 
CD-ROM’s for installing programs, applications or updates of the control panel. 



Note: When you open and close the 
DVD drive the control panel must be in 
the 14° inclination position as shown, 
otherwise the drive tray or the disc may 
be damaged. 

Do not use the DVD unless the control 
panel is attached to the docking sta¬ 
tion. 


43 - 04-13 


Docking Station 


The Docking Station is intended for stationary operation, it replaces the bench power unit 
and provides the power supply. The Docking Station also provides the interfaces for con¬ 
nection to a USB device and the LAN Network. 



1. Docking interface for the Control Panel 

2. Hinge - used to change viewing angle 

3. Hinge Release 



1. LAN connection 

2. USB port 

3. Power cord 


43 - 04-01 


7 

Diagnostic Equipment 













Bench Power Unit 


As an alternative to the docking station, the bench power unit may be used to power the 
control panel. The bench power unit consists of the built in connecting cable on the con¬ 
trol panel, the power unit itself and a separate power cable. When the control panel 
receives power from the bench power unit, the internal battery is simultaneously charged. 


Optical Keyboard 



The keyboard uses an Infrared link to communicate with the GT1 control panel. It is used 
only for service programs and can not be used in place of the virtual keyboard of the con¬ 
trol panel. The keyboard must always face the control panel when in use and must be less 
than 1 meter away from the control panel (IR). The keyboard uses 4 AA batteries as an inter¬ 
nal power supply. 


Caution: Old batteries can leak and damage the keyboard. Always keep fresh batteries in 
the keyboard (or remove when not in use). 


If more than one GT1 is in use in 
the workshop, the optical key¬ 
board should be configured to a 
specific GT1 control panel as 
follows: 


1. Press and hold the identification key while pointing the keyboard at the control panel. 

2. Press a numeric key, 0-7 on the keyboard. The control panel will now respond only to 
commands from that keyboard. 

If necessary the identification can be changed at any time following the above instructions. 








1 IR interface 

2 Identification key 




43-04-33 


8 

Diagnostic Equipment 












LAN Control Panel Cable (Crossed) 


The LAN control panel adapter (crossed) is approximately 30 cm long with a RJ45 con¬ 
nector and a RJ45 socket. It is identified by a black (yellow on early units) stripe near the 
socket and a label reading “LAN Adapter BT X.” 



43-04-20 43-04-19 

LAN Cable Crossed LAN Cable Uncrossed 

LAN Control Panel Adapter (Uncrossed) 

The LAN control panel adapter (uncrossed) is approximately 30 cm long with a RJ45 sock¬ 
et and a RJ45 connector. It can be identified by a gray stripe near the socket and a label 
reading “LAN Adapter 1:1.” 


LAN Control Panel Cable 



43-04-22 


The LAN diagnostic head cable is 10 meters 
long and has a RJ45 connector and an orange 
plug connector. 

The LAN docking station cable is of the same 
design. 


MFK1 and MFK2 

The MFK1 and MFK2 cables function similar in operation to the DISplus. Only one cable, 
either MFK1 or MFK2 (visual markings) may be connected to the control panel at one time. 



Diagnostic Equipment 



Touch Pen 


The Touch Pen is an ergonomic operating aid for the touch screen that makes it easier to 
operate the displays. 

Diagnostic Cable 

The Diagnostic Cable is used to connect the diagnostic head to a vehicle with the 20 pin 
underhood connector. The cable consists of the 20 pin connector, the cable and the 21 pin 
plug for connection to the head (bottom left). 



43-04-17 


OBD Diagnostic Cable 


The OBD Diagnostic Cable is used to connect the diagnostic head to the OBD II diagnos¬ 
tic connector (upper right). 

Diagnostic Head 

The Diagnostic Head enables operation of the diagnostic interface via either radio or cable 

communication. 



> i 












1. Connection for Voltage Measurements 

2. LED 1 (Power) 

3. Connection for Voltage Measurements 

4. LED 2 (Status) 

5. Connection for LAN Cable 

6. Connection for TD Cable 

7. LED 3 (Excess Temperature) 

8. Connection for Diagnostic or OBD Cable 


23 4 


8 


10 

Diagnostic Equipment 


43-04-15 





















LED 1 Green 

LED 2 Yellow 

LED 3 Red 

Function 

Remarks 

ON 

ON 

ON 

Initialization 

Recorder Button Green 

ON 

OFF 

OFF 

Power Up 


ON 

Flashing 

OFF 

Standby 


ON 

ON 

OFF 

Connected 


Flashing 

ON 

OFF 

Self Test or Update 




Flashing 

Excess Temperature 

Fault 



1. Recorder Button (For Future Use) 

2. Nine Pin Interface (For Future Use) 


Optional Cables 



Vehicle battery adapter cable - to 
use while in vehicle, does not 
charge the internal battery. 


43-04-30 

50A Ammeter clip and adapter to 
bring the GT1 current measuring to 
DISplus standard. Requires the use 
of the size 2 adapter. 


43-04-31 

The size 2 adapter. It connects the 
50 A ammeter clip to the control 
panel. 




USB/Centronics Adapter 

A USB/Centronics adapter may be used to connect one of the recommended PostScript 
printers to the control panel or docking station to serve as a local printer. 


11 

Diagnostic Equipment 























Battery 


Power is supplied by the integrated battery when the control panel is not connected to an 
external power source. The battery must be charged to insure uninterrupted use of the con¬ 
trol panel as a mobile test unit. The battery is charged automatically as soon as the control 
panel is placed in the docking station or connected to the bench power supply. Charging 
time is approximately 2 hours and while the battery is being charged the “Battery” LED illu¬ 
minates in yellow. 

To achieve the longest possible service life for the integrated battery, it must be fully 
charged, then discharged for normal use. Once a month the battery should be “formed” 
which entails fully discharging the battery, then fully recharging it. To “form” the battery: 

• Disconnect the bench power unit from the control panel or undock from the docking 
station or disconnect the docking station from a power source. 

• Fully discharge the battery, by leaving the control panel “ON” until all the LEDs are out. 

• Dock the control panel or supply power to the docking station or connect the bench 
power unit. 

Charging is complete when the “Battery” LED goes out. 

Note: Always replace a defective battery with a new battery. Never operate the control 
panel with out a battery (it acts as a buffer). Sudden interruption of power my cause the 
control panel to loose the installed operating system. 


Replacing the Battery 

1. Switch off power and undock control panel. 

2. Remove screw on right hand handle. 

3. Pull off handle. 

4. Remove battery. 

5. Press down on the retainer for the con¬ 
nector and carefully remove connector. 

6. Connect new battery. 

7. Insert new battery in handle. 

8. Reinstall handle on control panel. 

9. Completely charge new battery. 




43-04-34 


12 

Diagnostic Equipment 


Operation 


Currently the GT1 will operate only when hardwired to the diagnostic head. Software 
upgrades are planned for this year which will give the GT1 wireless (RF) capabilities. Further 
upgrades will include full network capability and a measurement kit. 



43-04-21 43-04-02 


For hardwire connection three cables must be used: 

• LAN control panel adapter UNCROSSED 

• LAN control panel adapter CROSSED 

• LAN Diagnostic head cable 

The three cables MUST be connected in the particular order shown below. 



Diagnostic Head 
Control Panel 
Docking Station 

LAN Control panel adapter UNCROSSED 
LAN Control panel adapter CROSSED 
LAN Diagnostic Head Cable 


Note: Never connect the LAN Diagnostic Head Cable without the LAN adapter cables. 

Use of the GT1 for diagnosis is functionally the same as the DISplus. 

Refer to the SIEMENS operating manual shipped with the GT1 for additional information. 


13 

Diagnostic Equipment 































































Control Panel Faults 


Symptom 

Possible Causes 

Remedy 

The system “crashes”; the 
hourglass no longer changes 
back to the cursor arrow; no 
operation possible 

Internal Fault 

If ‘normal’ switch-off not possible, use a forced switch-off 
(press the on/off switch for approx. 5 seconds) to switch the 
control panel off and on again. 

With the control panel 
docked, the “Operation” 

LED lights up orange. 

Docking station power 
supply is interrupted. 

Control Panel is not 
supplied with power via 
the docking contact. 

Check whether power is present. Insert the power plug 
correctly. 

Check the spring contacts for dirt or foreign objects. 

To set up a correct connection, undock and then redock 
the control panel tow or three times (also see Section 7.3). 

If no faults can be determined, send a Fault Report Fax. 

“Temperature” LED lights up 
red; control panel switches 
off. 

Excess internal 
temperature circuit 
breaker activated. 

Move the control panel to a cooler room and allow it to cool 
down adequately. Switch the control panel on again. 

If the “Temperature” LED flashes yellow without the 
presence of high ambient temperature, send a Fault Report 
Fax. 

“Battery” LED flashes yellow 
for 10 seconds on startup; 
control panel does not start. 

After the control panel 
shuts itself off, there is 
still excess temperature. 

Move the control panel to a cooler room and allow it to cool 
down adequately. Switch the control panel on again. 

If the “battery” LED flashes yellow without the presence of 
high ambient temperature, send a Fault Report Fax. 

System does not power up 
completely; gets ‘stuck’ with 
an error message. 

Internal run error 

Switch the control panel off (press the on/off switch for 5 
seconds = forced switch off) and then on again. 

If the system still freezes, you must reinstall the Base CD in 
accordance with Section 3.5.3. 

If this fault occurs repeatedly, send a Fault Report Fax. 

After complete discharge and 
docking at the docking 
station, the system does not 
power up. 

Profound discharge of 
the battery. 

After a profound discharge and docking at the docking 
station, you must wait approx. 3 minutes before the system 
can be powered up 


Note: The power supply to the control panel cannot be measured at the open docking con¬ 
tact because the power is through-connected via a proximity switch only when the control 
panel is docked. 

Caution: Forced Switch-Off may be used only in the case of special faults. Continued use 
of this feature may cause operating system failure and device shut down. Normal shut off 
is performed by pressing the ON/OFF switch for 2 seconds 


14 

Diagnostic Equipment 












Touch Screen 


Symptom 

Possible Causes 

Remedy 

The cursor does not respond 
(does not follow finger 
contact). 

Touch controller 
defective or system 
‘crashed’. 

Switch the control panel off (press the on/off switch for 5 
seconds = forced switch-off) and then on again. 

If the fault persists or occurs more frequently, send a Fault 
Report Fax. 

The touch screen remains 
dark; no error message by 
means on LED. 

Touch screen is in the 
energy-saving mode. 

Backlighting failure. 

Not a fault. The screen image reappears when the touch 
screen is touched. 

If you glance sideways at the touch screen, you can detect 
vague characters. 

Send a Fault Report Fax. 

The cursor arrow is not 
located beneath the point of 
touch (touch offset) 

Touch the controller set 
incorrectly. 

The touch controller must be calibrated in the 
“Administration” window. Press the “Calibrating touch 
screen” button, enter the password and follow the 
instructions that are displayed. 

If this does not eliminate the problem, send a Fault Report 
Fax. 

Incorrect pixel colors 

Individual transistors 
defective. 

Individual pixels of incorrect colors are tolerable. If the 
entire screen rows or columns are incorrect, send a Fault 
Report Fax. 


Important: Use only your finger or the touch pen to operate the screen. 


Plug-in Connections 


Symptom 

Possible Causes 

Remedy 

50 A ammeter clip cannot be 
connected 

Connectors on the 
ammeter clip do not fit in 
the socket. 

Use the size 2 adapter 

Cable connection via LAN 
interface to diagnostic head 
interrupted 

Plug-in connections on 
LAN adapter defective 

Check that the plug-in connections are correctly seated and 
undamaged. Check whether the plug-in connection via the 
LAN control panel adapter (uncrossed) has been 
established. 


Important: Never use force to insert the connectors. The connectors on the measuring and 
diagnostic cables are marked with a red dot that must be aligned with a corresponding dot 
on the socket. 


15 

Diagnostic Equipment 















Printer 


Symptom 

Possible Causes 

Remedy 

Local Printer does not print 

Printer connected to 

Dock the control panel or insert the USB cable on the 


docking station, control 

printer in the control panel. Check that the connection is 


panel undocked. 

correctly seated. 


Printer is defective. 

In the “Administration” window, press the “Self-test” button 
and select the “Printer connection” function from the menu 
displayed. The printer should print a page with the heading 
“PS”. If this does not occur, check the cable connection to 
the printer. 

Network Printer does not 

Network printer 

Dock the control panel. 

print. 

connected via LAN cable 
to docking station; 
control panel undocked. 



Radio link to diagnostic 
head established 

Disconnect the cable connection to the diagnostic head 
and established a connection to the network printer in 
accordance with Section 4.4.8. 


Cable link to diagnostic 
head established. 

Disconnect the cable connection to the diagnostic head 
and established a connection to the network printer in 
accordance with Section 4.4.8. 


Printer Defective. 

In the “Administration” window, press the “self-test” button 
and select the “printer connection” function from the menu 
displayed. The printer should print a page with the heading 
“PS”. If this does not occur, chack whether the correct IP 
address for the printer is entered in the “Administration - 
Network configuration” window. 


Accessories 


Symptom 

Possible Causes 

Remedy 

No measurements possible 
with MFK1. 

Measuring head defective. 

In “Administration”, run a self-test of the MFK1. 

If an error message is issued regarding the measurement 
system or measuring cable, send a Fault Report Fax. 

No measurements possible 
with MFK2. 

Measuring head defective. 

In “Administration”, run a self-test of the MFK2. 

If an error message is issued regarding the measurement 
system or measuring cable, send a Fault Report Fax. 

No input possible via the 
optical keyboard. 

No IR connection possible 
or batteries discharged. 

Check whether the transmit and receive windows of the 
infrared connection are covered. Change the distance 
between the devices. Replace the batteries in the optical 
keyboard. 

If no connection can be set up, send a Fault Report Fax. 


16 

Diagnostic Equipment 
















Docking Station 


Symptom 

Possible Causes 

Remedy 

No power supply to the 
control panel (“Operation” 

LED does not light up in 
green on docking when 
switched on). 

No power supply or 
power supply plug 
disconnected. 

Docking contacts dirty 

Insert the power supply plug. Press the on/off switch. 

Carefully clean the contacts on the docking station with a 
lint-free cloth. 


Foreign object prevents 
the perfect seating of the 
plug-in contacts. 

Remove the foreign object. 


Proximity switch is 
defective, does not 
through-connect power. 

Send a Fault Report Fax 


Power supply unit 
defective 

Send a Fault Report Fax 


LED defective 

Send a Fault Report Fax 

“Battery” LED does not light 
up orange when switch off. 

Battery is fully charged. 

Docking contacts dirty. 

Not a Fault. 

Carefully clean the contacts on the docking station with a 
lint-free cloth. 


Power supply unit 
defective. 

Send a Fault Fax 


LED defective. 

Send a Fault Report Fax 


Fault Codes 


Codes 

Fault Group 

000 

System error from UNIX operating system 

100 

Fault in the measurement system, internal 

200 

Fault in the EDIC application 

300 

Fault in the system technology 

400 

Fault in the TOROS application 

500 

Fault in the measurement system application 

800 

Run error 

900 

Internal error 


17 

Diagnostic Equipment 

















Diagnostic Head 


Symptom 

Possible Causes 

Remedy 

No connection possible 
(LED 1 on diagnostic head 
is dark). 

No Power supply of the 
diagnostic head via vehicle 
electrical systems. 

First check the plug-in contact on the BMW or OBD 
diagnostic cable and its connection to the vehicle. 

Switch on the ignition. 

If the LED still does not light up, send a Fault Report Fax. 

Connection to the 
diagnostic head not 
possible or faulty (LED 2 
flashes yellow); no 
diagnostic head is 
recognized (see 
“Administration, Diagnostic 
Head Allocation” window). 
The diagnostic head 
cannot be connected. 

Interference due to 
excessive distance from 
the vehicle; in the case of 
radio link, may also be due 
to external radio sources or 
absorption. 

Diagnostic head software 
defective. 

Incorrect IP address when 
the diagnostic head was 
changed. 

Radio card in the 
diagnostic head defective. 

Check the correct connection of the cables at the diagnostic 
head. 

Change the location of the diagnostic head and, if necessary, 
of the control panel. 

If this does not remedy the fault, change the connection type. 

If there is still no connection, send a Fault Report Fax. 

Perform a reinstallation in accordance with Section 7.7 

Check the IP address in the “Administration, Network 
configuration” window. 

If possible, use the second diagnostic head to check the radio 
link. If the connection can be established, the card in the first 
diagnostic head is defective. Send a Fault Report Fax. 


Radio card in the control 
panel is defective. 

If possible, use the second diagnostic head to check the radio 
link. If no connection can be established with this head either, 
the card in the control panel might be defective. 

Using a suitable tool (such as a screwdriver), pry the cover off 
the radio card slot in the left handle of the control panel (see 
fig. 7.1); you will then se one green and one yellow LED on the 
radio board. If the green LED is lit, the radio board is OK. If 
the yellow LED is flashing rapidly, data transmission is being 
formed correctly. 

If the LEDs are in any other state, send a Fault Report Fax. 

LED 3 Flashing Red 

Interior temperature of the 
diagnostic head is too 
high. 

Terminate the diagnosis. Terminate the connection and allow 
the diagnostic head to cool adequately before using it again. 

LED1 flashing rapidly 

General fault in the 
diagnostic head. 

Send a Fault Report Fax. 

“Recorder” button on the 
back lights up in green. 

Only while booting. 

Not a Fault. 

This button has not function at this time. 


18 

Diagnostic Equipment 












Optical Testing and Programming System - OPPS 




43-04-35 


OPPS (Optical testing and Programming System) is a device that may be used instead of 
the Diagnostic Head as a vehicle interface for either the DISplus or GT1. When used, it 
replaces the Diagnostic Head. OPPS was developed to reduce the amount of time required 
to program E65/E66 MOST control modules by 30-60% and to diagnose the Fiber Optic 
communication systems MOST and Byteflight. OPPS can be connected into the MOST bus 
and the OBD connector simultaneously. 


Refer to E65 CIP PROGRAMMING SETUP below, for details on how to connect and make 
use of OPPS for CIP programming. Each OPPS unit will have the Network settings for your 
service workshop configured when you receive it. API International has been contracted to 
perform this service: 

• No loading or configuring necessary upon receipt of the OPPS. 

• Report any problems to API @ (800) 527 - 4872 ext. 232. 


Note: For additional details and updated information, refer to SI #B07 03 02. OPPS is deliv¬ 
ered with newer operating software than is available through the DISplus/GTI. Do not 
under any circumstances perform an OPPS software update available in "Connection 
Setup " or if automatically prompted by the DISplus/GTI software until CD32. If an update 
is performed before CD32 the OPPS will be non-operational and must be returned for 

repair. 

All OPPS units remain the property of BMW of North America LLC. Centers may not sell, 
transfer or assign any third party to use the OPPS and its software. 


19 

Diagnostic Equipment 





080 
Connector 




USB connector 


43-04-37 



MOST 

Adapter 


Byteflight 

Adapter 43-04-36 


OPPS SPECIFICATIONS: INCLUDED WITH OPPS: 


• 200 MHz Pentium processor 

• 32 MB flash and RAM 

• DK LAN connection 

• USB connection 

• MOST bus connection 

• Byteflight connection 

• OBD connection 

• Supports all model series 

• No RF communication possible. 


OPPS unit 

Assorted fiber optic test cables 
2 Owners manuals (device and cables) 
Fiber Optic test loop device 
2 Carrying cases 
2 OBD cables 


Cabling Setups: 

There are 2 different cabling setups that are addressed in this section. Each is used for 
E65/E66 programming and MOST/Byteflight diagnosis. Each OPPS will require 1 Network 
IP address and 1 wall mounted LAN receptacle. API has acquired the additional IP address 
(es) for each center. 

If upon receiving your OPPS the workshop has a sufficient number of LAN receptacles, use 
cable setup #2. If the workshop does not have a sufficient number of wall mounted LAN 
receptacles, use cable setup #1. The following is an overview of the 2 different cabling 
setups. 

1. Cable setup #1 This setup should be used if the OPPS is operated independent of the 
workshop network. 

2. Cable setup #2 This setup should be used if the OPPS is operated on the workshop 
network. 


20 

Diagnostic Equipment 



Cable Setup #1 - To be used if the network is not operational (using GT1) 

This setup may be used temporarily if the network is not operative, there are not enough 
LAN wall drops or network IP addresses are in conflict. The vehicle is direct wired to the 
OPPS and the GT1, which is direct wired to the printer via the USB A/B cable (1 piece sup¬ 
plied to every center with the first GT1 delivered). The USB printer cable can stay attached 
to the printer even if the printer is working on a network. The printer configuration must be 
changed to "Local printer" in the GT1. 

Note: This setup requires a direct USB cable connection to the printer. This greatly limits 
GT1 mobility and will not allow the update of diagnostic programs via the network, which 
will be available as of the third quarter of 2002. It should only be used as an exception for 
the reasons stated above. This setup may also be used for E65/E66 programming. 


GT1 Wired to OPPS (Setup #1) 


Existing 
110V 
Power 
for 
GT1 


Existing 
|Hf 110V 
™ ’ -i Power 
for 

****** p nnter 



RequirecJ Existing Power Supply 


S07 02 U06 


21 

Diagnostic Equipment 

































































For this setup you will need the following cables: 



• Straight adapter marked "LAN adapter BT 1:1" (2) 

• Cross over adapter marked "LAN adapter BT X" (3) 

• DK LAN cable marked "LAN Kabel DK" (4) 

• Short OBD cable for OPPS P/N 663 111 (6) 


1. Attach the straight adapter to the control 
panel LAN connector (4). 

Note that the straight adapter stays attached 
to the GT1 regardless of which cable setup is 
used. 



2. Attach the cross over adapter (3) to the 
free end of the straight adapter (2). 

3. Attach the DK LAN cable (4) to the free 
end of the cross over cable (3). 


4. Attach the free end of the DK LAN cable 
(Orange connector) to the OPPS (1 below). 



5. Attach the chrome connector end of OBD 
cable (short) 663 111 to OPPS connector (2). 
This OBD cable is used for diagnosis and for 
CIP programming. 

6. Establish communication with the vehicle via 
the usual procedure. OPPS takes slightly 
longer to perform the "self test" than the 
DISplus/GTI head. 


22 

Diagnostic Equipment 























































Printer connection - at this time the printer is 
connected to the GT1 via the USB connector on 
the control panel (6). 

Note: Do not connect the USB connector to the 
clocking station USB connection. The docking 
station printer interface software is not opera¬ 
tional at this time. 


Cable Setup #2 - To be used if the workshop network is operational (using GT1) 

Fiber Optic Module & Harness Testing Via LAN (Setup #2) 


EXISTING 
DCS PATCH 
PAIMEL/HUB 



S07 02 U13 


The GT1 and the OPPS are attached to wall LAN lines. Printing works via the network printer. 



For this setup you will need the following cables: 

• Straight adapter marked "LAN adapter BT 1:1 "(2) 

• Straight LAN cable marked "LAN Kabel SE"(3) 

• Short OBD cable for OPPS P/N 663 111 (5) 

• DK LAN cable marked "LAN Kabel DK" (4) 


5 


S07 02U14 


23 

Diagnostic Equipment 
















































































































































































Instructions 



S08 02 U11 


1. Attach the straight adapter to the control 
panel (4) LAN connector. 

Note that the straight adapter stays attached 
to the GT1 regardless of which cable setup is 
used. 



2. Attach the straight LAN cable SE (3) to the 
free end of the straight adapter. 

3. Attach the free end of the straight LAN cable 
SE to an open LAN connection on the wall. 

Wired wall L4N connections should have a 
number/letter combination on them. 

This number will also be on the connection 
where the switching hub is located. 


4. Attach the OPPS to the vehicle using the 
short OBD cable P/N 663 111 (2). 


5. Attach the DK LAN cable to the OPPS (1). 

6. Attach the chrome connector end of OBD 
cable (short) 663 111 to OPPS connector (2). 

This “short” OBD cable is used for diagnosis 
and for CIP programming. 

The “long” OBD cable 663 112 is used for 
testing optical bus systems only. The “long” 
OBD cable 663 112 only transmits at a baud 
rate of 10400 compared to the high speed 
115K baud rate for 663 111. 


24 

Diagnostic Equipment 
















































































S07 02 U14 


7. Attach the free end of the DK LAN cable (4) 
to a LAN connection on the wall. Wired wall 
LAN connections should have a number/let¬ 
ter combination on them. 

This number will also be on the connection 
where the switching hub is located. Before 
attaching this line to a wall LAN line make 
sure that the other end of the line is attached 
to the switching hub. 

8. Establish communication with the vehicle via 
the usual procedure. OPPS takes slightly 
longer to perform a "self test" than the 
DISplus/GTI head. 


OPPS CONNECTIONS 



OBD & Network Connection 

• OBD connection (2) 

• DK LAN connection (1) 

• 2 color LED (4) 

1. Green- flashing OPPS is free, 

2. Green solid OPPS is connected. 

3. Green rapid flash Software update active 

4. Orange self test active or fault 


• External voltage testing (3) 



USB and Card connection 

• These connections are not in use at this time 
and should not be used. 


25 

Diagnostic Equipment 


































R66 0033 


MOST Connection 

MOST bus test cables and programming cable 
attach to this connector (1). The white protec¬ 
tive cap should be replaced after use to keep 
the fiber Optic connections clean. 

LED (2): 

Red LED = voltage is supplied 
Yellow LED = accessing MOST bus 
Green LED = Bus lock 


Byteflight Connection 

• Test connection (2) 

• Reference connection (1) 


OBD CONNECTIONS 





Diagnostic Equipment 


As stated earlier, OPPS comes with 2 OBD 
cables: 

“Short version” P/N 663 111 which is used for 
CIP programming through the OBD (2) and 
MOST bus as well as diagnosis of all E65/E66 
modules. 


“Long version” P/N 663 112 (2) which is used 
for Optical module and bus testing of modules 
located a distance from the vehicle OBD con¬ 
nector such as in the vehicle trunk. 

The long OBD cable 663 112 only transmits at 
a baud rate of 10400 compared to the high 
speed 115K baud for 663 111. 















































E65/E66 CIP PROGRAMMING SETUP 


Attach the OPPS and GT1 in accordance to Cabling setup 1 or 2. 

• Attach the MOST bus programming cable (663 121) to the OPPS MOST connection (1). 




• Run the MOST bus cable to the glove com¬ 
partment (4). 


GT1 Wired to OPPS (Setup #1) 


Existing Ex sting 



Pull down the trap door inside the glove com 
partment 

Disconnect the MOST bus interface (1) 

Plug the MOST bus harness (2) into the MOST 
programming cable (3). 


Notes: 


27 

Diagnostic Equipment 
























































E65/E66 OPTICAL BUS AND HARNESS TESTING SETUP 


Attach the OPPS and GT1 in accordance to Cabling setup 1 or 2. Follow the directions in 
the Diagnostic program test module. The following is an example of how to test the SVS 
module and the SVS fiber optic harness. 


Note: Always consult the "Operating Instruction" books supplied with the OPPS and the 
"Functional Description" section in the DISplus/GTI Test Modules for complete testing 
instructions. 



For SVS Optical CM testing you will OR 
need Control module cable (663 122) 


For SVS Optical CM harness testing 
you will need Control module harness 
cable (663 123) 



• Attach the Long OBD cable (3) to the OPPS 

• Attach the DK LAN cable (4) to the OPPS 

• During the Test module you will be instructed 
to attach the MOST test loop P/N 663 124 (2) 
to the OPPS as illustrated. 


Note: This is a crucial step and must not be ignored. Failure to complete this step will result 
in incorrect readings and results. 


28 

Diagnostic Equipment 





















Control Module Testing 




• Next you are instructed to attach the MOST 
control unit cable P/N 663 122 (2) and the 
MOST test loop P/N 663 124 (4). 

This is a crucial step and must not be 
ignored. Failure to complete this step will 
result in incorrect readings and results. 

• Remove the test loop 

• Remove the SVS harness from the module 

• Remove the fiber optical insert (4) from the 
SVS harness plug. 

• Insert the free end of the MOST CM cable P/N 
663 122 (5) into the SVS harness plug and 
plug the assembly into the SVS module. 

• Follow the DISplus/GTI test module instruc¬ 
tions. 



Control Module Harness Testing 

• Remove the test loop. 

• Remove the SVS harness (6) from the module 



• Remove the fiber optical insert (2) from the 
SVS harness plug (1) 


29 

Diagnostic Equipment 



















































• Plug a MOST attachment housing P/N 663 
125 


W66 3 125 



• Into the MOST wiring harness 



• Plug the free end of the MOST wiring exten¬ 
sion cable into the MOST attachment hous¬ 
ing. 

• Follow the DISplus/GTI test module instruc¬ 
tions 


Notes: 


30 

Diagnostic Equipment 





Review Questions 

1. What is the OPPS Tool used for? 

2. How is the GT1 battery recharged? 

3. In what sequence must the three hardwire connection cables be attached between the 
diagnostic head and the GT1 control panel? 

4. Where is the floppy disc drive located on the GT1 ? 

5. What additional lead can be plugged into the Base Measurement connector shared with 
MFK 1 and MFK 2? 

6. What is the procedure for configuring the Optical Keyboard when more than one GT1 is 
used in the workshop? 

7. What does an orange glowing “operation” LED on the GT1 indicate? 

8. List the uses of the following OPPS OBD cables: 

• The short cable #663 111 

• The long cable #663 112 


31 

Diagnostic Equipment 



