Table of Contents 


Features and Technology 

Subject Page 

Introduction .6 

Design .8 

The Roundel.8 

Quad Headlights .8 

Optimum Weight Distribution .8 

Kidney Grills .9 

Hofmeister Kink .9 

Aerodynamic Design.9 

Drivetrain.10 

VANOS .10 

Valvetronic.11 

Direct Injection.13 

Turbocharging .14 

Principles of Operation .14 

Bi-turbocharging.16 

Twin-scroll Turbo System.16 

EfficientDynamics .17 

Hybrid Technology.18 

DOT .20 

Principles of Operation .20 

Chassis and Suspension .23 

AFS/AL .23 

IAL .24 

Low Speed Range.24 

High Speed Range.25 

ARS .26 

Tire Pressure Monitoring.27 

System Identification and Terminology .27 

xDrive .30 

Dynamic Performance Control .31 


Initial Print Date: 06/08 


Revision Date: 04/10 

































Subject Page 

Dynamic Stability Control.32 

Features:.32 

Dynamic Stability Control .32 

Traction Control.32 

Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) .33 

Electronic Brake Proportioning .33 

Antilock Braking (ABS) .33 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC).34 

Cornering Brack Control (CBC) .34 

Hill Descent Control (AWD models only).35 

Brake Fade Compensation.35 

Brake Standby.35 

Brake Drying .35 

Comfort Stop/Soft Stop .35 

Start-off Assistant.35 

M Differential .36 

Driver Assistance Systems .38 

Active Blind Spot Detection .38 

KAFAS - Multifunction Video Camera .39 

Lane Change Warning.40 

High-Beam Assistant .41 

Head-Up Display.42 

Night Vision.43 

Comfort Access.45 

Active Cruise Control with Stop & Go Function .46 

Adaptive Brake Assistant with Warning Function.47 

Top View Camera .48 

Parking Assistance .50 

Drive Concept.51 

Display, Operating and Control Concept.52 

Body Electronics.53 

Bluetooth.53 

Digital Radio Sources.54 

HD Radio .54 

Sirius Satellite Radio .55 

BMW ASSIST .56 

Safety Plan.56 

Automatic Collision Notification.56 

Emergency Reguest (SOS) .57 

Enhanced Roadside Assistance .57 

My Info.57 












































Subject 


Page 

Door Unlock.57 

Stolen Vehicle Recovery .57 

TeleService .58 

Customer Relations .58 

Convenience Plan.58 

Directions.58 

Critical Calling.58 

Traffic .58 

Weather .58 

Optional Services.59 

Hands-free Personal Calling .59 

Concierge.59 

BMW Search.59 
















Subject 


Page 



Features and Technology 


Model: All 
Production: All 


After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Familiarize yourself with some of the technology in BMW vehicles 

• Be able to set the correct time, date and radio stations on all BMW models 

• Familiarize yourself with the different sound and navigation systems on all 
BMW models 



5 

Features and Technology 




Introduction 


BMW defined the sports luxury vehicle division. Over the years other automobile manu¬ 
facturers have tried to obtain some of the market share originally held exclusively by the 
BMW. 

Other manufacturers have copied our designs, handling characteristics, and even our 
marketing styles, but BMW continues to be the benchmark for setting standards. For 
BMW to maintain its leadership position in this category it requires innovative design 
concepts and technology. 



BMW Group Research and Innovation Center (FIZ) 


6 

Features and Technology 








BMW World and BMW Group Corporate Headquarters 



© BMW AG 


This section is intended for new center personnel as an overview of some of the technol¬ 
ogy behind BMW vehicles. Specific information on these systems discussed in this sec¬ 
tion can be found in TIS under Technical Training Information. 

The topics are divided into three major sections which are: 

• Drivetrain 

• Chassis/Suspension 

• Body Electronics 


7 

Features and Technology 












Design 


The Roundel 


BMW was founded in 1916 and the most recogniz¬ 
able of all BMW design elements is its distinct 
logo, known as the Roundel. Seen from a distance, 
even as a blur, the blue-and-white propellers of the 
Roundel signal that you're in the presence of great¬ 
ness. With its colors deriving from the Bavarian flag 
and the propeller motif symbolizing BMW's origins 
as a manufacturer of aircraft engines, the Roundel 
expresses the pride and sense of tradition that go 
into the design of every BMW. 




Quad Headlights 

The four round headlights or "eyes" of the 
BMW represent one of the most recent 
BMW design elements. They first emerged 
with the six-cylinder 320i and 323i as a rank 
marker designed to distinguish them from 
"lesser" 3s that sported only two headlights. 

By the late 1980s, the four-eyed look had 
become the norm for most BMWs and 
remains a distinctive marker today. 

Optimum Weight Distribution 

All current BMWs have their front wheels relatively far forward and their engine as far 
back as practical. BMW even positions the battery toward the rear of the vehicle to dis¬ 
tribute its relatively heavy weight. The resulting weight distribution comes within 3.3% of 
the ideal 50/50 balance, far closer than most cars deliver. BMW fore-aft weight balance 
aids handling during braking, cornering and accelerating. Optimum balance for optimum 
performance. 



8 

Features and Technology 










Kidney Grills 


One of the most visible of BMW design 
elements, often seen rising up in rear-view 
mirrors, is the traditional "kidney" grille. 
Introduced at the 1933 Geneva auto show 
on the BMW 303, the distinct shape of the 
kidneys first emerged from an effort to 
reduce aerodynamic drag. Overtime, they 
have evolved from tall ovals into their now- 
emblematic 

low, wide kidney-like shape. They continue 
to symbolize the timelessness of BMW 
design and engineering. 



Hofmeister Kink 

Certainly the BMW element with the most 
unusual name is the Hofmeister kink, the 
distinctive bend in every BMW's C-pillars 
(the metal roof supports that separate the 
rear side windows from the back glass). 
Although it appeared as early as the 1930s, 
the kink formally debuted with the "New 
Class" 1500 Sedan at the 1961 Frankfurt 
auto show and was named after Wilhelm 
Hofmeister, then director of design for BMW. 
Aside from its pleasing visual effect, the 
Hofmeister kink subtly highlights a BMW 
trademark: rear-wheel drive. 



Aerodynamic Design 

The mantra of BMW design is "form follows function." For example, the integrated front 
spoiler on all BMWs reduces the amount of air flowing under the car, hence minimizing 
front-end lift at speed. The very shape of BMWs is a result of precise aerodynamic engi¬ 
neering. Each closed-body BMW has been designed for a low drag coefficient. With air 
flowing smoothly over the body, the engine has less drag to overcome. BMWs are also 
designed to minimize aerodynamic lift. Thus the legendary cornering and road-hugging 
agility of The Ultimate Driving Machine®. 


9 

Features and Technology 



























Drivetrain 


VANOS 


VANOS is a combined hydraulic and 
mechanical camshaft control device man¬ 
aged by the vehicle's engine manage¬ 
ment system. VANOS was introduced for 
the US in 1992 on the 5 Series equipped 
with a M50B25 engine. 

VANOS significantly enhances emission 
management, increases output and 
torque, and offers better idling quality and 
fuel economy. 

The VANOS system is based on a mech¬ 
anism that can modify the position of the 
intake camshaft relative to the crankshaft. 
Double-VANOS adjusts both the intake 
and exhaust camshafts. 



VANOS operates on the intake camshaft in accordance with engine speed and accelera¬ 
tor pedal position. 

• At the lower end of the engine-speed scale, the intake valves are opened later, 
which improves idling quality and smoothness. 

• At moderate engine speeds, the intake valves open much earlier, which boosts 
torque and permits exhaust gas re-circulation inside the combustion chambers, 
reducing fuel consumption and exhaust emissions. 

• At high engine speeds, intake valve opening is once again delayed, so that full 
power can be developed. 

An advantage of double-VANOS is that the system controls the flow of hot exhaust 
gases into the intake manifold (EGR valve function). This is referred to as "internal" 
exhaust gas re-circulation, allowing small amount of exhaust gas to be recycled. 


10 

Features and Technology 




Valvetronic 

Valvetronic was introduced in the US on 
the MY2002 E65 7 Series vehicle 
equipped with the N62B44 engine. 

Valvetronic engines use a combination of 
hardware and software to eliminate the 
need for a conventional throttle mecha¬ 
nism. A Valvetronic engine replaces the 
function of the throttle butterfly by using 
the amount of valve lift to regulate the 
amount of air entering the combustion 
chamber. 



The valves are of a conventional design, 
but the intake camshaft uses a secondary eccentric shaft with a series of levers and roller 
rockers, activated by a motor. The motor moves the eccentric shaft and varies the posi¬ 
tion of the pivot point of the rocker thus changing the amount of valve lift achieved. 


VALVETRONIC II 


In the beginning the Valvetronic System required its own computer (separate unit) apart 
from the engine management system. It was networked to the engine control module by 
the use of a high speed CAN bus. With the introduction of the N52 engine though, the 
management of the Valvetronic System was incorporated into the DME. 


11 

Features and Technology 





Benefits: 


• Valvetronic reduces maintenance costs, improves cold start behavior, lowers exhaust 
emissions, and provides a smoother running engine. Valvetronic does not need spe¬ 
cific fuel grades or fuel qualities because of its fine atomization of fuel. 

• Because Valvetronic allows the engine to breathe more freely, fuel consumption is 
reduced by 10%. The fuel savings are greatest at lower engine revolutions and allow 
for decreased engine emissions. 

• In an engine with no VALVETRONIC, at light throttle the throttle butterfly partially or 
even nearly closes. The pistons are still running, taking air from the partially closed 
intake manifold. The intake manifold between the throttle and the combustion cham¬ 
ber has a partial vacuum, resisting the sucking and pumping action of the pistons, 
thus wasting energy. Automotive engineers refer to this phenomenon as "pumping 
loss". The slower the engine runs, the more the throttle butterfly closes, and the 
more energy is lost. 

Compared to the conventional engine where the load is controlled by the throttle 
valve, pumping loss is lessened in an engine with VALVETRONIC by reducing valve 
lift and the amount of air entering the combustion chambers. 

• In Valvetronic engines coolant flows across the head, resulting in a temperature 
reduction of 60%. The water pump size is cut in half, reducing power consumption 
by 60%. 



12 

Features and Technology 















Direct Injection 

The term “direct injection” refers to a fuel injection 
system which injects fuel directly into the combus¬ 
tion chamber rather than into the intake manifold. 

This technology has been around since the 
1920’s, but has not been in widespread use until 
the late 20th century. The first passenger car to run 
on direct engine was a car called the “Gutbrod” in 
1952. 

The first application of this technology on a BMW 
was in 2003 on the 760Li. The N73 V-12 engine 
utilizes the latest direct injection technology com¬ 
bined with VALVETRONIC. 

For the 2007 model year, BMW has introduced a 6-cylinder engine with direct fuel 
injection. The N54, which is turbocharged, uses the second generation of direct 
injection (Dl 2), which is referred to as High Precision Injection (HPI). 

As the name suggest, the direct injection (Dl) system use a fuel injector which sprays fuel 
directly into the combustion chamber. The fuel injection pressure (N54) varies from 50 to 
200 bar, depending on the engine’s speed and load. The A/F mixture in a Dl engine is 
formed inside of the combustion chamber. 

In 2010 BMW introduced the N55 engine with high pressure fuel injection system (HDE). 
In contrast to high precision injection (HPI) solenoid fuel injectors with multi-hole nozzles 
are used, as opposed to the piezo-injector units used in the N54. 

In comparison, a manifold injection system sprays fuel into the intake manifold or into the 
intake port near the intake valve. In this case, the A/F mixture is formed outside of the 
combustion chamber. The injection pressure on most manifold injection systems is 
between 3 and 5 bar. 

The Dl system allows for increased engine efficiency and has several distinct advantages 
over manifold injection systems: 

• The fuel is evaporated and atomized in the combustion chamber, which provides a “cool¬ 
ing effect” on combustion. A cooler combustion chamber allows an increase in air densi¬ 
ty, which allows for more available oxygen. In addition, cooler combustion allows for an 
increase in compression ratio which equates to improved efficiency and engine power. 

• By injecting the fuel directly into the combustion chamber, there is less possibility for 
fuel to condense or accumulate on the manifold walls or the back of the intake valve. 
This results in less fuel needed to achieve the desired A/F ratio. 

• The increased injection pressure causes the fuel droplet size to be reduced. This 
allows for improved atomization and therefore improved mixture formation. Efficiency 
increases in total by up to 10%. 



13 

Features and Technology 


Turbocharging 

Until now, BMW has built a reputation for building 
high performance engines which are naturally aspi¬ 
rated. Much research has gone into the develop¬ 
ment of an efficient engine design which meets 
not only the expectations of the customer, but 
complies with all of the current emissions legisla¬ 
tion. 



Currently, the global focus has been centered 
around the use of alternative fuels and various 
hybrid designs. While BMW recognizes these con¬ 
cerns, there is still much development to be done on the internal combustion engine. 
Therefore, BMW will continue to build some of best internal combustion engines in the 
world. 


That is why in 2006 BMW introduced the N54 engine as the first turbocharged power- 
plant in the US market. In addition to turbocharging, the N54 features second generation 
direct injection and Double-VANOS. 

As far as gasoline engines are concerned, turbocharging has not been in widespread use 
at BMW. As a matter of fact, the last turbocharged BMW production vehicle was the E23 
(745i) which was not officially imported into the US. The previous “turbo” model before 
that was the legendary 2002 tii turbo in the early 1970’s. This 2002 tii turbo was also not 
officially imported into the US. 


Principles of Operation 

The turbocharger consists of a turbine and compressor assembly on a common shaft 
inside of the turbocharger housing. A turbocharger is driven by waste (exhaust) gasses 
and in turn drives a compressor which forces air into the engine above atmospheric pres¬ 
sure. This increase pressure allows for an air charge with a greater density. The result is 
increased torque and horsepower. The turbine and the compressor can rotate at speeds 
of up to 200,000 rpm and the exhaust inlet temperature can reach max temperatures of 
up to 1050°C. 


This increased density during the intake stroke ultimately adds up to the creation of more 
engine output torque. Of course, this increased density must be accompanied by addi¬ 
tional fuel to create the desired power. This is accomplished by engine management sys¬ 
tem programming to increase injector “on-time” and enhance associated maps. 


The use of an exhaust driven turbocharger is used to create more engine power through 
increased efficiency. In the case of BMW turbocharged engines, the turbocharger is used 
in conjunction with direct fuel injection. This provides the best combination of efficiency 
and power with no compromise. 


14 

Features and Technology 




N54 Turbo schematics 




N63 Turbo schematics 



15 

Features and Technology 



























































































































































































Bi-turbocharging 

A major advantage of the smaller-sized turbocharg¬ 
ers is their low moment of inertia. Even the slight¬ 
est impetus given by the driver with the accelerator 
pedal receives a response with an immediate 
build-up of pressure. The lag typically experienced 
until now in turbocharged engines - i.e. the time it 
takes for the turbocharger to attain its power-deliv¬ 
ering effect - is thus no longer perceptible. 

This requirement is met in the N54 engine with 
two small turbochargers, which are connected in 
parallel. Cylinders 1, 2 and 3 (bank 1) drive the first 

turbocharger (5) while cylinders 4, 5 and 6 (bank 2) drive the second (2). The advantage 
of a small turbocharger lies in the fact that, as the turbocharger runs up to speed, the 
lower moment of inertia of the turbine causes fewer masses to be accelerated, and thus 
the compressor attains a higher boost pressure in a shorter amount of time. 

Twin-scroll Turbo System 

The response characteristics of the use of twin- 
scroll exhaust turbochargers are enhanced when 
compared to the single-scroll turbos. The S63 tur¬ 
bocharger turbines are fed through two separate 
channels within the turbine housing (highlighted 
red in the graphic). Each of these channels or 
“scrolls” is always fed by the exhaust pulses from 
the same two cylinders. 

The layout and cross sections of the turbine 
impeller and compressor wheels have been correspondingly adapted and are designed 
for the maximum exhaust inlet operating temperature of 1020° C (1868° F). 

The specially designed exhaust manifold connects each of the 8 cylinders in sequence 
according to the exhaust pulses in the firing order. This delivers a uniform flow of exhaust 
gas to the turbochargers which improves volumetric efficiency by promoting cylinder 
scavenging. 

Every 180° of crankshaft rotation, one exhaust gas pulse is fed to each turbocharger over 
the entire ignition sequence (1-5-4-8-6-3-7-2). 

This highly efficient charging concept achieves optimum energy transmission of the 
exhaust flow to the turbine blades of the turbochargers. The result is the fastest and most 
direct response characteristics of any turbo engine worldwide. The innovative technology 
is patented by BMW and therefore represents a unique selling point over the competition. 




16 

Features and Technology 












EfficientDynamics 

The sheer pleasure that driving a BMW creates is 
legendary. But the factors that trigger this intensi¬ 
ty of emotion are cutting-edge: a unique symbio¬ 
sis of outstanding dynamism and unsurpassed 
efficiency. In short: BMW EfficientDynamics. A 
package of concepts that uses a whole host of 
innovative technologies to effect a significant 
reduction in fuel consumption and in vehicle 
emissions, while at the same time making BMW 
vehicles even more thrilling to drive. Many of these concepts are already integrated as 
standard in almost every BMW. What’s more, we are currently involved in research to 
develop alternative energy sources. Because BMW EfficientDynamics also represents a 
vision - the vision of driving pleasure with no emissions at all. As we work towards this 
goal, intelligent, demand-led hybrid technologies are being introduced into mass produc¬ 
tion, under the name of BMW ActiveHybrid. 

BMW CleanEnergy provides a glimpse of where we hope to arrive in the more distant 
future. The first BMW Hydrogen 7 models are already on the road - driven by hydrogen, 
a clean energy source which does not generate any harmful emissions. The Paul Pietsch 
Award for special innovative developments in the automobile sector, the Green Steering 
Wheel and the British What Car? Award - in 2007 and 2008 BMW EfficientDynamics 
won a cornucopia of international awards and most recently, the BMW 118d was named 
World Green Car of the Year 2008. These awards are a powerful affirmation of our work. 
But they only serve to drive us on: to work even harder for more driving pleasure and 
fewer emissions. 



BMW EfficientDynamics include: 

• BMW Gasoline Engines. As dynamic as ever. But more efficient 
than ever before. 

• BMW Diesel Engines. The only diesel engines with BMW 
dynamism. 

• BMW Blue Performance. Almost as impressive as its history: 
the future of the diesel engine. 



17 

Features and Technology 




• Lightweight construction. We save on weight, you save on fuel. 

• Optimum Shift Indicator. Cranking efficiency up yet another gear. 

• Electric Power Steering. Use the stretches between bends to save 
fuel. 

• Brake Energy Regeneration. Braking to win - to win back energy. 


2M - j 

' - s \ 

0 

lb JF 

t * 

/ 

-Li: 3E5 — 




• BMW ActiveHybrid. Reduced emissions. With unlimited driving 
pleasure. 

If you want to learn more about BMW EfficientDynamics go to 
www.bmw.com access the International website and then click on 
BMW EfficientDynamics. 



Hybrid Technology 

In the long term, BMW EfficientDynamics also 
includes zero-emissions motoring with hydrogen 
fuel, and in the medium term BMW ActiveHybrid 
- the combination of internal combustion engine 
and electric motors in the powertrain. The first 
production BMW ActiveHybrid models, the 
hybrid versions of the BMWX6 and the BMW 7- 
series, will have matured to production status by 
late 2009. 

What does BMW ActiveHybrid stand for and what distinguishes it from the hybrid offer¬ 
ings of our competitors? In principle, BMW ActiveHybrid refers to all hybrid-technology- 
related endeavours undertaken by BMW to achieve even higher efficiency - in this 
respect "Active" underscores the highly dynamic performance-motoring claim that will 
remain a keynote characteristic of all hybrid BMW models to come. BMW ActiveHybrid 
also refers collectively to the two different modes of hybridization, namely full hybrid and 
mild hybrid. 



18 

Features and Technology 





Here in brief are the basic differences between the two: 

Full hybrid: 

• Powerful electric motor or motors capable of delivering enough power to propel the 
vehicle without the assistance of the internal-combustion engine 

• High potential for consumption and emissions reduction, particularly in urban-traffic 
conditions 

• Vehicle weighs more and offers less luggage capacity because the hybrid compo¬ 
nents take up space and the batteries are heavy 

• High component costs, high production costs. 

Mild hybrid: 

• Small electric motor, designed to assist the combustion engine (boost function) 

• Not enough power for all-electric motoring 

• Moderate potential for reduction in consumption. Advantages particularly in urban- 
traffic conditions 

• Slight increase in weight and space requirement because the hybrid components 
are smaller and not as heavy as their full-hybrid counterparts 

• Production costs higher than those for conventional IC-engine design, but lower 
than those for full-hybrid configurations. 

BMW's hybrid strategy calls for hybrid technology only in circumstances in which the ratio 
of additional cost to savings potential justifies the outlay. The launchpad is provided by 
the high-end models with big engines like the BMW ActiveHybrid X6 and the BMW 
ActiveHybrid 7, because this is where the efficiency potential is largest. Hybrid technology 
for smaller models will be a medium-term development. 


19 

Features and Technology 



DCT 


BMW presented in the spring of 2008 an 
enthralling alternative to the 6-speed manual trans¬ 
mission which fascinates drivers with sporty ambi¬ 
tions while at the same time providing all the con¬ 
venience and comfort of an automatic transmis¬ 
sion. The new 7- speed sports automatic transmis¬ 
sion with double clutch (DCT/DKG) available in sev¬ 
eral BMW series, enables even more dynamic 
acceleration and contributes to the reduction of 
fuel consumption and exhaust emission levels. It 
represents the sportiest embodiment of the development strategy BMW 
EfficientDynamics. The new sports automatic transmission gives the driver the choice 
between automated shifting and manual gear selection. 

In both cases, the 7-speed double clutch transmission shifts without interruption of 
power delivered to the driven wheels and by consequence enhances traction, thus 
enhancing both sporty dynamic responses and shift comfort. The result is a unique com¬ 
bination of further increased dynamic performance when shifting manually with the com¬ 
fort provided by automatic transmissions - and at fuel consumption and exhaust emission 
levels which are even lower than those of manual transmission vehicles. 

A newly designed shift lever is provided in the central console to operate the system. It is 
clearly differentiated from a conventional automatic transmission selector lever in its 
shape and its integrated display for the selected shift program; and it does not relay com¬ 
mands for the shift program selection or gear change by means of a mechanical connec¬ 
tion but electronically. Alternatively, the driver can carry out manual gearshifts using shift 
paddles which are attached to the steering wheel. 

Principles of Operation 

The sports automatic transmission with double clutch 
is designed for engine speeds of up to 9,000 rpm and 
torque levels of up to 442lb-ft. This transmission 
combines two partial gearboxes in one casing, whose 
compact dimensions are the same as those of a con¬ 
ventional manual transmission. The technical core of 
the system is provided by two oil-cooled wet clutches. 

One of the two clutches is for the even transmission 
stages (2, 4, 6), the other is for the uneven transmission stages (1, 3, 5, 7) and the reverse 
gear. While the vehicle is moving, one of the two clutches is closed and the other open. 
During an acceleration maneuver - also when shifting down - they thus operate in alter¬ 
nation. 




20 

Features and Technology 












At every gearshift, the opening of the first clutch happens simultaneously with the closing 
of the second. The transmission control system identifies the next gear with a transmis¬ 
sion ratio which is ideally suited to the relevant engine speed and road speed, selecting it 
in advance and holding it in readiness. For example, if the vehicle is accelerating in third 
gear the power transmission is effected through the relevant clutch and partial gearbox 
with the uneven gears. In the partial gearbox responsible for the even transmission 
stages, the gear required to continue the acceleration process - in this case the fourth 
gear - is already engaged. It is then sufficient for the clutch responsible for the fourth gear 
to close while the clutch for the third gear simultaneously opens: within milliseconds the 
engine power is transferred to the wheels at the new gear transmission ratio. This enables 
a jerk-free, comfortable gearshift which is also incomparably fast and without any inter¬ 
ruption of traction whatsoever. 


21 

Features and Technology 




22 

Features and Technology 



Chassis and Suspension 


AFS/AL 

Active Front Steering (AFS) or Active Steering 
(AL) was introduced on the E60 5 Series 
models as part of the Sport Package. 

AFS varies the steering transmission ratio 
electronically in direct relation to the style 
and speed of driving and road conditions. 

AFS is different than variable assist power 
steering, which only varies the amount of 
effort, not the actual steering ratio. 

Benefits: 

• At low and medium speeds, the steering becomes more direct. This requires less 
turns of the steering wheel and increases the car’s agility in city traffic or when park¬ 
ing. 

• At high speeds the steering becomes less direct, offering improved directional sta¬ 
bility. When cornering at high speeds, or when undertaking sudden movements, the 
steering wheel will require more input to make the wheels turn. 

• AFS works in conjunction with Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) by monitoring the 
yaw rate and changing the steering angle accordingly. This reduces the number of 
DSC interventions, providing more control to the driver and increased comfort for 
the passengers. 

AFS works by inserting an electric motor with a worm gear drive that drives a planetary 
gear set located between the steering rack and the steering column. 

When the steering wheel angle senor detects driver input, the AFS control unit registers 
the data and then powers an electric motor to increase mechanical advantage in terms 
of rotation amount and turns the front wheels at more or less turns that the driver input. 
At lower speeds the system dials in a more direct steering ratio allowing a small move¬ 
ment of the steering wheel to result in a greater movement at the road wheels. 



23 

Features and Technology 





IAL 


Integrated Active Steering (IAL) is an innovative and logical development of the Active 
Steering system developed by BMW. 

With Active Steering, a steering angle amplification factor reduces the steering effort on 
the part of the driver and combines the capabilities of “steer by wire” systems with 
authentic steering feedback. 

By intervening in the steering independently of the driver’s actions, it is also able to per¬ 
form a stabilizing function in terms of vehicle handling. 

In order to move further ahead in terms of handling dynamics, the familiar Active Steering 
has now been logically extended by the addition of active rear-wheel steering on the new 
BMW 7 Series. 

Active Steering of the rear wheels is a logical extension of Active Steering and the two are 
now combined as an all-in one system referred to as Integrated Active Steering. 

Integrated Active Steering is available as an option on the F01/F02 because the standard 
steering system is the Servotronic 

Low Speed Range 

The variable steering-gear ratio of the Active Steering component reduces steering effort 
to approximately 2 turns of the steering wheel from lock to lock. In the low speed range 
up to approximately 37 mph, the variable steering-gear ratio for the front wheels is com¬ 
bined with a degree of opposite rear-wheel steer. The effect is to increase vehicle agility. 




24 

Features and Technology 





High Speed Range 

As the vehicle speed increases, the degree of steering angle amplification by the Active 
Steering component is reduced. The steering-gear ratio becomes less direct. 

At the same time, the steering strategy adopted by the Integrated Active Steering 
changes. Whereas, at low speeds, the rear wheels are steered in the opposite direction to 
the front wheels, at higher speeds the rear wheels are steered in the same direction as 
the front. 

The momentary axis moves further back, equivalent to a vehicle with a longer wheelbase, 
producing more stable straight-line handling. The radius of the curve becomes longer. 

By the combination with the Active Steering, an additional amount is added to the steer¬ 
ing angle of the front wheels so that the radius of the curve and the required amount of 
steering lock remain at the familiar level. 

All in all, co-ordination of the steering interventions at front and rear makes lane changes 
and steering maneuvers considerably easier to negotiate without sacrificing agility or bal¬ 
ance. Combination of the Active Steering with the new rear-wheel steering system offers 
benefits for the driver at all speeds. 




25 

Features and Technology 





ARS 


Active Roll Stabilization winds up the stabilizer 
bars in the front and rear suspension to resist 
body lean while cornering. Because the system is 
actively controlling only when needed, the spring 
rates and stabilizer bar stiffness are reduced. This 
results in a smoother ride. 

This system consists of: 

• Active anti-roll bars, replacing conventional mechanical (“passive”) front and rear 
bars. Each bar consists of left and right portions, twisted in opposite directions by 
a hydraulic motor between them. 

• Valve/sensor block containing various system valves and sensors. 

• Lateral-acceleration sensor to detect how hard the vehicle is cornering. 

• Electronic control unit (ECU) regulating the entire system. 

• Tandem oil pump which, via its two sections, provides hydraulic pressure 
for ARS and the power steering. 

Whenever the vehicle enters a corner or begins an avoidance maneuver, “lateral accelera¬ 
tion” is generated. This is read by the sensor, which transmits a signal to the control unit 
which processes this signal and transmits it to the valve/sensor block. The valve block 
determines the hydraulic pressure applied to the active anti-roll bars to control body roll. 

The key word here is “active.” 

Active Roll Stabilization: 

1. Generates resistance to body roll by twisting the front and rear anti-roll bars 

2. Highly “tailored” and stronger than conventional anti-roll bars. 

3. Does not offer resistance to bumps as do conventional anti-roll bars. 

4. Increases the vehicle’s maximum cornering capability. 

5. Improves steering response, particularly in the range of cornering where body 
roll is most tightly controlled. 




26 

Features and Technology 















































Tire Pressure Monitoring 


System Identification and Terminology 

In order to accurately diagnose TPM systems, the system must be properly identified. 
These systems have had numerous acronyms which are used to describe the various 
systems. For the purposes of this training module, the systems will be broken down into 
two basic configurations. 

These are as follows: 


• Systems which monitor wheel speed - These “Indirect ” systems will be 
referred to as Flat Tire Monitoring systems or FTM. FTM systems take advantage of 
components already installed in the vehicle. The wheel speed sensors, which are 
already an input to the DSC control unit, are used to monitor wheel speed. When a 
tire starts to deflate, the overall diameter changes. This affects the rotational speed, 
which is picked up by the DSC module. The DSC module contains software for the 
purpose of calculating the speed changes and reporting the pressure loss to the dri¬ 
ver via an illuminated indicator or symbol. The only additional components which are 
installed is the switch for system initialization. Early generation systems used a mod¬ 
ule which received wheel speed input from the DSC module. 


• Systems which monitor actual tire pressure - These “Direct” systems will be 
referred to as Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems or TPM systems. TPM systems 
use wireless sensors which are part of the tire valve stem. These sensors monitor 
actual tire pressure and send this information to a module via multiple antennae. 
These systems are preferred due to the fact that the actual tire pressure is moni¬ 
tored rather than by variations in tire rotational speeds. 


There is a simple way to identify the difference between the two systems. On systems 
which monitor actual tire pressure, the tire valve stem is threaded and has a “hex head” 
on the valve stem. The systems which monitor wheel speed have conventional rubber 
valve stems. 


TPM Control 
Module 


LIN-Bus 



UN-Bug 



t p 3 ^ Transmitter 
am r-ni'mnl in 
Vil i:.i.‘ HflChOMaCS 
Modus Id send 

nfo* i iic£o r < 



Digital 

Antenna 


433 MHz 

Wbfflh FhgC tjTjrits 
Mortis 1 .7 

sending lele^ am lu 
Dgilal Antennd 

I K l -d ni=. 1-1 p. f.i let - rcm K 

ID. 1 im viJi.ir<! and lemp 
n'lfLHMIiilxjl'L 


27 

Features and Technology 




In 2000, there was much media attention surrounding tire safety issues. The leading tire 
manufacturers were involved with many law suits regarding catastrophic tire failures. 
These well publicized incidents involved injury and fatalities. 

In response to these issues, the U.S. Congress enacted legislation Features and 
Technology the “Transportation Recall Enhancement, Accountability and Documentation 
(TREAD) Act in November of 2000. 

The TREAD Act encompasses many aspects of tire industry issues. The act includes 
items such as tire labeling requirements, tire testing standards, information on tire safety 
related recalls etc. There are also provisions for issues on child safety restraints. 

However, the focus of this training module is to train technicians about Tire Pressure 
Monitoring Systems (TPMS). TPM systems are also one of the primary components of 
the TREAD Act. TPM systems allow early detection of tire pressure loss which is not 
usually detected by the driver until vehicle handling and safety is affected. 

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) is the government agency 
responsible for the creation and enforcement of the mandates of the TREAD Act. Initially, 
NHTSA approved the installation of “Indirect” TPM systems. 

Indirect TPM systems monitor tire pressure “indirectly” by monitoring the rotational speed 
of the tire via the wheel speed sensors. The ABS/DSC system can then detect pressure 
loss by comparing wheel speed information between all 4 tires. Any loss in tire pressure 
would result in a change in tire diameter and therefore a change in rotational speed. 

The guidelines of the TREAD Act found that “Indirect” TPM systems are ineffective in 
detecting tire pressure loss until the tire was under-inflated to an unsafe level. Therefore, 
NHTSA mandated that auto manufacturers install “Direct” TPM systems on all vehicles. 

Direct TPM systems monitor tire pressure directly by using pressure sensors at each 
wheel which report tire pressure and temperature information to relevant vehicle systems. 
Tire pressure loss is then reported to the driver via an illuminated warning symbol. Direct 
TPM systems also offer the capability of monitoring tire pressure when the vehicle is at a 
standstill. Indirect systems must be driven in order to collect sufficient data to detect tire 
pressure loss. 

As per NHTSA guidelines, passenger cars and light trucks must have the “Direct” TPM 
systems installed via a specific timeline from 2005. By 2007, all auto manufacturers must 
be in 100% compliance. 

Aside from the obvious safety benefits, Direct TPM systems will also assist the driver by 
maintaining fuel economy and extending tire life. 

This training module will help the technician to diagnose and repair both “Indirect” and 
“Direct” TPM systems. The first step in the diagnosis the these systems is identification. 


28 

Features and Technology 




29 

Features and Technology 



xDrive 

BMW’s “intelligent” all-wheel drive system was 
introduced on the E83 and E53 9/2003 produc¬ 
tion. It is now available on current all wheel drive 
versions of BMW models. 

BMW caters to the needs of customers that 
desire vehicles with exceptional handling and per¬ 
formance while driving in snow/winter conditions 
by offering xDrive all-wheel drive. 



Operation of xDrive: 


• Driving torque is always transmitted to the rear wheels. At least 50% of the torque is 
always sent to the rear wheels. 

• The portion of torque that is transmitted to the front wheels is achieved by a multi¬ 
disc clutch. This clutch assembly can be fully open, fully engaged or at any level of 
partial engagement in between. At full engagement the torque split to the front and 
rear wheels is exactly half. 

• Engagement pressure on the multi-disc clutch is directed by an electronic control 
system in response to actual road and driving conditions. 

The purpose of xDrive is not just to optimize traction; it can also enhance both handing 
performance and stability on dry as well as slippery road surfaces. 

Th xDrive system is incorporated in to the DSC logic. The DSC system utilizes the xDrive 
transfer case to compensate within physical limits for excessive oversteer and understeer. 
xDrive adjusts the front/rear torque distribution to avoid these tendencies. 

If an oversteer condition is sensed, the multi-disc clutch 
engages, sending the maximum possible torque to the 
front wheels; thus making the vehicle take on front 
wheel drive characteristics. 

If an understeer condition is detected, the clutch disen¬ 
gages completely, sending 0% of the driving torque to 
the front wheels. 

Under normal operating conditions, the vehicle torque 
split is 60% rear and 40% front with few exceptions. 

^ 30 % 30 % 

These are not fixed values. 

They are just an example ■N> r>® 
of torque distribution with 
xDrive. 


20% 


20% 


20% 


40 % 


60 % 


30 % 




20 % 


xDrive 



30 % 


30 

Features and Technology 






Dynamic Performance Control 

Introduced in the E71, Dynamic Performance 
Control (DPC) complements xDrive and Dynamic 
Stability Control, serving as an additional module 
to increase active safety and enhance the brilliant 
driving dynamics. 

Dynamic Performance Control switches power 
between the left and right rear wheels to stabilize 
the vehicle within milliseconds and helps increase 
traction and lateral acceleration. 



How Dynamic Performance Control works can best be described in canoeing terms: if 
you want to turn right when canoeing in the main current, you can brake using the paddle 
on the right side of the canoe. This is how most common electronic stability programs 
work. Alternatively, you could use the paddle powerfully on the left side of the canoe in 
order to have more control in progressing forwards and turning right. This is the principle 
behind Dynamic Performance Control. 

DPC links the standard rear differential with a mechanical planetary gear set and an elec¬ 
tronically controlled multi-plate clutch for each rear wheel. Its mechatronical system com¬ 
bines informatics, electronics and mechanics to process complex data such as the yaw 
rate, wheel speeds, steering angle and engine torque so that it can react immediately. 
When required, the system ensures that drive power distribution to the rear wheels can 
be freely varied and increased on either side as needed. The power distribution can also 
be displayed on the onboard computer. 


DPC increases directional stability when accelerating out of bends and provides the driver 
with extra support when dealing with difficult driving conditions. Before under- or over¬ 
steer can take place, lateral guided force is used to 
keep the vehicle on track. Precise steering significant¬ 
ly increases driving comfort and safety. 


20% 


20% 


20% 


20 % 


40% 


60% 


15 % 



45% 


W+® 

These are not fixed values. They are 
just an example of torque distribution 
with xDrive & DPC 


Whereas xDrive variably controls the power distribu¬ 
tion between the front and rear axles, Dynamic 
Performance Control intelligently distributes power 
between the two rear wheels. This results in precise 
handling whatever the driving conditions. 


If the rear wheels are on different types of surfaces, 
DPC improves traction by supplying more drive power 
to the wheel with more grip. A wheel torque differ¬ 
ence of up to 1,800 Nm can be actively created 
between the left and right rear wheels. This increases 
driving stability and allows for much faster accelera¬ 
tion. 


31 

Features and Technology 




Dynamic Stability Control 

DSC encompasses three functions that aid in 
traction control: 

• Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS) 

• Automatic Stability Control (ASC) 

• Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

Features: 

Dynamic Stability Control 

Intervening in the engine and brakes, DSC prevents both under- and oversteering. Acting 
as a driver assistance system, DSC is made up of various modules ranging from proven 
ABS technology through DTC traction control all the way to the ADB automatic differen¬ 
tial brake on xDrive equipped vehicles. Whenever required, each of these modules will 
intervene in the engine and brakes. 






i 


Inletvention i<> ehgifri 


Traction Control 

Controls engine power and the brakes to limit wheelspin and thereby improve the driver’s 
control of the vehicle under conditions where a wheel or wheels might spin, primarily on 
slippery roads. The DSC system continually processes data from the wheel-speed sen¬ 
sors. Anytime a drive wheel begins to lose traction (rear wheels on most models, any 
wheel on AWD models), the system senses this and acts on the engine’s throttle(s) or 
Valvetronic and ignition timing to reduce engine torque. It also acts on each brake individ¬ 
ually as necessary to help bring wheelspin under control, enhancing driving stability on 
slippery surfaces (or even on dry roads under extreme acceleration or cornering). 

BMW’s traction control is an all-speed system. Engine intervention is possible at any 
speed. 

Below 25 mph, the brakes are also applied selectively and separately as necessary to 
optimize traction very quickly. Between 25 and 50 mph, the rear brakes are applied as a 
pair. Above 50 mph, traction control operates entirely through engine intervention. 


32 

Features and Technology 

















Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) 

It has always been possible to de-activate Dynamic Stability Control functions (except 
antilock braking) via a console switch. In all RWD models except M models, a capability 
called Dynamic Traction Control is also incorporated. 

DTC improves utilization of available road traction under specific conditions: 

• on sand, gravel, deep snow or packed snow. 

• climbing hills with deep or packed snow. 

• when there is deep snow on only one side of the road. 

• when driving with tire chains. 

The driver may either fully de-activate DSC (except ABS) or activate the DTC mode. 
Dynamic Traction Control is selected via a brief push on the DSC console switch; full de¬ 
activation of DSC requires a longer (2 sec.) push on the switch. In the E65/E66 7 Series, 
DTC selection is via iDrive. Even with DSC de-activated, ABS always remains functional. 

Electronic Brake Proportioning 

Anytime the brakes are applied, a vehicle’s front end becomes more heavily loaded; the 
rear “gets lighter.” To deal with this, front to-rear proportioning of braking force is varied 
according to braking severity. 

Via the wheel-speed sensors, EBP actually measures the slip at each wheel when the 
brakes are applied, and regulates pressure accordingly to the front and rear brakes. 
Braking force is thus apportioned optimally at all times, making best use of available brak¬ 
ing traction at the tires and helping distribute brake and tire wear more evenly. 

Antilock Braking (ABS) 

During braking, anytime a wheel begins to lock up (slide), DSC releases and re-applies 
(cycles) the individual wheel brakes to prevent this from occurring. As only a rotating tire 
can deliver effective braking power to the road, the antilock function helps the driver 
achieve quick, controllable deceleration or stopping when necessary, helping avoid 
skidding. 


33 

Features and Technology 



Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

Reinforces the driver’s brake-pedal effort in emergency braking. The system recognizes 
when the driver has made a “panic” brake application, and increases the level of assis¬ 
tance. By forcing the ABS to function optimally, this helps ensure that the most effective 
braking is achieved. 

Cornering Brack Control (CBC) 

Cornering stabilization. For this most sophisticated DSC function, the following 
inputs are employed: 

• The wheel-speed sensors 

• A steering-angle sensor (measures turning of the steering) 

• A lateral-acceleration sensor (measures how “hard” the vehicle is cornering) 

• A yaw sensor (measures the vehicle’s rotation around its vertical axis) 

• A brake-pressure sensor (informs the system of any application of the brakes 
by the driver) 

Together, these sensors precisely measure the vehicle’s cornering motion. With their 
inputs feeding into the powerful DSC microprocessor, the system detects any deviation 
from the normal cornering path (abnormal understeer or oversteer) and gently regulates 
the vehicle into a controlled situation. 


conventional brake 1 Dynamic Brake Control 




trained normal driver 

driver with DBC 


34 

Features and Technology 





























The following key features appear in more than one BMW Series: 

BMW features applies individual wheel brakes to help the driver keep the vehicle on the 
intended path. Thus in these critical situations, when the driver may be attempting a 
maneuver beyond the normal control range of the vehicle, he or she is more likely to 
retain control and avoid an accident. 

Although it obviously affects the vehicle’s handling, this function should be considered 
primarily a safety feature; in other words, it should not be interpreted as a feature that 
allows faster cornering or more abrupt maneuvers. 

Hill Descent Control (AWD models only) 

Helps the driver maintain speed and stability on steep downhill runs. The driver needs 
only to press a dedicated button on the console; HDC takes over, gently applying the 
brakes as necessary to keep the speed to a brisk walking pace. 

Brake Fade Compensation 

“Brake fade” is the loss of effectiveness when brakes heat up under hard use. When this 
occurs, a given degree of deceleration requires more pressure on the brake pedal. As 
brake temperature rises, Brake Fade Compensation automatically increases the hydraulic 
pressure in the brake system relative to pedal application, so the driver does not have to 
press harder on the pedal. 

Brake Standby 

When the driver lifts off the accelerator pedal abruptly, DSC recognizes that sharp braking 
may be about to occur and applies just enough pressure in the brake system to snug up 
the pads against the rotors. Thus when the driver’s foot reaches the brake pedal, the 
short “time lag” normally resulting from bringing the pad to the rotor is eliminated. Actual 
braking sets in more quickly; the reduced stopping or deceleration distance could reduce 
the likelihood of an accident. 

Brake Drying 

Acting on input from the windshield wipers’ rain sensor, the pads are periodically brought 
up to the rotors - just enough to eliminate any film of water between pads and rotors, but 
not enough to cause any brake application. 

Comfort Stop/Soft Stop 

Especially with automatic transmissions, unless the driver consciously eases off on the 
brake pedal, a jerk can occur as the vehicle comes to a stop. Comfort Stop automatically 
eases off, making for smoother stops. 

Start-off Assistant 

Similar in part to the 7 Series’ Automatic Hold function, this function keeps the vehicle 
from rolling backward when stopped facing uphill. The driver can then start up without 
doing a ballet with the clutch, brake and accelerator (manual transmission) or doesn’t 
have to hold the accelerator or brakes while stopped on a hill (automatic transmission). 


35 

Features and Technology 



M Differential 


The main distinction between a conventional limited-slip differential and the M Variable 
Differential Lock is that where the former senses torque, the latter senses wheel speed 
(rpm). Under dry to not-quite-dry road conditions, the 25% limited-slip has traditionally 
enhanced the handling of sporty rear-wheel-drive BMW's; yet under slippery conditions, 
this differential type has limited ability to improve traction. In particular, this limitation 
applies when one wheel is on slippery, the other on firmer ground; it cannot transmit more 
torque than the slippery side permits. 


On all current BMW models, electronic traction control (a function of Dynamic Stability 
Control, nearby) addresses this issue, although not in a manner conducive to sporty, M 
Car-style driving. 


The M Variable Differential Lock specifically addresses low- and split-traction situations in 
a way that reinforces sporty handling, imparting to the M vehicles a slippery road ability no 
high-performance, rear-wheel-drive sports car ever before had. 


Any time a speed difference develops between the two rear (driven) wheels, a shear 
pump, driven by this difference, develops pressure in the unit’s silicon viscous fluid. This 
pressure is directed to a multi-disc clutch that transfers driving torque to the wheel with 
the better road grip (“select high”). The greater the speed difference between the two 
wheels, the harder the clutch engages. As this difference in wheel speeds diminishes, the 
clutch begins to ease off. In extreme cases, up to 100% of power can be channeled to 
the wheel with the better grip. In winter, this results in a significant boost to traction. 


This mechanism accomplishes sophisticated action by entirely natural means. There is 
no external pump, no external source of lubrication or operating fluid. The very motion to 
be controlled - differences in speed between one wheel and the other - generates its 
locking action. 


Viscous fluid is so-called because it develops internal force (via an increase in viscosity) 
whenever it is sheared; this is why the relatively small difference between one wheel 
speed and the other can generate the necessary action. 


The variable M differen¬ 
tial lock ensures that 
BMW M vehicles handle 
with remarkable sure¬ 
footedness and deliver 
excellent driving stability. 



Pump Hunting 

/ lAuft^Okh AiiGTbly 


nirrwftnti.fli 


Dtjvd Hr-inn 


36 

Features and Technology 





37 

Features and Technology 



Driver Assistance Systems 


Active Blind Spot Detection 

Active Blind Spot Detection is a new BMW system. It is being introduced for the first 
time in the F01/F02 7 Series . The system is designed to assist the driver in making lane 
change maneuvers by monitoring traffic at the rear and sides of the vehicle. Using two 
radar sensors it detects vehicles traveling in the rear and along side our vehicle and 
warns the driver of the position of any unseen vehicles around him traveling in his 
“Blind Spot”. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Fast approaching vehicle on the left-hand neighboring lane 

2 

Vehicle in the left-hand neighboring lane travelling at the same speed 

3 

Your own vehicle, with the intention of changing lanes to the left 

4 

Blind spot area (left/right) 

5 

Vehicle in the right-hand neighboring lane travelling at a faster speed 

6 

"Lane change zone" 


38 

Features and Technology 






































































KAFAS - Multifunction Video Camera 

With the F01/F02, the customer is able to choose from a comprehensive range of 
optional driver assistance systems. 

The individual systems and function units are becoming ever more densely networked 
as a result of the shared use of components and signals in some areas. 

Depending on the combination of the available options installed, the functions in the 
F01/F02 are implemented as camera-based systems, both sharing the same camera 
and the one control unit, the KAFAS control unit. 

KAFAS is the Camera Assisted Driver Assistance System. 

KAFAS is used for the following combined functions: 

• Lane departure warning 

• High-beam assistant. 



39 

Features and Technology 



































Lane Change Warning 

Keeping your attention on the road ahead: BMW's Lane Departure Warning recognizes 
when your BMW is straying from your lane, and gives you early warning with a discreet 
vibration of the steering wheel. 

Lane Departure Warning is a driver assistance system that is based on a video sensor. 

A camera integrated near the rear-view mirror takes an image of the road ahead of your 
BMW during the day or within the headlight beam at night. This visual image is sent to 
a central control unit, where it is analyzed. The system identifies the lane markings, and 
tracks their position permanently. If the vehicle is threatening to stray outside the limits 
of the lane, the system alerts you by vibrating the steering wheel so you can correct the 
direction of your vehicle. 

The system takes the vehicle's speed into account, providing a warning earlier when the 
vehicle is travelling at higher speeds, so the driver always has adequate time to correct 
the steering before the lane markings are crossed. 

Lane Departure Warning is activated using a button on the multifunction steering wheel. 
It is intended primarily for use on freeways and highways, and becomes active at speeds 
of 70 km/h and above. 

An icon on the Info Display (and Head-Up Display, depending on the model) displays if 
the system is on or off and if it has detected lane markings and is able to issue warnings. 
To preclude unnecessary warnings, the system is automatically deactivated in city traffic 
(at speeds below 70 km/h), construction areas and whenever the indicator is activated. 




40 

Features and Technology 














High-Beam Assistant 

The video cameras monitor the area ahead of the vehicle for light sources. Vehicles trav¬ 
elling in front and oncoming traffic become recognizable at distances of up to approxi¬ 
mately 400m/437yd. The detection range of the video camera is approximately 
1,000m/1093yd. The video camera has a horizontal viewing angle of approximately 
15° to the left and right and a vertical viewing angle of approximately 5° up and down. 

When active, these special video cameras capture dots of light and, in the process, are 
able to distinguish between various parameters, e.g. light color and light intensity. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Recognition range 

2 

Detection range 


Depending on the traffic situation, the prevailing ambient light conditions and which lights 
on the vehicle have been switched on, the high-beam headlights of the vehicle are 
switched on or off automatically by the footwell module at the request/activation recom¬ 
mendation of the KAFAS control unit. 


41 

Features and Technology 


















Head-Up Display 

The very name “Head-Up” describes the principle benefit of this system. The Head-up 
Display (HUD) projects a virtual image into the driver’s field of vision. Important informa¬ 
tion such as cruise control details or graphical directions from the navigation system are 
projected onto the windshield and are thus permanently visible within the driver’s field of 
view. 

The driver of a BMW thus has the important data and graphics put up in his field of view, 
just like a pilot in his jet fighter. 

The head-up display in the new BMW 7 Series incorporates various functions aimed at 
enhancing road safety and driver convenience. 

That includes display of: 

• Information from the cruise control system 

• Information from the navigation system 

• Check Control messages 

• Road speed 

Having the displays in the driver’s direct field of view increases safety, as the eyes are 
always on the traffic. 






Head-up Display (HUD) in F01/F02 


42 

Features and Technology 





Night Vision 

The BMW Night Vision 2 system provides the driver with a black-and-white image of the 
driving environment ahead of the vehicle in the control display CD or central information 
display CID. 

BMW Night Vision 2 is a passive system without active infrared illumination. Objects sit¬ 
uated ahead of the vehicle are shown in varying degrees of brightness depending on the 
temperature of these objects. This enables the driver to detect in good time heat-emit¬ 
ting objects such as, for example, persons, animals and other vehicles. 

This thermal image is recorded with a Far Infrared camera (FIR) via a special imaging 
sensor which detects the infrared radiation in a specific wavelength range. 

Intelligent algorithms in the control unit makes it possible to automatically detect persons 
in the image. Following evaluation of distance and direction of movement, a symbol on 
the central information display CID and in the head-up display HUD warns the driver of 
any persons at risk. 



43 

Features and Technology 









The BMW system is distinguished from infrared systems by its robust resistance to 
dazzling, its long range and its clearly structured image. 

The system offers the customer the following advantages: 

• Highlighting of non-illuminated, heat emitting objects such as pedestrians, cyclists, 
vehicles and animals. 

• Better overview of the driving situation thanks to the depiction of the route of the 
road beyond the headlight cone. 

• Improved vision in twilight (dawn/dusk) and darkness. 

• Symbol warning of persons at risk in the area ahead of the vehicle. 

• No dazzle in the screen image caused by the headlights of oncoming vehicles. 

• Display of dark courtyard and garage entrances. 

Night Vision 2 is designed as a supporting system, which, with a modified driving style, 
affords the driver a better overview of the road conditions ahead of the vehicle. 

Note: The driving speed must be adapted to the relevant visibility conditions. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Environment ahead of vehicle 

4 

BMW Night Vision 2 control unit 

2 

Optical element 

5 

Control display 

3 

Thermal imaging sensor 




44 

Features and Technology 




































Comfort Access 


Keyless Vehicle Access is possible with Comfort Access. This system allows the cus¬ 
tomer to unlock and open the vehicle without active use of the ID transmitter. Access to 
the vehicle can be gained from any point. It is important that the ID transmitter be located 
in the vehicle’s immediate vicinity (approximately 5 feet). It is sufficient to have the ID 
transmitter somewhere on your person. 

Comfort Access was first introduced on the E65 (03/2002). The system was then gradu¬ 
ally introduced on other BMW models. It is currently available on the 1 Series, 3 Series, 

5 Series, 6 Series, X5 and X6. 

The benefits of Comfort Access are: 

• High level of convenience when unlocking and locking the vehicle 

• Convenient and fast access to the vehicle 

• Simple engine start/stop procedure 

• Maximum comfort for the driver 

• No more annoying hunting for keys. 

The vehicle is unlocked when you place your hand into the handle recess on the outside 
of the door and opened when you pull the door handle. 

You can lock the vehicle again by subsequently pressing on the sensitive surface of the 
outside door handle. 

The ID transmitter must be located in the vehicle interior in order for the engine to be 
started. The engine can now be started by pressing the START-STOP button and the 
vehicle is ready to be driven. 


45 

Features and Technology 




Active Cruise Control with Stop & Go Function 

ACC Stop & Go extends the operating range of the former ACC system to include low 
speeds down to a standstill. In other words, speed and distance from the vehicle in front 
are automatically controlled at those speeds as well. 



ACC Stop & Go will automatically stop the car if necessary and then indicate to the driver 
as soon as it detects that it is possible to start moving again. To pull away again, the driver 
has to acknowledge this message. The pulling-away process is controlled fully automati¬ 
cally by ACC Stop & Go only if the duration of the standstill is very short. 

Thus, ACC Stop & Go provides optimum assistance for the driver not only in moving 
traffic but also in traffic jams such as are more and more frequently encountered on high¬ 
ways. However, this system (in common with ACC) is not intended for use in urban areas 
for negotiating junctions or traffic lights. 


46 

Features and Technology 



Adaptive Brake Assistant with Warning Function 

This function is included automatically if the customer orders the ACC Stop & Go option, 
or in some countries, the ACC option. 



Adaptive Braking Assistance offers the greatest benefit in situations where the vehicle 
is following another vehicle. If the vehicle in front brakes hard, it is detected by the long- 
range radar sensor. The two subfunctions of: 

• precharging the brake system (also known as the “brake readiness” function) and 

• lowering the threshold for the hydraulic Brake Assistant 

assist the driver to perform the braking operation to best effect and thus in the best case 
to avoid a rear-end collision with the vehicle in front. 

In the F01/F02, this function is no different from the function implemented in the E6x LCI. 
The long-range radar sensor gathers data on the road users ahead of the vehicle. The 
data are supplemented by data relating to the driving status of the customer’s vehicle, 
and both types of data are used as a basis for calculating a collision avoidance rate of 
deceleration. This is the rate of deceleration at which the driver would have to brake in 
order to avoid a collision with the vehicle in front. If the calculated collision avoidance 
deceleration is above a stored threshold value, the brake system begins to precharge 
and the activation threshold for the hydraulic Brake Assistant is reduced. 

All sensor-related and processing functions of Adaptive Braking Assistance are computed 
in the long-range radar sensor. However, the computed output variables have to be trans¬ 
mitted to the DSC control unit because that is where they are put into action. To make 
this possible, the ICM control unit acts as a gateway between the local CAN and the 
FlexRay. 


47 

Features and Technology 





In the DSC control unit, there are still more conditions that need to be fulfilled before 
these two subfunctions can be carried out. (Example: road speed must be higher than 
a defined minimum speed.) 

However, the Adaptive Braking Assistance technology also has limits and cannot react 
fast enough in situations such as other road users cutting in right in front of the vehicle. 
Driving with care and anticipation remains the fundamental imperative even with Adaptive 
Braking Assistance! 

Note: The Adaptive Brake Assistant and its subfunctions, precharging the 
brake system and lowering the threshold for the hydraulic Brake 
Assistant are always active and does not have to be switched on sepa¬ 
rately by the driver. 

Top View Camera 

With the introduction of E70 M and E71 M the top rear side view camera (TRSVC) is 
available for the first time in the US market. Using two additional cameras in the outside 
mirrors, a virtual view of the vehicle from above is displayed in the central information dis¬ 
play. When combined with PDC information and the rearview camera, the vehicle is mon¬ 
itored from all sides and the driver is warned both visually and acoustically of obstacles. 

The cameras are located in the out side mirrors (see arrow in the graphic). The mirror 
mounting carriers are specially adapted to accommodate the LVDS cable of the camera 
system. 

The cameras are located in the out side mirrors (see arrow in the graphic). The mirror 
mounting carriers are specially adapted to accommodate the LVDS cable of the camera 
system. 



48 

Features and Technology 






The Top view cameras are connected to the TRSVC control unit and work in conjunction 
with the rear view camera and Park Distance Control (PDC). They can be turned on by 
pressing the PDC button or are automatically turned on when the vehicle is placed in 
reverse. 

The top view cameras have the same adjustment options as the rear view camera. 

Parking aid line assistance is available for the top view camera and can be selected from 
the top/rearview menu screen (See lower left graphic). 

The customer can choose between a “three way split view” that displays left, right and 
rear views in one image or the single view by selecting just the rear view camera image to 
be displayed in the CID. 



49 

Features and Technology 
















Parking Assistance 

For the first time in a BMW vehicle, a system is being 
introduced in the FI 0 that assists the driver when per¬ 
forming a parallel parking maneuver. Parking assistance is 
available as optional equipment (option 5DP) in conjunc¬ 
tion with the optional Park Distance Control (option 508). 

Parking assistance makes it easier to maneuver the vehicle 
into parking spaces parallel to the roadway. The system measures potential parking 
spaces when driving by them at speeds less than 35 km/h, regardless of whether parking 
assistance has been activated or not. When a parking space 1.2m larger than the vehicle 
length is detected and the system has been activated, the space is shown to the driver in 
the central information display (CID). The driver remains responsible for the acceleration 
and braking of the vehicle. The parking assistance system only takes over the steering 
function and the PDC monitors the distances and obstacles. The driver is led through the 
parallel parking process with detailed instructions for action displayed on the CID and, 
where applicable, additional acoustic warnings and acknowledgements are issued. 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

Maximum distance to the row of parked vehicles: 1.5m 

2 

Horizontal opening angle of the ultrasonic sensor: ± 10°, range approximately 4.5m 

3 

Vehicle or object length at least 1.5m 

4 

Length of the parking space, vehicle length plus approximately 1.2m 

5 

Vehicle or object length at least 1.5m 


50 

Features and Technology 




















iDrive Concept 



Contemporary automobiles and particularly contemporary luxury automobiles - pose an 
ever-growing challenge to their designers: how to accommodate the extensive functions 
that modern technology offers without overwhelming the driver and creating a driving 
environment cluttered with controls. 

iDrive is BMW’s solution to this challenge. 

BMW has applied the Navigation System’s 
proven concept: a color monitor with control 
menus, and a controller. 



More functions than ever are controlled in this manner, and the con¬ 
troller has migrated from the monitor panel to a central position 
between the front seats. This controller acts like a “fixed position 
mouse” that controls the menus located in the control display 
or central information display (vehicle dependent). The 
controller is equally accessible to the driver and front 
passenger, and is finished in satin aluminum. 


There are two different versions of the controller. 


• One controller includes force feedback: 
According to the functions it is controlling, it 
gives the user an appropriate tactile feed¬ 
back. 


• The other controller has fixed notches and 
provides no force feedback. It’s operation of 
the CD/CID is the same. 


51 

Features and Technology 
























Display, Operating and Control Concept 

With the new BMW 7 Series F01/F02, a new operating and control concept is being 
introduced at BMW. In addition to the main menu, there is an arrangement of four direct 
access buttons, a Back button and an Option button in the immediate vicinity of the con¬ 
troller. 



Display, operating and control concept BMW 7 Series F01/F02 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Head-up display (HUD) 

2 

Instrument cluster 

3 

Central Information Display (CID) 

4 

Favorite buttons for individual assignment 

5 

Controller 

6 

Gear selector switch (GWS) 

7 

Steering column stalk/steering wheel 

8 

Operating unit for driver assistance systems (BEFAS) 


52 

Features and Technology 















Body Electronics 


Bluetooth 



Bluetooth technology uses radio frequencies, instead 
of wires, to connect various electronic devices to 
each other. This allows you to connect your com¬ 
puter, keyboard and mouse; share addresses 
between your PDA & laptop, and send music from 
your MP3 player to your wireless headphones. This ver¬ 
satile feature can also wirelessly connect compatible 
mobile phones to vehicles for hands-free calling. With a 
Bluetooth mobile phone, drivers can make and answer calls, as 
well as browse and select phone book entries, just by 
using the multifunction steering wheel controls and radio keys. 
For more information please visit www.wireless4bmw.com 


Do I need to add a special antenna or cradle for Bluetooth and what is the 
range for staying connected between the phone and the vehicle? 

New BMW's that come factory-installed with Bluetooth capability do not require a 
special cradle. The phone can be kept in your vehicle’s glove box, trunk or even in your 
pocket - anywhere within a 30-foot radius of the vehicle, depending on the power of 
your Bluetooth device, signal interference, or objects that might be between the phone 
and the vehicle’s Bluetooth antenna.. Please note that docking cradles providing phone 
security, battery charging and improved antenna connection are available for selected 
phone models. 

Certain 2003 and 2004 BMW's can be retrofitted with Bluetooth as a BMW center- 
installed accessory. This requires using a special, console cradle. For costs and more 
details, see your BMW center. 

Can I access my mobile phone Phonebook entries in the vehicle? 

After the initial pairing procedure is completed, your Phonebook contacts will 
automatically download to the vehicle’s hands-free system. Any changes you make in 
your phone’s Phonebook will be automatically updated in the vehicle when the phone 
connects to the hands-free system. If more than one phone is paired to the vehicle, 
individual Phonebook information will be used for each phone. For added protection, 
the contact information will only be available in the vehicle when the phone is connected 
to the hands-free system. 

How secure is the Bluetooth connection between my mobile phone 
and the vehicle? 


To protect your privacy, the BMW Bluetooth hands-free system requires a Bluetooth 
Passkey code to pair a mobile phone. This Bluetooth Passkey must be entered only 
once during the initial pairing procedure. To reduce the risk of interference or intercep¬ 
tion, Bluetooth wireless technology hops communication frequencies 1,600 times per 
second. In addition, BMW provides encryption to further protect the privacy of your calls. 

53 

Features and Technology 




Digital Radio Sources 


H5) Radio 

Pure Digital. Clear Radio. 

BMW Group introduced HD Radio 
Technology developed by the iBiquity Digital 
Corporation starting with the 9/2005 produc 
tion 7 Series. 

iBiquity Digital is the sole developer of HD 
Radio technology. This technology is 
approved by the FCC for the US market. Thi 
company does not actually produce radios n 
audio equipment. They are responsible for 
licensing this technology for use in the radio 
industry. 

The benefits to digital radio are: 

• AM will sound like present day FM 

• FM will have compact-disc-like quality 

• Improved Fidelity 

• Free programming (only cost is for IBOC receiver) 

• Supplemental Program Services (SPS) - Station ID, Features and technology, 

Artist, Album, Genre, etc. 

• Improved Reception (depending on digital data received) 

• Analog to Digital (Digital to Analog) switching depending on reception quality 

• From March 2007 Multicasting is available on some models 

The HD Radio technology used in our IBOC control unit practically transparent to the 
user in terms of tuning. 

IBOC is the acronym for In-Band On-Channel. This signifies that the location for the 
digital radio signals can be found in the exact same location on the “dial” as the analog 
signals. FM101.1 in the “analog realm” is also FM101.1 in the “digital realm.” 

Initially, radio station broadcasting with iBiquity Digital’s HD Radio technology broadcasts 
two signals in the same frequency range. One signal is analog with an 8 second delay 
and the other is digital. This is known as “Hybrid Mode.” 

Eventually the radio stations will stop transmitting in “Hybrid Mode” and will go to purely 
digital. The time frame is not yet established. 



54 

Features and Technology 







Sirius Satellite Radio 

BMW offers our customers the latest in radio 
technology. The 3, 5, 6 and 7 Series can be 
factory equipped with the system; these models 
are also available with factory preparation for 
SIRIUS installation by BMW Centers. 

SIRIUS delivers 120 channels of the best in digital entertainment coast-to-coast. 65 of 
these channels are 100% commercial-free music, featuring multiple categories as widely 
varied as hip-hop and classical. 50 further channels are devoted to news, sports and 
entertainment from content partners such as NASCAR, ESPN, Fox News, NPR, CNN 
Headline News and Radio Disney. And as the official Satellite Radio Partner of the NFL, 
SIRIUS leads in live sports on satellite radio, offering the entire NFL every week and up to 
40 live NHL games per week. 

SIRIUS channels are delivered by three powerful satellites for seamless coverage any¬ 
where in the continental U.S., and optimized for superior sound resolution by proprietary 
S>PLEX technology. 

Hardware for the vehicle consists of: 

• a SIRIUS Satellite Receiver 

• a Satellite Antenna 

• a SIRIUS-compatible audio system 

Once the equipment is installed and activated, the customer simply selects the satellite 
radio mode (example: AM/FM/CD/Satellite). As with FM and AM, users will be able to 
scan and set their favorite presets. The audio display can show the channel name, chan¬ 
nel number and (in the case of music channels) artists and music Features and 
Technology. 


SIRIUS& 

SATELLITE RADIO 

THE BEST RADIO ON RADIO 


55 

Features and Technology 


BMW ASSIST 


The BMW Assist system incorporates an integrated 
wireless telephone with advanced digital and analog 
service plus a Global Positioning System (GPS) satel¬ 
lite receiver to determine your vehicle's location. 

Combined, they enable BMW Assist to enhance the 
BMW driving experience. 

With BMW Assist, the customer will feel prepared 
and protected 24 hours a day, 7 days a week in the 
case of situations they may find. 

The features of ASSIST can be broken down into three main categories: 

• Safety Plan (core program) 

• Convenience Services (optional; requires Safety Plan) 

• Options 

Safety Plan 

(Standard on 2007 5, 6, & 7 Series and with option code 639) 

To make a safety service request simply press the “SOS” button. This transmits the 
vehicle location and information. A specialist responds via the hands-free telephone 
system to coordinate the best course of action for your situation and notify emergency 
services. 

The vehicle will attempt to call BMW Assist automatically in the event of a serious 
accident. 

If the vehicle ever gets stolen, the BMW Assist service can help the police locate it. This 
feature may save the customer money on their insurance premium, as well as give peace 
of mind. 

Automatic Collision Notification 

The BMW Assist system transmits the vehicle’s current location and vehicle information 
to the BMW Assist Response Center automatically after an airbag deploys or a severe 
rear impact occurs. A trained response specialist will then attempt to contact the vehicle 
via the hands-free telephone system, and will notify the appropriate emergency services 
of the location and situation, even if response is not returned to the operator/specialist. 



56 

Features and Technology 




Emergency Request (SOS) 

By activating “Emergency” on the control display or pressing the “SOS” button, you 
transmit your location and vehicle information. A BMW Assist response specialist then 
speaks with you to determine the nature of your emergency and to coordinate the 
response to your specific assistance needs. The specialist can direct emergency services 
to your vehicle's location, provide you with emergency directions to the nearest hospital 
or police station, and even notify your emergency contacts about your situation. 

Enhanced Roadside Assistance 

If you experience a flat tire, run out of gas, or need any other roadside help for your vehi¬ 
cle, just press the “Wrench” or “Roadside Assistance” button to transmit your location 
and vehicle information. The BMW Assist Response Center then links you to BMW 
Roadside Assistance for the appropriate dispatch to your location, even if you don't know 
where you are. 

My Info 

Mylnfo allows you to send business listings and _ v 

street addresses with associated phone numbers 
from the comfort of your home or office directly to ^Jl 

your BMW. To use Mylnfo, just search for a busi¬ 
ness or street address at Google Maps™; add a 
personal note, if desired, and click “Send.” The destination will then appear in your BMW 
under the “Mylnfo” menu option and can be exported to your Navigation system (if so 
equipped) for immediate route guidance, while you can call the destination via your 
Bluetooth linked phone. 

Mylnfo is available on 2008 and later X6 produced 4/08 and 
and later BMW models, except the X3 SAV. 

Door Unlock 

This helpful feature allows you to gain access to your BMW 
if you’re ever locked out. Simply call BMW Assist, provide 
your name and password, and a response specialist will 
send a signal to your vehicle to unlock the driver’s door. 

Stolen Vehicle Recovery 

(7 Series from 9/2005; 5/6 & Other Series from 10/04) 

If the BMW is equipped with this capability and is ever stolen, the BMW Assist Response 
Center can be notified by calling toll free (888) 333-6118 immediately after filing the 
police report. 

The center can remotely activate the BMW Assist system to locate the vehicle and help 
the police recover it. 


later, and on all other 2009 




r+.MA - cJ WjiJir-n 

rJ 

1 

C&fVIIIV 

' -C'. K L r u li n o: u ri3 

"T 

Si 

;/ 

_E_ 



57 

Features and Technology 






TeleService 

(5,6, & 7 Series from 2004, 3 Series from 2007) 

The vehicle's service condition (condition based 
service) is transmitted automatically or the cus¬ 
tomer’s request to the preferred BMW center. 

The customer’s service advisor will then call the 
subscriber to set up a convenient appointment. 



V ■ - "i l 1 3P p n 

1. \ Slfrt BITYILLf 

1 

__ 


■ ■ ■ ■ BWWf "Ad 

. 




Customer Relations 

For questions, compliments or concerns, The BMW Customer Relations department can 
be reached by pressing the ASSIST button or selecting customer relations from the 
CD/CID Drive Menu. 


7 Series drivers can also easily contact their preferred BMW center. 


Convenience Plan 

For an addition yearly rate, the BMW ASSIST Safety Plan can be Upgraded to include the 
Convenience Plan. 

A personal concierge is available to assist with business or personal arrangements such 
as making hotel or dinner reservations, buying event tickets, or even finding that perfect 
gift. 

Directions 

Pressing the “SOS” button allows the customer to contact a naviga 
tion specialist for step by step directions to a desired street address 
or point of interest. 

If the vehicle is equipped with the Drive based navigation system, 
the address and number of the location desired can be automatical¬ 
ly downloaded to the vehicle. 

Critical Calling 

This feature allows the customer to place up to 4 operator assisted calls a year (five 
minute maximum allowable time). This feature is excellent in case the customer forgets 
their mobile phone but needs to make an urgent call to a family member or colleague. 

Traffic 

Up to-date traffic reports along the route can be obtained as well as the weather forecast 
locally or at the destination. 

Weather 

The BMW ASSIST operator can also help with the weather forecast of your desired desti¬ 
nation. 



58 

Features and Technology 






Optional Services 

Make hands-free personal calls with the BMW handset or an approved Bluetooth® phone. 


Hands-free Personal Calling 

Using an approved Bluetooth® cellular phone will allow the customer to call hands-free 
without any cords or cables getting in their way. The phone will completely integrate with 
the vehicle’s electrical system. 


Concierge 

This feature takes advantage of BMW Assist Concierge and utilize BMW's expert 
resources for travel arrangements, service referrals, shopping, entertainment, business 
outings and much more. BMW Assist Concierge addresses needs in many areas in life, 
not just those related to the driving experience. 

The concierge service is part of the Convenience Plan and can be used at anytime, from 
anywhere by dialing toll-free (800) 233-8896 or via http://concierge.bmwassist.com. 


■ BMW Search 

BMW Search allows online access to up-to- 
date fuel prices and the latest weather fore¬ 
casts, as well as stock indices from Bloomberg 
and the powerful reach of the Google Maps™ 
database - all delivered to the iDrive display 
right inside your vehicle. 



59 

Features and Technology 










60 

Features and Technology 



