Table of Contents 


Integrated Service Technical Application 

Subject Page 

Introduction .6 

ISTA Operating Modes.8 

HO Workshop Mode .8 

Online .8 

Offline .8 

TeleServices.8 

Data Exchange with Other Systems .10 

ISPA Broker.10 

JET Stream .10 

Distinguishing Different Makes .10 

General Operation of the ISTA Workshop System .11 

Options for text entry (on-screen keyboard) .13 

Quick System Overview.14 

Starting the ISTA Client.14 

Checking the Operations List .15 

Selecting a Vehicle.16 

Selecting a Diagnostic Connection to the Vehicle.17 

Creating an Operation.19 

Creating a New Operation or Selecting an Existing Operation ... .20 

Perform Vehicle Test .21 

Display Fault Memory .22 

Editing a Test Plan .23 

Running a Procedure.24 

Terminating an Operation.25 

ISTA Menu Structure.26 

Start Mask.27 

Displaying New Items .28 

Identification .29 

Vehicle Selection .29 

Operations List .30 

Filtering the operations list.32 

Vehicle Identification Number .34 


Initial Print Date: 04/10 Revision Date: 05/10 


































Subject Page 

Reading Out Vehicle Data .35 

Identification Operation.36 

Reading Out Vehicle Data via the Connection Manager.36 

Basic Features.37 

Incomplete Entry of Basic Features .38 

Operation Information.39 

Operation Details .39 

Vehicle Details.40 

Operations Report .41 

Print operations report or diagnostic report.42 

FBM Reports (FASTA).42 

Vehicle Test.42 

Control Unit Tree.43 

Control Unit Functions.44 

Identification .44 

Diagnostic query.45 

Component activation .46 

Control unit list .47 

Activities .48 

Information Search.48 

Product Structure.48 

Filters.49 

Function Structure.51 

Components and Signals.52 

Text Search .53 

Additional general information on the text search .54 

Assisted Troubleshooting.55 

Fault Memory .55 

Display detail table .57 

Fault Pattern.58 

Selected fault patterns .59 

Service Function.60 

Workshop/operating fluids .61 

Workshop Equipment .61 

Text Search .62 

Measuring Devices.63 

Service Plan .64 

Flit List.64 

Viewing a Document.66 

Text Documents .67 

Wiring Diagrams.68 

Display several documents simultaneously.69 













































Subject Page 

Whole Screen .70 

Zoom Function .71 

Test Plan .72 

Displaying and Editing a Procedure .75 

Message.75 

Substitute value input .76 

Question.77 

Displaying and editing a procedure in BST mode.78 

Symbol Bar.79 

Start Mask .80 

History list .80 

Administration .81 

Client settings.81 

Language settings.82 

Dealer data.83 

Software status.84 

Connection Manager.85 

Operating Mode .87 

Status Display.88 

Printing .89 

Help Functions .90 

Table of Contents.91 

List of Abbreviations.92 

Units Converter.93 

Minimize Workshop System .94 

Close Operation/application .94 

Operations .95 

Creating an Operation.95 

Identification via operations list .95 

Identification via VIN Entry .96 

Vehicle Identification by Reading Out Vehicle Data.96 

Vehicle Identification via Basic Features .97 

Identification in “TeleServices” Operating Mode.98 

Statuses.98 

New.99 

In progress.99 

Copy of an operation or parallel operation.99 

Interrupted.100 

Terminated.100 

Re-open terminated operation .101 

New operation to be created and opened .101 

Simultaneous access to an ISTA operation .101 













































Subject 


Page 

Time-dependent status change .101 

Workshop PC .101 

ISID in offline mode.101 

TeleServices .102 

Terminating an operation .102 

Abbreviations .105 

Glossary.106 

Fault Messages and Fault Rectification.107 











Integrated Service Technical Application (ISTA) 


Model: All 
Production: All 

■BIIBTHBS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the components of the ISTA System BMW 3rd generation Diagnostic 
Equipment. 

• Describe the operation and different functions of the ISTA System. 

• Properly utilize the ISTA System to search for technical information related to 
the repair i.e. wiring diagrams, repair instructions, functional descriptions. 

• Navigate and operate proficiently all aspects of the BMW 3rd generation 
Diagnostic Equipment. 

• Properly diagnose BMW Group Vehicles using the ISTA System. 


5 

ISTA 


Introduction 


ISTA or the ISTA workshop system consists of several functionally oriented system com¬ 
ponents that communicate with each other via LAN, WLAN and Internet. The entire sys¬ 
tem supplies up-to-date diagnostic data and information from BMW headquarters. The 
primary applications of the terminal devices are powerful diagnostics on the vehicle, with 
various options for vehicle identification for highly specific information searches and 
guided troubleshooting. The associated software is a client/server solution known as 
ISTA. The ISTA client software is installed on the Integrated Service Information Display 
(ISID) operator devices and the workshop PC. It communicates with the ISTA server soft¬ 
ware that runs on the Integrated Service Information Server (ISIS). ISID can operate tem¬ 
porarily offline and then be resynchronized later with the server. In a large dealer organi¬ 
zation (HO) workshop, several ISIS may be present. 







u 




n f fr if 

wi '-.U R* 




U 


__ H 7L .M If 


W H 


il! 'I~T I. I I I r ■ 4 l it ■'■■a, L 


CD. 


m- ]« 4 I 

Sol) 

M_ t/ f(r 


-X - “T T TIT 



Note: For more information regarding ISTA, please refer to Dealernet and 

select: Menu>BMW>Aftersales Portal>Service>Workshop Technology 
and access the ISTA User Manual file. You can also type Workshop 
Technology in the search engine and that will prompt you to the correct 
web page. 


6 

ISTA 




















Integrated Service Information Server (ISIS) 

ISIS is the workshop server. In addition to other applications, the server-specific compo¬ 
nent of the ISTA software is installed on ISIS. 

The workshop server is connected with BMW AG via an internet link. BMW AG makes 
the data available via the ISPA Broker and JET stream. 

Integrated Service Information Display (ISID) 

ISID is a mobile tester for workshop use integrated into the workshop network. The 
scope of delivery consists of a control panel, a base station and accessories. An ISTA 
client is installed on the ISID. The device can be operated “online” (in conjunction with 
the ISTA server) or “offline” (temporary interruption of connection with the ISTA server). 

Integrated Measurement Interface Box (IMIB) 

The IMIB is a powerful measuring instrument that is used in the BMW Group dealer orga¬ 
nization. It contains several measuring units that can simulate the performance of an 
oscilloscope or a digital multimeter. The IMIB contains adjustable current and voltage 
sources which can be used as voltage and current supplies. 

You can use the IMIB as a multimeter, even if not connected to ISTA, or execute more 
complex functions with ISTA. You can establish a link between ISID and IMIB via LAN or 
WLAN. 

The IMIB can be operated in two modes in conjunction with ISTA: 

• Interactively as a manually adjusted measuring instrument 

• Embedded in test processes as an automated measuring instrument 

With the manually adjusted measuring instrument you can make manual settings in the 
relevant masks once a connection to the measuring instrument system has been estab¬ 
lished. The results are displayed in the mask. For additional information, see IMIB section. 

With the guided measuring instrument, the measuring instrument system is automatically 
adjusted via program instructions in the test seguence. The results are displayed in spe¬ 
cific masks and evaluated by the program. 

Integrated Communication Optical Module (ICOM) 

ICOM is a communication device and constitutes the diagnostic interface to the vehicle. 

It is connected to the vehicle and can be linked to an ISID via a connection manager. 

Thus ISID can communicate with the vehicle, e.g. for automatic vehicle identification, or 
for executing test programs. 

Integrated Service Access Point (ISAP) 

ISAP is a communication device (Access Point) for linking WLAN-capable devices to the 
workshop network. 


7 

ISTA 



Personal Computer (PC) 

You can also install an ISTA client on a PC or a workshop PC, for example. As these 
devices are fixed, a PC is primarily suitable for information searches. 

Printer 

Approved and standard commercial network printers are used for printing jobs. 

ISTA Operating Modes 

HO Workshop Mode 

In the HO workshop mode, the terminal devices can be operated both “online” (default) 
as well as “offline”. 

Online 

In this operating mode, the client and the workshop server are located in an HO work¬ 
shop and are connected via the local workshop network (LAN, WLAN). An online con¬ 
nection to BMW AG is established. ISTA software can be operated on a mobile ISID 
and/or a stationary workshop PC. 

The online link not only supports the prompt update of ISTA data and software, but also 
provides access to data from other systems at BMW headguarters. Data access usually 
occurs in the background when certain functions are accessed. 

Offline 

In this mode, the client is temporarily separated from the workshop server. For example, 
this is necessary if the ISID is used on a test drive with the vehicle. The changeover from 
online to offline mode and back again is performed by the Workshop Management 
System (WSM). Once the client is online again, the software synchronizes itself automati¬ 
cally with the workshop server. The same thing happens if the server crashes and is avail¬ 
able again at a later point in time. 

TeleServices 

In the “TeleServices” operating mode, communication with the vehicle is performed via 
the mobile phone network (GSM). The vehicle transmits a service call to the central 
TeleServices switchboard (TSSB) either automatically triggered by Condition Based 
Service (CBS) scopes or manually by the driver. In the process additional fault memory 
data and control device information is transmitted in the form of a file. This data is trans¬ 
mitted to the home dealer of the customer via the TSSB and can be read out there with 
ISTA. 

This option is only available if the application for ISPA service advice and order control 
has been installed on ISPA. ISTA is then called up in the “TeleServices” operating mode 
by the service advisor from the ISPA Client. The first mask that is displayed in ISTA after it 
is called up in this mode is the fault memory list of the identified vehicle. 


8 

ISTA 



Only limited ISTA functions are available in the “TeleServices” operating mode. No direct 
link is established with the vehicle at any time. 


TeleServices components 



TeleServices on workshop PC (no current screenshot) 


TtcMol Apple 



MINI Service 

Werkstattsys 



die r^rjeujj-JeftJfHnen . 


After the data has been read out, the “Fault memory” mask is displayed. From here a test 
plan can be accessed. You can now search for information objects. 


9 

ISTA 










































Data Exchange with Other Systems 


ISPA Broker 

Score Broker is an online interface with BMW AG. It enables the calling-up of information 
on technical actions, fault patterns (Customer's own words/Customer's quote, qualified), 
vehicle details, repair history and vehicle rundown. The information is integrated into the 
respective masks and requires an online connection of the ISPA Broker to BMW AG. 

(Not yet in US) 

JET Stream 

JET stream is an online interface to BMW AG. It provides updated software (content and 
system packages) and transmits nonprocedurally defined data to the vehicle description 
module (FBM) at BMW AG. The information is integrated into the respective masks and 
requires an online link to BMW AG. 

Distinguishing Different Makes 

The user interface is standardized for the BMW, MINI and Rolls-Royce brands. The vari¬ 
ous brands - depending on the authorization of the respective business - can be identi¬ 
fied by the different colors of the active objects in the display. A marked object is thus 
highlighted on the screen in the respective brand color. Furthermore, depending on 
authorization level, the brand in the header of the start mask will be displayed as text. 

Colors and logos are listed in the table below: 


Brand 

Logo left 

Logo right 

Color 

BMW Group 
Multi-brand Cealers 

BMW Service 

Workshop System 

MINI Service 
Workshop 

System 

turquois 

e 

BMW 

BMW Service 

Workshop System 


blue 

MINI 

MINI Service 

Workshop System 



Rolls-Royce 

Rolls-Royce Motorcars 

Service Workshop System 


chamois 


10 

ISTA 















General Operation of the ISTA Workshop System 

The graphic displays on the screen are known as “masks”. These contain information 
and control functions that enable the user to operate the ISTA workshop system. 

The masks normally have a standard structure. They are divided into the following 
sections: 

1. Symbol bar 

2. Header 

3. Navigation area 

4. Content range 

5. Comment line 

6. Action line 



1 

2 

3 


4 


5 

6 


11 

STA 


Symbol bar 

The symbol bar is visible in all masks. The functions that can be called via the individual 
symbols are described in the ISTA Menu Structure Chapter. 
























Header 

The vehicle identification number and the basic features of the identified vehicle are dis¬ 
played in the header. The vehicle identification number is only displayed if the vehicle has 
been identified by entering or reading out its vehicle identification number. 

Navigation area 

You can navigate among the individual functions of the workshop system using the: 

0 main menu (first line) 

0 submenu (second line), and 
0 tabs. 

The selected menu items or tabs are marked in the appropriate brand color. 

Content range 

This is where you will find further selection options and information. A white arrow point¬ 
ing up or down identifies the column that is used for sorting a selection list. 

Comment line 

The bottom part of the content range may also contain a comment line in which you will 
receive additional information. 

Action line 

Various buttons are shown here according to the content range. 


12 

ISTA 



Options for text entry (on-screen keyboard) 

In various masks, it may be necessary to enter text or characters. In general, this can be 
done using the PC keyboard. By clicking on the “Keyboard” button you can fade in the 
so-called “on-screen keyboard”. Only keys that are necessary to make valid entries at the 
respective function step are enabled on the on-screen keyboard. Impermissible charac¬ 
ters cannot be selected with the on-screen keyboard. 

A second click on the “Keyboard” button hides the on-screen keyboard. 


Integrated Service 
Technical Application 


VIN VA200D8 

identification 

Vehicle test 

1 Information 

Guided 

1 search 

troubleshooting 

Product 

fun ebon 

structure 

structure 


a! /•] |w <?] 

VaMcIa 3 *90ISAL/320dffA47fT2UUjTIEUR LU2004/11 


Workshop / Meacunnfl 

Oparacnp fluids devices 


Components 
and tlpult 


’iltc- Default 

Keyboard 


Search term: 
axle 


0 Search In the dociatient title 
0 Search in the docianent 
O Search for document number 




9 T 


Start 

search 


On-screen keyboard: Entering search terms 


13 

ISTA 











Quick System Overview 


Starting the ISTA Client 

How to start the ISTA Client: 

0 Double-click the symbol on the Windows desktop (if displayed); or 

0 Open the application in the program file by selecting “Start - All Programs - ISTA - 
ISTA Client”; or 

0 Open the application by selecting the corresponding entry on the central start page 
on the ISID. 

After selection, the start mask appears a list of news will be displayed. You can set the 
display period in Administration. 

If the date has changed since the last time the system was activated, the “ISTA usage 
notes” will be displayed. After reading the note, close the pop up window by clicking the 
“Continue” button. 



You can initiate an identification procedure from the start mask. 
► To initiate an identification procedure for a vehicle: 

0 Select the “Identification” menu 


14 

ISTA 






Checking the Operations List 

Note: In the “Central/online” operating mode (OSS and TeleServices), the 
“Operations list” tab is not available for technical reasons. Proceed 
with next section. 

After you have selected the “Identification” menu from the start mask, the workshop sys¬ 
tem switches to the “Operations list” tab. 

Each identification session generates a “procedure” that is automatically initiated and 
administered by the workshop system for vehicle identification. At the end of the session 
an operation is closed via a pop up. The user can thus choose whether he wants to ter¬ 
minate or interrupt the operation. Depending on the option selected, an operation is con¬ 
cluded via a pop up, assigned a status (“terminated”, “interrupted”) and entered into the 
operations list for a certain period. Saved procedures can be reopened from the opera¬ 
tions list. 

Additional information is available in the “ISTA Menu Structure” section. 


Integrated Service ▲ 

Technical Application 

>] 


□0 

[ip] 


[F 



P?~ 

Itacij 


[X] 


VIN: Vthlel#: 


Vehicle 

selection 


Operation 

information 


VIN 


Read out 
vehicle data 


Basic features 



Basic features 

VIN 

Date/time 

Status 


E46 / 320d / TOUR / M47 

PE46572 

16104/2008 12:13 

Interrupted 


▲ 

E46 / 318i / SAL /M43/TU 

JJS7307 

16/04/2008 12:11 

Interrupted 


■ 

E46 / 310i / SAL / M43JT U 

AY27004 

16/04/2008 12:11 

Interrupted 



E82 / 136is / COUPE f N54 

VE99063 

16/04/2008 1126 

Interrupted 



E90 /3901/ LIM / N62 

PR23000 

16/04/2008 1082 

Interrupted 



E91/3101/ TOUR / N46 

KW69004 

16104/2008 1023 

Interrupted 


■ 

E32 / 750(1/ LIM f M70 

DC71313 

16/04/2008 10.26 

Interrupted 



E32 / 750iL / LIM / M70 

DC71313 

16/04/2008 1026 

Interrupted 



E32 / 750iL / LIM / M70 

DC71313 

16/04/2008 09:37 

Interrupted 



E4€/318Ci/COUPE/N42 

PK62200 

15/04/2008 11:15 

Interrupted 



E82 / 19Sis / COUPE f N64 

VE93063 

15/04/2008 11.09 

Interrupted 



E82 /13Sis / COUPE f N64 

VE99063 

14/04/2008 13 49 

Interrupted 


▼ 

Operations filter Default 





Filter Set 

operations list standard fitter 




Accept 


Operations list 

The selection of an existing procedure is not suitable for the “Short introduction” provided 
here. Therefore change to the “Read out vehicle data” tab. 
















Selecting a Vehicle 

There are four options for initiating vehicle identification: 

0 by selecting an operation 
0 by entering a vehicle identification number 
0 by reading out the vehicle data, or 
0 by selecting basic features. 

The most reliable way to identify a vehicle is by reading out the vehicle data from a con¬ 
nected vehicle. 

► How to identify a vehicle by reading out the vehicle data and automatically creating an 
operation to do this: 

0 Click the “Identification” main menu item in the navigation area. 

0 Select the “Read out vehicle data” tab and follow the instructions provided. 

0 Click the “OK” button. 


Integrated Service 

Technical Application 

A 


0 

;0B 



[if 


[teLr 


? 




x| 


VIN: Vehicle: 




Preparations for reading out vehicle data 

After a short interval, the connection manager appears. 


16 

ISTA 













Selecting a Diagnostic Connection to the Vehicle 

The ISTA communication devices from the HO workshop are entered into the content 
range of the connection manager. 

► How to select the communication device: 

0 Determine which ICOM is connected to the vehicle to be identified. 

0 Select the appropriate components in the connection manager and click the 
“Set up connection” button. 



Connection manager 


17 

ISTA 









After the “Set up connection” button is selected and clicked, the connection will be set 
up. The tester performs a vehicle identification. To do this, it reads out the vehicle identifi¬ 
cation number from the vehicle. The progress of the identification procedure is displayed 
on a progress bar. 


Integrated Service 
Technical Application 

VW: Vehicle: 


Identification 

Vehicle test 

Activities 

Service plan 




Vehicle 

Information 






Operations list 


nUMMi 

Bukfe.lur» 


• Connect vehicle interface 
■ Switch on vehicle Ignition. 


Identification operation Ju 

Read out vehicle Identification number (V1N)... 



Identification procedure 


18 

ISTA 














Creating an Operation 

After the identification procedure, the workshop system tries to uniquely assign the oper¬ 
ation to an existing operation. If this does not succeed, it automatically creates a new 
operation and switches over directly to the “Operation details” mask. 

If operations with the same identification features are already available in the workshop 
system, these will be offered for selection in the “Assignment/generation of operation” 
list. 


Assignment/generation of operation u X 


Basic features 

VIN 

Date/time 

Status | 

E90 / 320d / SAL / M47/T2 

VA20008 

16/04/2008 13:38 

Terminated 

E90 / 320d / SAL / M47/T2 

VA20008 

15/04/2008 15:33 

Terminated 

E90 / 320d / SAL / M47/T2 

VA20008 

18/04/2008 16:18 

Terminated 


Cancel 


New 

operation 


OK 


19 

ISTA 





Creating a New Operation or Selecting an Existing Operation 

► How to assign an operation: 

0 Select an existing operation or click the “New operation” button. 

0 Click the “OK” button. 

If no unigue assignment is produced (e.g.: the other operation is open or several suitable 
operations are available), a corresponding pop up is displayed. 

Additional information is available in “ISTA Menu Structure Chapter” under Operation 
details (without an online connection to BMW AG). 


Integrated Service 

Technical Application 

1 8 i_j ? | 


jLxij 



Vehicle 3‘lE90«AU320dWyU7/T2iAUTlEUR LU2004/11 


Operation 

Information 



Operation details for “Technical actions” and “Customer complaints” reguire an online 
connection to BMW AG. 

You can specifically search for various types of information via the “Search for informa¬ 
tion” button. 

You can start the vehicle test by clicking on the “ 


20 

ISTA 


Perform vehicle test” button. 









Perform Vehicle Test 

The vehicle test runs automatically the first time for each operation. During the vehicle 
test, the “Control unit tree” submenu is displayed by default. Alternatively you can switch 
to the corresponding list of control devices by selecting the ’’Control unit list” entry from 
the submenu. 

The control unit tree displays the maximum number of control units installed in a vehicle, 
and their assignments in the respective bus system, in the form of a chart. At the begin¬ 
ning of the vehicle test, the rectangular symbols are not colored. Non-installed control 
units in the identified vehicle are shown in gray in the display. Currently processed (or 
selected) control units are displayed in the color of the mask. 

While the vehicle test is being performed, you can follow its progress on the screen as 
the displayed symbols are updated in real-time. 

From this mask, you can if required restart the vehicle test or also call up control unit func¬ 
tions so that you can read out measurements or activate actuating elements. 

Before you can access a test plan you must first display the fault memory. 

► How to view the fault memory: 

0 Wait until the vehicle test is completed. 

0 Click the “Display fault memory” button. 



I-CW 




rr-c4N 


fault memory: Available 

• ECU fipcndrc 

• ECU lot mszmdnj 

ECJ nutfrteil 

Stan Cali up 

vehicle test ECU functions 



Display 
fault memory 


21 

ISTA 


Control unit tree at the beginning of the vehicle test 



















Display Fault Memory 

After the vehicle test, go to the “Fault memory” mask. The read-out fault codes and the 
associated description will be listed. From this mask you can calculate a test plan. 

► How to calculate a test plan: 

0 Click the “Test plan” button. 


Integrated Service 

Technical Application 

A 


DO 

1 1 



e oil 

? 

M 

|x 


V<N VA20008 Vehicle 3 <«Oi>SAiJ320d/Mi7;T2iAUT<tUR LU2004A11 


Vehicle test Activities 


information 

Guided 

Service 

Workshop / 

Measuring 

search 

troubleshooting 


Operating fluids 

devices 


Fault pattern 



Fault pattern 


Mo. of fault memories A N. of fault memories 0 


DU 

play 

Start quick 


Calculate 

data 

table 

delete 


test plan 


Service plan 


Identification 


Display fault memory 

You run the “Start quick delete” function when the guided troubleshooting is completed. 
You can find details about this function in Fault Memory section. 


22 

ISTA 













Editing a Test Plan 

The test plan lists the suspected components and functions. 

The individual suspected components and functions are presented in white lettering 
against a dark background. Underneath them the appropriate documents and procedures 
are listed in black lettering against a light background (indicated in the “Type” column 
with “ABL”). 

Procedures localize a fault and provide advice on rectifying it. 

► How to start a procedure: 

0 Select the reguired procedure from the test plan. 

0 Click the “Display” button. 


Integrated Service 
Technical Application 


A 

J- 

□d| 

EH ill 

1® 1 

? 


x| 


Vehicle 3'ft90/SAU320d^M47/T2/AUTiEUR LU20Q4111 


Identification 

Vehicle teat 

Activities 

Service plan 



1 Note Typi 

Title 

Status 

Priority a 





ABL 

BSS12.S0100 M ASK Versorgung 

0 

4 





ABL 

B6S12_60100-M-ASK Veraorgung 

O 

5 





ABL 

B6690_ttX)0a-Navlgatientsyttem Japan 

o 

6 





ABL 

B4612 _60104 • N a v i g atx> n s system 

0 

7 

ABL 

B8612.50006 CCC Navlgetlonsfunhtlen 

o 

7 

ABL 

B6S12_«0100MASK Versorgung 

0 

8 





ABL 

B6590_10000-Navigat>cnssystem Japan 

o 

9 

I Ms: 11 Fitter: Default O NrtraiM e Pertorrrec a Mnrnsrd ♦ Carr: 

Back 

Show! Hid. Oii'l»|r.n*ri 


Display 


Test plan 


23 

ISTA 

















Running a Procedure 

A procedure (service program) is primarily designed to identify the cause of a fault. 
Further-more, service functions can be performed via procedures. Information can be dis¬ 
played within a procedure, as well as measurements read out or entered. Furthermore, 
gueries can be made available via selection screens. 

After a procedure has been carried out, additional information will be added to the test 
plan, if this turns out to be necessary for further fault search or fault rectification. In the 
test plan, you can select and start another procedure. 

The following mask gives an example of a guestion with the options “Yes” and “No”. 


Integrated Service jl . Z"j 

Technical Application 

[W : Z] [E S [?] M [* 

VIN VA2OO08 Vehicle J'/ESWSAUJWdlMdT/TflAUTJEUR LL0004J11 

B6£90_10000-Navigatlcnssyttem Japan 

a i* 


Funktions- 

bdIChftiUllfl 


Oata transfer to following control unit faulty: 
Navigation system Japan 

Chock: 

• Fust for Navigation system Japan 

• Power supply for Navigation system Japan 

ts the fuse OK? 

is the voltage supply OK? 

1 Y«» 

2 Nil 


Function 

The . jpjfiKc -®-:ic»- o' Tfis navigation system is .-.w fo- ic».tc ;<arnna rctrs Irfiimseo 
uf :untf-ii'. alt; and fit mart ,mnj thfc rou*.» 

OPS Navi^atmn Oi hu Potitnnn; Ih* Gd*S n*v»g*tMin ey*t(rr> patfnrto hi 

trantmtr-d Py siteltes Tt* sgrvil: ate received 6y the GPS jo'wI ;n trie vehicle, piece 
to the n*>iaatun :orrcir.tr as arfcud: and i:natu:o oata Tne navigation co-pjtcr uic: 
Ca-uA oi«f Xi(t' or tha CPS 'd«i 9 *U:n oyttam u arty fotsfcls «*t«»n vata a in mb’CAa 

hi: nI t>n>l l«n lil*. xtNir«x h inlKijiii.nd i r nil >, luimx •*. i , J , !i'.ni)!ir «iil 

Navigation computer with GPS receiver, hard drive and gyro censor: The -•ap 
dit-e of ro rus-gsoo’ crmp-tc* Th: nautaaiwn lomptfcrccifbnK the vtclile po:h>on < 
oara The luire't po-ahon is ;h:**ri in Tf» o'-board rwntot n ths 30 :r 20 r^ap 
l k M anv -1 t:«wi n‘Imi m :n*ini«li n III* mr»iaiHiii linin' »i Rtfcddoii « mif- rnim ti. 
on eetectjbie r-te'tj |va mihnwey. *«j mitrrwy. etc ) The cacu^ed *wte t shown n 
VV-ic th: vehicle i: tic no dit.ea tre -■X'.igjdni c impute- s.ti Ihc OSC 0FAV1. 5Jg*oi ta 
hem OSC and rf unur .on in a massage via MuS”; 

All vijihl Vttll iTy rrn'.r, kfttwfi <k "« "«jr-in WltilU*, rfutriu lti» DiM^IUn iincll’-f «l 

{e g -*he* tumnj uft er: i t-ij gyre c«nc:r ic hited in fe raeng of th? naviprtcn lon^i 

Brief description of components 
GPS aerial 


fht* Di*j s*nrf ih:hvhi lh« mjniliicf' 
ntte; in the •rcf-miunted aertil 


iltcxUnlr- I h* -lyuix »n» |hx*j*i| " lh* 


Measuring 

devices 


Keyboard 


Example of procedure and “Question” (no current screenshot) 

After the test plan has been completed, you should execute the “Quick delete” function. 


24 

ISTA 














Terminating an Operation 

You can terminate an operation either by: 

0 Clicking the “X” symbol 
0 Identification of a new vehicle, or 

0 Calling up the start mask via the symbol with the same name. 


In any case a dialogue will be displayed, showing options on how to terminate 
the operation. 


Integrated Service 
T echnk el Appficctfcn 


□ 


£’ 


Vir VA20006 


Veh»c ie: 3/E90«/UJ320dYM47/T2JAUTfEUR LU2004H1 




“Close operation” dialogue 

► How to terminate the operation: 

0 Click on the “Start mask” symbol. 

0 For example, select the “Terminate operation” option. 

The procedure will now be included in the operations list. 
You can if reguired reopen it there. 


25 

ISTA 


















ISTA Menu Structure 


For a quick overview and a rapid introduction to ISTA, you will find a brief description 
of the guided diagnosis in the Introduction Chapter of this training information. 

The following chapter provides more comprehensive overview of the ISTA workshop 
system's menu structure. This chapter describes the menus, masks, and buttons in 
detail. 

This section will walk through step by step the operation and different features and 
functions of the system. 



26 

ISTA 






Start Mask 


When you access the ISTA workshop system, initially the start mask appears. Once a day 
a window appears when the system is booted up displaying the “ISTA usage notes”. 

After reading the note, close the pop up window by clicking the “Continue” button. 


Service 

TrchncafAppIcrion 


A 


FI 


•» ? IS] Ixl 


Nrws 


BMW Service 


MINI Service 

Workshop Sv 


IS I A U 4 M 9 I nilKX 


fcii ixl 



I Hmmirim in IMk app « prmlM In nitfiitrl Ihn pml. HimtUlim nl 

Hnjnml', (nsnlwsmi mil rn(ntr rnrk rhinlwri pMiirh nl tM I MW 

Kmup 



UV'MMtlU 


prr'PQillsIfrs lor the prcptr perftrmance rf rr** s'Tffmivdnrnd work It 4 r-mpriM 
rankg a: a c-jr meiharlc k wHI k reg.lar k-scrvke traMng. 

Air t special tools must be .sm Mk'oi r. txteptton 

ipi'.i Jist wurk whenever ihey arc memowd in the intwnull;*. 

>11 ivliLks n<h hull i ;iluu LMiiipjiutilx, U<i unuipu'ilru kifuli iiikliULliinii 
"iisf ti: ujin^htl ntt in *t cmiik buftew •Ixtlmi Mirk Wul uii h i hull villup: 
cimoiiiMiilk lx miihi.II/ |iiiil«li«Kil HkIivn mvi«i upintfiiin umit#lt«| n tup »ul m|ii 
iiituiira*ii1 lie |ii*wi xuppt/ In ll*r Iii|IhviIImih icy x lien nnid he <»l 1ml ntt will *ri: jril 
n]xn>) iinailli'rtnn rwrtvjtinn 

• »/r 1 mp»n ipch-nkigf Repair .ini maintMa'v*n v**irk on me t tfrimg*n f (LUB) *:hiiiM n?t he 
cerTormefl urrl tf»? tpecllc cutwmrr contact prrton f v ttw tpccllc -«ehck has bwn 
consulted (sm Cp. Manual;. lmor:pc< hand. may le-ad to ctroeq. damapefasto:. safety 
risks. 


CwdltuK 


I ilKplir/ 


ISTA usage notes pop up 



27 

ISTA 


ISTA Home page 

















In the start mask you can: 

0 read new items. 

0 access standard functions via the symbol bar. 

0 access “Identification” main menu and initiate an operation. 

0 access the main menu “Activities” and search for vehicle-specific information. 

When working on a vehicle and going through the main menu using the menu items 
“Identification”, “Vehicle test”, “Activities” and “Service plan”, you normally work from left 
to right. 

Displaying New Items 

The content range of the start mask contains a multicolumn listing of news from BMW 
headguarters. 

The columns have the following meanings: 

0 News: shows the titles of all available news items. 

0 Date: shows the date on which the news item was last edited. When the start mask 
is opened, the news items are sorted by date, with the most recent entry at the top. 
You can delete older news items to make the list shorter. 

► How to change the sorting seguence: 

0 Click the column header with an arrow symbol in the start mask. 

► How to change the order using another column: 

0 Click another column header. The arrow symbol jumps to the corresponding column. 
The new order is retained until you guit the start mask. 

► How to access a news item: 

0 Click a news item. The selection bar jumps to the corresponding line. 

The “Display” button is activated. 

0 Click the “Display” button. The selected news item is displayed. 

0 Click the “Close” button, to return to the start mask. 


28 

ISTA 



Identification 

A vehicle can be identified with any of four approaches. During identification, to assure 
unique assignment of the diagnostic session, a new procedure will be created or an exist¬ 
ing one used. 

You can obtain detailed information on administering procedures in the “Background 
information on the procedure” section. 

Vehicle Selection 

Before you can work with a particular vehicle, you must initiate an operation. The first step 
is to select the vehicle 

► How to start the vehicle selection: 

0 Click the “Identification” main menu item in the navigation area. If you do this from 
the start mask and have previously created operations in the workshop, then the 
“Operation details” tab is automatically selected. If you have selected the 
“Identification - vehicle selection” menu from an open operation, the workshop sys¬ 
tem changes over to the “Operation details” tab and displays the “Close operation” 
query. 


Integrated Soraloo 

n 

4 jQ "qT] 

Technical Application 

Id 

If - kJ 


V1N VA200G8 


ld»nlifitjtion I Vahid 


test 


.» c 37ES<USAl.f32QdlV447IT2MJTJEUR LL/2D04H1 





Status | Abbr 

Control mod-rurt* 

• AL 

Close ope» Jtion , X 

- I__J 


▲ 



■ 

A>1M 




• AMP 

0 I errrmaee ©peramen 

Q Interrupt operation 



• CCC-ANT 



• CCC-ASK 


| 

• SM8F 

Bogota vehicle handed over to eustetier on# faults 



• CAS 

»MI p*»«ent n vehicle nu« pe deleted wish the 

'unction “Cult* delete*. 



• CCC-A 




• CDC 




• CIO 

Cancel OK 



• DAB 

uignai tunoi 



• DSC 

Dvranlt StaJillfc# Control MK60 


• DMA 

amt theft alirn system 

▼ 

FauKmofior# Available 

• ECU rrjccncra 

=CU nst t:p:na*fl • fcCUrotfttid 



D*vpUv 


--' i 


29 

ISTA 


“Close operation” dialogue 

0 Decide whether the ongoing operation should be terminated or interrupted. 















Operations List 

In general, the vehicle identification /operation administration tries to uniquely assign an 
existing procedure or independently generates a new one. If no unique assignment is 
produced (e.g.: the other operation is open or several matching operations are available) 
the “Assignment/New” pop up or even the “Decision Operation/ VIN” pop up is displayed. 

Note: In the “Central/online” operating mode (TeleServices and OSS), the 
“Operations list” tab is not provided because there is only ever one 
operation there. 

The operations list is automatically brought to the front when you select the 
“Identification” menu from the start mask. The prerequisite is that procedures are already 
available in the “New”, “Interrupted” or “In progress” statuses. Terminated operations do 
not become visible until the adjustable filter has been set accordingly. 


Kegrjtcd ServUt 
Tachncd Application 


A 


* no ^ S' X 


Vthtalr 


IdtrlTcit 

or 

VbHkIb tatt 

1 VahlcJa 

mrornatlan 



k VK 

Raadout 

vaWcia data 

Basic faaiuraa 




— 

1 Bu<e faaturaa 

W4 



Stilus 


£46 1320d ) TOUR / M47 

PE46C72 


16AM/2OO0 12:13 

Imamiptad 


▲ 

E46 13181 / SAL (IMVTU 

SJB7W7 


16.04/2008 12:11 

Imamiptad 


| 

C« 13101 / SAL f MWTU 

AY27004 


1MM/2COI12:11 

Imamiptad 



rw i non t coiipp r nu 

•T90C63 


1MM/700I11:29 

imamiptad 



en i 330i / lim / m»7 

PWXOG 


1MM/3C0I 10:» 

Imarnjpraa 



6*11313. / TOUR ( N46 

KWROUJ4 


16.04/3008 10:33 

Intamjptad 


■ 

E32 l 75fliL ! LIM i KT70 

OC71313 


16.04.%03 10.29 

Imamiptad 



E32 17B0IL / UM fM70 

OCT 1313 


16.04% 03 10.26 

Imamiptad 



£32 1 790IL / LIM f M7D 

OCT 1313 


16.0442003 09.37 

Imor'upwd 



zm i3i9Ci t coure / N42 

PK6Z2D0 


15.04/2001 11:19 

Imamiptad 



cm i i»n r coupr r wi 

VTWX3 


ISA)4/2004 1100 

Intamiptad 



tta i issii i couptrr MJ4 



14.04/2001 13:49 

Intamiptad 


▼ 

nparitian* Mt»r Da^sutt 






FIC« 

coa-attort liat inndinJlr* 





Adapt 


“Operations list” tab 

The operations list shows a table of all previously completed operations depending on 
the filter settings and the time elapsed. 


30 

ISTA 













The table columns have the following meanings: 

0 Basic features: shows the basic features that are saved with the operation. 

0 Vehicle identification number: shows the vehicle identification number read out of 
the vehicle. Reading out the vehicle identification number is part of the vehicle iden¬ 
tification procedure. It can also be automatically determined at a later stage with the 
identification via Basic features with a vehicle test. 

0 Date/Time: shows the date and time at which the operation was first saved. 

0 Status: shows the status of the operation. A distinction is made among the follow¬ 
ing statuses: - New operations (new) - Interrupted operations (interrupted) - 
Ongoing operations (in progress) - Terminated operations (terminated). 

The table is sorted by default according to the “Status” column. 

Note: You can obtain background information on the “Operation” section of 
this training material. 


31 

ISTA 



Filtering the operations list 

In the “Enter filter criteria” field, you can enter a basic feature, a VIN or a date. To do this 
use the on-screen keyboard. If you wish to enter several filter criteria, separate them from 
each other using space characters and/or check one or more selection fields in the 
“Status” area. 

Confirm the input with the “OK” button. The “Filtering operations list” window closes and 
the workshop system returns to the operations list. The “Cancel” button closes the win¬ 
dow without changing the settings. 


Integratee Service 

Technical Application 


-° B- o 



Vehicle; 



tikenng operation* in 



'*1 71 x 


tr*er (titer eritere - 


Sucuii: 

0 New 

n InprOfltetS 
® Interrupted 
_| T«rninatid 


EDCDOIDODIDQOODC 



iJ 

r f id m: 

ItJUUUU ■ 



i r nm :i 

nrinriF. 

1 1 



00 

s 

Cancel 


- 1 


“Filtering operations list” window 


► How to display “terminated” operations in the operations list: 

0 Click the “Filter operations list” button. The “Filtering operations list” window opens. 
0 Mark the “Terminated” option and click “OK”. 


32 

ISTA 




















The following buttons are available in the action line: 

0 Set standard filter: This button resets the filter to the default settings; no filter crite¬ 
ria, and only operations with “New”, “In progress”, and “Interrupted” status are dis¬ 
played in the corresponding sequence. 

0 Accept: Opens the selected operation. If you have selected an operation that has 
been terminated, a dialogue appears in which you can decide if this operation should 
be reopened or if a new operation should be created and opened. 


Tachnieal Application 


Mo**e)Tica!ion 

VaWcJataat 


Sarnca plan 




:_i 





E92 I7KIL IUMJM7G 
E32 170WL I UM l M7Q 
E32 f 75CIL IUM I hITQ 
E46 ITOCIJ COLPE I M2 
EB2 1138s / COUPE 1 NG4 
E82M38*/COUPE JfiM 
EM I32C* I SALJ M477T2 


E« 1320* I SAi. IWA7IT2 


E»I32WI SALJ W47IT2 

EM 132MI LM I UM7/T2 
EK 1 32C-S I SAi .) M47IT2 
EM r32M f LM IMM7/T3 

Op«r«tcr. r . Uaor dafinad 


n/ craala operation 

0 Roopon oalttd op*f Jflon. 

O Nrw operation to created a 


iS»\ X 


VA2SCO0 

VA230M 

VA2SO06 


1M40008 1*37 
IB.OL’KOS 1509 
1M4O0QS 17 » 


metrrupttd 

KamipMd 

kncomjpMd 

MomjpMd 

Warruptad 

tocorruptad 

Tarnlnxod 

Tarnlnxod 

Tarnlnxod 

Tarriinxod 

Tarninxod 


B 


“Open/create operation” menu 


33 

ISTA 






















Vehicle Identification Number 

If you select the “Identification” menu from the start mask, the “VIN” (Vehicle identifica¬ 
tion number) tab will be automatically selected. Only the last seven characters are 
required when entering the vehicle identification number. You can use the on-screen 
keyboard for making entries. 


5»r»io» 

TiCncil Appicaban 


IftJ 





“Vehicle identification number (VIN)” tab 


Confirm the input by clicking the “Accept” button. 

After the vehicle identification number has been entered the ISTA workshop system 
checks whether an operation with this number already exists. If a corresponding operation 
exists, you can select it and thus continue or create a new operation. If no suitable opera¬ 
tion exists, a new operation will be generated automatically. The associated basic features 
and other identification data will then be read out of the server database. The workshop 
system changes over to the “Operation details” mask. 


34 

ISTA 



















Reading Out Vehicle Data 

The VIN can be directly read out from the vehicle by using “Read out vehicle data”. 
First, the prerequisites are displayed. 


Integrated Sar«-«ca 
Techrical Appfoafttn. 


?i m x 


Identification 

Vphfelttpu 

Acilvidtt 

Sorvwo plan 

Vahicla 

selection 





Opatationt li*t VIS 


• Connpsr vfhltte Interne*. 

• Switch on vthldo IgMctev 


Prerequisites forvehicle identification 

► How to read out vehicle data: 


Bite faatu'ea 


0 Click the “Read out vehicle data” tab. 

0 Connect a vehicle interface (ICOM) to the vehicle. 

0 Switch on the ignition. 

0 Click the “OK” button. The request begins with checking the existing connection 
and continues with the vehicle identification via the VIN readout. During this time, 
progress bar will be displayed on the mask. 








Identification Operation 


toctpraftfrd Servlet 
TicMcil AseJicjtion 


doudflc adon 

vthiiit rast 

Asdvhlts 

Strvlco plan 




Vttliltl* 

Oparjden 





Op^oniNT 


Readout 

BntafMam 

I • Connect v»hxl» interface 



• Smite* on veh«le IgnRIan 


flenfltu ttlon odorjoor 

Road «u vthldt kPtrcfkadon number (VIN).. 



After reading out the VIN the workshop system checks whether an operation with the 
same VIN is already on the operations list. If this is the case, the operations list will be dis¬ 
played to select an existing operation. Otherwise a new operation will automatically be 
created. 

An exceptional case may occur if you have previously selected an existing operation from 
the operations list and then read out the vehicle data. If the VINs do not match now, the 
“Decision operation/VIN” pop up will appear. 

Reading Out Vehicle Data via the Connection Manager 

Another option for starting the automatic read out of vehicle data is via the “Connection 
manager” mask. You can call it up at anytime via the symbol bar. (See “Connection 
Manager” section.) 


36 

ISTA 










Basic Features 


If the vehicle identification number is unknown, you can alternatively use the “Basic fea¬ 
tures” tab. 


Integrated Stri de 

Technical Application 

M 


1™ ® 

E 

@ IT) 

m 

El 


V 1 N: Vehicle 



Operations Hit 


Read ouc 
vetMie data 


Bottc feature* 

Model «or<h 

M^del «ene* 

11 

E designation 


Bedy 


Sale* cengnton 


Engine 


NaoenaJ-euraec refiior 


Lenhing 


Qiirtoi 


Model year 


Model worrit 





Selected h.i«feature* 


Model 

8’ 

E designation 

so dr 

TOUR 

Sale* fluignirsn 

82M 

En gine 

HIT 

Nic*nV aiartet vertle-n. 
EUR 

lenkung: 

LL 

Oiarboi 

MeCH 

Vodol year 

2007 

Model worrit: 

11 



Undo 


Accept 


“Basic features” tab 

► How to identify a vehicle via its basic features: 

0 Click the “Identification” main menu. The “VIN” tab will be selected. 

0 Click on the “Basic features” tab. 

0 If required, choose another basic feature from the left-hand “Basic features” selec¬ 
tion list. 

0 Define the contents for the basic feature by selecting an entry from the central list. 

0 If necessary, repeat the entry with other basic features (the predefined sequence 
does not have to be observed) or click the “Accept” button. 

After the individual basic features, the workshop system only offers items that are com¬ 
patible with the previously selected ones. This excludes contradictory entries. 

There is no need to enter all available basic features. However, you must define at least 
one. The more completely you specify the basic features, the more precisely the work¬ 
shop system can select the matching documents. 

Note: Without specification of E-designation and in some cases the model year 
and month, vehicle-specific searches for the function structure, compo¬ 
nent structure, or service function structure cannot be performed! 

37 

ISTA 



























Note: It is not possible to manually select the features for security vehicles. 
Security vehicles can only be identified via the VIN. 

After entering the basic features a check is performed to see whether an operation with 
the specified features is already present in the operations list and a selection is offered. If 
the selected basic feature combination is unknown, a new operation is automatically cre¬ 
ated. 


Incomplete Entry of Basic Features 

If you click the “Accept” button without having defined all “Basic features”, a pop up win¬ 
dow appears containing a system message. Acknowledge the message with “Continue” 
to end the vehicle selection procedure or return to selection of the basic features with 
“Cancel”. 


System message 



The basic features have not been completely selected. 

Information displayed below will not relate to specific 
vehicle. 


Cancel 


Continue 


“System message incomplete entry of basic features” pop up window 

On completion of vehicle identification, the display switches over to the “Operation 
details” menu. 


38 

ISTA 





Operation Information 

“Operation information” is automatically accessed after the vehicle identification is com¬ 
pleted. This is where information on the current operation and the identified vehicle is 
displayed. 

Operation Details 

If you have completed vehicle selection or if you access the “Identification” menu from an 
ongoing operation, the workshop system automatically displays the “Operation details” 
tab. 

This is where you can view general information to identify the vehicle, for example: 

0 Basic features of vehicle 

0 Technical actions on the identified vehicle with status “open”, special defect code 
and name (title) 

0 Customer statement (customer complaints). 

In the header, you will see the vehicle identification number (“VIN”) and the determined 
basic features of the vehicle. If you select a vehicle via “Basic features”, the basic features 
that you entered appear in the header. 

Prerequisites: 

0 Vehicle identification. 

0 Before the “Technical actions” can be displayed, the vehicle identification number 
must be known and an online connection must be established to BMW headquar¬ 
ters. 



39 

ISTA 


“Operation information” menu, “Operation details” tab 









The following buttons are available in the action line: 

0 Perform vehicle test: For manual vehicle identification, this button starts the vehicle 
test. With automatic vehicle identification, the vehicle test proceeds in the back¬ 
ground and the button only switches over to the control unit tree. 

Note: For the E21 - E31 Series, the BST mode is called up! 

(for more information see BST mode). 

0 Information search 

Vehicle Details 

You can obtain more detailed information on the selected vehicle by clicking the “Vehicle 
details" tab, such as series eguipment and special eguipment. This information will be 
retrieved from a central database and indicates the vehicle status in each case on delivery 
from the factory. Retrofitted eguipment or installations are not taken into account. Not all 
information is available for vehicles made before 1992. Therefore valid values cannot be 
displayed in all fields. Such fields are displayed without a value. 

Prerequisites: 

0 Vehicle identification via “VIN”. 

0 Online connection to BMW AG (via ISPA Broker). 


V*vw> |0rtMtr«| Ap# t«r.4lk<' 


LaJ * * ;U Ejs} x 

Vthui* X R»**C9» a GErZGiXS ljMM*fTUMKN0Uft ILflOUflO 



S^fvln 

T •chmsat 

VP. LC313T3 


“Operation information” submenu, “Vehicle details” tab (no current screenshot) 

Note: The standard series equipment and special equipment listed in the 

“Vehicle details” mask corresponds to the state of the vehicle as it left 
the factory and may diverge from the present state of the vehicle! 


40 

ISTA 














Operations Report 

By clicking the “Operations report” tab you will receive a report on the ongoing operation 
with the dealer data and the data on the respective vehicle. The report is constantly 
updated during the execution of the operation. 


Integrated Serv*oe 

'»:hni:i ApplctL-an 

virr *c j nmi 


s g g 8 u 

a?o«iiva34MtCtt*:uR 11 arasior 


VtWok 

lalttban 


Operidon 

infomuban 


Operation 

details 


IOr,||>T 

Stksra AiC Sp.io.o. 

UlPS2<7#ftl(U 103 
43-190 Mildew 

V#rr»t#«b»p*Trr^fnunrr-r 33000 
B(!) abk’unnr 3 XK 

ISTA Verging 

Vorgengkldentf'lcr**" 

ISPAOuidt 

vorfjngsbeglrt' MC432C03 flMM* 


ra^fTev f I denti cy* er rinaib e titiuMWlKmntr 

F il'fwofld Min 
F 2 t*rgest«llmjiin«r 
Mirk#' 


A 01 «S 4 

M 4 WPKW 

3‘ 


Meter 

Lankung. 

Biujarr: 

1-ML.r# HO: 
Qefcitrtwegttrecke. 


Typicfttttiol: 

V#rkaufib«z»«hnur»g 

ArUriae 

Hubraurr 

Cv.riab# 

I-Siufa W»rl 


Syiterr-et^'n 1 2 203 
Oat aril Li rid 2.010.0 


VF71 Lirderiuv'livung: 

320«i 

HECK Kuei**-*lefor«. 

20 

MECH 

KA7 


EUR 

WO 

SAL 


“Operation information” submenu, “Operations report” tab 

The screen display for the operations reports differs from the printed report because of its 
colored displays. The following information blocks are contained in the operations report: 

0 Dealer data 

0 Vehicle data 

0 Customer complaints (customer's own words, customer's guote, gualified) 

0 Start of operation (date, time) 

0 First vehicle test 

0 Fault memory data from the first vehicle test 

0 Test plan diagnosis start (first test plan) 

0 Test plan diagnosis end (last test plan) 

0 Information object selected (title, document type, identifier) 

0 Process object selected (title, start, end time stamp, identifier) plus process steps 
(inputs/outputs, ECU functions, measuring instruments actions) 

0 Vehicle test diagnosis end (last vehicle test) 

0 Fault memory data (last vehicle test) 

41 

ISTA 









Print operations report or diagnostic report 

► How to print out an operations report: 

0 Click on the “Print” icon. 

0 Select the “Document” option. 

0 Click on the “OK” button. 

FBM Reports (FASTA) 

FBM reports are always automatically produced in the background when an operation is 
terminated or interrupted (exception: OSS) and forwarded to BMW AG. In offline mode, 
the FBM reports are not created until the system is synchronized with the server. 

Vehicle Test 

The vehicle test determines the control units installed in the vehicle and their variants, as 
well as their special equipment. Furthermore the vehicle test reads the diagnostic and 
service-related data from the control units and generates test plans, which become part 
of the service procedure. In the first vehicle test within an operation, vehicle-specific 
FASTA data are determined and logged. 

Prerequisites for the vehicle test: 

0 Vehicle identification 

With manual vehicle identification the primary vehicle test starts by clicking on the 
“Perform vehicle test” button in the “Operation details” mask. With automatic vehicle 
identification, the vehicle test runs in the background of the “Operation details” mask. By 
clicking the “Perform vehicle test” button, the workshop system switches to the “Control 
unit tree” mask and runs the vehicle test in the foreground. 

If required, for example after repair or modification work, you can restart the vehicle test 
manually. 

Note: For the E21 - E31 Series, there is no vehicle test available. Clicking the 
“Perform vehicle test” button in the “Operation details” mask takes you 
to BST mode. Furthermore, the “Vehicle test” and “Activities - Guided 
troubleshooting” menus are inactive. 

Note: The “Operation information” submenu, “Repair history” tab function at 
present is only available in Germany! 


42 

ISTA 



Control Unit Tree 

The “Control unit tree” mask shows the configuration of the control units. While the vehi¬ 
cle test is running, the symbol of the directly accessed control unitwill be displayed in the 
color of the mask. The vehicle test identifies the installed control devices and reads out 
the fault memory and the control device characteristics. 

At the end of the vehicle test, the symbols in the control unit tree indicate the test result 
by means of the following colors: 

0 Green: control unit is responding 

0 Yellow: control unit is not responding 

0 Gray: control unit is not installed. 



Control unit tree (after vehicle test) 

► How to repeat the vehicle test: 

0 Click the “Start vehicle test” button. In the “Control unit tree” mask, the control unit 
symbols are updated again according to the vehicle test just completed. 

► Thus the vehicle test starts automatically behind the “Operation details” mask: 

0 Select “Identification” -> “Vehicle selection” -> “Read out vehicle data” in the navi¬ 
gation area to perform an automatic vehicle identification. 

0 Continue as described with the “Read out vehicle data” tab. 


43 

ISTA 




















The buttons in the action line do not become active until after the vehicle test, and have 
the following functions: 

0 Start vehicle test: repeats the vehicle test. 

0 Call up ECU functions: switches to the “Control unit functions” mask. 

0 Display fault memory: switches to the “Fault memory list” mask. 

Control Unit Functions 

The control unit functions become accessible if at least one vehicle test has been com¬ 
pleted for the ongoing operation. 

► Flow to call up the control unit functions for a control device: 

0 Click on a control device in the control unit tree; or 
0 Select a control unit from the control unit list. 

0 Click the “Call up ECU functions” button in the action line. The following control unit 
functions can be displayed in three different tabs: - Identification - Diagnostic guery - 
Component activation 

0 Return to the original mask by clicking the “Close” button. 


Identification 

The control unit function “Identification” is selected by clicking the “Call up ECU func¬ 
tions” button. 


“Identification” tab 


lnt«ar«t*< Sorvko 
Technical Applkartoo 


Control unit function* - TRM 


[SI in >: [*?; > l 7 tti 

V«liitl«. yiE9Cl5AL/32D4M47IT2.WU'nEwR LU2004.M1 


? 53 



44 

ISTA 
















The “Identification” tab contains the following data: 

0 ECU Name: name of the control unit version. 

0 ECU Status: communication status (“ECU responding”, “ECU not responding”). 

0 ECU Information: this is where the ECU readout specifications are listed. 

The buttons in the action line have the following meanings: 

0 ECU Test: reads the ECU data out again. A progress display keeps you up-to-date 
with progress. 

0 Close: closes the display of the control unit functions and returns to the original 
mask. 

Diagnostic query 

Access the diagnostic guery by clicking on the “Diagnostic guery” tab. 

The content range is divided into two sections; The “Control unit functions” table lists the 
sensors belonging to the control unit and the “Function and status display” area indicates 
the current signal status. 

Depending on the control unit, several sensor may be combined in groups whose entries 
you can open by clicking so that you can reach the individual sensors. Multiple selection 
is possible. 


Service 

Ttctwcai Affilcjtlon 


a |7] !w gfl |a,| T1 HI x 


.. . 3VEttDi«l_a20.ilW<?lTH»JT/EUR LLflflMIl1 



45 

ISTA 


“Diagnostic query” mask 

















The buttons in the action line have the following meanings: 

0 Undo all: undoes the entire selection in the table. 

0 Undo: undoes the last selection in the table. 

0 Query status: switches the cyclical update of the display on or off. 

0 Close: closes the display of the control unit functions and returns to 
the original mask. 

Component activation 

Access the component activation by clicking on the “Component activation” tab. 

The content range is divided into two sections: The “Control unit functions” table lists the 
actuating elements and the “Function and status display” area indicates the current sta¬ 
tus of an actuated component. 

Depending on the control unit, several actuating elements may be combined in groups 
whose entries can be opened by clicking so that you can reach the individual actuating 
elements. Multiple selection is not possible. 



“Component activation” mask 

The buttons in the action line have the following meanings: 

0 Undo all: undoes the entire selection in the table. 

0 Undo: undoes the last selection in the table. 

0 Actuate component: displays the associated function name and the execution of 
the function in the “Function and status display” area. 

0 Close: closes the control unit functions display and returns to the original mask. 
46 

ISTA 
















Control unit list 

The control unit list is another way of presenting the control unit tree. You can call up the 
list by clicking the tab as soon as the first vehicle test is completed and repeat it from the 
vehicle test. 

The individual columns the following meaning: 

0 Status: This is where the status of communication with the control unit of the vehi¬ 
cle test is updated. 

0 Abbr.: The abbreviation for the respective control unit. 

0 Control unit name: A short description of the control unit appears at the beginning. 
When the vehicle test is performed, the control unit name is replaced by a complete 
description. 


inugrxed S»r«t<« 
Technical Application 


A. GE fc£] l9 i£j [H m LH 

Vfhiile 3e90«ALqaJ<llKM7rr2fWJT(EuRLLQ»4/11 




AL 

active iN«fin| 


▲ 


AHM 

TraMr nodule 


■ 


AMP 

Aiypltfler 




CCC-AMT 

Aaml tuner 




CCC-ASK 

Audio i|Vin cartrollw 


| 


SMUT 

Seat nodule, pattenger 




C AS 

CrAcctn S>xten 




CCC-A 

Application* 




CDC 

CD CHangar 




CID 

Centril h/onnitlon Duplay 




DAB 

Dlgral tuner 




DSC 

Dfnent: Stibiily Control MKdO 




DMA 

artti-lhaft aam 


▼ 

Fjjf. menory 

Aviilihlc 

• £CUr«sp:n:ra 

• £CUratrc:p^iS*fl • £C r»:t tier 

S'.irt 

vehicle tat9 

Cal up 


Display 

t*u»t nemerj 


“Control unit list” mask 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions after completion of 
he vehicle test: 

0 Start vehicle test: repeats the vehicle test. 

0 Call up ECU functions: only active if a control unit is previously selected. 
Changes over to the “Control unit functions” mask. 

0 Display fault memory: changes over to the “Fault memory” mask. 


47 

ISTA 










Activities 


Information Search 

Three different structure searches (Product structure, Function structure, Components 
and signals) and a text search are available in the “Information search” menu. 

Prerequisites: 

0 Vehicle identification. 


Product Structure 

In the product structure menu, you can search for information in the main and subgroups. 
In the left-hand column, the required product group can be selected. The previously 
selected elements are clearly displayed in the “Selected structure elements” column. 

T u ?; M. |X| 


Integrated Servtoe 

Technical Ap pleat on 

[Aj 

j# |>| 

□0 jS? 

VIM vwoooa 


• •Mclo yieWlSAi.OTOOlM4;iT7JIAU-»^llP L 1.9004/11 

Idemnaxer 

Vehicle test 

Activr** 

Service plan 


rf or nation 
search 

OulSM 

roubleshooting 

Sorvtco 

function 

vtoraamep / 
Operating fluids 

Measuring 

devices 


Function 

•rructwro 

Conponorxs 
and tgna« 

Text searth 



1100 E-*a»n«, porartl 

1111 engine block 


11 1 ? cylndor hood urn cover 


1113 oil sunp 

1114 houaing tovar 

11II cfjnlcut vMiUdion 
1121 orankshaft «ht bearing 
1127 

1123 vibration donpor 

1124 connecting rod with bearing 
112 b pi»c:«* with ring* and put 




Seiacsod otruclure «i*rv«nto 


War grojo 

11 Cnpne 

Subgroup 

1112 cylrdar Nad wlh ccvor 


HUr 14 


Undo 

all 


"I't- Default 

Undo 


Start 

•oamth 


“Product structure” tab 


The elements in the info line have the following functions: 

0 Hits: states how many elements satisfy the present search criteria. If a product group 
has not been selected, then the number of hits is “0”. 

0 Filter: displays the filter status. If you have not changed the filter setting, then the 
“Default” status appears; otherwise it is “User-defined”. 


48 

ISTA 












The buttons in the action bar have the following functions: 

0 Undo all and Undo: You may reverse individual or all operating steps so that you can 
enter new search criteria. 

0 Filter: You can call up a window with which you limit the search to certain time peri¬ 
ods or information types, e.g. circuit plans or repair instructions . These filter settings 
are taken into account in the search. 

0 Start search: Start search using the selected criteria. 

► How to search in the product structure: 

0 Select one element in the left-hand selection list. Depending on the item chosen, in 
some cases further selection lists with additional options will be displayed, via which 
you can further refine your search criteria. 

0 Further restrict the search criteria in the left-hand list. The previously selected items 
are clearly shown in the “Selected structure elements” column. 

0 If necessary, you can refine the selection using the “Filters” button. 

0 Click the “Start search” button. 

When the search has been completed, the ISTA workshop system switches over to the 
“Service plan” and displays the hit list. 

Filters 

The “Filter settings” window can be accessed via “Information search”, “Service func- 
tion”(See “Test plan”) by clicking the “Filters” button in the respective window. You can 
change the filter settings for information types and/or define a time slot for the latest 
update of the documents. 

In the default setting, the information types available in the respective search mode are 
preselected. These preselected as well as the manually selected information types are 
marked with a cross. 


49 

ISTA 



Inceg'sTed Scr. it 
Tfcmctl Apptcafaon 

V^ VA2C0C9 Vehicle J ICW^ALf32WT4iTIT2WJ T «LRLLROO*M1 



“Filter settings” tab 

The buttons in the action bar have the following functions: 

0 Cancel: the window is closed and the changed filter settings are not adopted. 

The filter status does not change and remains in the previous status (“Default” 
or “User defined”). 

0 Default settings: resets the filter to the preset values. 

0 Keyboard: displays the on-screen keyboard. 

0 Select all: marks all information types. 

0 Selecting nothing: removes all selections from the information types. 

0 OK: starts the search. 

► How to change the filter settings for information types: 

0 Click on a specific information type that you would like to select or 
deselect or else click on the buttons “Select all” or “Select nothing”. 

0 Select or deselect individual information types as reguired. 

0 Click the “OK” button. The workshop system adopts the selected filter settings and 
closes the pop up window. The number of hits is adapted accordingly, the filter sta¬ 
tus in the information line changes from “Default” to “User defined”. 


50 

ISTA 

















► How to define the period for the last update of the information type: 

0 Define a date as the lower limit in the “Time period from:” field. If appropriate, use 
the on-screen keyboard. The date must comply with the order stated in brackets 
under “Last date change”. 

0 Define a date as the upper limit in the “Time period to:” field. The date entered has 
to be later than the one entered in the “Time period from:” field. 

0 Click the “OK” button. The workshop system adopts the selected filter settings and 
closes the pop up window. The number of hits is adapted accordingly, the filter sta¬ 
tus in the information line changes from “Default” to “User defined”. 

If you click the “Select nothing” button, then the entered period will be deleted. 

Function Structure 

In the “Function structure” window, you can search on several levels by selecting the 

function groups and functions. 


Integrated Service 
Technical Appli:a?»sr> 

VtN V420COI 


M ? 


[x| 


Vrhi-l* TICWlSM.Q2C4lM47fT2»*;/TaeURlLf2034M< 


k*/e*'?r»Jtion 

taarch 


Product 

•tructuro 


Guided 

trediliihccerg 


• e.ei 5 

Slartrochronie irirror 


Mirror adjustment 

Mirror netting 

Mirror & voting 

Supply FRM feotwoli module 

Supply JBE .oncilei-box electronics 

Sarrth block drrversdeer 


Accrifties 

1 Service plan 


Service 

ttorkiKep / 
□periling retd* 

Measuring 

eevtcae 

1 Cempenercs 

1 and signal* 

Text search 



1 Seeded itruccur* elenem* 


LeveM 


I rre 7 

Irtrrer 

Level 5 

Doer nirror 
Lave* 4 
Driven tide 

ElectrocnrorNe mere' 


HITT 1 

Undo 


r i iter Defalt 

Undo 


SU'X 

vesren 


“Function structure” tab 


51 

ISTA 


This operation is similar to that for “Product structure”. 














Components and Signals 

The “Components and signals” tab can be used to search for documents that relate to a 
specific component or signal. 


|Al / m 1^1 HI 1*1 1 ^ [xl 


»‘N. VA2C0C8 Vaf in'*. 3 i£50»SALQ2QdlXM7/T2rAUTiEUR LU2DMM* 


iarhhc.itinn 

V »h«l» t»«t 

AdU’f>M 

I Nirrc* slan 


1 InfortiAton 

Ou4«d 

S«rvit* 

WortiWnep 1 

kWtkiflg 

1 «»»rch 

IroublMhoottng 

funcrkcn 

□panting Hut** 




“Components and signals” tab 

This operation is similar to that for “Product structure”. 


52 

ISTA 
















Text Search 

As an alternative to a structure search, you can also use a text search. 
Prerequisites: 

0 Vehicle identification 


IntagraM Sorrx 
Technical Apple icon 


VIN VM0M8 

Idorrtttu alien 

V(NcO t»«t 

1 tHf$rm»tton 

1 torch 

Gudort 

irouNdthoMirtc 

Product 

•tructuro 

Funct«on 

•tructuro 


A TiP [/] a? |/P| 

V ■ ^ I. a‘.<E«USM.a2CdlM4riT2»i/r>EURLLia>!MI11 


a] !? sr [x| 


Worxo-cp 1 


Mooturng 


Opafitji'O rudi M<ie»s 


-orrpananta 
ind (ignili 


rliter De*iuh 

Kc\fe«ard 


Search tarn: 

turr: :li_-y«r 

® 5 oai<** In the doeunont:** 
Q Socrc* in Sha decunont 

O StiftMor do:ur*oiununbor 


Start 

cosrcii 


“Text search”tab 


► How to search for information with full text: 

0 Select “Activities” in the main menu. 

0 Select “Information search” in the submenu. 

0 Select the “Text search” tab. 

0 Restrict the search to document titles, documents (texts), or document numbers. 

0 Enter the text string in the “Search term” field. If appropriate, use the on-screen 
keyboard. If necessary, you can refine the search using the “Filters” button. 

0 Start the search with the “Start search” button. 

Note: When the search has been completed, the ISTA workshop system 
switches over to the “Service plan” function and displays the hit list. 


53 

ISTA 












Additional general information on the text search 

The text search is not case-sensitive. Entering “Engine” or “engine”, for example, 
produces the same result in the hit list. 

If several terms are entered and are separated by space characters, then the terms are 
linked by the operator AND in the search. Only those hits that contain all of the search 
terms entered are displayed. 

Each search term must contain at least two characters. 

Additional information on the text search in headings 

If you search for the term “Engine” in the title, for example, then all documents whose title 
includes the term “Engine” will be listed. Furthermore, all documents which have the 
term anywhere in their title will be added to the hit list, for example “Gasoline engine”, 
“Engine mounting”, “Electric engine”. 

Additional information on the text search in the document 

If you search in the document for the term “Engine”, for example, only documents that 
contain this term will be found. Documents containing terms such as “engine mounting” 
or “gasoline engine” will not be included in the hit list. Numbers will not be taken into 
account when performing a text search in the document. 

Specific information for individual markets is contained in the data packages in the form 
of pdf files. These can be displayed in ISTA. It is not possible to perform a text search in 
these pdf files. Title and document number searches are also supported in these docu¬ 
ments. 

Additional information on the text search by document number 

For searches by document number, the entered character seguence is only searched at 
the beginning of the document number. If the search term “123” is entered, then docu¬ 
ments such as “123456” will appear in the hit list. Documents such as “456123” or 
“51234” will not appear in the hit list. 

Additional information on text searches by component code and signal name 

In the wiring diagrams codes are used for components and signals such as “A149a” for a 
control device or “X1108” for a ground connection. The text search can only be used to 
find these codes in the title. All the documents are displayed in the hit list that contain the 
entered code in their title, e.g. “A149a” or “X1108”. Searches by component code within 
the document are not possible. The same applies for searches for engine codes such as 
“M54”. 


54 

ISTA 



Assisted Troubleshooting 


Fault Memory 

The “Fault memory” tab displays the fault memory entries read out from the control units 
in the vehicle test. 


There are several ways to reach this tab: 

0 On completion of the vehicle test in the “Control unit tree” or “Control unit list” tabs 
by clicking the “Display fault memory” button. 

0 By selecting “Activities” -> “Guided troubleshooting” -> “Fault memory” in the 
navigation area. 



“Fault memory” tab 


The fault memory list contains the following columns: 

0 Code: The fault code or the fault number appears in hexadecimal form. 
0 Description: This column contains a description of the fault location. 


55 

ISTA 









The following buttons are available in the action line: 

0 Display detail table: choose a line and then click this button. You will then obtain the 
detailed information on a fault. If there are several results for the ambient conditions, 
then only the first and the last information block will be displayed. 

0 Start quick delete: this function is only active after a completed vehicle test. In each 
identified control unit, the fault memory is deleted and then reread. OBD control 
units are only deleted if a fault is set in your fault memory. 

0 Display all: adapts the widths of all columns to their maximum text lengths. If you 
click the button once more, the workshop system sets the columns to their initial 
widths. If required, a horizontal progress bar is displayed. 

0 Calculate test plan: starts the calculation and display of the test plan with the exist¬ 
ing fault memory entries and selected diagnostic symptoms. 


56 

ISTA 



Display detail table 


lmgr-r id S«r#lit 

T«<hn<4l Ampliation 



E 


v m k'uiraa 

Vohtel 

• TieK4SAU32DA*MTrT2n»LTieL» UJMMH1 



Fjuk dattlll 




c. ? x | 


Corn's! -nr 
faiit vnccp 


Opnartt Siiblrr/ c antral U<jt: 

MBS 

»««tiig cdutv* loU^inj ;onlr«. intornalfwh 


nn pr«MM 

f iut cirrontV net ptit't 


“Fault details” mask 

The “Fault details” mask contains supplementary descriptions on a fault code: 

0 Control unit: the name of the control unit version will be displayed. 

0 Fault memory: displays the fault code in hexadecimal form and, below this, fault 
location. 

0 Vehicle data: the fault status as well as details on the ambient conditions will be 
displayed (if available). 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions: 

0 Update: the detailed information will be reread and displayed. 

0 Close: closes the window and returns to the “Fault memory” mask. 


57 

ISTA 




Fault Pattern 

The “Fault pattern” tab can be used to select fault patterns from a functional structure on 
many levels. They supplement the read-in fault memory entries and are taken into 
account in test plan calculation. The tab is not active unless the fault memories of the 
identified vehicle are being read out. You should select the fault patterns independently of 
the customer's complaints about the vehicle. Otherwise, only the saved faults will be 
taken into account when the test plan is created. Especially for complaints apart from the 
vehicle's electric system, the selection of fault patterns is especially important for assuring 
a successful diagnosis. 

Select “Activities” -> “Guided troubleshooting” -> “Fault pattern” in the navigation area. 

In the left-hand section of the content range, you can select the fault pattern from a hier¬ 
archical structure then start with the uppermost, most general level and work your way 
down to an exact description of the fault pattern. On the right side of the mask, the path 
through the selection levels is logged. 

Define the fault pattern as precisely as possible; otherwise, the test plan generates an 
unnecessarily high number of test suggestions. 


liei^rilM 5 » -.«c• 
'•chnteil Apsl liana n 

VI . M20M6 


si • 2* ■ w lai 14 

Vtfi.l. S‘.EW$ALt32&dlM47<T2Ml/T<EUR LUlSteMI 


I? 



120301 G«nar«l rulfu*rt 

120302 No «nj»*o »iaft postJb* 
1703CC Oo syttf onflln* r#<pc»*^» 


120310 FltKliMlion in «npn« vg«»i « 1 u'inj iccalwtlien 


120311 Co",.r«|<onhl|ho' lMntipe-nM 

130216 Prob^m warring or wtttchng elffh* onglno 
120271 S*afcnp v«n iv»rchnq o f ttio «npn* 

1203*7 MarimOon engine virung after 'surtiw' in rtewmi R 


<J3MI Huiluitisn In engn* ip*«d iun-fl accalorallo 


Ns cf fauh rr«n 

LWdoNI 


II: sf fauh pitto-m 

Aetojl 
lauh potfjitn 


Caculilo 
Ural sUn 


“Fault pattern” tab 


58 

ISTA 

















The following buttons are available in the action line: 

0 Undo all: deletes the existing selection and returns to the uppermost level. 

0 Undo: undoes the last selected step. 

0 Accept fault pattern: the previously selected symptom path (at least one level) is 
saved as a basis for subseguently calculating the test plan. The tab then returns as 
the “Undo all” button to the uppermost selection level. The selected fault pattern is 
then saved when you guit the “Fault pattern” tab. 

0 Display fault patterns: when clicking this button, a pop up appears containing all the 
previously saved fault patterns. 

0 Calculate test plan: starts the calculation and display of the test plan with the 
existing diagnostic symptoms. 

Selected fault patterns 

The pop up window in the “Fault pattern” mask shows the previously saved fault 
patterns. 



“Fault pattern” tab with “Selected fault patterns” pop up 

The following buttons are available in the action line: 

0 Cancel: the pop up window will be closed; the changes made will not be saved. 
0 Delete: deletes the selected entry. 

0 OK: the pop up window will close; the changes made will be saved. 


59 

ISTA 

















► How to save a fault pattern and include it in the test plan : 

0 Compile the desired fault pattern in the content range by navigating through the 
available levels and selecting the suitable terms or phrases. 

0 If appropriate, click the “Display fault patterns” button and confirm with “OK”. 

0 Click the “Calculate test plan” button. 

Service Function 

The “Service functions” area covers all service-related jobs. 

You can search for service-relevant jobs under the “Service functions” tab, 
e.g. when searching a function description. 

Prerequisites: 

0 Vehicle identification 


Ireaqraad Sarvlta 
Tachncal Ajpicjeon 

vr« YAxroa 


ffi H > B n fel f H. ® 

V.I.l: J1€SO»SALt»3«ir447rr2VWJTAEUR LUU04I11 


iMmlKKO* 

Vatmla Ini 


nlo'naliv* 

3uidad 

IrNbukhoriini 

StniM 

Unction 



A'orkthqpl Wajjunn; 

Opv Jliru Mvcti 



Stlawrd ftrvMU'* aim* mi | 

Csmunpfcwi calculation 

Lav* 1 

Crka 

ME-CAS 

Leva* 2 

L'«aa» blactrD*i:t 

rw*u«-jii raclrcjitlon 

l avw 3 

Adjirtlntfit h c-l'orr-'. 

Ida >:«•: 

Lavai 4 

HJacw rata a^uctnam 

1 Injatlor utM 

Start j merry 













lift 7 rtn- Dafi.lt 

L T ** "<-■■■ 


“Service functions” tab 

This operation is similar to that for “Product structure”. 


60 

ISTA 














Workshop/operating fluids 

The search functions in the “Workshop/Operating fluids” area are vehicle-independent (or 
operation-independent, respectively); you can use these functions without previously hav¬ 
ing to identify a vehicle. 

Workshop Equipment 

The “Workshop equipment” tab can be used to search for general information on work¬ 
shop equipment. 

Prerequisites: 

0 None 


Irrtgrxrt 

T«chn«4l Ajpl<«3on 
Vf. »«COM 


A] |o?J 5 1 jl : 1 |?i !S| X 

V»Mcll UUUJTISlR LL*D34i1' 


V*hlcl» t»« 

AntiWK 

plan 

S.id«d 

trcubitkhottnB 

'tfltlip* 




T 


«it mic* 


1 kifliil*’ rurtMn 


0 


1 - fifcW iicrii! ln«> 

Ragitltr *unbnv 

? rest Mubr<cro‘«p 


3 -’AIimI ilkjnmnl 


* • Wn*ing and clainng 


F Body f rr.no 


t - lifting (q.<pn«nt 


r TvmtanU* 




“Workshop equipment” tab 

This operation is similar to that for “Product structure”. However, no filter functions are 
available in this case. 


61 

ISTA 















Text Search 

You can enter character strings for vehicle-independent information via document title, 
document contents or document numbers. 

Prerequisites: 

0 None 


kUtvited S«i «it« 
Tnh-itd AppitaCion 


Aj I / [op] <? 

■ r.rBaw-TOdftMrrTiMUTjrxm 1iflaMiil 


7 rra 


•Jt'dfliu)*' 


Attfahkt 

par 


If/arorUn 

Su4*« 


Worktop l 

Upisuilnt 

<4 anti 

rrouelnn«ot 1 -<j 


Op*r*lr^ *01 ** 

dtVKK 

tfomtim 

•q.lpTwm 

i " 

Cptfidr* 

*udi 



"1 


SorchMnrr 


0 S««h n t-« Mcuninlith 
0 n ”+ locunMit 

O f M dMUMfllNUVlbtr 


,' 1 ll J ll» II* l.» 5 It II s II* II* l : - 1 


nrr 'innnrr 'inn 



nnnnnnnnnnFif; 


.! 

DocmmncDDe 

| end 

Ml*-I 

Q 


9un 

Hirih 


Example of “Text search” tab and “Workshop/Operating fluids” 

► How to search for a random term: 

0 From the displayed options, choose whether you want to search for a document title, 
document contents, or a document number. 

0 Enter the text or number sequence that you want to look up in the “Search term” 
field. If appropriate, use the on-screen keyboard. Only part of a longer term has to 
be entered as search text, e.g. “Doc” for “Document”. 

0 Click the “Start search” button. 

When the search has been completed, the ISTA workshop system switches over to the 

“Service plan” and displays the hit list. 

Note: You can find additional information on the title or document-specific text 
search in section of this training material. 


62 

ISTA 























Measuring Devices 

The measuring devices (Multimeter, Oscilloscope, Signals) are component parts of the 
ISTA workshop system. The corresponding measuring devices hardware, as well as the 
periodic measurement data logging, preparation of information, and provision of the 
results, is performed by the IMIB connected via LAN. 

► How to start the measuring devices: 

0 Call up the measuring devices via the “Activities” -> “Measuring devices” selection 
in the navigation area. 

0 Choose the “Measuring devices” tab. The “Connection manager” mask appears. 

0 Select the desired IMIB and click the “Set up connection” button. The “Measuring 
devices” tab will then appear with the preset “Multimeter” preset tab. 


Irrtgmrt &«r*W« 

T«CtlfflMl A»p l<a^on 

id] 1 

s 4 8 

?| g i 

111 


"1 

X 


VW k'AXDM V»Mcli TJ1AUT ICLR LLW34I V 



VfWtlf 







tfmu 

fttark«hsp l 

V*i«irnp 


i»«rf 

treubWthocang 

•jllHo* 

%«rrn) 

divIcM 




“Measuring devices” tab 


63 

ISTA 


Note: For more information regarding measuring systems refer to the IMIB 
section of this training material. 

















Service Plan 


Hit List 

The hit list shows the results of the search performed in the following menus: 
“Information search” (Chapter 3.4.1), “Service function” (Chapter 3.4.3.1), and 
“Workshop/Operating fluids” (Chapter 3.4.4). The search criterion entered is stated 
in the first line. All matching documents are listed under this. You can select and 
display a document from the hit list. 



Tnt plan 



“Hit list” tab 

The individual columns have the following meaning: 

0 Note: provides information about the entry found. 

0 Type: states the information type, e.g. “REP” for “Repair instruction”. All information 
types are listed in the “Table of types Information filtered” (in the next page). 

0 Title: the first title states the search criterion used to call up the hit list. The remain¬ 
ing lines contain the titles of the documents found. 

0 Status: shows whether the named document has already been accessed during the 
operation: - white circle: not accessed - green circle: performed or called up - yellow 
circle: minimized - black circle: display canceled. 


64 

ISTA 












The buttons in the action list have the following functions: 

0 Back: returns to the previous mask. 

0 Filter: calls up a menu for setting a filter. The filter determines which objects are dis¬ 
played and which are suppressed. 

0 Display entire: adapts the widths of all columns to their maximum text lengths. If you 
click the button a second time, the workshop system returns the columns to their 
initial widths. If reguired, a horizontal progress bar is displayed. 

0 Display: shows the selected document. 

The following table shows the possible information types in the hit list with their 
abbreviations: 


Abbreviation 

Information type 

PRC 

Procedure (service program) 

AZD 

Tightening torque 

EBO 

Installation location 

FEB 

Fault elimination 

FTD 

Vehicle engineering diagnosis 

FUB 

Functional description 

PIB 

Pin assignments 

REP 

Repair instructions 

SBS* 

Operating fluids 

SIT* 

Service Information (Engineering) 

SSP 

Wiring diagram 

STA 

Connector view 

SWS 

(SI) Special tools/equipment 

SI 

Special tools 

TED 

Technical data 

* Only via Workshop/Operating fluids 


Table of types of Information filtered 


65 

ISTA 





































Viewing a Document 

► How to view a document: 

0 Select a line. The corresponding entry is highlighted in color. The “Display” button 
is active. 

0 Click on the “Display” button. The required document will be displayed. 



T*ti plan 


T*ti plan 


N*t* 

rm 

Till# 

A SUKUt 1 



FTD 

IM7TUV4S7TU Cylndar Hmmd and Piatan* 

O 


TED 

PltMfK wttfc Rlnp* and Pin* M47T2 / D2D 

■ 


TED 

PIMWH witt’ and Pin* M37T2 1 D23 

o 


HEP 

(Urnot-irQ and mvtallrtp »• replacing Ml praton* (M47TU t M4 1 TV| 

0 


Hh 4 Fihar DtfiuH O NI aifcii • = »r^ urn! • VIh-ii-m] • P.#i» #4**: 

Sack Hit*™ Display 

Selecting a document for display 


66 

ISTA 












Text Documents 

Besides texts, text documents also contain graphics, photos and cross-references (hyper¬ 
links). Cross-references appear in blue, underlined lettering; when you click a link, another 
cross-referenced document is opened. 

A magnifying glass symbol is shown in text documents next to graphics. You can use it to 
zoom in on the corresponding illustration. 


tocegrjted Serviee i| 4 K|j) >, nO S 

Techie*! Apple »tcr J?h _ LCj \SL J=r* L* 

LI B 

? 

’ Jgj 

fx| 

VN: VAK0:« Vehicle: TlEKl5AU320d | M47fT2lM/TJEUR LL/20O4111 

0£P 1123S30 Q«m»»-ng mna minting or repbeing >11 pxtani (M47TU i M47T?) 




txi 1 



& 


Nolle 

Oefore removing pistons. rwrKive caiton deposit* Irom cftnder 

WMlbc 


Close 


Text document 

0 Close: closes the window and returns to the hit list. 


67 

ISTA 

















Wiring Diagrams 

Sometimes the displayed wiring diagram may contain hyperlinks. These are recognizable 
as such by their blue lettering. Via hotspots, you can access detailed information such as 
installation position, connector view or pin assignment for one of the components. The 
additional information is displayed together with the scaled-down wiring diagram. 


nwgratvd Service 

TeehnrtjJ Ajplltxon 

A <1 |> 9? iS>! 

|B: 

HI 

|? 

f" 

x| 

WN VA20CC6 

Ve*-.* . yrEWSAJ32CdiKM7lT2,V»JUTlEURLU2:04l1* 






REP *126533 Rtmt*ing and imu Ing o- t«p!<c ng <11 piitom (M47TU1 M47T2) 





& 


mVt . ■ - 

Irv • r*2#fc£ 



Remove mo;c balancci’ol pomp. 

<OSt3\'jtt<yr 

I kgnten screws according to numbering vequence 


: 


& 


I ff*rw4ing pleaton*. rrmw/f rarbon rrom ryltndiv 

Wa4)i. 


Wiring diagram with hotspots and BirdView function 

The action list offers several options for changing the presentations: 

0 Installation: call up a list of wiring diagrams that contain the selected component. To 
do this selected a component drawing and then click the “Installation” button. A list 
of wiring diagrams is displayed in a pop up. Here you select and display the desired 
wiring diagram. 

0 Move: activated during selection. In this mode, you can move the document around 
the mask. To do this, click the document and drag it in the desired direction. If you 
click the “Move” button a second time, this function is switched off again. 

0 Zoom in: activated during selection. In this mode, you can magnify the document 
step-by-step. To do this, click the document; the clicked point will be centered. The 
“BirdView function” is active from the first magnification level. It facilitates navigation 
within a wiring diagram. At the top right of the content range, a window appears in 
which the small scale wiring diagram is displayed. You can then move the sguare, 
framed in red, in the x and y-directions; the excerpt of the wiring diagram in the con¬ 
tent range moves accordingly. 

0 Zoom out: zooms out step-by-step from a magnified view until the original size is 
displayed. 

0 Whole screen: is active when several documents are simultaneously displayed on 
the screen. It magnifies the view of the active document to fill the entire screen 
width. 

68 

ISTA 
















If you have accessed detailed documents via a hotspot, clicking on this button will close 
the detailed document and magnify the view of the wiring diagram to the full screen size. 

0 Close: by clicking this button, you return to the hit list. 

Display several documents simultaneously 

Several documents can be displayed in the content range. This option is only available for 
wiring diagrams and the information that can accessed from them via hotspots. The fol¬ 
lowing example shows the split display, in which you can switch to the right-hand window 
between additional documents via the displayed tabs. 

Remember that the functions that can be accessed by using these buttons only apply to 
the active window. You can see which window is active by the color-coded tab. 



Displaying several documents simultaneously, for example 


69 

ISTA 


















Whole Screen 

Via the “Whole screen” button, you can select the active document (tab is highlighted in 
color) and display over the entire width of the screen. A second click on the "Whole 
screen" button deactivates the whole screen display mode and returns to the split dis¬ 
play. 


imoflr S4rvic« 4 Q > DO (0 

T««hnlcjl Application 

liD 


? 


|xj 

VM vahida 7 7E66ISAi.f745iM32.'ftUTlt J»VK02j©6 

| EBO EO EtC 6S 0^13 NB, X13344, X01M6 X010S7 








Whole screen example 


70 

ISTA 

















Zoom Function 

You can call up the zoom function by clicking the magnifying glass symbol at the bottom 
right under the pictures. The magnified image will be displayed in a pop up window. 



Zoom function example 


The window offers the following functions: 

0 Zoom in: Magnifies the view in several steps. After the first click, scroll bars will 
appear at the bottom and right side of the display window, helping you to adjust the 
size of the required screen section. 


0 Zoom out: Zooms out the picture in several steps back to the original size. 


0 OK: Closes the window. 



71 

ISTA 


Zoom in example 













































Test Plan 


When first opened, the “Test plan” tab contains the test plan that has been calculated on 
the basis of the most recently read fault memory entries and/or selected fault patterns. 
Components/functions to be examined are presented in the multicolumn table in white 
lettering; the associated documents and procedures appear below the compo¬ 
nent/function to be examined in black lettering. 

The information line on the left states the number of hits. The filter status states whether 
the default setting of the filter has been changed. Next to it, the symbols for process sta¬ 
tus are explained. 

Clicking the “Calculate test plan" button in the “Fault memory list” mask or in the “Fault 
patterns” mask will automatically take you to the “Test plan” tab. Provided that at least 
one fault memory entry and/or fault pattern is present, you can also get to the mask man¬ 
ually via “Service plan” -> “Test plan” in the navigation area. 

In the standard view, the mask only lists the test suggestions for components/functions to 
be examined, sorted according to priority. A selected line is highlighted with the mask 
color. 


Intagritea Sarvloa 
Technical Apphcihan 


m A 2 . IA \L 

Vel-ii « 3‘,E60ISAL(320dM47IT2lAUTfEJRLLf2004ri1 


liii I? 


X 


idarKMattan 

Va«cle tut 

Activates Service plan 



Mole Type 


ABL BftS17_M "CU-M-ASK Vereorgung 


AIIl tJB*17_«^CO-M-ASK Veraorgung 


ABL BG3TO_100CO-Nav*g»tlon*i|'ft*m Jipsn 


ABL OG?12JJC*C4 Nsvgst1on*ty?t*rr 

ABL B6312JWOCGCCC NsvIgxiOAsfurklton 


ABL B6»12_W'«0 M ASK V«rt»'gtrg 


ABL B 659 D_ 10 K 0 Ns*igjtionssfstam Japan 


Hri. 11 

Back 


Pillar Oaf suit 

rikara 


“Test plan” tab in the standard view 


Statue P'iorty a 


O NotcUrc • =ciur-td • ‘An'nic d • Cancelled 


72 

ISTA 














In the content range, the following information is displayed in the sortable columns: 

0 Note: A little red sguare signifies that a note about this test suggestion is available 
from BMW AG. 

0 Type: Information type. For example, “ABL” stands for “Ablauf” (procedure) and indi¬ 
cates a test program. After selection and clicking the “Display” button, the test pro¬ 
gram starts by attempting to localize a fault in the operation of the suspected com¬ 
ponent/function. 

0 Title: Description of the component/function to be checked, possibly with symp¬ 
toms; title of the document or test program. 

0 Status: The process status is indicated with a circle symbol. An empty or colored 
circle indicates the following statuses: 

0 Empty: The procedure has not been started or performed yet, or the document has 
not yet been called up. 

0 Green: Procedure performed or document called up. 

0 Yellow: Minimized. This mode indicates that a procedure is running in the back¬ 
ground. It can be displayed again via the “Display” button. Only one procedure can 
be active at a time. It is possible to switch to the “Control unit functions” mask and 
to start the functions there if the test module currently running is not using the vehi¬ 
cle interface. 

0 Black: Procedure canceled. 

0 Priority: Priority is graded from 1 in descending order; 1 represents the highest pri¬ 
ority. The calculated priority figures determine the order of the object in the test plan. 
A two figure code, is displayed for suspect causes that are generated by a test pro¬ 
cedure. 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions: 

0 Back: Go back to the previous mask. 

0 Filters: Calls up a menu for setting a filter. The filter determines the information 
objects that will appear in the test plan and those that won't be displayed. 

0 Display symptoms: When you click this button, the symptoms (fault memory entries 
with prefixed fault code, fault patterns) appear below the selected compo¬ 
nent/function to be tested, indented and in small font. When you click a second time, 
the symptoms are displayed again. 

0 Show/Hide: With this button, you can show or hide the documents and procedures 
assigned to a component/function to be tested. 

0 Display entire: Use this function to widen or narrow text columns. Selecting the but¬ 
ton again restores the original status. 

0 Display: With this button, you start a test procedure or display an information object. 

73 

ISTA 




A 0 | \i 

[a£ 

7 

}jtij 

VW» VAMOM 

*•*>« . 3#f Rf.h*^W,*AO»4l»M7rr2jlfcUTltC« 11009*11 







“Test plan” tab with symptoms displayed 


► How to start a test procedure: 

0 Select a procedure (Type = “ABL”) in the content area of the “Test plan” mask. 

0 Click the “Display” button. 

► How to display the symptoms for a component/function to be tested: 

0 Select a component/function (white lettering) to be tested in the content range of 
the “Test plan” mask. 

0 Click the “Display symptoms” button. 

► How to return to the test procedure running in the background: 

0 Select the list entry with the “yellow” status in the content range of the “Test plan” 
mask. 

0 Click the “Display” button. 

► How to generally suppress the display of documents and procedures: 

0 Select a component/function (white lettering) to be tested in the content range 
of the “Test plan” mask. 

0 Click on the “Show/Hide” button. 


74 

ISTA 




























Displaying and Editing a Procedure 

A “procedure” corresponds to a service program that start and runs. A procedure may 
contain dialogues (messages, questions), measurement instructions and procedure steps 
with vehicle communication. Depending on the objective, a service program can be used 
to localize a fault or to execute a service function. The test steps and procedures con¬ 
tained in the sequence always relate to the performance of a certain task. Examples of 
some masks are presented below. 

Message 

A message provides you with information and results. Confirm the message with the 
“Continue” button. 



flirOak UmgrrKf Tatftvtur 


Message example 


75 

ISTA 







Substitute value input 

A substitute value must be entered if no measuring instruments are available. In this case, 
you have to make the measurements with an external instrument and enter the reading 
into the displayed fields. 


Int««r7ted 5crvlc« 

Tachmcai Application 

® « • i/j ai gi b 

l—l 

[r i [x 

Ffi>t-Nr DM59601 

Fahruu*: 7tf R«lh*IEW<lJW746ilN52IAUTlEUR LU2002W6 



Ersatzwerteingabe 



L?j|x I 


£ rc*fcrw • rt * «■»$* b •; 

t : 


Substitute value input example 


76 

ISTA 






Question 

A question may display information and set values. The user has to select a reply from 
among several options. In this case, the available options are “Yes” and “No”. When you 
click one of the options, the procedure continues to the next step. 


ImogrstoO Sorvtco 

Tochnit Jl Appllc jtJon 

A 13 B) [Z 

S3 


ID 

11 

[x| 

VIV VWtKOI 

Vphi.-lr Ttt»WSAi./ 3 «i|tl l Mm?fWjrieURLlf 7004 rl 1 






EaJ 59 0 _ 13)30 -N j v i g * b o n « • yota m J a p j n 





El 

txl 


Furfction*- 

b«ict*re!bung 







0«u Uir*rot to foicmtng control L#it louty 
Nivigrlor tyilotn jjppn 

GAM*. 

- ruM tor hjvigjtiati iyktom Jjptr 

- romor iuppv lot NjvtgiDon syttom Jjp«r 

it cno tuso OK? 

i* tno von*9* tuppry ok? 


Function 

T*» >|MmMVo*Arr rt tn iv»/ t>irn h iimi % ml* limit. nr» ItVit 

hVtmMn rlr \ til *ar rrrrKtli) it** mh 
(iPR Nivlj.rtun ^ImiPii'.tfrti] RjtJmt) Tl» ru*^ ; itro i.tifiwi fhi 1 rt» rt 

hirrrrftrc ty »»t*l (•» Tt# rt)itK in ml tff It# VR .tilt rr ti* fmrj 

Ir iii it'tjni' :rnrit»i .ttlii1iii irclmjtitr uti Tt# rxljitrr rnrfitw .»»#.! 
fimrt irmtrn r(1w >«PC iit^yiv r-»t*n i* trly pittlK «t#n lt#n K m i rtrrtv 
ml .♦ Iwr t*T RPR »mi t»» r. trdwi^iiil rjv f.wlinnK ilr >rt ■*nrtrn 
Nivl|.itlrn r.«nr*utK wttti OPR MMtwir. H»iO tttvi ini ijyri mv.ir Tti n»r 
itt»iiytti rjsijrtrr rrrrfitii Tl» mljnrr rrirfiiw 'inthu tt# fW.rr 
it#* Tm r.irwit ffnivr i. itnam m It# rr-trjrc mrlr# n t*» *P. v JO trap 
T*» siswir iftindtriihm Tin nTft^Kti >'.iiMi*«-Mlrit«miiTiti InmUi ri 
m Mlirhtl* ntnti i\ 1 t rnrmi>,' 1 rr nniKT/ i*r . Tlr rttiiiln nit! » »ir*r r» 
UK W* It# »»Wi r l». h#l? i tr Hi ik*i •tv* TfAV * imI tin 

fr-n *»V: mll'lnvtli' r « •n»*ift tttl.VIR*'i 

An trtji li >• rrl~t rrMtt, otat i> im ' t J_i rn r#twv*, r/r«n» In r>T» tyt in r.im w rt 
i> t wn* nrHu tt* rtr |i Tfh ij,m imw It fttrii *t It# rwti] i* It# nn^jitrn rnrp 

Brief description of components 
OPS aerial 


I *» -t •- bUU v.-|*tvl'i .I||<I t tvilltl 
IUac nil* uiUwrtMi Mill 

-VAttvaAl jtMaA. < 


»Uf U llttipiviti sittviJU In 


Example of a question 


77 

ISTA 












Displaying and editing a procedure in BST mode 

Procedures for the E21 - E31 Series are displayed in BST mode. These are service pro¬ 
grams that were created for the BMW Service Tester (BST) predecessor system and that 
have their own mask layout. Operation in procedures in BST mode differs from general 
operation. Other buttons are displayed in the action bar for navigation within the BST 
procedures. 



BST procedure (no current screenshot) 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions: 

0 Keyboard: shows or hides the on-screen keyboard. 

0 Back (<): calls up the next procedure step within the BST procedure, 
o up n : jumps to the next selection item in the screen above. 

0 Down (v): jumps to the next selection item in the screen below. 

0 Continue (>): calls up the next procedure step within the BST procedure. 
0 Acknowledgement (A): with this button, you can confirm your selection. 


78 

ISTA 









Symbol Bar 

The following table provides an overview of the functions that can be directly accessed 
via the symbol bar. 


Symbols 

Function 

A 

Start r 

nask 

When clicking this symbol, the start mask will be displayed The ISTA 
workshop system then terminates the ongoing operation (after 
confirmation). 

a 

Display previous 
document 

Clicking this symbol takes you to the previous entry in the history list and 
displays the corresponding document. The symbol is only available if the 
history list contains a document which has been selected previously. 

|W 

Displa 

histon 

y document 
i list 

When clicking this symbol, the history list will be displayed. 

y 

► 

Displa 

docun 

y next 
lent 

Clicking this symbol takes you to the next entry in the history list and the 
displays the corresponding document. The symbol is only available if the 
history list contains a document which has been selected previously. 

a 

Administration 

When clicking this symbol, Administration is accessed. 

□B 

□B 


Click on this symbol to call up the connection manager. Connections to the 
vehicle interface or the measuring instrument adapter can be established or 
disconnectea. This symbol is shown (on left) as "connected" when at least 
one device is connected to the system. If no connections are available, it is 
shown as "separatee" (on right). 

> 

Connection manager 

& 

Opera 

ting mode 

Click this symbol to display information on switching between offline and 
online mode. The status of the symbol reflects the present mode: online 
(left); offline (right). 

0-J 

Status 

; display 

Click on this symbol to call up the "Status display" window. Here, the status 
of the connected Device and. where appropriate, the battery status is 
displayed. 

£i 

Print 


Click this symbol to access the "Print" function. 


79 

ISTA 




Symbols 

Function 

7 

■ 

Help 


Clicking this symbol calls up the "Help" function. 

Minin 

rtize 

Clicking this symbol minimizes the application window. 

|X 

Exit 


When clicking this symbol, after a security prompt and the appropriate 
confirmation the current operation or the ISTA application is exited. 


Start Mask 

The start mask is in the home mask for the ISTA workshop system. You can obtain more 
detailed information on the start mask in Chapter 3.1. 

History list 

While performing an operation, the ISTA workshop system creates a list of all documents 
accessed during this operation. This list is called the history list. 


History 


B x 

No. 

Type Title 

Statu 5 | 

1 

FTP Abbreviations Ait models 

• 























Cancel Minimised 

saquanca 

Display 


The history list 


80 

ISTA 




























The history list works on the same principle as the history function in a web browser. 

The list adapts to the sequence in which the documents were accessed. The most 
recent document always appears in the last position. With the “Display previous docu¬ 
ment” and “Display next document” symbols, you can switch between the documents 
that have been accessed previously. Clicking the “History list” symbol opens a pop up 
window in which specific entries from the history list can be selected. 

If you browse back and open another document via a hyperlink, then this new document 
will be added to the list after the one with the hyperlink and all entries listed below it will 
be deleted. 

Administration 

You can access “Administration” via the administration symbol in the symbol bar. You can 
view information on the workshop system and change the settings. 

Client settings 

The “Client settings” tab is displayed by default when “Administration” is opened. Here 
you can set the language of the workshop system, the brands for which you have autho¬ 
rization and the display period for news items. The selection applies to the client currently 
being used. 



Select iHritfu-ifl** 

O © Eolith 

Select make: 

© Cl MW 

I imit tfcspl»y time period for news: 

O 1 month O 3 months Q B months 0 12 rnunttis 


“Client settings” tab 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions: 

0 Cancel: Closes “Administration” without changing the settings. 
0 OK: Closes “Administration” and saves the selected settings. 


81 

ISTA 






► How to select the display period for News: 

0 Under the “Limit display time period for news” menu point, specify how old the old¬ 
est news item to be displayed should be. 

0 Confirm your selection by clicking the “OK” button. The “Administration” window is 
closed and the workshop system returns to the most recently displayed mask. The 
change to the display period becomes effective the next time that you access the 
start mask or reboot the workshop system. 

► How to select the brand(s) for which you have authorization: 

0 Click an option in the “Select brand” area. 

0 Click the “OK” button. The “Administration” window is closed. The change to the 
selected brand(s) becomes effective the next time that you access the start mask or 
reboot the workshop system. 

► How to change the language of the displays in the workshop system: 

0 Click an option in the “Select language” area. 

0 Click the “OK" button. The “Administration” window is closed. The change to the 
language becomes effective the next time that you access the start mask or reboot 
the workshop system. 

Language settings 

The language settings vary from one country to another and are determined in agree¬ 
ment with the respective market and BMW headguarters. 


82 

ISTA 



Dealer data 

When clicking the “Dealer data” tab, you can view the dealer data. 

The “Security vehicles” line is only displayed if you have security vehicle authorization . 

The data is centrally compiled by BMW. It is not possible to edit the dealer data in ISTA. 
If necessary, such changes should be carried out via the respective market organization. 


Adreoluratlon 



[uj ?j X 

Client 

m Software «tatu« 


Dealer; 

Sale', partner number: 

32«C 



Dealership number; 

1 



Narmr 

SVtra AC Sp£C.o 



Address: 

j.P&zc*yr$fca 103 




*3-103 Mint:* 




Polska 



Msfen: 

HMW 


Cancel 



OK 


“Dealer data” tab 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions: 
0 Cancel, OK: closes the “Administration” window. 


83 

ISTA 










Software status 

When clicking the “Software status” tab, information on the installed software packages 
will be displayed. The names of the software packages, information on their contents, 
version number, release date and the package quantity will be shown. 

The “Installed contents packages” and “Installed system packages” option fields switch 
the display between content/data packages and system packages. 



“Software status” tab 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions: 

0 Cancel, OK: closes the “Administration” window. 

If the computer has been in operating mode for more than 24 hours when you click the 
“Software status” “Decentral/Offline” tab, then the ISTA issues a warning that no update 
test is possible unless a server connection is reestablished. In this case, change the oper¬ 
ating mode and click the “Software status” tab again. 


84 

ISTA 






Connection Manager 

If you click the “Connection manager” symbol you can independently initiate communica¬ 
tion between the tester and vehicle (via ICOM). This function is automatically called up 
before communication with a vehicle is required. 

The devices used in the HO workshop such as ICOM and IMIB are listed in the content 
range. 

The individual column entries have the following meanings: 

0 Name: The name of the available device will be displayed. 

0 Color: Color coding of the device to facilitate a visual distinction. 

0 Type: Short description of the device. 

0 VIN: Shows the vehicle identification number of the vehicle connected to the 
respective vehicle interface. 

0 Connection: Shows the connection type (LAN: wire-based workshop network, 
WLAN: wireless workshop network) 

0 Status: Shows the availability of the communication device. Only those communica¬ 
tion devices whose status is “free” are displayed. Previously reserved devices do not 
appear in the list. 



85 

ISTA 


“Connection manager” tab 





► How to establish a connection between the tester and vehicle manually: 

0 Click on the “Connection manager” symbol. 

0 Select the vehicle interface (ICOM) that is connected to the vehicle to be diagnosed. 

0 Click the “Set up connection” button. Wait until the connection is established. 

0 Create a new operation or select an existing operation from the operations list. 

After the operation has been created, the “Operation details” mask will be displayed. 
From here you can search for information or start the vehicle test. 


“Identification operation” progress bar 


Identification operation 



Read out vehicle identification number (VIN)... 



“Assignment/Generation of operation” mask 

Assignment/generation of operation 

3 \S\ 

1 Basic features VIN Datv/tim# 

Status 1 

E90 / 320d I SAL / M47/T2 VA20008 16/0412008 13:38 

In progress 

E90 / 320d / SAL < M47/T2 VA20008 19/04/2008 15:33 

In progress 

E90 / 320d / SAL / M47/T2 VA20008 18/04/2008 16:18 

Terminated 











_ New 

Canc *' operation 

OK 


After the operation is selected, the “Operation details” mask will be displayed. 


86 

ISTA 













Operating Mode 

A change is for example required if a test run is to be conducted with the vehicle and the 
tester is to be taken along for other activities, such as the display of status values. In this 
case, you have to switch from “Online” to “Offline”. 

The operating mode switches to WSM. Only the current status of the ISTA client can be 
viewed and confirmed in the following pop up. 


Operating mode Online/OfFline 
Current operating mode: Online 

The operating mode can only be 
changed via the WSM jumpgate. 


OK 

“Operating mode Online/Offline” pop up 


Note: The change to the “Offline” operating mode must be effected via the 
WSM. If the device is simply disconnected from the workshop network, 
then ongoing processes such as data adjustment or updates may be ter¬ 
minated. This may result in indeterminable conditions on the ISID, up to 
and including a crash with loss of data. 


87 

ISTA 






Status Display 

When clicking on the “Status display” symbol, a window opens showing the status values 
of the connected hardware (ISID, ICOM and IMIB) as a color bar diagram with percentage 
display. The display includes information on the connection guality and the charge status 
of the batteries. 

The respective bar can appear in the following colors, depending on the percentage 
value: 

Green: > 75%, Yellow: 25% - 75%, Red (critical): < 25% 

If one of the status displays enters the “critical” range, the “Status display” symbol is 
colored red. 

Status displays UkJ X 



OK 


“Status display” mask (without ICOM and IMIB) 


88 

ISTA 










Printing 

The print function is available in all masks and can be accessed via the “Print” symbol. 

A pop up window with selectable print options appears. 

The “Print screenshot” option is available in all masks and can be used to create a print¬ 
out of the current mask. Other options depend on the displayed mask. 

Examples of other print options: 

0 Table of contents 

0 List of news items 

0 Hit list 

0 Document 

0 Operation details 

The workshop system automatically uses the standard printer defined by Windows. 


Print 

X 

0 Print screenshot 


O Print operations list 


Cancel 

OK 


89 

ISTA 


“Print” window, example 






Help Functions 

You can access a help function via the symbol bar or via the header of a pop up window 
(except in the case of very small pop up windows) by clicking the help function symbol. 
Help provides information on screens and functions. No operating instructions are includ¬ 
ed in the help function. 

The help window can cover parts of the screen. However, it never covers the symbol 
bar or the header. The “Help” symbol is active when the help window is displayed. 

When the help function is accessed, a help text is always initially displayed that relates 
to the most recently displayed mask. 

You can access the following other help functions from here: 

0 Table of contents 

0 List of abbreviations 

0 Units converter 



“Help for mask” tab 

The “Help for mask” tab describes all elements (symbols, buttons, selection lists etc.) of 
the mask, from which help can be accessed. The “Mask” field (at the top of the content 
range) displays the name of the corresponding mask, e.g. “Operation details”. Under this 
you can select an element from the available graphic overview, e.g. “Symbol bar”. The 
workshop system then displays the appropriate help text. The “Overview” button is acti¬ 
vated. 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions: 

0 Overview: The workshop system returns from the overview of help functions 
to the mask. 

0 Close: The help window is closed. 

90 

ISTA 
















Table of Contents 

You can select the help text for all masks and screen elements of the ISTA workshop sys¬ 
tem in the table of contents. 


Ho Ip 


Holp for 

List of 

Units 

Mil 

abbreviation* 

convert*' 


ootent ov»rvi*» 


Start ptflt 
Idontlfkatlon 

AcjrvMos 
Sorvico plan 
Administration 
Infarmtfipp tip* * 


•i E 


Overview 


Close 


“Table of contents” tab 


► How to access a help text from the table of contents: 

0 Click one item in the “Content overview” area. 

0 Depending on the selected area, the help system may be subdivided in further sub¬ 
sections. 

After selection, the active window shows the appropriate help text. The “Overview” but¬ 
ton is activated. 


91 

ISTA 










List of Abbreviations 

In the list of abbreviations, you will find alphabetically arranged explanations of all abbrevi¬ 
ations used on the workshop system. 

In the content range of the mask, the abbreviations for the selected letter will be dis¬ 
played. The default is the letter “A”. If reguired, select another letter at the top of the 
content range or scroll the display down with the scroll bar. The “Overview” button is 
activated. 


Help 




dll 

[X 

Table c* 
contents 

Holp for 

mask converter 



B 

C 

0 110 

M 1 J K L 

M N 


0 P 

Q 

R S T U 

V W X 2 



•A* 

Shor form 


-or-g form 

Dm 

CO QT. 

▲ 

□ 


A 


Ampere 

Aistheieve cf eteclrtalcjrerl that does net 
rpanqe ever to* 




AMfc'A 


American AssaciaUr c f Motor Veh.-e 
AdflftHMrttiOr 

Brim MM 

viands! Js InsHute) in ttretcry staNaiCfe 

iTsrnabnaii/ 




A3E 


Aij-Vn-pe ;C«-r er 4 

:perathq perrrfcl 

In 3trn 9ry, c» fy s *i *u « uenpral eperain; 

permt rray be eperatec on pcblc npfwavs 




A3S 


Ai5-ioc» farakrg system 

&3S prevsrts the wheels h:n locking v»ti*n the 
tr&r* tfflr rt APS thus? rnarnr^ns thn vnhrli^ 

Lapa.ir.lu be t&tered 

A3i> consists T ^tiee speed senserser 1 he excels, 
z rnrlrn nnr art rlrrtr-rir. prrivw.o -•-rim vqtos in 
Ife teak* system ABSnefitlao&sd's beaks free n 
such a v/y/tha: the wteds are ius‘. yeverted from 
tlntknq 

A "Atm re larnq n the rstn_Tent cester ndcates an 
ASStal IT 

34 



AflS.'AST 


S-rUnrv hrd.» vsK\mT wlh A rrrnT'r 

Al ►!({ Tn)B^ .’r* rrt rr<*f\ v: rtyn Ixrrt wih 

34 

w 


Overview 




Close 



“List of abbreviations” tab 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions: 

0 Overview: The workshop system returns to the letter “A”. 
0 Close: The help window is closed. 


92 

ISTA 














Units Converter 

With the units converter, you can convert physical units for various categories 
(e.g. lengths, volumes, temperatures) into other appropriate unit. 


Help 

Table of Help for Lnt of 

contents mask abbreviations 

Input III 1 

Linear measives 
O Kilometre (km) 

0 Metre (m) 

O Centimetre (cm| 

O Mile |ml.) 

O 

O F0M1R.J 
© Inch tin.) 



Keyfccard 

Delete 

Select 

category 


“Units converter” tab 

The buttons in the action line have the following functions: 

0 Keyboard: Shows or hides the on-screen keyboard. 

0 Delete: Deletes the entered value. 

0 Select category: Selects a unit category such as length or volume units. 

0 Close: The help window is closed. 

► How to convert physical units: 

0 Click the “Select category” button. A pop up window is opened. It contains a selec¬ 
tion list of the available categories. 

0 Select the reguired category in the pop up window. The displayed window closes. 
The selected category is now displayed in the content range. 

0 Select in the unit in the left-hand column into which you want to enter the value. 

0 Select the unit into which the entered value should be converted in the right-hand 
column. 

0 Enter a value in the “Input” field. If appropriate, use the on-screen keyboard. 

The converted value immediately appears in the “Result” field. 


tit x 



Hcr.ull 2 54 


Q Kilometre (km) 
O Metro <■) 

0 Centimetre (cm) 
O Mil* (ml ) 

O Yard (yd.) 

O Foot (ft.) 

O loch (In.) 


93 

ISTA 










Minimize Workshop System 

When you click the minimize symbol in the symbol bar, the ISTA Application window will 
be minimized. The ISTA application can be maximized again via the Windows task bar. 

Procedures that are displayed in BST mode cannot be minimized. 

Close Operation/application 

You have various options for closing or interrupting an operation: 

0 Click the “Start mask” symbol in the symbol bar. 

0 Access the “Identification” main menu and begin a new operation by selecting the 
“Vehicle selection” item in the submenu 

0 Click “X” (Exit) in the symbol bar. In this case, a pop up appears in which you can 
select whether to exit the operation or the ISTA Application. 

Close operation / application X I 

O Terminate operation 
O Interrupt operation 


Cancel 

Close 

Close 



rr 1 ■' 


“Close operation/application” mask 

► How to exit the ongoing operation: 

0 Click the “X” in the symbol bar. ISTA will prompt a security note. 

0 Select the “Terminate operation” option and click the “Close operation” 
button to return to the start mask; or 

0 Select “Close application” to close the ISTA workshop system; or 

0 Select “Cancel” to continue the current operation. 


94 

ISTA 





When exiting the operation, the workshop system switches back to the start mask from 
where a new identification procedure can be started. 

► How to interrupt the ongoing operation: 

0 Click the “X” in the symbol bar. ISTA will prompt a security note. 

0 Select the “Interrupt operation” option and click the “Close operation” 
button to return to the start mask; or 

0 Select “Close application” to close the ISTA workshop system; or 

0 Select “Cancel” to continue the current operation. 

When exiting the operation, the workshop system switches back to the start mask from 
where you can start a new vehicle identification operation. You can open the interrupted 
operation over the next 14 days from the operations list. It will then be set to the “termi¬ 
nated” status and no longer appears in the list. 

If you want to display terminated operations in the list, you can change the filter settings 
accordingly. 

Operations 

All data generated during a vehicle's stay in the workshop are compiled in an operation. 
These are identification, vehicle and work data. 

An operation is always linked to a specific vehicle by vehicle identification via the VIN. It 
accompanies the vehicle from the initial identification via the vehicle test, through the 
diagnosis performed in the workshop and the info search for the repairs, to the conclu¬ 
sion of the repair and service work. Within an operation, the ISTA only provides informa¬ 
tion for the identified vehicle. 

Procedures can be terminated or interrupted and continued within a certain period. An 
operation may also be continued on a different device and even in another language. An 
ISTA client can, however, only ever process one operation at a time. 

Creating an Operation 

There are several ways to create a new operation. The procedures depend on how the 
vehicle has been identified. 

Identification via operations list 

If you use the operations list to select an operation whose status is set to “in progress”, 
then the workshop system copies it after a security check into a new “parallel operation” 
that it then opens. The parallel operation does not contain the log data of the initial opera¬ 
tion. If the status of the selected operation is “terminated”, however, then the workshop 
system opens it directly. 

Multiple simultaneous access to the vehicle is automatically prevented. 


95 

ISTA 



Identification via VIN Entry 

If a VIN has been entered and the workshop system finds an operation record with the 
same VIN, then it opens the record directly or copies the contents of it into a parallel 
operation, depending on the status. 

If several operations are available for the same VIN, then the “Assignment/generation of 
operation” mask appears first. In this mask, you can select and open an existing operation 
or create a completely new operation. 

Vehicle Identification by Reading Out Vehicle Data 

The workshop system reads out the vehicle data and searches as previously described 
for a matching existing operation. If it does not find such an operation, it automatically cre¬ 
ates a new one. 

When the “Read out vehicle data” mask is open, the “Decision Operation/VIN” pop up 
may also appear 

When an operation is open, you can read out the VIN directly from the vehicle via the 
connection manager. The workshop system checks whether the open operation matches 
the vehicle identification. 

If this does not apply, the following pop up appears: 


S«rvfce 

Tathnicd Appl<c«Len 

WN Vahids LU3C08ID7 

C«rn«<c*n naniger 



“Decision Operation/VIN” pop up 


Continue with the open operation and separating vehicle connection: 

Select this option if for example you wish to carry out an information search with the exist¬ 
ing operation and associated vehicle ID number to which the connected vehicle does not 
belong. In this case, the workshop system separates the communication link to the vehi¬ 
cle in order to prevent data conflicts. 

96 

ISTA 












Interrupt operation and continue work with connected vehicle: 

Select this option if you have selected the wrong operation or have not yet closed a previ¬ 
ous operation. 

Continue with the open operation, maintain vehicle connection and 
ignore read out VIN: 

Select this option if you have removed the control module in which the VIN is stored from 
a donor vehicle and installed it in the vehicle to be diagnosed. In this case, the workshop 
system reads out the VIN of the donor vehicle. 


Vehicle Identification via Basic Features 

After the input of the basic features, the workshop system searches for match operations 
in the operations list. If one or more hits are returned, then the “Assignment/Generation of 
operation” dialogue appears. In this mask, you can select and open an existing operation 
and open or create a new operation. The dialogue does not appear if the selected basic 
feature combination does not appear in the operations. In this case, a new operation is 
automatically created. 


Assignment/generation of operation 


X 


Basic features VIN 

Date/time Status 

E90 / 320 d / SAL / M477T2 VA20008 

16/04/2008 13:38 In progress 

E90 / 320d / SAL /M477T2 VA20008 15704/2008 15:33 In progress 

E90 / 320 d / SAL I M477T2 VA20008 

18/04/2008 16:18 Terminated 










_ 


Cancel 


New 

operation 


“Assignment/generation of operation” dialogue 

On completion of the vehicle test, the VIN is automatically made available and is retroac¬ 
tively stored in the operation. The next time the operation is opened via basic features, it 
will also be displayed. 


97 

ISTA 










Identification in “TeleServices” Operating Mode 

A new operation is always created here. The “TeleServices” operating mode can only be 
accessed via the “ISPA” application. When the ISTA Client is closed in the “TeleServices” 
operating mode, the operation is automatically set to the “Terminated” status. 

Statuses 

An ISTA operation can adopt the following statuses: 

0 New 
0 In progress 
0 Interrupted 
0 Terminated 



98 

ISTA 











New 

An operation has the “New” status, if the job creation is completed in ISPA (service 
advice) and the operation has not yet been opened in the ISTA workshop system. 

If an operation is automatically created on an ISTA client as part of a vehicle identification, 
although this initially has the “New” status, it then switches to the “In progress” status. 
You cannot interfere with this change. A new operation is only created if the vehicle to be 
identified cannot be unambiguously assigned to any operations present in the existing 
operations list. If a matching entry appears in the operations list, a pop up appears 
(See below). 


In progress 

An operation has the “In progress” status for as long as it is in process. In the meantime 
it is not possible to view the operations list, unless you use a second ISTA client. If you do 
not have this option, you will have to close the existing operation after vehicle identifica¬ 
tion before you can switch to the “Operations list”. You will see this concluded operation 
with the “Interrupted” or “Terminated” status (depending on the selected option). 

From the operations list you can select an operation with the “In progress” status. In this 
case, the workshop system creates a copy of the original operation. 


Copy of an operation or parallel operation 

An “In progress” operation can be opened from 
the operations list on a second ISTA client or 
workshop PC. The following pop up appears: 

A copy of an existing operation can also be creat¬ 
ed and opened, for example to carry out informa¬ 
tion searches. After the “OK” button is clicked, 
the “Operation details" mask will be displayed. 

A parallel operation is a copy of the existing oper¬ 
ation without its expiration dates and has all the 
same rights. A new identification is not reguired. 
Once vehicle communication is established, the 
VIN will be in any case reread and compared to 
the original VIN. If there is a disparity, a pop up will 
appear. 


Copy operation 

uj X 

The operation is already in progress. 


A copy of (he operation is being produced. 


Cancel 

OK 

“Copy operation” pop up 


99 

ISTA 





Interrupted 

The “Interrupted” status is set if “Interrupted” has been selected when closing the opera¬ 
tion. 

An interrupted operation can be reset to the “In progress” status if you select it from the 
operations list and execute other functions in the open operation. The operation can con¬ 
tinue to use the data obtained before the pause. 


Copy operation 

S \E\ 

The operation is already in progress. 


A copy of the operation is being produced. 


Cancel 

OK 


Terminated 

An operation is terminated if “Terminated” has been selected when closing the operation. 

A terminated operation can be reset to the “In progress” status if you select it from the 
operations list or identify the respective vehicle from the start. This may be necessary, for 
example, if there are further customer complaints or the repair was not successful. In this 
case, the ISTA workshop system inguires whether the terminated operation should be 
reopened or whether a new operation should be created: 


Copy operation 

3 x] 

The operation is already in progress. 


A copy of the operation is being produced. 


Canecl 

OK 


“Open/create operation” pop up 


100 

ISTA 







Re-open terminated operation 

A terminated operation will be opened, using the respective sequence data. 

The operations report will be continued. 

Applications: 

0 The repair was unsuccessful 
0 There are new customer complaints 

Operations with “Terminated” status are not displayed in the operations list by default. If 
you wish to select these operations in the list, you can change the filter settings for the 
operations list. 

New operation to be created and opened 

Use this option if the current operation no longer has anything in common with the old 
(selected) one either in technical or chronological terms. The workshop system copies 
the selected operation. A new operations report will be created, however, and the original 
procedure data will not be used. 

Simultaneous access to an ISTA operation 

An operation cannot simultaneously be processed by several service technicians. A com¬ 
plete copy of the operation is created so that several service technicians can work on the 
same operation simultaneously. 

Time-dependent status change 

The time after the operations are removed from the operations list depends on the opera¬ 
tion status. The “New” and “In progress” statuses are automatically replaced after 7 days 
with the “Terminated” status. The “Interrupted” status is set to the “Terminated” status 
after 14 days. Terminated operations are only displayed in the operations list if a filter has 
been set correspondingly. They can be reedited from this list. Operations with the 
“Terminated” status are completely deleted from the operations list only after 14 days 
(exception: if there is a very large number of operations and the reserved memory range 
on the ISIS is exhausted, then the oldest operations with the “Terminated” status will be 
deleted before the 14-day period expires. 

Workshop PC 

The operation and its protocol data are always available on the workshop server. The PC 
is only used in online mode. 

ISID in offline mode 

If you have to switch to the offline mode with the ISID, any open operation must first be 
interrupted or terminated. This operation will then be transferred to the ISID when you 
change over to offline operation. This operation is set to the “In progress” status on the 
ISIS and therefore cannot be simultaneously edited by another user. 


101 

ISTA 



You can edit other vehicles in offline mode. In this case, the operations and the associat¬ 
ed protocol data are initially generated and saved locally on the ISID. When the device 
goes online again, it is resynchronized with the workshop server. 

TeleServices 

As far as the user is concerned there is only one possible operation in the “TeleServices” 
mode. The “Operations list” tab is not available. Operations are automatically created and 
terminated and will be invisible from the user's point of view. It is not possible to pause. 
As is usual for all procedures, logs are generated for the FBM. 

Documentation/ISTA User's Manual of 132 

Terminating an operation 

You can close an operation with the following actions: 

0 Exiting the application 
0 Identifying another vehicle 

(Operations list, VIN, Read out vehicle data, Basic features) 

0 Calling up the start mask 


102 

ISTA 



Scope of Functions for Operator Devices 


Menu 

Tele 

Service 

PC workshop 
online 

ISID 

online 

ISID 

offline 

3.1 Start mask 





3.2 Identification 





3.2.1 Vehicle selection 





3.2.1.1 Operations list 

- 

X 

X 

X 

3.2.1.2 Vehicle identification number 

- 

X 

X 

X 

3.2.1.3 Reading out vehicle data 

- 

- 

X 

X 

3.2.1.4 Basic features 

- 

X 

X 

X 

3.2.2 Operation information 





3.2.2.1 Operation details 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.2.2.2 Vehicle details 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.2.2.3 Repair history 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.2.2.4 Operations report 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.3 Vehicle test 





3.3.1 Control unit tree 

X 

- 

X 

X 

Control unit functions 

X 

- 

X 

X 

Identification 

X 

- 

X 

X 

Diagnostic query 

X 

- 

X 

X 

Component activation 

- 

- 

X 

X 

3.3.2 Control unit list 

X 

- 

X 

X 

Control unit functions 

X 

- 

X 

X 

Identification 

X 

- 

X 

X 

Diagnostic query 

X 

- 

X 

X 

Component activation 

- 

- 

X 

X 

3.4 Activities 





3.4.1 Information search 





3.4.1.1 Product structure 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.4.1.2 Function structure 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.4.1.3 Components and 
signals 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.4.1.4 Text search 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.4.2 Guided troubleshooting 





Detail table 

X 

- 

X 

X 

Quick delete 

X 

- 

X 

X 

3.4.2.1 Fault memory 

(X) 

- 

X 

X 

3.4.2.2 Fault pattern 

X 

X 

X 

X 


103 

ISTA 













































Scope of Functions for Operator Devices (Cont.) 


Menu 

Tele 

PC workshop 

ISID 

ISID 


Service 

online 

online 

offline 

3.4.3 Service function 





3.4.3.1 Service functions 

X 

- 

X 

X 

3.4.4 Workshop/Operating fluids 





3.4.4.1 Workshop equipment 

X 

- 

X 

X 

3.4.4.2 Operating fluids 

X 

- 

X 

X 

3.4.4.3 Text search 

X 

- 

X 

X 

3.4.5 Measuring instruments 





3.4.5.1 Multimeter 

- 

- 

X 

X 

3.4.5.2 Oscilloscope 

- 

- 

X 

X 

3.4.5.3 Signals 

- 

- 

X 

X 

3.5 Service plan 





3.5.1 Hit list 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.5.2 Test plan 

(X) 

- 

X 

X 

3.6 Symbol bar 





3.6.1 Start mask 

- 

X 

X 

X 

3.6.2 Information object 
forward/History/Back 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.6.3 Administration 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.6.4 Connection manager 

- 

- 

X 

X 

3.6.6Status display 

- 

- 

X 

X 

3.6.7 Print 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.6.8Help 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.6.9 Minimize/Maximize 

X 

X 

X 

X 

3.6.10 Close operation 

X 

X 

X 

X 







"x" available, "(x)" restricted availability,not available 


104 

ISTA 

































Abbreviations 


Term 

Explanation 

BST 

BMW Service Tester (former BMW diagnostics system) 

DIS 

Diagnostic and information system 

FBM 

Vehicle description module (repair history and vehicle details) 

VIN 

Vehicle identification number (VIN) 

GSM 

Global System for Mobile Communication 

GT1 

Group Tester 1 

HO 

Dealer organization 

HTML 

Hypertext Markup Language 

ICOM 

Integrated Communication Optical Module 

IMIB 

Integrated Measurement Interface Box 

ISAP 

Integrated Service Access Point 

ISPA 

Integrated Service Processes Application 

ISTA 

Integrated Service Technical Application 

IDES 

Integrated diagnosis development system 

ISID 

Integrated Service Information Display 

ISIS 

Integrated Service Information Server 

LAN 

Local Area Network 

OBD 

On-Board Diagnostics 

OSS 

Online Service System 

PC 

Personal Computer 

PDF 

Portable Document Format 

pdm 

Predefined diagnostic messages 

ECU 

Electronic Control Unit 

SoWu 

Individual equipment for vehicle details 

SVG 

Scalable Vector Graphics 

TA-DB 

Technical Actions - Database 

TSSB 

TeleServices Switch Board (not available in several markets) 

VIN 

Vehicle Identification Number 

WLAN 

Wireless Local Area Network 

WSM 

Workshop system management 

XML 

Extensible Markup Language 


105 

ISTA 






Glossary 


Term 

Explanation 

Administration 

Shows and facilitates general settings; shows dealer data and the installed versions of the content and system 
packages. 

Operating mode 

The operating mode designates the application options for ISTA. 

BST mode 

The BST mode is the name of the mode of the predecessor system for the E21 - E31 Series. The associated 
diagnostic software has been imported to ISTA. It can also be recognized on an ISTA client by the different lay¬ 
out of the masks. 

Client 

In this context, a client is an ISTA program section on an operator device (in this case, ISID or workshop PC). It 
operates according to the client-server system and communicates with ISTA server components (software) 
located on the server (hardware). 

pdm result 

As part of the TeleServices a vehicle transmits diagnostic data that is compiled in an XML file and transmitted to 
the TSSB. In addition to the VIN, the file contains a list of the fault memory entries for all control devices. 

Vehicle 

identification 

Contains all functions that are required for vehicle identification via input of a VIN (vehicle identification number), 
by reading out the VIN from the vehicle, via selection of basic features or vehicle selection from an operations list. 

Vehicle test 

Contains all functions that are required for performance and display of the vehicle test. In the vehicle test the sta¬ 
tus of the installed control devices is determined and graphically presented. 

Fault pattern 
selection 

The identified diagnostic symptoms can be selected via the fault patterns. 

Information 

display 

Contains all functions that, as a result of an information search, deliver and display a document. 

Information 

search 

Contains all functions that, as a result of a query, deliver and display a hit list. 

Installation/ 

Update 

Installs and updates the content and system packets in conjunction with other components (WSM, JETstream). 

JET stream 

System for controlling installations and updates on ISIS. 

Measuring 

instruments 

Measurement and signal functions are made available via the measuring instruments. The measuring functions 
are, on the one hand, intended to measure current, voltage etc., in the vehicle, and on the other, to generate sig¬ 
nals. Usually additional auxiliaries are required before measuring instruments can be used such as adapters, for 
example. The measuring instruments are used by instructions from a test program. Furthermore, the user can 
also use measuring and signal functions independently of a test sequence in the “manually controlled measur¬ 
ing instruments” mode. In this case, the user must make all settings and evaluations himself. 

Test plan 

The test plan provides a test proposal with the optimum sequence of test objects for selection on the basis of 
the fault statuses read out from the vehicle and the optionally selected fault patterns. 

ISPA 

Support system for service consultation. May not be used in all markets. 

ISPA Broker 

Interface service for checking data from BMW headquarters, e.g. technical actions. This service is always avail¬ 
able. It does not depend on installation of ISPA.. 

Control unit 
functions 

With the aid of the control unit functions, individual control units can be identified, interrogated and actuated. 

Operations 

All work on one vehicle is compiled under one operation. Operations can be created, interrupted, terminated and 
reported. 

WSM 

The Workshop System Management (WSM) helps to administer ISIS. This is where all administrative tasks are 
performed. 


106 

ISTA 





Fault Messages and Fault Rectification 

If a function cannot be performed due to a fault, a pop up with a fault message is dis¬ 
played. If this pop up is displayed, please proceed as follows: 

0 Execute the desired function again. 

0 If a fault message is issued again, please note the displayed fault code and contact 
your local administrator. He will initiate suitable measures or send a message (via 
WSM) to Support. 

If you find faults in an information object in terms of content or technical details, please 
also report this fault to support (via WSM). Examples of such faults can be a missing 
description in a set of repair instructions, incorrect wire color in the wiring diagram, or a 
graphic showing the place of installation that does not correspond to the vehicle in gues- 
tion or a similar one, for example. 

You can obtain a description of the procedure for reporting faults in the WSM documents. 

If the system needs more than approximately 10 seconds to execute a function, then a 
progress bar is displayed. With longer process times, the following pop up with options 
may be displayed: 

System message 


System message ' 


The service call has exceeded the permitted run time. 

You can choose to continue waiting or exit the 
program. 


Exit 

program 


Wait 


This is not a fault. The message signals that the execution of the function is ongoing. You 
can continue the action by selecting “Wait” or close the program with “Exit program”. If 
no entry is made when a pop up appears, then the operation continues running in the 
background. 


107 

ISTA 





