Table of Contents 


Integrated Service Technical Application - 
Programming 

Subject Page 


Introduction .5 

Reasons for introduction of the new programming system.5 

New features when comparing ISTA/P with Progman.6 

Release Phases .7 

Phase 1 .7 

Future Phases.7 

Transforming an SSS into an ISSS.8 

Programming .8 

Preparatory Measures .9 

During Programming/encoding .10 

Follow-up.11 

Programming of Control Units .12 

Programming.12 

Coding .12 

Customizing.13 

Personal Profile.13 

Programming Process.14 

Starting Programming.15 

Opening an Existing Programming Session.16 

Starting a New Programming Session .17 

Selecting Vehicle Interface .19 

Vehicle Access for MOST Bus.20 

Vehicle Access for l-bus/K-bus Vehicles .20 

Vehicle Access from the F01/F02 on.20 

Identifying the vehicle and obtaining a 

read-out of control unit data.21 

Producing and Configuring the Measures Plan.23 

Preparing for Programming .27 

Carrying Out Repair Tasks .27 

Updating the Measures Plan .27 

Carrying Out Programming .28 

Completing Programming Session .29 


Initial Print Date: 01/09 


Revision Date: 05/10 


































Subject Page 

Overview of Functions on ISTA/P .31 

Overview of Main Functions .32 

Import Vehicle Order (VO) .36 

How to Import a VO?.37 

Import Enabling Code.43 

How to Import an Enabling Code .44 

Updating and enabling of map data for navigation system and 

Gracenote® DB .47 

Enabling of the Navigation Map (Road Map) .50 

Import via Data Management.51 

Import via SWT Online (as of ISPI 2.7.1) .51 

Import via External Storage Medium (e.g.: USB stick, CD).51 


Glossary . 

A. 

Assembly number . 

B . 

Bus systems . 

C. 

CBS data . 

Car and key memory . 

Conversion. 

D. 

Diagnosis address . 

E . 

EWS/DME or EWS/DDE adjustment 

Enabling code. 

Enabling code short. 

Encoding . 

F . 

Flash-programming . 

G. 

Gracenote® DB. 

Gateway . 


IBAC enabling code 

ICOM. 

IMIB. 

ISAP . 

ISID . 

ISIS . 

ISPA. 

ISSS . 


52 

.52 

.52 

.52 

.52 

.53 

.53 

.53 

.53 

.53 

.53 

.53 

.53 

.53 

.53 

.54 

.54 

.54 

.54 

.54 

.54 

.54 

.54 

.55 

.55 

.55 

.55 

.55 

.55 

.55 












































Subject Page 

ISTA.55 

ISTA/P.55 

Integration level/lnteqration staqe .55 

ITOOLS .55 

IP address .56 

IP subnet mask.56 

J .56 

JETstream.56 

M.56 

MAC address.56 

Mecca indicator .56 

N.57 

Native action plan.57 

0.57 

Overall encoding.57 

P .57 

Personal profile .57 

Programming.57 

Programming status.57 

R .57 

Retrofit .57 

Replacement follow-up .58 

S .58 

SGC.58 

SWT .58 

Software ID .58 

T .58 

Target context .58 

U .58 

USB.58 

V .59 

Vehicle order/central encoding code .59 

W.59 

Web copy console .59 

WSM.59 

Z .59 

ZCS.59 








































Integrated Service Technical Application 
Programming (ISTA/P) 


Model: All Models 
Production: All 

■micmiis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Navigate through the various ISTA/P menus 

• Successfully code/program a BMW Group Vehicle 

• Understand the reports generated by ISTA/P 

• Know how to import a VO 

• Know how to import an enabling code 

• Know how to update the Navigation maps 

• Know how to update the Gracenote® DB 


4 

ISTA-Programming 



Introduction 


Reasons for introduction of the new programming system 

Due to the constantly growing complexity and ongoing development of functions over 
the life of vehicles, adaptation of the software on the control units is unavoidable. 

The launch of the F01 brought with it a new generation of vehicles which have not only 
new functions but also a new control unit architecture and a new electrical system con¬ 
figuration. 

In order to ensure that those technologies can be supported by the dealer organization 
today and in the future, a new workshop system was introduced alongside them. 

The new workshop system incorporates an extensive workshop network with a central 
server for data storage and provision of the applications. It also introduces new hardware 
components for diagnosis and programming. 

The existing programming system, Progman, is being replaced by the Integrated Service 
Technical Application for Programming, ISTA/R 

ISTA/P contains the present vehicle field programming functions plus new functions and 
is thus designed for the future content and reguirements of vehicle programming in the 
field. 


Note: For more information regarding ISTA/P, please refer to Dealernetand 
select: Menu>BMW>Aftersales Portal>Service>Workshop Technology 
and access the ISTA/P User Documentation file. You can also type 
Workshop Technology in the search engine and that will prompt you 
to the correct web page. 


5 

ISTA-Programming 




New features when comparing ISTA/P with Progman 

• Reduction and combination of input demands. 

• Configurable measures plan viewable as a graphical chart 
or a table. 

• Detailed display of control unit status. 

• Automatic repetition of programming in the event of control unit programming or 
coding errors within the programming process. 

• Importing of enabling codes/vehicle order from any location in the workshop provid¬ 
ed there is access to the workshop system/ISTA/R 

• Measures plan can be subseguently extended and adapted. 

• Programming takes place first followed by automatic coding of all control units. 

• Proactive saving of customization and CBS data and re-importing into control units 
from F01 on. 

• Saving of personal profile settings such as phone book or navigation destinations, 
depending on control units fitted. 

• Generation of a control unit order list if hardware needs to be replaced. 

• Session can be saved if parts are not immediately available. 

• Display of the Progman or ISTA/P version that was last used to program the vehicle. 

• Timely/faster updates. 


6 

ISTA-Programming 




Release Phases 

The new programming system ISTA/P is to be introduced in several phases. 

Phase 1 

Phase 1 reguires the transformation of the Software Service Station, SSS, into the 
Integrated Software Service Station, ISSS. This “Phase 1 ”, allows the ISSS to be 
integrated in the ISIS network. 

The actual data/software (ISTA/P application) needed to program the vehicles is installed 
in the will be on the ISSS. Updates will be applied to the ISIS via Jetstream or from DVD 
and then passed on to the ISSS during the maintenance cycles (off-business hours). 

ISTA/P is capable of programming and coding all models. 

Initially, the interface and control for programming can only take place by using keyboard 
and mouse on the ISSS. Soon after, programming control can take place via each individ¬ 
ual ISID in the workshop. 

The ICOM A and the ICOM B will be used as vehicle interface for programming. 

The ICOM B will be used exclusively for programming MOST control units. 

From the introduction of the ethernet connection in the OBD2 interface, ICOM B 
will not be used, (example: F01/F02) 



Illustration of Phase 1 


Future Phases 

It is planned to integrate the programming system ISTA/P entirely in the ISIS workshop 
server. A precise timetable for integration of ISTA/P in ISIS has not yet been established. 


7 

ISTA-Programming 


















Transforming an SSS into an ISSS 


The technical requirements for conversion demand that the SSS is at least the 2nd gen¬ 
eration (release 2). The 1st generation SSS can not be converted. 


A starter pack containing the following items will 
be needed: 

• ISSS - basic DVD (1 disc) 

• ISIS - ISTA/P client (1 disc) 

• ISIS ISTA/P data/software (2 disc) 

First, the basic DVD is placed in the DVD drive 
on the SSS and the operating system installed 
on the SSS. In the process, the previous applica¬ 
tion, Progman, is completely deleted. From this 
point on, future, updates and installation of the 
ISTA/P application on the ISSS will take place 
exclusively via the ISIS. 



The ISTA/P client and then application software are installed on the ISIS. The ISSS is 
updated/supplied with the application software by the ISIS via the network during the 
maintenance cycle. 


Programming 

An important factor for error-free programming is proper preparation of the vehicle and 
observance of the instructions during programming. There are special requirements that 
may apply to individual vehicle models. The actions that are required for all models are 
described in the following pages. 

Note: Programming must always be preceded by carrying out a diagnosis on 
the vehicle and making sure that there are no faults on the vehicle. 
Programming must not be started before faults in the vehicle electrical 
system are ruled out. Always refer to the latest bulletins and information 
on currently known issues involving software releases. Please refer to 
SI B 01 03 06 for further information. 


8 

ISTA-Programming 




Preparatory Measures 


1 J 

Engine 

Turn off engine, ignition key turned to terminal 0 


Manual Gearbox/SMG/DKG 

- Transmission in neutral 

- Parking brake applied 

tt *4 

rji i, 

\ 

Automatic Transmission 

-Transmission in position P 

- System temperature below 80°C 

11 

Parking Brake 

On vehicles with electromechanical parking brake, apply the 
parking brake by means of the parking brake button, otherwise 
use the handbrake. 

1 / A \ 

i\ V-' 

Electric Loads 

All electric loads, lights and turn indicator switched off. 

Wiper/washer system switched off. Make sure that the wipers 
can move freely. 

The wipers may be activated during programming. On no 
account block the wipers. 


9 

ISTA-Programming 




















HT — ,i3,ov u 

\Wk9Q ° - Co 


Battery and Battery Charger 

The battery should be sufficiently charged at the start of the pro¬ 
gramming procedure (>13 V). 

Connect a BMW-specified and approved battery charger and set 
to external power supply mode (FSV mode). Do not connect or 
disconnect the charger during programming. The electrical system 
voltage must not drop below 13 volts during the programming 
procedure. 

Note: If Programming/Coding a Hybrid Vehicle please 
follow their specific preparatory measures. 

1 J 


Diagnosis 

Carry out a vehicle test on the ISTA workshop system. 

Using the ISTA diagnosis system, rectify any problems before 
programming and delete stored fault codes. 


Interfaces 

Programming is performed exclusively via the ICOM devices. 

Any vehicle equipped with a MOST bus manufactured before the 
F01/F02, will require the use of an ICOM A and an ICOM B. 

Lcs/J* • - 


Programming 

CKM data is automatically saved by ISTA/P and written back to the 
control unit after programming. 

The data status of the ISSS must always be up to date. 


Hybrid Vehicles 

To properly diagnose E72 Active Hybrid X6 vehicles, all current software must be installed 
on your ISSS & ISTA/P equipment. Please refer to the Workshop Technology website on 
Center Net for the update instructions contained in the "ISSS & ISTA/P Installation 
Manual" and for other relevant information - Release Notes, 3g DCS messages etc. The 
update process takes approximately 2-3 hours. 

Please ensure that no overnight programming happens when the updates are scheduled. 
Updated information: 

• Please check that the transport / energy saving mode is off. 

• All E72 Active Hybrid X6 vehicles need to be on the integration level (l-level) 
E070-09-12-512 or higher. 


10 

ISTA-Programming 

















• Before start programming, please make sure that the HV (High Voltage) is 
switched off with Service Disconnect. 

• Keep in mind that the car has to go to sleep mode before you can start the engine 
after programming. 

• The E72 Active Hybrid X6 is fully supported by BMW NA Technical Services. 

During Programming/encoding 

• Take note of and comply with any prompts or instructions issued by ISTA/R 

• Leave the ignition on and comply with the instructions issued by ISTA/P 
(e.g. for CAS). 

• Do not cut off the connection between the workshop network, ICOM and vehicle. 

• After every action in the luggage compartment (e.g. loading / removing navigation 
DVD), close the luggage compartment lid of the vehicle (prevents the luggage com¬ 
partment lights from overheating). 

• Do not do anything in or on the vehicle during vehicle programming/encoding unless 
the ISTA/P system has issued an instruction to do so. 

Follow-up 

• The follow-up work listed at the end of the final report such as calibrations, initializa¬ 
tions, service functions, etc. are to be carried in the vehicle test in the ISTA work¬ 
shop system. Each item of follow-up work is to be confirmed individually. 

• Enter time and date information in vehicle via Drive for correct CBS value 
calculation. 

• After vehicle programming/encoding, insert/connect all data storage media (DVD, 
iPod®, etc.) that were previously removed/disconnected in the drives and interfaces 
in the vehicle. 

• Compare the previously printed out or noted CBS data of the control units and, if 
reguired, reset and correct them via the vehicle test in the ISTA workshop system. 

• Run the vehicle test with the ISTA workshop system and terminate the vehicle test. 

• For safety reasons, keep vehicle stationary for at least 5 minute (vehicle electrical 
system 2000 and vehicle electrical system 2020 vehicles) or 16 minutes (1-Bus vehi¬ 
cles) with terminal R OFF so that all control units "go to sleep", i.e. can assume rest 
state. 

Note: Control units that do not go into "sleep mode" could cause errors relat¬ 
ing to closed circuit current! 

• Concluding check that the vehicle is trouble-free. 

• Check all radio and TV freguencies and destinations previously noted and store 
manually as necessary. 

11 

ISTA-Programming 



Programming of Control Units 

The programming system ISTA/P ensures updating of the data statuses on all vehicles by 
automatically generating a measures plan that should be implemented on vehicles that 
are bound to an l-level status. 

In this context, a distinction is made between three different options. Each of these 
options represents a change or adaptation to the software and functions. A distinction 
is made between three measures: 

• Programming 

• Coding 

• Customizing 

Programming 

Programming (also known as flash programming) loads a new program or data in the 
control unit. A distinction can be made between control units with: 

• Program status and 

• Program and data status 

The program status of the control unit corresponds to the operating system and controls 
the computer program in the control unit. The data status involves the characteristic 
maps and characteristic curves specific to the vehicle, engine and transmission. The 
ISTA/P programming application automatically takes that into account when programming 
the control unit concerned. 

With ISTA/R the control unit has been programmed, any necessary coding procedures 
are performed automatically. 

Coding 

Coding involves adapting the control units to the specific vehicle. That means that func¬ 
tions and data maps already in the control modules are enabled or activated in accor¬ 
dance with the vehicle order for the vehicle. 


12 

ISTA-Programming 



Customizing 

On older vehicles, the car and key memory (CKM) option located under the Vehicle 
option is used to enter the customer-specific settings for the car and key memory func¬ 
tions on certain electrical systems. 


hlb)ialui link* 

I KlrKti > |»M)iaiM*<tf 



lib A 

gj IS! 1 

jiifcj [? 

" [x 1 

-- .’tit!'' 


€81 


... i 

IJtJV r, —... 

» 10 4 tv 



□ fUtralt. Jtt At ACM battery 

D Matrat*. CD charter 

D Hitwlt. uriartif lint' 

□ Hatnll. ittte MAi »*«*»■ M* 'alt It 
0 Matrat* ttcaisbi iiaguai n:dj« 

□ Hatral# l**ar) 

□ MHWll. I»*<M !■<•»<•) 

O IWiali, raaiM IxiMtt 

□ Hatttl# 

□ M*tt*la. Hrfl O'•«<« 

□ Hyttal#. (4*» 

□ Ma«f«t» r«A» 7 

□ Httiatl. t|iiit iltWKy VH4I 

□ Metro!# TEI (reoir.ttrtt 


s 




DatMvaaa 


Personal Profile 

On vehicles with the Personal Profile function, the customization settings are entered 
directly by the customer. For such vehicles, there is no Customize button on the Vehicle 
menu. 


13 

ISTA-Programming 








Programming Process 

The programming process consists of various procedures, some 
of which reguire manual intervention although most are automatic. 

The individual procedures are illustrated here and described in detail below. 

Programming process sequence 


© ® ® © © © ® 



1 © 


\ 

J 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Identify vehicle and obtain read-out of control unit data 

2 

Produce and configure measures plan 

3 

Prepare for programming, export CBS/CKM data 

4 

Carry out repairs and replace control units where necessary 

5 

Re-check vehicle identification after repairs. Update measures plan 

6 

Carry out programming 

7 

Carry out programming follow-up, import CBS/CKM data 

8 

Programming successfully completed 


14 

ISTA-Programming 



















Starting Programming 

Essentially, ISTA/P is an independent external application that will run on the ISSS in 
Phase 1. 

Although in a latter stage ISTA/P can be started from the ISID, it is entirely independent of 
the ISTA diagnosis application. That means that before programming can be started, 
diagnosis must be ended or interrupted. 

Starting and management of a new programming session can only be carried out by 
means of ISTA/R 

When ISTA/P is started, the user has a choice of three different actions: 

• Cancel and exit ISTA/P 

• Open an existing programming session 

• Start a new programming session 



Start screen on the ISSS Integrated Software Service Station 


Integrated Service Information i 3°] [/> & [J] [xj 

Display 



Start screen for ISID (not enabled initially) 


15 

ISTA-Programming 














Opening an Existing Programming Session 

If the user decides to open an existing programming session, all the programming ses¬ 
sions currently in progress are listed and the user can select the session reguired. 

On the toolbar there are various buttons for opening more menus. 

On the options bar, you can select the session or the vehicle that is to be programmed 
or the Integrated Software Service Station (ISSS) that is to be used for programming. 
Depending on the model of the vehicle, each ISSS can carry out up to five programming 
sessions at the same time. 

The button for selecting the vehicle access method is located on the function bar. 

The information panel shows the details of the sessions or available ICOMs. 

The control buttons are used to navigate through the programming process, 
e.g. the "Next" button takes you to the next screen. 

List of current sessions 



©- 

©■ 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Toolbar 

2 

Options bar 

3 

Function bar 

4 

Information pane 

5 

Control buttons 


16 

ISTA-Programming 















Starting a New Programming Session 

When a new programming session is to be started, the programming server on which the 
vehicle is to be programmed must first be selected. 

The ISSS used for the session can be selected manually or automatically. Because at the 
moment the ISSS can only program one F01 at a time or 5 other vehicles at a time, it is 
recommended that the automatic ISSS selection is carried out. 



Selecting ISSS to be used for session 



Selecting ISSS to be used for session 


17 

ISTA-Programming 
























The connection manager on the ISIS establishes all the ICOMs that are available and dis¬ 
plays the details. The user can select the desired ICOM or vehicle from the list displayed. 
ISTA/P then establishes the vehicle data. If that is not possible for any reason, the vehicle 
must be selected manually. 



Selecting ICOM 


The user then has the opportunity to give the session any individual name, but the sys¬ 
tem automatically enters the model of the vehicle along with the chassis number as an 
identifier (example: E60_EE12345). 


18 

ISTA-Programming 














Selecting Vehicle Interface 

The same vehicle interfaces are used for programming with the new workshop system as 
for diagnosis. 

From the F01 on, all control units can be programmed using only the ICOM A. Even 
though the F01/F02 is equipped with a MOST bus, ICOM B is not necessary due to the 
ethernet connection via the OBD2 connector. 

For CAN-bus vehicles the ICOM A is used. MOST control units are programmed directly 
using the ICOM B. The ICOM B is connected to the ICOM A and the workshop network 
by a USB cable. 

For older l-bus/K-bus vehicles with the round diagnosis connector, the ICOM C is used in 
conjunction with the ICOM A. 



Vehicle interfaces 


19 

ISTA-Programming 


Vehicle Access for MOST Bus 

When programming vehicles with MOST bus from E65 to E9X, vehicle access is estab¬ 
lished as shown in the photograph below. 



Vehicle access for programming MOST-bus. The location of the MOST 
connector varies according to the vehicle. 


Vehicle Access for l-bus/K-bus Vehicles 

On older vehicles without OBD II connection, programming is carried out via the round 
diagnosis connector in the engine compartment. That reguires connecting the ICOM C 
to the ICOM A and on to the workshop network. 



Vehicle access for l-bus/K-bus vehicles 


Vehicle Access from the F01/F02 on 

All control units will be programmed exclusively using the ICOM A. 


20 

ISTA-Programming 















Identifying the vehicle and obtaining a read-out of control unit data 

ISTA/P checks the vehicle electrical system, the central gateway and the vehicle-order 
control units (FRM/CAS/light module). The vehicle order (VO) is read and a consistency 
check carried out between the actual status and the reguired status. 

If the central gateway does not respond, a software routine for restoring it to working 
order is attempted before the service technician is instructed to replace the ZGW. 

First of all, the basic details of the vehicle are established such as VIN number, model, 
type code, etc. 

Then, all control units fitted and the current l-level of the vehicle is determined. In addi¬ 
tion, the programming system establishes, if possible, the software version last used to 
carry out servicing operations on the vehicle. 

That makes it possible to avoid unnecessary programming if the vehicle already has the 
latest software version. 

Afterwards, the details of the ex-works eguipment options for the vehicle stored on the 
BMW programming system are retrieved. 

Next, the control units identified and the eguipment options fitted are compared (compar¬ 
ison of reguired vs. actual status). 

For example, it is established whether the list of control units obtained actually matches 
those fitted on the vehicle and whether the level matches the current reguired status. 

That ensures that all control units on the vehicle communicate properly with one another 
within the network. An l-level is a combination of networked control units validated and 
approved by BMW Development. 


21 

ISTA-Programming 



Establishing vehicle details 


•Jit/H amnncn 

»ihnc«l *ppl : »%or> t projrannuij 

o vr?«afi 


wr;r/n< , M 



d> 




® 


id ikntir 


H»t» lr»iiHrJ»HJ 


vrxiia 
ini i« 

UC. T 1 
n*rj 
M934*-4IS-!>}U 



Mu*l 

M»|f I*V*l (4*lltl| 


l t>l tsmd 

• i'i PDflrcnStl 

1 

C^.uiil «>*r 


HwiNi 

ltnrt|itM< 

- 

xr. 

iKKlPMiiain 

□ 

31 ? 

\-*rm >rt»Ki«| 


M 

Wifillti '«m IK <lnn > •) mhiil 


SM 

1 > 0 M «lk*)f ■•»»» **•» ■lie *** »•- 


2JB 

r.r» ri.oituri Mutter 


■ni 

ipiaynwl UMranal rowfi rcrfrM 


VI 

Miwlir p«li in tmtfy nAiir 


322 

Cintot Atwi 

▼ 


«*vd» l»»h«i 

IHIL 



M3 

fn ccrtor, Mirrn rmp ffF 

■000 

MMXMT 

I 


Aclnul'.'*' r«ir ilnlui 


•ui>i AcvUtaMa •! 


Itwnsrv rnrrir» 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Vehicle data 

2 

l-level with which the vehicle left the factory 

3 

Current l-level of the vehicle 

4 

System and version last used to program the vehicle 

5 

List of all optional equipment fitted on the vehicle 


22 

ISTA-Programming 

























Producing and Configuring the Measures Plan 

Before programming can be carried out, the measures plan is produced and can also be 
configured by the user. For example, it is now possible to program retrofits or conversions 
at the same time as the software update. The configuration for that is done now so that 
no further manual input is required later on during the programming sequence and it can 
then run automatically. 

After the identification process, the user is asked if any control units have been replaced 
on the vehicle. If the answer is YES, ISTA/P checks whether an enabling code is required 
for the replaced control unit and, if so, requests it from the user if it has not already been 
entered on the system. 



Control unit replacement check 

Associated customization data such as settings for the air conditioning are backed up 
and the action "Follow up control unit replacement" added to the list of actions. 

In general it is advisable to manually back up the customer's individual settings. If the 
control unit is defective, they can not be read and, therefore, can not be written back to 
the control unit after programming either. 

The necessary actions, such as "Update control unit software", are established and 
added to the list of actions. 

Then for the first time ISTA/P produces a measures plan based on the tasks in the list of 
actions at that point. 



23 

ISTA-Programming 










The user has the option of editing the measures plan. The user can add further actions to 
the measures plan but not remove them. The following actions can be added to the mea¬ 
sures plan: 

• Carry out conversion 

• Prepare control unit replacement 

• Program control unit 

• Code control unit 

• Set CKM data 

• Enter enabling code 

• Import vehicle order 



Note: Required service functions such as initializations and clearing of fault 

codes are only indicated; they must be carried out on the ISTA diagnosis 
system. 


24 

ISTA-Programming 














ft > Pf 





II? 



Display of action plan as graphical chart 


Measures plan shown as a table 


The measures plan can be viewed as a graphical chart by pressing the button "Control 
unit tree" or as a table by pressing the button "Edit control units". 

The measures plan can now be confirmed, rejected or cancelled. 

The measures plan indicates which control units do not reguire any action - they are 
marked green. 

The other control units, on which action is required, are marked yellow or red. The actions 
that are required are indicated by the letter(s) shown on the control unit. The letters stand 
for the following: 

P = Program 

C = Code 

I = Initialize 

R = Replace 

M = Mount (i.e. fit/install) 

U = Unmount (i.e. remove). 


25 

ISTA-Programming 












***«•«•% MK(M mUJl 

'irvH* M. M.HJ4 




'*>k 1 «K(M HUB/! 




(««•*> c»r»» 


Action list 


The Action list contains all information relating to the concerned control unit and which 
via channel (D-CAN/MOST) it is programmed. 


. 

«• * |< 

* 9 






ttv i—— 

■ > 



Guidance notes 


Furthermore, additional guidance notes can be shown, e.g. on noting the remaining life of 
DME or conversion instructions for replacing control units. 

Note: The guidance notes must be acknowledged by ticking the checkboxes 
and confirmed by clicking OK. 


26 

ISTA-Programming 


















Preparing for Programming 

After confirming the measures plan, the flash programmability of the control units is first 
checked and a notification message displayed if there is a problem. Then the customiza¬ 
tion data and the CBS data is read and backed up for rewriting later on. 

If a control unit requires replacing, ISTA/P displays a message to the user indicating that 
the control unit should now be replaced. 

After replacement is confirmed, the action "Follow up control unit replacement" is flagged 
for attention later on in the process. 

ISTA/P then shows all required notifications, which must be acknowledged by the user 
before the actual programming starts. 

That simultaneously starts the automatic programming process which requires no further 
interaction on the part of the user. 

Note: As always, please keep in mind that the CAS is programmed first with 
the key removed. After successfully programmed, the ignition has to 
be switched on again. 

Carrying Out Repair Tasks 

If it was established in the process of identifying the vehicle that repair tasks are required, 
e.g. due to updating hardware or replacing a control unit, they are now carried out before 
the actual programming/coding process. 

If the spare part is not available or the wrong part has been ordered, the session can be 
saved and ended at this point. As soon as the right part is available, the session can be 
retrieved and continued. 

ISTA/P establishes from the measures plan which repair tasks are required and displays 
them. After successful completion of a repair task, the vehicle must be re-identified and 
any necessary software updates added to the measures plan. 

In that way the possibility of inconsistencies on the vehicle after a repair is avoided. If a 
repair task fails, the programming process is cancelled. 

Updating the Measures Plan 

After a repair task has been carried out, ISTA/P performs the vehicle identification 
process again. If it identifies irregularities, e.g. that a control unit with an older l-level sta¬ 
tus has been fitted, appropriate actions are automatically set on the system or indicated 
to the user. 

If there are irregularities, ISTA/P establishes which software updates are required based 
on compatibility management and adds them to the action plan. The measures plan is 
then updated and programming automatically started. 

To prevent vehicles with inconsistencies being created, the user has no means of stop¬ 
ping the programming sequence. 

27 

ISTA-Programming 



Carrying Out Programming 


This stage of the process involves the programming and subsequent coding of the con¬ 
trol units. 


In the process of programming or coding a particular control unit, the system checks in 
each case whether the operation has succeeded before continuing with the program¬ 
ming of further control units. A particular version of ISTA/P distributes only one l-level. 
Programming of the vehicle as a whole (meaning all control units on the vehicle) is always 
performed to the latest l-level (target l-level). 

The next step is to write the enabling codes to the relevant control units if required and 
modifying the vehicle order if conversions have been carried out. The programming of 
control units can also be performed simultaneously if they are on different bus systems, 
e.g. MOST and CAN. 


The progress of the programming process is indicated by a progress bar. 



Carrying out programming 


View after completion of programming 


If programming/coding/initialization has been completed successfully, there is a green tick 
by every control unit on which an action has been performed. 


If an action has failed or not been completed, the control unit concerned 
is marked with a red X. 

By clicking the control unit concerned, you can obtain information as to 
why programming failed. 



28 

ISTA-Programming 











Completing Programming Session 

The last stage of the programming process is importing the customization, CBS and 
CKM data. The data is written back to the control units and checked. Afterwards, the 
automated initialization sequences are performed where required (electric win¬ 
dows/slide/tilt sunroof). 

The automatic programming process is them complete. The initialization sequences 
that require user interaction are then carried out. 


*» 



Notes on follow-up 


After completion of the initialization sequences, ISTA/P establishes from the measures 
plan what service functions are required, e.g. setting steering angle. They are shown to 
the user. They have to be carried out as part of the diagnosis after programming. That is 
carried out byway of the vehicle test on the ISTA workshop system and afterwards all 
fault memories must be cleared. 

Finally, the actual status is checked once again and the final report produced. ISTA/P 
provides the user with the final report. 

The user can print out the final report or else it is stored for a certain period on the ISIS. 

The entire programming log is sent to BMW AG as part of the FASTA data. This allows 
BMW to retrace how the vehicle programming was carried out from the user actions, 
either for accounting purposes or if there is a subsequent fault. 

Furthermore, that data is automatically analysed so that software errors can be detected 
at an early stage and suitable measures initiated. As a result, BMW is able to continuously 
monitor and improve software quality. 


29 

ISTA-Programming 










Final Report 



Final report 


I M OtUlM 


ES3.vt4«:-i 
x :■ n 


CoufulnQ My* -<*tx 


JM« IttMO* 
NC 




•ftVtf 





C MM *»> 



a*** Mi *J»< .1* . * Miiiwwteccir -.r 



-«J (ft »rt#. Lt'«j 







UJfO*|iO *\K». ROM 



* «sr*iav« 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Final report 

2 

Current programming data: data, time, 
ISTA/P version 

3 

Vehicle data: mileage and VIN number 

4 

l-levels: factory, last, current 

5 

SA numbers 

6 

Programming actions indicating 
success or failure over MOST 

7 

Programming actions indicating 
success or failure over l/K bus 

8 

Coding actions indicating success or failure 

9 

Data saving actions indicating 
success or failure 

10 

Additional actions, e.g. whether updating 
of l-levels was successful or failed. 

11 

End notes 


30 

ISTA-Programming 


























Overview of Functions on ISTA/P 


The following graphic in the "Programming" menu, "Edit control units" tab, shows a lay¬ 
out example of a typical screen mask. 



RX 610571 


Index 

Screen element 

Index 

Screen element 

1 

Menu 

3 

Functions 

2 

Tab 




31 

ISTA-Programming 





















Overview of Main Functions 


The functions in ISTA/P can be accessed via certain paths. The following overviews show 
the menu in which the required function can be executed. Manual selections and infor¬ 
mation are normally not shown. 


Menu 

Session 

Is displayed after “Start ISTA/P” 

Tab 

Session Overview 

Create New Session 

Enter Session name 

Function 

Programming 

sessions that are 

running are displayed 

Select ISSS automatical¬ 
ly/manually 

Select programming system 

Control unit information 

Connection manager 

Select vehicle/interface, trans¬ 
fer to the Programming menu 

Issue session name 


Menu 

Programming 

Is displayed after "Start ISTA/P" (manual switch to 
"Vehicle" menu and "Data management" menu possible) 

Tab 

Vehicle details 

Control unit tree 

Action List 

Function 

Display of vehicle details 

Determine action plan, 
transfer to "Action Plan" 

menu 

Control unit actions (program¬ 
ming, encoding, replacing, 
replacement follow-up) 

Action list (after control unit 
action) 

Control unit information 

Overall encoding 

Determine action plan, transfer 
to the Display action plan menu 

Planned actions are 
shown 

Determine action plan, 
display transfer to 
"Action Plan" menu 


32 

ISTA-Programming 





Menu 

Vehicle 

Is displayed after "Create new session" 

Tab 

Conversions 

CKM 

Vehicle actions 

Function 

Retrofits 

Conversions 


Car and key memory 
settings 

Updating of map data, navi¬ 
gation system (HDD update) 

Enabling of map data for 
navigation system 





Update Gracenote® DB 
Import vehicle order 

Select complete 

encoding 


Menu 

Data management 

Is displayed after "Start ISTA/P" and after "Create new session" 

Tab 

Import/delete enabling 

code (summarized) 

Import/delete vehicle order 
(summarized) 

Reports 

Function 

Import enabling code 

Enter short enabling code 

Delete imported enabling 
code 

Import vehicle order 

Delete imported vehicle 
order 

Reports of previous ses¬ 
sions are shown 


33 

ISTA-Programming 





Menu 

Display action plan (1/2) 

Is displayed after "Determine action plan" 

Tab 

Action plan 

Control Unit Tree 

Action List 

Function 

Action plan is shown 

Planned actions are shown 

Action List 

Control Unit Information 

Accept action plan, action 
plan is executed 

Planned actions are shown 

Accept action plan, action 
plan is executed 


Menu 

Display action plan (2/2) 

Is displayed after "Determine action plan" 

Tab 

Order list 

Activation code list 


Function 

Control units to be 

Imported enabling codes are 



replaced are shown 

shown 



together with the order 




number 




34 

ISTA-Programming 






Menu 

Action plan execution complete 

Is displayed after "Accept action plan" 

Tab 

Final Report 

Control Unit Tree 

Action List 

Function 

Final report is shown 

End programming switch 
to Session menu 

Executed actions are shown 

Action List 

Control Unit Information 

End programming switch to 
Session menu 

Executed actions are 
shown 

End programming switch 
to Session menu 


35 

ISTA-Programming 






Import Vehicle Order (VO) 

In order to import the VO of a vehicle, you should go to the Data Management Menu and 
then click the Import vehicle order tab. 

The following data is necessary to generate the vehicle order: 

• Which conversions/retrofits are to be carried out, or which fault has occurred; 

• 7-character vehicle identification number; 

• Dealer number. 

Note: The vehicle order for conversions and retrofits is ordered through the 
ASAP portal. To eliminate errors, the vehicle order can be ordered 
through the subsidiary or the regional office. 

The vehicle order is downloaded in the form of a compressed XML-file 
(ZIP file). The ZIP file must be unpacked and filed on the root directory of 
the data carrier (e.g. F:\) 

The diversity of USB storage media on the market means that it can not 
be guaranteed that every USB data storage medium will work with 
ISTA/P. 

All the vehicle identification numbers where the vehicle orders are in the data stock of 
ISTA/P are displayed in a selection list. The user can select a vehicle identification num¬ 
ber and have the corresponding vehicle order displayed. The user can also search for a 
vehicle identification number by changing the sorting function. 


User action 

Result 

1. Select "Import vehicle order" tab. 

The vehicle identification numbers for 
which vehicle orders or central encoding 
keys are available are displayed. 

2. Press the "Import" button to acknowl¬ 
edge. 

A prompt to insert the data carrier 
appears. 

3. Insert a data medium in ISSS or set up 
a connection between ISSS and the 
USB data storage medium. 

4. Select vehicle order. 

5. Press the "OK" button to acknowledge. 

The vehicle order is imported. 


36 

ISTA-Programming 




How to Import a VO? 

Prerequisites: 

- Vehicle Order (VO) as XML file received via PuMA case or email, e.g., FZ38042.xml 

- Media to copy the XML file on: 

• USB stick (recommended) 

• CD-ROM media and CD/DVD burner 

• Floppy disc 

- IBAC code provided by RTE/NTE via PuMA case or email, 
e.g., 3R4SMT4NRI65QBI 

Note: 1. When using a USB stick, ensure it’s formatted as a removable disc 

(usually default format). Otherwise the stick will not be recognized by 
ISTA/P. 

2. More than one VO can be loaded on the interchangeable data media. 
VOs then need to be separated by different file names. 

3. Recommended filename is: [7-digit VINJ.xml 

4. Currently the import of a VO is protected by IBAC. Make sure you 
have the 15 digit IBAC code before you connect the vehicle. 


37 

ISTA-Programming 



ISTA/P - How to import a vehicle order (VO) 



ISTA/P - How to import a vehicle order (VO) 


•** ? M x] 



1 Select Import vehicle order. 

2 Ciick on Import. 




38 

ISTA-Programming 












































39 

ISTA-Programming 













































ISTA/P - How to import a vehicle order (VO) 



1 Select Delete vehicle order 

2 Select Import vehicle order 



1 2 3 4 5 


ISTA/P - How to import a vehicle order (VO) 



D 


12 3 4 


Start a session with the vehicle to which 
you want to write the imported VO 
After complete identification. 

1 Select Vehicle. 

2 Check out Import vehicle order 



5 6 


40 

ISTA-Programming 



























ISTA/P - How to import a vehicle order (VO) 


i'. tativ .... i iiciv 



WllW «H>1 


2WW *» b* »n«to *> 


CZ 3 - 


g raiMUtki pl«' 

F-l.Ml)n< 


Compare the Vlhfs. 

If the/ match, click on OK. 
If not click on Termination. 


2 3 4 


6 7 


1ST A/P - How to import a vehicle order (VO) 


m*ori4»f imiia 

Uthnral ■■»«»*<••»»«• / pngmw w nf 



OnwiMAt 


□ • * 


*»«*•* l»>lf 

irrarn v*»lm «rr*«r 


□ (VfMH 


■mc mmm> 
r.Mlrt «l*l IIMS. 




OI 





1 Type tntne 15 digit I3AC code 

2 Click on OK. 


1 Type tntne 15 digit I3AC code 

2 Click on OK. 



1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 


41 

ISTA-Programming 




































ISTA/P - How to import a vehicle order (VO) 


TJ '*'*••• t |»w)< mmw h 

Basil mi (YJOW 7 VI».I. rni 


0 <I»! 1A ■-»! lQ-i iM ? jTI ix] 

I.ninw 11 n erv ■••umiii on»v 



D OvaraB 


CMBmiMA Ml AC ara»l«n .«*• 


I. ,«l • .irilMO 


Confirm that the ISAC code is correct 
with OK, or go Bask to reenter the code 



123456789 


ISTA/P - How to import a vehicle order (VO) 


TcUWMitf n»H> -an.* f 

Bas.irw milf47 W»«t« CT1 Immd la _13 TOV '«mml 31 *» ftV 




lupin v 
Owarat 


Irpol Vlhxll [1*11 lu'inutJ 

VrAM<«* p#.»n r.H MMMialtn auMitr p*ft*svr?jr.«rtr4? 

»» «* ■» ban dill riMigimr* to Hi innmbH nAreP 'ht »•»•»••*■ < 




12 3 4 


Click on OK. The imported VO rs now 
written to the vehic e. 



5 6 7 8 9 10 


42 

ISTA-Programming 































Import Enabling Code 

Software enabling in a number of control units (e.g. when programming the CCC, an 
enabling code must be imported to enable the option "extended voice control") is possi¬ 
ble with ISTA/R 

In ISTA/R there is the possibility to import enabling codes for a vehicle even before work¬ 
ing through the action plan. All imported enabling codes are saved within the ISPI net¬ 
work and are available for future sessions without having to import them again. 


User action 

Result 

1. Select "Import enabling code" tab. 

The vehicle identification numbers for 
which enabling codes are available are 
displayed. 

2. Press the "Import" button to 
acknowledge. 

A prompt to insert the data carrier 
appears. 

3. Insert a data medium in ISSS or set 
up a connection between ISSS and 
the USB data storage medium. 

4. Press the "OK" button to acknowl¬ 
edge. 

The enabling code is imported. 


Note: The enabling code can be downloaded in the ASAP portal. The enabling 
code is supplied on CD with new control units. 

The ZIP file must be unpacked and filed on the root directory of the data 
carrier (e.g. F:\). 

The diversity of USB storage media on the market means that it can not 
be guaranteed that every USB data storage medium will work with 
ISTA/P. 


43 

ISTA-Programming 




Howto Import an Enabling Code 

Prerequisites: 

ZIP archive file with: 

• release code (FSC) file (.xml) e.g., FZ38042_00020001 .xml 

• certificate file (.der) e.g., FZ38042_00020001 .der 

Media to copy the files on: 

• USB stick (recommended) 

• CD-ROM media and CD/DVD burner 

• Floppy disc 

Note: 1. This import function neither writes the code to the vehicle nor acti¬ 
vates the associated function in the vehicle. The activation will be 
requested during the measures plan realization. 

2. When using a USB stick ensure, that it’s formatted as a removable 
disc (usually default format). Otherwise the stick will not be recog¬ 
nized by ISTA/P. 

3. The FSC file (.xml) AND the certificate file (.der) need to be extracted 
on the media. Do not copy the ZIP archive file on the media. 


44 

ISTA-Programming 



ISTA/P - How to import an enabling code (FSC) 



ISTA/P - How to import an enabling code (FSC) 



1 Select Import activation code. 

2 Click on Import. 



45 

ISTA-Programming 


































ISTA/P - How to import an enabling code (FSC) 




ISTA/P - How to import an enabling code (FSC) 




46 

ISTA-Programming 













































Updating and enabling of map data for navigation system and 
Gracenote® DB 

Updates to map data using ISTA/P are possible only in the case of vehicles with the Car 
Information Computer (CIC). 

Importing of a current navigation map to the vehicle becomes necessary: 

• In the event of updating or initialization of the data for new, used and demonstration 
cars prior to delivery to customer. 

• If update is reguested by customer. 

• In the course of a repair. 

The procedure for updating the Gracenote® DB and the map data is identical. Updating 
of the Gracenote® DB is only possible with the Professional (SA 609) navigation system. 

Enabling of the navigation map (Road Map) with ISTA/P is necessary: 

• After updating or initialization of the map data. 

• In case of a repair. 

• In case of retrofitting of CIC. 

Note: In the course of a repair, it is not necessary to order an enabling code. 

In this case, the previous enabling code is used again. 

Updating of the map data for the navigation system (HDD update) 
depends on the integration levels. 


47 

ISTA-Programming 



Proceed as follows to update the navigation system map data (HDD update) or 
Gracenote® DB: 

• To create a new ISTA/P session, see "Vehicle" menu (create new session) 

• Select the "Vehicle" menu 

• Select the "Vehicle actions" tab 


1 2 3 


4 

T 


Tactwar*! Ajiplit aim f r m 

P321H0 


V-Wnlr c»1 




^ JBf HU ? 

j [jS 



- . 1 4 OOV 

19 

*4 OOV 

I 0 **_ II 


I (mm Hi* 


RXfrl 


Index 

Screen element 

Index 

Screen element 

1 

Checkbox "Update of the navigation system 
map data (HDD update)" 

3 

"Vehicle actions" tab 

2 

Activate checkbox "Enabling of navigation 
map (Road Map)", already imported map 

4 

"Vehicle" menu 


• Activate checkbox "Update of the navigation system map data (HDD update)" 

To select further actions with E-series (programming, encoding), switch back to the 
"Programming" menu. 


48 

ISTA-Programming 



















With the F-series, all the previously selected actions will be deleted. No further actions 
can be added. 

• Press the "Determine action plan" button to acknowledge. 

The action plan is determined and displayed. The installed navigation maps (Road Maps) 
and Gracenote® DB are displayed on the ISIS. 

Note: The ISIS server address (ISIS1 or ISIS2) on which the navigation maps 
with the web copy console are saved must be entered in the "Download- 
ISIS IP" input box. It is thus identical to the ISIS IP address, which was 
used by the web copy console. 

The ISIS IP can be read out in the WSM under device settings. 

The map data and the Gracenote® DB cannot be updated at the same 
time. 

Ensure that the selected Road Map is installed on the ISIS. 

• Enter the Download ISIS IP (e.g. 10.249.155.10) in the input box. 

Select Gracenote® DB or "Road Map" by activating the corresponding checkbox 

• Press the "OK" button to acknowledge 

The name of the Gracenote® DB or Road Map is displayed again for checking purposes. 

• Check name 

• If the name is OK, press the "OK" button to acknowledge. 

The action plan is drawn up. 

• Accept the action plan. 

After the action plan has been completed, the final report will be displayed. 

Note: After the import, the map data has to be activated. An enabling code is 
required to do this. To activate the map data, a new ISTA/P session must 
be started, see next page. 

Enabling is not required to import the Gracenote® DB. 


49 

ISTA-Programming 



Enabling of the Navigation Map (Road Map) 

An enabling code is required to enable the navigation map. When ordering the enabling 
code, refer to the section Data management menu. 

The enabling code can be imported to the ISTA/P in the following ways: 

• Import via Data management before the start of the session. 

• Import via SWT online after the action plan has been accepted (as of ISPI 2.7.1). 

• Import via external storage medium (e.g.: USB stick, CD) after the action plan has 
been accepted. 

Proceed as follows to activate the map data for the navigation system: 


1 2 


t*,** 

■fed Qerv<t« 

AfpL.MtMf/r 

, gr| - n - _ § 




IMf ^ 


9 

M. (xj 



• PWMIO 


. CM 


rnaiMlta 1 4 otxv 


-•« 30 14 OCV 



ran 

outfit p* n»r« 


O IrtfHin rahttl* «ilm 
Q Overall CTCikOtftq 
—Q t tidattfiQ «if matt «ta#a ranpj»»«r 


'Vtwn ftffl W 


CitnMd ran l*rt vnfatM 




pint 


RXS1Q504 


Index 

Screen element 

Index 

Screen element 

1 

Checkbox "Update of the navigation system 
map data (HDD update)" 

3 

"Vehicle actions" tab 

2 

Activate checkbox "Enabling of navigation 
map (Road Map)", already imported map 

4 

"Vehicle" menu 


50 

ISTA-Programming 



















To activate a map that has already been imported (e.g. new car): 

• Activate the checkbox "Enabling of navigation map". 

• Press the "Determine action plan" button to acknowledge. 

The remaining procedure depends on the import of the enabling code: 

Import via Data Management 

The reguired enabling code is imported from Data management. After the action 
plan has been completed, the final report will be displayed. 

Import via SWT Online (as of ISPI 2.7.1) 

The pop-up "Enabling code download via SWT" is displayed. 

• Press the "Import" button to acknowledge. 

The reguired enabling code is imported. After the action plan has been completed, 
the final report will be displayed. 

Import via External Storage Medium (e.g.: USB stick, CD) 

The pop-up "Enabling code download via SWT" is displayed. 

• Press the "Next" button to acknowledge 

The pop-up "Enabling code download via USB stick" is displayed. 

• Press the "Import" button to acknowledge. 

The reguired enabling code is imported. After the action plan has been completed, 
the final report will be displayed. 

Note: For further information concerning ISTA/P please refer to the ISTA/P 
Documents available on the DCS.net under Workshop Technology. 


51 

ISTA-Programming 



Glossary 

A 

Assembly number 

Hardware number, program version and data version together give the assembly number. 


B 

Bus systems 

The bus systems enable the individual control units in the vehicle to be networked via 
serial interfaces. The following bus systems are used in BMW vehicles: 

• BSD (Bit-Serial Data interface) 

• Byteflight 

• CAN bus (Controller Area Network bus) 

• DCAN (diagnosis CAN) 

• Ethernet (wire-conducted data network technology for local data networks and vehi¬ 
cle access) 

• FCAN (suspension CAN) 

• FlexRay 

• K bus (body bus) (also known as I bus - instrumentation bus - in earlier models) 

• K bus protocol 

• KCAN (body CAN) 

• K-CAN2 (body CAN 2) 

• LIN bus (Local Interconnect Network bus) 

• Local-CAN 

• MOST bus (Media Oriented System Transport) 

• PT-CAN (Powertrain CAN) 

• PT-CAN2 (Powertrain CAN 2) 

• USB (Universal Serial Bus). 


52 

ISTA-Prog ramming 





c 

CBS data 

Condition Based Service. CBS data are updated in the vehicle key within a driving cycle. 
CBS data can be updated on the ignition key via a concealed service function. 

Car and key memory 

Performs customer-specific settings on the vehicle: 

• Car Memory settings affect all the users of a vehicle 

• Key Memory settings are user-specific and relate to a key being used. 

Conversion 

Modifies individual functions in a control unit (e.g. the language); the vehicle must be in 
sleep mode before complete conversion is carried out. 


D 

Diagnosis address 

Address of control unit for diagnosis. 


E 

EWS/DME or EWS/DDE adjustment 

Adjustment between EWS (electronic immobilizer) and DME/DDE control unit, control 
units are synchronized. 

Enabling code 

The enabling code generates a functional enhancement in the vehicle. Software enabling 
in a number of control units (e.g. when programming the CCC, an enabling code must be 
imported to enable the option "extended voice control). The background to this is the 
technology of Sweeping Technologies (SWT). 

Enabling code short 

Comparable to enabling code. In contrast to the enabling code, the enabling code short is 
not a file. It is used for manual entry purposes. 


53 

ISTA-Programming 



Encoding 

Adapts the control units to the vehicle in which they are installed: Functions and charac¬ 
teristic maps are enabled or activated depending on the national-market version, vehicle 
equipment and vehicle type. 


F 

Flash-programming 

See Programming 


G 

Gracenote® DB 

Music track recognition technology from Gracenote®. It provides the data (metadata) 
associated with the music tracks. 

This metadata contains information such as: 

• Artist/performer 

• Song ISTA-Programming 

• Album 

• Year of publication 

• Genre 

Gateway 

This information identifies the four segment address of the component located on the 
network responsible for communicating from the current network to another network. If 
there is no address in this location then a connection to any devices outside of the cur¬ 
rent network can not be established. 


I 

IBAC enabling code 

Enabling code for enabling conversions and retrofits. 


54 

ISTA-Programming 



ICOM 

Integrated Communication Optical Module 

The interface between the BMW Workshop network and the vehicle 

IMIB 

Integrated Measurement Interface Box 

Measuring device for the ISTA workshop system. The IMIB is mainly operated online via 
the ISTA workshop system and controlled by the ISID. 

ISAP 

Integrated Service Access Point 

Wireless data transmission device for the ITOOLS 

ISID 

Integrated Service Information Display 

Display and operating unit for the workshop and vehicle reception 

ISIS 

Integrated Service Information Server (workshop server) 

ISPA 

Integrated Service Processes Application 
Software for service reception 

ISSS 

Integrated Software Service Station 

By installing the ISTA/P Base DVD via the SSS DVD drive, the SSS becomes an ISSS. 

ISTA 

Integrated Service Technical Application (diagnosis and technical documents) 

ISTA/P 

Integrated Service Application/Programming 
(programming system) 

Integration level/integration stage 

Production periods during vehicle development are denoted by integration levels (l-lev- 
els). 

ITOOLS 

The ITOOLS are ISID, ICOM, IMIB and ISAP 


55 

ISTA-Programming 



IP address 

The IP address (internet protocol address) is a unique and specifically assigned address 
for each device in the workshop network. This address consists of a number block which 
is normally structured as follows. 

Example: 192 . 168 . 100.10 

The IP addresses must be structured so that each device in the network is distin¬ 
guished from all the others and must be exclusive to that device and not shared 
among other devices connected to the network. 

IP subnet mask 

This information is used to define which segment of the four segment IP address specifi¬ 
cally identifies the device and which identify the specific network. 

Example: 255.255.255.0 

Indicates that the first three segments (255.255.255) identify the specific network 
that the device is located on. The last segment (0) indicates that this is the seg¬ 
ment that will identify the specific device. 

Note: The network and device address information must be entered exactly as 
defined by the network administrator for your facility, otherwise the 
devices can not be accessed. 


J 

JETstream 

Online update: Renews application software by loading new software packages. 


M 

MAC address 

Media Access Control address is an unchangeable and unique address for identification 
of a network device. 

Mecca indicator 

The "Mecca indicator" is an arrow within the navigation system that points permanently 
at the geographical position of the city of Mecca. 


56 

ISTA-Programming 



N 

Native action plan 

Shown after successfully determining target context. All actions are shown that are initiat¬ 
ed by ISTA/P (e.g. update integration stage). 

Comparable to status report in Progman. 


O 

Overall encoding 

Matches functions to each other and synchronizes them. This may be necessary if, after 
programming/encoding is completed, functions in the vehicle fail to work or fail to work 
properly. 


P 

Personal profile 

In certain vehicles, this is the new designation for "Car & Key Memory". Settings are 
made directly in the vehicle. Only those settings which are difficult for the customer to 
grasp (e.g. tilt sensor ON/OFF) will continue to be made in ISTA/P in the Conversions 
menu. 

Programming 

Loads a new program to the control unit. Former designation "flash programming". 

Programming status 

Indicates the status of the control unit as a number 


R 

Retrofit 

Designation for a subseguent installation (e.g. telephone), a new system is adapted to the 
vehicle's complete electrical system. 


57 

ISTA-Programming 



Replacement follow-up 

Follow-up work on a control unit after replacement. 


S 

SGC 

Control unit encoding 

SWT 

Sweeping Technology 

The enabling code generates a functional enhancement in the vehicle. The background 
to this is the technology of Sweeping Technologies. The enabling code is encrypted in 
the control unit. 

Software ID 

Software identification feature 


T 

Target context 

Software version of the vehicle which is allocated by the programming system. 
The native action plan is shown after successfully determining target context. 


U 

USB 

Universal Serial Bus 


58 

ISTA-Programming 



V 


Vehicle order/central encoding code 

Denotes the file in which various vehicle data (data status, optional equipment, etc.) 
are kept. 


W 

Web copy console 

Web copy console for navigation data 

The web copy console for navigation data allows you to copy navigation maps for the CIC 
onto the ISIS hard disks. 

WSM 

Workshop System Management 

Used to manage the ISIS. All administrative tasks are executed here. 


Z 

zcs 

Central encoding key, see vehicle order. 


59 

ISTA-Programming 




60 

ISTA-Programming 



