Table of Contents 

Service and Maintenance 

Subject Page 

Quality Certification I (QCI) .4 

Display Vehicle Check- BMW Technician .4 

Delivery Check-BMW Technician .5 

Sample Quality Certification I.6 

Deactivating Transport Mode.7 

Transportation Mode.7 

Vehicle and Key Memory.8 

Vehicle Memory.8 

Key Memory.8 

Service.9 

Required Preconditions.9 

Vehicle Memory Configuration Procedure.9 

Vehicle/Key Memory Service Considerations .9 

FZV Key Initialization Procedure.9 

Technician Awareness.9 

Service Maintenance Programs.10 

Scheduled Maintenance .10 

Engine Oil Service .10 

BMW Inspection I.11 

BMW Inspection II .11 

Condition Based Service.11 

Sample 2005 BMW Service Maintenance Checklist .12 

SIAIV.14 

SIA IV Components.14 

Instrument Cluster (IKE, KOMBI) with LED Display .14 

DME.14 

ASC/DSC Control Module.14 

Principle of Operation .15 

Service .15 

Reset Procedure using the Reset Mode.16 

Reset Procedure using Diagnosis Program .17 

Connected Service.18 

Condition Based Service (CBS).19 

Coded Keys.19 

Key Reader .19 

Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM) .19 

TeleService .19 

Transfer and Analysis of Vehicle Operation and Service Data 
(FASTA).20 


Initial Print Date: 02/06 


Revision Date: 05/10 









































Subject Page 

Updating Service Data .21 

Updating Service Key Data .21 

Automatic Updating .21 

Manual Updating .22 

Condition Based Service (CBS) .23 

Principle of Operation .23 

Sensor Based (CBS) Schedules.23 

Engine Oil Condition.24 

Microfilter State of Wear.24 

Front and Rear Brake Linings State of Wear .25 

Internal Calculation of CBS Service Items .26 

Service Indications.27 

Service Need Display (SBA) .27 

Check Control Message .27 

CBS Indicator in the Control Display.28 

CBS Reset.29 

Instrument Cluster.29 

CBS Data Correction .31 

CBS Handover Inspection .31 

Central Information Display (CID).32 

Service Mode .32 

Activating the Service Mode.32 

Instrument Cluster.33 

Test Functions.33 

To start function test.33 

Display of test functions.33 

Locking and unlocking the test functions (test function 19) ... .33 

To end test function .33 

CBS displays in the instrument cluster .34 

CBS Symbols.34 

Visual system test .35 

Overview of test functions.35 

Breaking-in period.37 

Engine and differential.37 

Up to approx. 1,200 miles/2,000 km .37 

From 1,200 miles/2,000 km .37 

Tires .37 

Brake system.37 

Clutch .37 

Following part replacement .37 

For BMW M vehicles.37 

Key Reader.38 

Key - Vehicle Data Holder and Business Card .38 

Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM).39 














































Service and Maintenance 

Model: All 
Production: All 

■tucnwis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Know the requirements of the Quality Certification. 

• Understand the Battery Maintenance Requirements. 

• Locate BMW Service Bulletins 


3 

Service and Maintenance 



Quality Certification I (QCI) 

Every new vehicle which arrives at the BMW center requires that a Quality Certification 
(QCI) be performed. The QC I is performed in two parts. 

• Display Vehicle Check 

• Delivery Check 

When performing a QCI, a checklist has to be competed. Refer to Centernetfor latest 
forms (based on Model and Model Year). 

The requirements for a vehicle’s Quality Certification vary slightly by model. The check¬ 
list must be adhered to strictly. 

Every item checked off signifies that it has been verified and in proper working condition. 
If an item is found defective an extra line has to be added on the repair order. 

The QCI checklist has two sections that should be checked off by a technician. 


Page Size 

Page Color 

Operation 

Half 

blue 

Display Vehicle Check performed by Technician. 

Perform when vehicle is being used for showroom display or demonstrator. 

Full 

White 

Display Vehicle Check performed by technician. 

Delivery Check performed by Technician. 

Delivery Check performed by BMW Client Advisor. 

Perform when vehicle is being prepared for customer sale. 


Display Vehicle Check- BMW Technician 

The Display Vehicle Check is performed if the vehicle is to be stored on the centers lot 
or in the showroom. The vehicle is inspected for shipping damage and any defects that 
may not have been caught at the VPC (Vehicle Preparation Center). 

• Complete the upper portion of the checklist and the box labeled 00 00 008 Display 
Vehicle Check-Technician. 

• Remove the top copy of the checklist and attach it to the repair order. 

The remaining portion of the checklist should be left in the vehicle or put into the vehicle 
sales file. 


Note: The automobile inventory should be verified frequently, so there are no 
open recalls/campaigns. Recalls/campaigns should be performed prior 
to the TECHNICIAN DELIVERY CHECKLIST to avoid any delays during 
delivery, including spot deliveries. 


4 

Service and Maintenance 






Delivery Check- BMWTechnician 

The Delivery Check is performed no more than 24 hours prior to the customer taking 
delivery of the vehicle. The purpose of the Delivery check is to ensure that no damage 
or system problems have appeared since the vehicle was first checked at arrival to the 
center. The BMW center must deliver a vehicle to the customer free of any defects at 
time of delivery, this is difficult to ensure if the vehicle has not been inspected for several 
days or weeks. 

Vehicles that are sold before arrival to the center or to be put into service as Loaner Cars 
may have both parts of the QC I performed together, this is referred to as a Spot Delivery. 
In this case the vehicle will not be sitting on the lot more than 24 hours before delivery. 

Always refer to the latest Service Information for special instructions and warranty 
information that is necessary to properly perform a QC I. 


Notes: 


5 

Service and Maintenance 



Sample Quality Certification I 


Service Department Copy 


QUALITY CERTIFICATION I 

2006 325i/330i (E90), 525i/530i, 7 Series 



DOT TIRE DATA 


1) 











2) 











3) 











4) 











Spare 












00 00 010 DELIVERY CHECK - TECHNICIAN 
(Prior to Customer Delivery) 


Note: Items in the DISPLAY VEHICLE CHECK should also be included. 


Customer Name:_ 

Stock No.:_ 

Chassis #:_ 

BMW Center Name: _ 
BMW Center No.:_ 


Model:_ 
_ Year:_ 


00 00 008 DISPLAY VEHICLE CHECK - TECHNICIAN 


Check for Transportation Damaqe 


Remove 6 Series Convertible Top Shipping Cover 


Check Car Cleaned - Interior & Exterior 


Check Cleanliness of Enqine Compartment X. 


Remove Transportation Battery Disconnect Switch X' 1 *• 


Maintain Exterior Paint Surfaces Aqainst Airborrfrfcjllurants 


Check for Appropriate Fuel Level V 


Take out of Transport Mode usinq DISpli^>r 


Initialize Steerinq Anqle Sensor on Acti\% Ste#rinq 


Check and Adjust 1 ire Pressures (iacl%oar^ire it equipped) 


Diqital Clock (set to proper timo^dafS^earl 


Diqital Compass (set/calibrat^kX a 


Proqram Radio and ChecX^reXion 


Top Up Washer Fluid f 


Install Service Win^shVd \^fpers 


Jack & Lug Wrerifejfiecured) and Spare Tire in Trunk (if equipped) 

(incl. tool kity^mpXpr 


Maintain BatterXpitaqe (12.65V minimum) 


Initialize Windows and Sunroof (incl. toll function & child safety button) 


Connect Approved BMW Charqer if displayed in Showroom 


Remove ShiDDino Spacers if eouiDDed 



DELIVERY CHECK-SALESPERSON [f|j§jS 

(Prior to and at Customer Delivery): I®IS 

A,. 

Del. 

Car Cleaned - Interior & Exterior 

1 

Check Tire Pressure (incl. spare tire if equipped) 

Check Battery Voltaqe (12.65V minimum) 

Check for Appropriate Fuel Level 

Warning Lights & Check Control 

Install Navigation System Map DVD 


Sound System (incl. CD player & telephone) 


Record Vehicle/Key Memory Features as per Customer's Preferences 
using form ZUS3077 


Seats/Headrest/Steering wheel (incl. memory function) 


Oil Level and other Fluid Service Locations, top up if needed 


Jack & Luq Wrench (secured) and Spare Tire in Trunk Tool Kit Complete* 


Check Operation of BMW Options and Accessories 


New Owner Auto Program Video 


Provide cellular telephone body kit to customer (7 Series) v 


Complete BMW Assist Agreement (before initialization by techniainnrV 


Program phone numbers for BMW center and BMW Customer Relations 
into BMW Assist menu. ' 


Wallet Key Adapter in Tool Kit (7 Series) J 


CBS Hand-Over Inspection f 



| ROAD TEST: „ I 

Transmission (incl. Auto P & display) \ * 



Park Distance Control (PDC) Opejpdjgn, i^^fflipped 




ROAD TEST fOPEflftTinN/ADiH JSTMENT):- 

Check/Adjust Tire pressure (incl. spare tire if equipped) 


Check for Appropriate Fuel Level 


Program Vehicle/Key memory as per customer's preferences using 
form ZUS3077 


Enter BMW Assist Phone Numbers per completed Aqreement 


Check for and correct Check Control Messages 


BMW Assist: perform test call 


Warninq Lights 


Enqine Operation 


Transmission (incl. auto P & L on 7 Series) Function Selector 
(incl. instrument panel display) 


Park Distance Control (PDC) Operation, if equipped ^ > 


Steerinq (wheel in center position) 


Foot/Parkinq Brakes (before and during roadtest)V \ 


Initialize the Flat Tire Monitor System if equipped wX Run-Flat Tires 


Check Handling and Wheel Balance l » 


Absence of Rattles, Squeaks and WincAaois^^ 


Cruise Control Operation v 


Telephone (7 Series) 


Speaker and Fader Operation (incntoass, treble & balance) 


On-Board Computer and fenafc^isplay 
(incl. service indicatocancnfcalk control) 


Check Operation ofCMW Options and Accessories 


Windshield WiM/WaXa«tems 


Interior/Exterkpflrrors (incl. dim & memory functions) 


Seats/Ha^fdrestsNpreering Wheel (incl. memory function) 



OWNER’S PORTFOLIO ifiM^ENTS (stored in center console): 

Vehicle Owner’s Manual S 



Combined Service/Wa^^ntWRoadside Assistance Booklet 



Telephone Own«£s Manual (7 Series) 



Radio code cards"X/ 



Dealer Dire&^Atlas 



Roadside As^tance Temporary ID Card 



Sale^»B@fc|ice and Parts Managers’ Business Cards 



BMW Accessories Booklet 



Accident Guidelines and Checklists 



Driver's Reference Guide 



BMW Assist reference card 



Three Keys (incl. wallet key) 



Purchase Agreement 



Sales Document 



Key Memory Programming Checklist 



Note: Recommend to Customer to Review Vehicle Owner’s Manual, New BDf 
Owner Audio Program Video, Quick Reference Guide, and 7 Series 

Battery Switch IMH 


n driver’s door pocket 


Review Service Schedule/Warranty/Roadside Assistance 
Introduce to Service Department _ 


| AFTER ROAD TEST: | 

Read Out Diagnostic System - Correct Faults as Necessary 


Program State and/or Emissions Inspection (if required) into service display 


Install Front License Plate Bracket if needed 


Stamp the Sen/ice Booklet in the QC1 space 



CHECK AND ADJUST: 

Doors, Trunklid and Hood 


CHECK: _ 

Battery Voltage (12.65V minimum) | 

REMINDER: 

Please complete and mail the postage paid and 
pre-addressed VEHICLE CONDITION REPORT. 


COPY DISTRIBUTION: 


BLUE 

WHITE 

GREEN 

GOLD 

SALES 

SERVICE 

SALES 

CUSTOMER 


SD92-285 (03/05) 




(Display Vehicle Check) 




(Delivery Check) 


Customer: 

Date: 


The BMW Experience 


6 

Service and Maintenance 




Transportation Mode 


Transport Mode minimizes battery current draw while vehicles are in transit to BMW 
centers. 

Transport Mode replaces the more traditional battery switch. Transport Mode has been 
phased in on all BMW models starting from the E39 (5 Series). 

Transport Mode immobilizes vehicle convenience features. Actual features immobilized 
vary between vehicle models, but typically include radio operation, interior lights, etc. 

Transport Mode must be deactivated at QC1. 

Note: Once deactivated, Transport Mode cannot be reactivated 

Deactivating Transport Mode 

To deactivate Transport Mode, connect the vehicle to ISTA. Connect an approved BMW 
battery charger. 

For E65 only, select "Diagnosis", then select "Function Selection / Service Functions / 
Maintenance / Transport Mode / Delete Transport Mode / Test Plan". Then follow the on¬ 
screen instructions to deactivate Transport Mode. 

For all other BMW models , select "Diagnosis", then select "Function Selection / Service 
Functions / Body / Transport Mode / Delete Transport Mode / Test Plan". Then follow the 
on-screen instructions to deactivate Transport Mode. 


7 

Service and Maintenance 




Vehicle and Key Memory 


This feature provides the flexibility of allowing the owner to customize certain functions 
of select vehicle systems and automatically identifies users of the vehicle by a key identi¬ 
fication signal provided by the remote keyless entry system (FZV). VKM coding is done 
at the time of delivery during the QC I. 

Vehicle & Key memory is marketed as a combined feature but is actually two separate 
functions of the select vehicle control systems. 

Vehicle Memory 

The owner is provided with a list of available system functions that can be customized to 
their liking. Prior to delivery, CIP is used to encode the owner’s chosen selections into 
the appropriate control modules. 

Key Memory 

This feature provides the added convenience of identifying users of the vehicle whenev¬ 
er a lock or unlocked signal is generated via the individual FZV keys. A maximum of four 
FZV keys can be used with the Key Memory feature. 

Each of the four keys generate a unigue key identification signal (key number) that is 
transmitted simultaneously with the lock/unlock signals to the General Module. Key 
Memory does not respond to Lock/Unlock reguests from the mechanical drivers door 
lock. 

Most of the key memory functions reguire the vehicle be configured using the “KEY 
MEMORY” function of the ISTA/R However, there are a few features that store settings 
automatically without configuration such as IHKA blower speed and temp setting. 

There are features that function as both a Vehicle & Key Memory feature. 

Example: The Automatic Seat Adjustment feature is encoded as a Vehicle Memory 
Function with the following possibilities: 

• when unlocking, 

• when opening a door after unlocking 

• or not active at all. 

If active, the seat positions are stored and reactivated by the Key Memory function for 
individual users of the car. 


8 

Service and Maintenance 




Service 


Required Preconditions 

Before configuring Vehicle or Key Memory Functions, connect a battery charger to the 
vehicle. This will ensure adeguate battery voltage during the VKM configuration. 

If battery voltage drops below 11.8 volts, the procedure will terminate. 

Vehicle Memory Configuration Procedure 

Please refer to Progman section located under the Workshop Applications tab of this 
book. 

Vehicle/Key Memory Service Considerations 

If a Vehicle/Key Memory capable control module becomes defective and needs replace¬ 
ment, the specific customized data will be transferred over to the new replacement unit 
during the encoding process. 

If this is not possible due to extensive control module failure, the owner must be made 
aware of the situation and reguested to provide the options they originally selected. For 
this reason, it is advantageous to print the selected features as mentioned in the Vehicle 
& Key Memory configuration procedures. 

FZV Key Initialization Procedure 

Also mentioned in the BMW Features section of this manual, If FZV keys need re-initializ¬ 
ing, make sure they are initialized in the same order. 

Technician Awareness 

Vehicle Memory/Key Memory Configuration changes the functionality of the systems. It is 
recommended that the Vehicle/Key memory selections be reviewed for the vehicle you 
are working on. There may be an owner selected function activated that is not a common 
selection, causing misunderstanding of the system's function. 


9 

Service and Maintenance 



Service Maintenance Programs 


There are two different types of service maintenance requirement used in BMW vehicles 
depending on the model and production date. The two maintenance programs are: 

• Scheduled Maintenance 

• Condition Based Service 

Early BMW vehicles are dependent on a scheduled service maintenance program. This 
means that when a certain criteria is met, usually an oil change, the vehicle will have to 
undergo either an extensive oil service or a major inspection. 

Starting with the E65 (7 Series) the BMW service program utilized is condition based. 
Condition Based Service (CBS) allows for the servicing of specific vehicle components 
only when it needs the actual service. 

Scheduled Maintenance 

A Service Maintenance Checklist has been developed for early BMW passenger cars 
that require scheduled maintenances. The checklist incorporates space to record values 
called for in specific checking operations. 

These include disc brake pad thickness, tire pressures, and the freeze point tempera¬ 
tures of the engine coolant and of the windshield washer fluid. 

Because the vehicle will be visiting the workshop less frequently it is very important that 
the maintenance and anytime dependent services be carried out thoroughly and cor¬ 
rectly. Follow the Service Maintenance Checklist for the necessary steps required to 
properly complete the service. 

Engine Oil Service 

Starting with the introduction of the 1999 3 Series (E46), BMW introduced an extended 
oil change interval of approximately 15,000 miles depending on engine operating condi¬ 
tions. The engine oil change interval of approximately 15,000 miles was carried over to 
all 2001 BMW models. (Before this the interval was approximately 7,500 calculated 
miles). 

However, engine oil should be changed at least once a year. This revision (annual oil 
change) is retroactive to earlier model years and is included in the BMW Maintenance 
Plan. To coincide with the increased oil change interval, BMW also introduced "BMW 
High Performance Synthetic Oil" SAE 5W-30. 

BMW recommends the use of BMW High Performance Synthetic Oil SAE 5W-30 or 
Castrol RS SAE 10W-60 Synthetic. 


10 

Service and Maintenance 




BMW Inspection I 

The next scheduled maintenance procedure performed after an oil service is an 
Inspection I. 

The advanced technologies used in engine management systems and improvements 
in low maintenance engine design have reduced the required maintenance in each 
inspection service significantly. 

BMW Inspection II 

The BMW Inspection II includes all of the procedures outlined in the Inspection I, but 
includes additional steps that are only necessary with higher accumulated miles. 

Condition Based Service 

Starting with the introduction of the E65, the CBS program does away with the sched¬ 
uled maintenance program that requires the replacement of components that might not 
need immediate replacement. 

Condition Based Service monitors wear and tear on important parts. Its sensors can 
determine when a component needs to be replaced or upgraded. Even if the degree of 
wear cannot be gauged directly, such as in the case of the air conditioning microfilter, the 
system uses algorithms to determine when a service check-up should be performed. 
'Made-to-Measure Maintenance' 

Several parameters provide the information for this system - mileage, temperature, driving 
style and more. Overall, Condition Based Service maximizes safety and keeps the vehicle 
on the road longer, as the car is serviced only when it is necessary. You get the most out 
of your automobile, and are always well informed. 


Notes: • For the most recent list of approved motor oils and their engine 
application refer to bulletin SI B11 08 98. 

• Intervals for services may vary slightly especially if it is a 
Motorsport model. 

• Always complete the appropriate maintenance checklist when 
performing a scheduled maintenance. 


11 

Service and Maintenance 



Sample 2005 BMW Service Maintenance Checklist 


cr 

cc 


BMW of North America, LLC 

2005 3 Series, Z4 (X3 and X5- use 2004 checklist SD92-260) 

Service Maintenance Checklist 

Customer’s Name 

Chassis Number 

Indicate # Lights illuminated in 
Service Interval Indicator 


|g |g 

|g |g 

|g |y 

IE 

Only operations that pertain to this vehicle will be performed. 

BMW center 

Mileage (on Service Interval Ind.) 

NOTE: Any other requested repairs not listed or covered by the applicable BMW Limited 
Warranty will be charged to the owner and invoiced separately. 






Repair Order No. 

Mileage (on odometer) 

State and federal statutes require a properly completed copy 
of this form to be retained in the BMW center’s customer file. 


A' 

m 

Zi./ 

z 

TECHNICIAN’S SIGNATURE 

_ 

E85 

E46 


BMW Oxygen Sensor Replacement, required at intervals of 120,000 mi. 

(325i SULEV: 150,000 mi. M3: 100,000 mi.) 

• 

• 

• 


BMW Spark Plug Replacement, required at intervals of_,000 mi. 

100 

100 

60 


BMW Automatic Transmission Service; change ATF at intervals of 100,000 mi. 

• 

• 



1200 Mile Service 


Read out diagnostic system. 



• 


Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. Use only Castrol TWS 

Motorsport SAE 10W-60 Synthetic oil, or Castrol Formula RS 10W-60 Synthetic oil, BMW p/n 07 51 0 009 420 



• 


Replace transmission fluid. 



• 


Replace differential oil. 



• 


Check all warning/indicator lights, check control. 



• 


Road test with check of brakes, suspension, shock absorbers (external), steering, clutch/manual transmission. 



• 


BMW Engine Oil Service 


Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. 

We recommend BMW High Performance 5W-30 Synthetic oil, p/n 07 51 0 017 866 

• 

• 



Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. Use only Castrol TWS 

Motorsport SAE 10W-60 Synthetic oil, or Castrol Formula RS 10W-60 Synthetic oil, BMW p/n 07 51 0 009 420 



• 


Replace microfilters. 

Note: reduce replacement interval in dusty operating conditions. 

• 

• 

• 


Check overall thickness of front and rear disc brake pads using special tool. 

Record results. If replacement is necessary*: Examine brake disc surfaces. 

Clean brake pad contact points in calipers. Grease wheel centering hubs. 

Check thickness of parking brake linings only when replacing rear pads. Record results. 

• 

• 

• 


Check parking brake actuation. Adjust if necessary. 

• 

• 

• 


Lubricate convertible top hinge covers. 


• 

• 


Reset Service Indicator. 

Note: Do not reset Service Indicator when additional oil changes 
(between the normal intervals) are requested by the customer. 

• 

• 

• 


BMW Inspection 1: Undercarriage 


Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. 

We recommend BMW High Performance 5W-30 Synthetic oil, p/n 07 51 0 017 866 

• 

• 



Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. Use Castrol TWS 

Motorsport SAE 10W-60 Synthetic oil, or Castrol Formula RS 10W-60 Synthetic oil, BMW p/n 07 51 0 009 420 



• 


Check transmission for leaks. 

• 

• 

• 


Check rear axle for leaks. 

• 

• 

• 


Half shafts: Check for leaks at flexible boots. 

• 

• 

• 


Visually check fuel tank, lines and connections for leaks. 

• 

• 

• 


Check condition, position, and mounting of exhaust system. Examine for leaks. 

• 

• 

• 


Check power steering system for leaks. Check p/s fluid level; add fluid if necessary. 


• 

• 


Check overall thickness of front and rear disc brake pads using special tool. 

Record results. If replacement is necessary*: Examine brake disc surfaces. 

Clean brake pad contact points in calipers. Grease wheel centering hubs. 

Check thickness of parking brake linings only when replacing rear pads. Record results. 

• 

• 

• 


Check brake (and clutch) system connections and lines for leaks, damage, 
and incorrect positioning. 

• 

• 

• 


Check steering for absence of play, condition of suspension track rods, 
front axle joints, steering linkage and joint disc. 

• 

• 

• 


Check parking brake actuation. Adjust if necessary. 

• 

• 

• 


Check all tire pressures (including spare). Correct if necessary. Record results. 

Check condition of tires (outer surfaces [left/right]), tread wear and pattern; 
in case of uneven tread wear readjust wheels alightment if requested.* 

Note: If requested, rotate all four roads wheels as instructed and rebalance.* 

• 

• 

• 


Replace M-Mobility System sealant cartridge every 4 years. 



• 



BMW NA SD92-283 8/04 


'Invoice separately 


12 

Service and Maintenance 



Tire Pressure (psi): LF_ LR_ RF_ RR_ Spare_ 


Sample 2005 BMW Service Maintenance Checklist (cont.) 


BMW of North America, LLC 

2005 3 Series, Z4 (X3 and X5 - use 2004 checklist SD92-260) 

Service Maintenance Checklist 

Only operations that pertain to this vehicle will be performed. 

NOTE: Any other requested repairs not listed or covered by the applicable BMW Limited 
Warranty will be charged to the owner and invoiced separately. 


State and federal statutes require a properly completed copy 
of this form to be retained in the BMW center’s customer file. 


Customer’s Name 


Chassis Number 

Indicate # Lights illuminated in 
Service Interval Indicator 


G G G G G |Y |r | 

BMW center 

Mileage (on Service Interval Ind.) 

Repair Order No. 

Mileage (on odometer) 



ffl 

'll. 

A 


TECHNICIAN’S SIGNATURE 

E85 

E46 

r 

BMW Oxygen Sensor Replacement, required at intervals of 120,000 mi. 

(325i SULEV: 150,000 mi. M3: 100,000 mi.) 

• 

• 

• 


BMW Spark Plug Replacement, required at intervals of_,000 mi. 

100 

100 

60 


BMW Automatic Transmission Service; change ATF at intervals of 100,000 mi. 

• 

• 




1200 Mile Service 

Read out diagnostic system. 

Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. Use only Castrol TWS 

Motorsport SAE 10W-60 Synthetic oil, or Castrol Formula RS 10W-60 Synthetic oil, BMW p/n 07 51 0 009 420 

Replace transmission fluid. 

Replace differential oil. 

Check all warning/indicator lights, check control. 

Road test with check of brakes, suspension, shock absorbers (external), steering, clutch/manual transmission. 

BMW Engine Oil Service 

Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. 

We recommend BMW High Performance 5W-30 Synthetic oil, p/n 07 51 0 017 866 

Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. Use only Castrol TWS 

Motorsport SAE 10W-60 Synthetic oil, or Castrol Formula RS 10W-60 Synthetic oil, BMW p/n 07 51 0 009 420 

Replace microfilters. 

Note: reduce replacement interval in dusty operating conditions. 

Check overall thickness of front and rear disc brake pads using special tool. 

Record results. If replacement is necessary*: Examine brake disc surfaces. 

Clean brake pad contact points in calipers. Grease wheel centering hubs. 

Check thickness of parking brake linings only when replacing rear pads. Record results. 

Check parking brake actuation. Adjust if necessary. 

Lubricate convertible top hinge covers. 

Reset Service Indicator. 

Note: Do not reset Service Indicator when additional oil changes 
(between the normal intervals) are requested by the customer. 

BMW Inspection I: Undercarriage 

Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. 

We recommend BMW High Performance 5W-30 Synthetic oil, p/n 07 51 0 017 866 

Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. Use Castrol TWS 

Motorsport SAE 10W-60 Synthetic oil, or Castrol Formula RS 10W-60 Synthetic oil, BMW p/n 07 51 0 009 420 

Check transmission for leaks. 

Check rear axle for leaks. 

Half shafts: Check for leaks at flexible boots. 

Visually check fuel tank, lines and connections for leaks. 

Check condition, position, and mounting of exhaust system. Examine for leaks. 

Check power steering system for leaks. Check p/s fluid level; add fluid if necessary. 

Check overall thickness of front and rear disc brake pads using special tool. 

Record results. If replacement is necessary*: Examine brake disc surfaces. 

Clean brake pad contact points in calipers. Grease wheel centering hubs. 

Check thickness of parking brake linings only when replacing rear pads. Record results. 

Check brake (and clutch) system connections and lines for leaks, damage, 
and incorrect positioning. 

Check steering for absence of play, condition of suspension track rods, 
front axle joints, steering linkage and joint disc. 

Check parking brake actuation. Adjust if necessary. 

Check all tire pressures (including spare). Correct if necessary. Record results. 

Check condition of tires (outer surfaces [left/right]), tread wear and pattern; 
in case of uneven tread wear readjust wheels alightment if requested.* 

Note: If requested, rotate all four roads wheels as instructed and rebalance.* 

Replace M-Mobility System sealant cartridge every 4 years. 


BMW NA SD92-283 8/04 


'Invoice separately 

13 

Service and Maintenance 




SIAIV 

Models: E46 and E52 
Production: From start of production 

SIA IV Components 

• Instrument Cluster with LED display 

• DME 

• Vehicle Speed Signal 


rum 




E46 Service Interval Display 


Instrument Cluster (IKE, KOMBI) with LED Display 

The Instrument cluster calculates the Service Interval. The cluster is also responsible 
for displaying the mileage reading for the next service. 

DME 

The DME provides the Fuel Consumption (ti) signal. 

ASC/DSC Control Module 

The vehicle speed signal is provided by the ASC or DSC control module. 


14 

Service and Maintenance 
















Principle of Operation 

Starting with the E46 a new method for display¬ 
ing the Service Interval is used. Colored LEDs 
are no longer used to display the amount of time 
until the next service or inspection is due. 

With the SIA IV system, the actual mileage remaining until the next service will be dis¬ 
played for five seconds when the ignition is first switched on. 

The text “OIL SERVICE” or “INSPECTION” will also illuminate to show which service is 
due. A minus symbol( -) before the mileage display indicates that a service is past due. 

The calculation process for determining the service interval is similar to SIA III. A set 
volume is stored in the Cluster. The processor receives the ti signal from DME as the 
vehicle is driven. The Cluster also receives the vehicle speed signal from the ASC/DSC 
control module. 

Based on the amount of fuel consumed and the distance traveled, the processor calcu¬ 
lates the distance remaining to the next service. 

Service 

Reset of the SIA can be done using special tool 62 1 110 if the vehicle is eguipped with 
the 20 pin under-hood diagnosis connector. 

On 2001 MY vehicles onward without the diagnostic connector in the engine compart¬ 
ment, the use of the S.l reset tool is not possible. The Service Indicator may be reset 
using the Reset Mode in the Instrument Cluster or with Diagnosis. 


OILSERVICE 

15000 Miles 


15 

Service and Maintenance 



Reset Procedure using the Reset Mode 
(possible from 9/99 onward for E46, MY2001 E52) 

• Ignition key must be “off”. 

• Press and hold the trip odometer button in the instrument cluster (left button), and 
turn the ignition key to the first position (KLR). 

• Keep the button pressed for approximately 5 seconds until one of the following 
words appear in the display: “OIL SERVICE, or “INSPECTION”, with “reset”. 

• Release the reset button and press and hold it again until “reset” begins to flash. 

• While the display is flashing, press the left button briefly to reset the service interval. 
After the display has shown the new interval, the following will appear: “END SIA”. 


The system can only be reset again after 10 liters (2.5gal) of fuel have been consumed. 



PRESS AND 
HOLD LEFT 
BUTTON 


rESET 

OILSERVICE 

SIR 

15000 

Miles 

_ A 



TURN KEYTO 
POSITION 1 (KLR) 



KEEP PRESSED FOR 5 SECONDS 
AFTER KEY IS SWITCHED ON. 

TAP BUTTON TO RESET SI DISPLAY 


E46 Service Interval Reset 


16 

Service and Maintenance 













Reset Procedure using Diagnosis Program 

• Connect the Diagnosis head to the diagnostic connector of the vehicle. 

• Identify the vehicle and perform the Short Test. 

• Select Function Selection and then Service Functions. 

• Highlight Reset Service Interval Indicator. 

• Select with tester. 

• Follow the directions from the help information in the test module (upper right corer). 

• Select which service is to be reset and press the continue key. 

• An acknowledgement is displayed on the screen that the reset has been carried out. 


17 

Service and Maintenance 




Connected Service 


The term "Connected Service" refers to "Networked service." Modern vehicles are 
already heavily networked internally by the single bus systems. Communication of vehicle 
occupants with the vehicle occurs via several control and display systems like the instru¬ 
ment cluster, on-board monitor with navigation system and on the E65 with the central 
Control Display. 

This networking in constant progress is also revolutionizing the service process. It is 
called "Connected Service" and allows increasing communication and networking 
between the vehicle and the Retail Service Departments. 

Customers can expect the following from the BMW Service in the future: 

• Exactly planned appointments, no loss of information, early problem detection and 
flexible service. 

• Fast handling of the service process without long waiting times for the service advi¬ 
sor, spare parts or vehicle. 

• Departure from fixed items of inspection/repair, same high service quality, personal 
and individual advice. 

Connected Service offers new possibilities. Vehicle specific service requirements are 
automatically assessed. Fixed inspection/maintenance schedules will be replaced by 
more flexible maintenance services. 

The existing process will be further optimized, the appointment process will be faster and 
more effective and service advisors will have more time for individual consultation. 

Connected Service is made up of several modules some of which are already available or 
are introduced starting with the E65. 

The modules are: 

• Condition Based Service (CBS) 

• Coded Keys 

• Key Reader 

• Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM) 


18 

Service and Maintenance 



Condition Based Service (CBS) 

BS defines vehicle specific maintenance requirements by sensor based monitoring of 
engine oil, air conditioning micro-filters and the front and rear brake linings. In addition, 
time dependent monitoring of the engine oil, brake fluid and coolant. 

CBS also provides distance dependent monitoring of spark plugs as well as visual and 
functional checks. The service need display (SBA) is located in the instrument cluster 
and the details are displayed in the Control Display. 

Coded Keys 

The BMW keys have already been storing information for approximately 3 years. Since 
1998 the chassis number and since 1999 the chassis number, mileage and status of the 
Service Interval Display (SIA) is stored. 

The E65 keys (FBD keys or remote control service keys) store more information, such as 
check control messages and all CBS relevant data like: mileage, oil condition, brake pad 
wear and microfilter condition. The key is the “business card” of the vehicle. 

Key Reader 

The Key Reader allows readout of the data stored in the key when the vehicle is checked 
in for service. The required basic data of the vehicle and the data concerning all service 
requirements are automatically available. 

Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM) 

SAM is the software running at the service advisor’s work station. The software interprets 
and displays (processes) the vehicle data stored in the key. 

SAM includes two future extension levels: 

• SAM 2 (Extension of SAM 1 - Future) Associated with TeleService 1, it allows the 

remote transmission of vehicle data stored in the keys and access to the 
central service databases (central repair history). 

• SAM 3 (Extension of SAM 2 - Future) Associated with TeleService 2, it allows the 

dealer to communicate with the vehicle for troubleshooting complex elec¬ 
tronic problems. 

TeleService 

TeleService will be offered at two levels: 

TeleService 1 : allows automatic or manual data transfer by cellular phone from 
the vehicle to a TeleService center. The Service Call transmits wear and fault informa¬ 
tion. Emergency service calls may be placed to an assistance service center. The 
transmission of information via SMS (Short Message Service) will allow collection of 
data from customers. 

TeleService 2: will allow remote diagnosis of the vehicle electronics. Finally, 
Telediagnosis/programming will allow the removal of faults, encoding and flash pro¬ 
gramming select control modules via the telephone interface. 


19 

Service and Maintenance 



Transfer and Analysis of Vehicle Operation and Service Data (FASTA) 

FASTA increases product quality, gives input to Research and Development and is the 
basis for developing more accurate diagnostic tools and optimizing processes aimed at 
solving problems. In the workshop, the vehicle data is read with the diagnostic equipment 
and transferred via network to the central FASTA vehicle related database at BMW. 

Starting with the E46, FASTA was implemented for the first time for a select number of 
dealers in Europe and in the USA. This pilot phase now is over and FASTA is now being 
used for the launch of all new models and as an integral part of quality control. For more 
information refer to bulletin SI B07 08 01 and 07 07 01. 


20 

Service and Maintenance 



Updating Service Data 

The service data records and fault memory entries are collected in a temporary memory 
by the Car Access System. The service data is thus available from a central point. 

If one of the conditions set out below results in transfer of the service key data, the serv¬ 
ice key data on the ID transmitter is updated. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Car Access System 

2 

Current data on electrical system that Car 
Access System receives via K-CAN2 

3 

Diagnosis data via K-CAN2 or direct from 
Car Access System 

4 

Permanently stored data provided by Car 
Access System 

5 

Manual data transfer (emergency start coil, 
low frequency) 

6 

Automatic updating of data (transmission 
frequency of ID transmitter, high frequency) 

|jC 

Accumulated data in Car Access System’s 
temporary memory 


Note: Updating can be performed both by way of the emergency start coil’s 
low frequency signal (5) and by means of the transmission frequency 
used by the ID transmitter (6). 

Updating Service Key Data 

The service key data is stored in the Car Access System and transferred to the ID trans¬ 
mitter. Transfer is initiated automatically by specific conditions or manually. The data can 
be read out using the BMW Key Reader when the vehicle is serviced. 

Automatic Updating 

The service key data is updated every time the vehicle is driven. That data comprises: 

• Conditioned Based Service data 

• Check Control messages 

• Fault memory entries. 

21 

Service and Maintenance 
















The conditions for updating are: 

• “Terminal 15 ON”, speed above 40 kph followed by speed below 40 mph. 

• The data is updated once a distance of 10 km has been covered and the speed is 
below 40 mph. 

• The remote control receiver transfers the data to the ID transmitter when the engine 
is switched off. Data continues to be written to the ID transmitter even after it is 
taken out of the vehicle. 

• A data read-out can then be obtained from the ID transmitter. 

Manual Updating 

The procedure for transferring current service key data to the ID transmitter in the course 
of servicing is as follows: 

• Press and hold the Center-Lock button and use the START-STOP button to select 
“Terminal 15 ON”, then release both buttons. 

• Within 10 s, hold the ID transmitter against the right-hand side of the steering col¬ 
umn trim in the position marked by the key symbol. 

Note: The key symbol is printed on the steering column trim. 

Wait until the Check Control message appears on the instrument cluster. The instrument 
cluster display shows the message “Updating service data”. 

• As soon as the updating process is complete, the Check Control message disap¬ 
pears and a gong sounds. 

• A data read-out can then be obtained from the ID transmitter. 

Note: The manual updating process transfers Conditioned Based Service 
data, Check Control messages and fault memory entries. 


Display of “Updating service data” message on F01 /FQ2 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Key symbol 

2 

Updating service data 

3 

“Caution Symbol” 


22 

Service and Maintenance 










Condition Based Service (CBS) 

Service Interval Indicator systems (SIA3 and SIA4) determine maintenance intervals 
based on fuel consumption, which is done to assess the need to change the engine oil. 
The main determining factor for the maintenance interval currently is the condition of the 
engine oil. Other maintenance needs, including the replacement of wear and tear items, 
are arranged to coincide with due engine oil changes. 

BMW is now measuring the need for maintenance of several critical components besides 
the engine oil, and independently of the engine oil. This affords us the ability to bring a 
vehicle in for service whenever one of the measured components reguires maintenance 
or replacement. 

Condition Based Service (CBS - further development of SIA) will strike a compromise 
between too freguent maintenance and too rigid intervals which call for the replacement 
of maintenance items that may still have substantial useful life left. The objective is to 
furnish economical maintenance by providing the ideal service for individual vehicles. 

Principle of Operation 

Sensor Based (CBS) Schedules 

The trend in the vehicle service business is to lengthen service intervals and reduce 
replacement of maintenance items. Additional measures have been taken to keep the 
vehicles in a roadworthy and comfortable condition. 

Usage dependent maintenance of select wear and tear items is detected by physical and 
virtual sensors. This means that, in cases where the wear is not measured directly, the 
service due date will be determined by using auxiliary variables such as mileage, vehicle 
performance, temperature, etc. 

Sensors built into certain components and control module algorithms take even more 
detailed account of the various conditions of vehicle use. The remaining times for select¬ 
ed maintenance tasks as well as any dates for State and/or Emissions Inspections (deter¬ 
mined by the state in which the vehicle is registered) are individually displayed. 

CBS determines the current and future maintenance reguirements. The current status of 
Service items determined by CBS are shown in the Control Display. This data can also 
be read from the vehicle key by using the Key Reader, as the vehicle’s current service sta¬ 
tus is automatically saved in the ignition key every time the key is used. 

Three sensors detect the following wear conditions: 

• Engine oil (sensor) 

• Microfilter (virtual sensor) 

• Front and rear brake linings (sensor as reference point) 

The instrument cluster collects the values from the wear detection control modules and 
manages the internally defined service repair schedule. Data exchange is carried out on the 
bus systems. 

23 

Service and Maintenance 



Engine Oil Condition 

The condition of the engine oil is detected by the oil condition sensor. Simultaneously, 
it also detects the engine oil level and the oil temperature. 

The engine oil condition sensor is monitored by the ECM and is mounted in the oil pan. 

The ECM contains an algorithm for evaluating the service due date. The following param¬ 
eters are considered in the calculation: 

• The correct oil grade is installed 

• Oil level 

• Oil temperature 

• Engine load 

• Fuel consumption (ti signal) 

• Mileage 

• Date (time elapsed since last oil change) 

The remaining life to the next service is forwarded from the ECM to the instrument clus¬ 
ter by a bus message when the ignition is switched "ON." When the "engine oil" service 
is due, it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 

Microfilter State of Wear 

The air intake section of the air conditioning system includes a microfilter on the right and 
on the left. The Microfilter includes an additional active carbon filter. 

The condition of the microfilter is detected by the IHKA control module. It does not 
include a physical sensor to measure the level of contamination in the microfilter. 

The IHKA uses an algorithm to calculate this from the following parameters: 

• Ambient air temperature 

• Rain sensor signal 

• Heating use 

• Air recirculation settings 

• Driving speed 

• Fan speed 

• Mileage 

• Date (time elapsed since the last oil change) 

The remaining life to the next service is forwarded by the IHKA control module to the instru¬ 
ment cluster by a bus message when the ignition is switched "ON." When the "microfilter" 
service due date occurs, it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 


24 

Service and Maintenance 





Front and Rear Brake Linings State of Wear 

The brake lining state of wear on the front and rear axle is confirmed and detected by 
2-stage brake lining wear sensors. These are located on the left front and right rear brake 
pads. The first stage (reference point for the calculation) of the wear indicator is activated 
when the thickness of the lining is 6 mm, and the second when it is down to 4 mm. 

The brake lining wear sensors voltage signals are monitored by the DSC control module. 
The brake lining wear sensor operates in the first stage as on current models and a resis¬ 
tor was added for the second stage. 

The algorithm is controlled by these two different voltages in the control module and 
determines the residual thickness of the brake lining. The residual wear of the brake lining 
is calculated from the following input parameters: 

• Wheel speed 

• Brake pressure 

• Braking frequency 

• Brake disc temperature 

• Braking time 

• Mileage (travel distance) 

The residual wear of the brake lining on the front and rear axles is stored in the DSC 
control module when the ignition is switched “OFF” and is used as the starting value 
the next time the vehicle is started. 

The residual distance to the next service is forwarded by the DSC control module to the 
instrument cluster by a bus message when the ignition is switched "ON." The "Front or 
Rear brake linings" service due date is displayed in the instrument cluster or the Control 
Display. 


Note: Simultaneous replacement of the instrument cluster and ECM must be 
avoided whenever possible , otherwise all current oil maintenance 
schedule data will be lost. The values will then have to be inserted 
manually in each control module. 


25 

Service and Maintenance 



Internal Calculation of CBS Service Items 

For certain wear and tear items, sensors are not needed by the Condition Based Service. 
The wear items that are calculated and managed internally by the instrument cluster are: 

• Brake fluid 

• Visual and functional checks (vehicle check) 

• Coolant 

• Official State Safety and/or Emissions Inspections 

• Spark plugs 

The maintenance of these items is performed affixed intervals. The residual wear or the 
remaining time to next service is calculated by the instrument cluster using the travel/time 
parameters of: mileage, current date and internal distance counter. When a service item 
is due, it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 

Battery down times (battery cut off by the distribution switch) also stop the trip distance 
counter which leads to longer time based service intervals. This will disrupt the CBS vol¬ 
umes for engine oil, microfilter, brake fluid and coolant. 

To correct this, the internal counter status must be reset by ISTA. The wear dependent 
items internally calculated by the instrument cluster are stored in the instrument cluster 
and in the CAS control module (redundancy). 

Note: The internal distance counter plays a particular role. Unlike the 
Time/Date, this counter cannot be set by the driver. 


26 

Service and Maintenance 



Service Indications 

Regarding CBS, there are different service indicators: 

• Service need display (SBA) in the cluster (base of speedometer) E65 only 

• Check Control display in the instrument cluster 

• CBS indicator in the Control Display 

Service Need Display (SBA) 

The Service Need Display is the evolution of the SIA4 
Service Interval display. When KL15 is "ON," the 
Service Need Display appears under the speedometer 
in the instrument cluster for 10 seconds in the place 
where the fuel tank level is normally displayed. 

The first line corresponds to the mileage dependent service items. It specifies the 
mileage when the next service is due. If the mileage is exceeded (service overdue), 
it appears with a minus sign. 

The second line corresponds to the time dependent service items and is displayed by a 
clock symbol. It specifies the weeks/months/years when the next service is due. If the 
service is overdue, it appears with a minus sign. 

The actual service item (with additional information) can be viewed in the Control Display. 

Check Control Message 

The CBS produces a Check Control message that 
indicates a service is needed. 

The icon in the picture to the left is taken from an E65 
instrument cluster that has a brake lining wear at the 
front or rear axle. 

A brief Check Control message appears: "Service, see Vehicle menu." For more detailed 
information, the user can access the Control Display. 




Note: For vehicles without a Central Information Display (such as an E90 
without NAV) the customer only receives an icon as a warning that a 
particular service is due. The owner’s manual should be referenced 
to look up the icon. 


27 

Service and Maintenance 





CBS Indicator in the Control Display 

The Control Display provides additional information on service and maintenance proce¬ 
dures by selecting: 

• “OB data” menu, for E65 

• “Settings menu => Service menu” for others models 
The CBS menu appears with the service items. 

The Control Display shows a list of selected service and maintenance procedures, as well 
as legally-mandated official inspections. 

The service and maintenance procedures are displayed in different colors: 

• Green: No service is currently reguired 

• Yellow: Service deadline is approaching 

• Red: Service deadline has already passed 

The service items highlighted in red with the highest priority appear in the bottom part 
of the display. 

You can scroll through the list of service and maintenance procedures from top to bottom 
by turning the Controller from right to left. You can leave the list of service items by press¬ 
ing the button with the Up arrow symbol. 

The service and maintenance items are: 


Engine oil 

• Front brake pads 

• Rear brake pads 

Microfilter 

• Brake fluid 

• Coolant 

Spark plugs 

• Vehicle check 

• State Inspection 

Emissions Inspection 




To display the service and maintenance item information in the Control Display, turn the 
Controller to select the item and confirm your selection by pressing the Controller. 


28 

Service and Maintenance 



CBS Reset 

The CBS Reset procedure provides resetting of the individual Condition Based Service 
items. The items that require a reset depend on the individual vehicle usage. When one 
or more service and maintenance items has been performed, these items must be reset. 
The reset procedure can be carried out via the instrument cluster or ISTA. 

Instrument Cluster 

Resetting the maintenance item using the instrument cluster is different depending on 
the model of the vehicle. 

E65 

To reset a service item using the instrument cluster, press the reset button on the top left 
side of the instrument cluster for greater that 10 seconds. 

A 4-line menu appears in the speedometer. At the top is the Back function, then the first 
three service and maintenance items sorted by priority. In addition, the residual wear or 
the remaining time are specified (possibly with a minus sign). 

The "!" symbol means that you can reset this service and maintenance item, while a "0" 
indicates it is not able to be reset (the first 20% of the service interval is protected against 
premature/accidental reset). 

1. Service items (in the speedometer) 

2. Resetable service item (in the tachometer) 

a. Back 

b. Vehicle Check 

c. Microfilter 

d. Brake fluid 

e. Back 

f. RESET Vehicle Check 


You can scroll through the service and maintenance items by pressing the reset button or 
the lower axial (FAS) button on the turn signal/high beam switch. When you have selected 
a service item, press the reset button for a few seconds to display a 2-line menu in the 
tachometer. 

The Back function is at the top and the Resetable service and maintenance item is below 
it. Now select the service and maintenance item with the reset button (or the axial button) 
and press the reset button again for a few seconds. 

In a third menu line, the system confirms that the reset was successful. The whole inter¬ 
val for the service operation is highlighted in the Service Need Display. 



29 

Service and Maintenance 







E60/61/63/64 


When one or more operations have been carried out, e.g. front pads have been changed, 
these operations must be reset to their full service interval. 

There are two options for resetting the service operations: 

• Legally required service operations Legally required service operations such as the 
Statutory vehicle inspection (HU) and the Statutory exhaust test (AU), can only be 
reset in the "Service" menu. 

• Maintenance service operations All service operations for the purpose of mainte¬ 
nance are reset by means of the reset button of the trip distance counter in the 
instrument cluster. If the reset button is pressed for longer than ten seconds, the 
reset mode opens automatically. "Reset?" is displayed in the lower display window. 

In the upper display window, the CBS symbol, e.g. for "engine oil service overdue" will 
displayed. Press the reset button until the time/distance-dependent displays in the lower 
display window are replaced with dashes. Reset is no longer possible once more than 
percent of the interval has expired. A reset lock will be shown in the display with "OK". 



1. Reset button for trip counter 

2. Upper Display Window 


- CBS Symbol 


3. Lower Display Window 


- Gear Indicator 

- Reset Mode 


E90/91 

To reset the service information data using the cluster: 

• KL-15 on and all Variable displays in cluster off (clock should be displayed) 

• Press and hold odometer reset button until CBS pictures display in cluster for about 
5 seconds then release 

• Use the BC button to scroll through till desired resetable picture is displayed. 

• “Reset?” is displayed, Press and hold BC button a picture of a small analog clock 
runs through its display. When complete, the CBS reset that you chose is reset. 

• If you want to insure that the reset was done, you can press the BC button while still 
looking at the CBS reset pictogram and the acknowledgment of reset will be shown 
with a check mark in a box. 


30 


Service and Maintenance 


CBS Data Correction 

The CBS correction vehicle data allows “quick access” to create or change the CBS 
data stored in the vehicle. Sometimes the vehicle’s maintenance data will not be plausible 
(usually due to coding/programming issues). The correction includes decreasing the use 
percentage and number of resets when a reset was mistakenly performed. When the 
CBS reset is carried out, the changed data in the tester is automatically transferred to 
the vehicle. 

Example: A vehicle with only 3,000 miles on the odometer enters the service drive 
with the oil service light illuminated. The vehicle obviously does not need 
an oil service until roughly 15,000 miles. 

The oil service should not be performed and the service maintenance 
light should not be reset either. This would make the vehicle undergo a 
roughly 18,000 mile service interval. Instead, the CBS data has to be 
manipulated or corrected to compensate for the miles already driven. 


CBS Handover Inspection 

The CBS handover inspection is for the deletion of past data in the vehicle and reconfig¬ 
uring the vehicle for latest data (updating after a service). 

To perform a handover inspection select option three from the CBS correction, vehicle 
data page. 

Option 3 includes: 

1. Check status, telephone numbers 

2. Enter date of first registration 

3. Drover Adaptation reset 

4. Back to selection CBS items 

It is important that the correct telephone numbers are entered. These numbers are used 
by the TCU to make service calls for teleservice and for the customer to speak to a cus¬ 
tomer service representative. 

Note: A list of the telephone numbers that should be entered can be found in 
SI B8414 01. 


31 

Service and Maintenance 



Central Information Display (CID) 

Service Mode 

The controller can be used to activate the Service mode 
functions. 

The Service mode is a special facility which provides 
information about the status of the display and user con¬ 
trol system. 

Note: This function was created to aid in diagno¬ 
sis and is not intended for the customer. 

The Service mode can be used, for example, to read out hardware/software versions for 
the Central Information Display or control units in the CIC system network. 

As an addition to the comprehensive facilities of the diagnosis system, the Service mode 
serves as a simple means of quickly accessing diagnostic data without a BMW diagnosis 
system. 

Activating the Service Mode 

In the main menu, push the controller forwards and hold there for longer than 10 sec¬ 
onds. 

Tactile feedback will then be generated. 

Then proceed as follows: 

• Turn the controller 3 stops clockwise 

• Turn controller 3 stops anticlockwise 

• Turn controller 1 stops clockwise 

• Turn controller 1 stops anticlockwise 

• Turn controller 1 stops clockwise 

• Press the controller; the Service mode is added 
as the last menu item in the "Settings" menu. 

The first menu level contains the following submenus: 

• Navigation Service 

• Telephone 

• Gracenote. 

Note: Push the controller in any direction to return to the main menu. 



32 

Service and Maintenance 



Instrument Cluster 


Test Functions 

The test functions are shown in the LC dis¬ 
play of the instrument cluster. The test func¬ 
tions are used by the BMW service 
mechanics to check the coding. They also 
provide help in troubleshooting without the 
diagnostic tester. 



To start function test 

• Terminal R ON or terminal 15 ON 

• Press and hold the reset button in the instrument cluster for 10 seconds (set/ reset) 


Note: The test functions can also be called up by holding down the setting but¬ 
ton in the instrument cluster and simultaneously switching on terminal R. 


Display of test functions 

The test functions are shown only in the upper LC display. 

Locking and unlocking the test functions (test function 19) 

Only the first two test functions are freely accessible. 

As from the third, all further test functions are locked. The functions can be unlocked only 
via test function 19. 

The test functions are unlocked by entering the sum of the digits in the vehicle identifica¬ 
tion number. 

To end test function 

• Ignition key at terminal R or terminal 15 ON 

• Press and hold the setting button for longer than 5 seconds or 

• Calling up test function 21 (RESET). 

Note: To protect against unauthorized access, all test functions (with the 

exception of test 1 and test 2), are locked again after a RESET and "sleep 
cycle". 


33 

Service and Maintenance 


'\c< 'hi: 


CBS displays in the instrument cluster 

The CBS display always comprises the following two separate displays: 

• A colored symbol in the upper display 

- Orange for normal 

- Yellow for service due 

- Red for service overdue 

• and information on remaining distance and/or due date in the lower display. 

You will find further information on the CBS displays in the BMW Owner's Handbook 
under Servicing Systems. 

CBS Symbols 




Engine oil 


Front brakes 


Rear brakes 


Brake fluid 


Vehicle check 


General inspection 


Exhaust-gas test 


34 

Service and Maintenance 


















Visual system test 

In the visual system test, all the indicator lamps and lights are lit briefly. 

The needle instruments are moved from the lower to upper stop and back again. 

Overview of test functions 

Only the main test functions are listed in the following table. In addition to the majority of 
test functions there are further equivalent functions for which a similar display appears in 
the instrument cluster. 


Test Function 

Description 

Display (e.g.) 

01 

Instrument cluster identification- 

- Vehicle Identification Number. 

01.00 

FGSTNR 

AB12345 

02 

System test 

02.00 

Kl TEST 

03 

Not used 

03.00 

Not used 

04 

Electric load values 

04.00 

VERB-MOM 

12,6 1/100 km 

05 

Range consumption 

05.00 

RW-VERBR 

06 

Fuel level 

06.00 

TANK L R S 

24.5 26.7 50 

07 

Current display values 

07.00 

KTMP-MOM 

104°C 

08 

Road speed 

08.00 

V-EFF 

123 km/h 

09 

System voltage 

09.00 

Ub 

13.3 V 

10 

Not used 

10.00 

Not used 


35 

Service and Maintenance 





































Test Function 

Description 

Display (e.g.) 

11 

Units 

11.00 

ZEIT-EINH 

24h 

12 

Calculated time of arrival 

12.00 

V-ANKUNFT 

67,8 km/h 

13 

Audible signals 

13.00 

AUDIO 

LICHT-WARN 

BLINKER 

ZS-WARN 

14 

Self-diagnostics 

14.00 

FSP-Eintrage 

10 

15 

I/O ports processor 

15.00 

PORT 00 

01010111 

16 

Dimming 

16.00 

DIMMRAD-CAN 

46h 

17 

Contrast 

17.00 

DISP-HEIZ 

Ein io 

18 

Not used 

18.00 

Not used 

19 

Locking 

19.00 

LOCK 

LOCK: ON 

LOCK. 25 

20 

Fuel consumption correction 

20.00 

KORR-VERBR 

1000 

1 er KORR 

10er KORR 

10Oer KORR 

21 

Reset 

(software reset) 

21.00 

Reset? 


36 

Service and Maintenance 








































Breaking-in period 

Moving parts need to be broken in to adjust to each other. The following instructions will 
help achieve a long vehicle life and good fuel economy. 

Engine and differential 

Always obey the official speed limit. 

Up to approx. 1,200 miles/2,000 km 

Drive at varying engine and road speeds but do not exceed in gasoline engines, 4,500 
rpm or a road speed of 100 mph. 

Avoid full-throttle operation and use of the transmission's kickdown mode for the initial 
miles. 

From 1,200 miles/2,000 km 

The engine and vehicle speed can gradually be increased. 

Tires 

Due to technical factors associated with their manufacture, tires do not achieve their full 
traction potential until after an initial breaking-in period. Drive conservatively for the first 
200 miles. 

Brake system 

Brakes reguire an initial break-in period of approx. 300 miles to achieve optimized contact 
and wear patterns between brake pads and rotors. Drive conservatively during this break¬ 
ing-in period. 

Clutch 

The function of the clutch reaches its optimal level only after a distance driven of approx. 
300miles. During this break-in period, engage the clutch gently. 

Following part replacement 

The same breaking in procedures should be observed if any of the components men¬ 
tioned above have to be renewed in the course of the vehicle's operating life. 

For BMW M vehicles 

Additionally, for Motorsport vehicles follow the next breaking-in periods. 

Up to 1,200miles 

Drive at varying engine and road speeds, but do not exceed an engine speed of 
5,500rpm and a road speed of 105mph. Do not depress the accelerator all the way down. 

From 1,200 miles to 3,000miles 

Engine and road speeds can be increased gradually up to a traveling speed of 135mph. 
Use the maximum speed only for brief intervals, e.g. when passing. 

Transmission 

The transmission begins functioning at an optimal level only after a distance of approx. 
300miles. Do not exceed engine speeds of 5,500rpm during this period. 

37 

Service and Maintenance 



Key Reader 

Starting with the E65, BMW opened a new dimension in customer service. Using the 
Key Reader, Service Reception uses the data stored in the vehicle key to provide the 
following benefits: 

• Accelerate and facilitate service consultation. 

• Routine tasks, such as collecting vehicle 
data, will be minimized. 

• After accessing the data stored in the 
vehicle’s key, service and maintenance 
reguirements are determined for the 
individual vehicle (CBS). 

• A customized service maintenance list will 
be printed out for specific operations (E6x 
and E9x vehicles no longer utilize a conven¬ 
tional Service Maintenance Checklist). 

The Key Reader facilitates and accelerates service reception. As soon as the key is 
inserted, the vehicle’s maintenance data, VIN, and mileage are displayed at the client 
advisor's desk. It obtains this information by reading the vehicle data from the vehicle 
keys. 

The Service Acceptance Module (SAM) software displays and prints this vehicle data via 
a Personal Computer with installed Key Reader. The reader accesses the stored vehicle 
data and the information is displayed on screen depending on the vehicle and model. 

Key - Vehicle Data Holder and Business Card 

The Key Reader automatically collects service relevant data from the vehicle key. The 
data is transmitted from the CAS module to the key or from the EWS module to the key 
(if not eguipped with a CAS). 

The key reader works with all current E38, E39, E46, E52, E53, and E85 vehicles with a 
vehicle key that has a colored BMW logo in the center and all E6x and E9x vehicles. 

On early vehicles, the software only provides current vehicle mileage and VIN to the 
Service Advisor. On newer vehicles, E6x & E9x onward, the software supplies through 
detailed condition based service information and produces a “Vehicle Inspection Check 
List” customized to the specific needs of each vehicle. 

There are circumstances under which the current vehicle data is not stored in the key, for 
example: the customer has provided the spare key, which has not been used recently. 

For this reason, a service function is provided to store data in the key: 

• With the driver’s door closed, push/hold the central lock switch in the unlock 
position and push/hold the start/stop button for approximately 5 seconds 
(without pressing the brake pedal) = Vehicle data is transferred to the spare key. 

38 

Service and Maintenance 



Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM) 

SAM is the software running at the service advisor’s work station. As soon as the key is 
inserted into the Key Reader, the software interprets the vehicle data stored in the key 
and the service and maintenance requirements determined for the individual vehicle 
(CBS) are displayed on screen (E65 example shown below). 



This on screen information provides the service advisor more specific information about 
the individual vehicle requirements when consulting with the customer. As shown above, 
the on screen information indicates that the engine oil and brake fluid is due to be 
changed. In addition, future service and maintenance requirements (based on mileage or 
time) can be planned. 

After accessing the data stored in the vehicle’s key, a customized service maintenance 
list can be printed out for specific operations (as shown on the next page). The E65 and 
E66 no longer utilize a conventional Service Maintenance Checklist. 


39 

Service and Maintenance 










40 

Service and Maintenance 



