Table of Contents 


Product and Measures Management Aftersales 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

QC Info.3 

Case.3 

Service Information .4 

Procedure .4 

Creating a PuMA Case.5 

URGENT PuMA CASE.7 

Construction Groups.9 

Drivetrain (Area Selection: Powertrain) .9 

Electrical System (Area Selection: Electrics/Electronics) .10 

Chassis (Area Selection: Chassis and Suspension) .10 

Body (Area Selection: Body and Trim) .10 

General .11 

Procedures Flowchart.12 

Examples.14 

Case 1 .14 


Initial Print Date: 2/06 Revision Date: 05/10 



















Product and Measures Management 
Aftersales (PuMA) 

■BIEETIMES 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the process that enables PuMA to be successful 

• Understand the information expected in a PuMA case 

• Review and understand what makes a “good” PuMA case 

• Understand the different documents that can be generated from PuMA 

• Understand the importance of the FASTA data transfer with respect to PuMA 


2 

PuMA 


Introduction 


Product and Measures Management Aftersales (PuMA) is the preferred method of 
communicating service issues that may be encountered at the centers. As of February 
2005 PuMA is the only method of first contact with the technical hotline department. 

There are four major components of information utilized by PuMA. 

These four components are: 

QC Info 

Quality Control Information report (Pink Sheet) is created by the technician when 
informing BMWNA of a guality issue. Information included in these reports is used 
by the engineering department to identify and resolve product issues. Create a QC 
Info when a response through PuMA is not expected. 

Case 

Cases are created by the technician and forwarded to the Hotline. The Hotline 
responds to the Case with a recommendation. The Case will appear in your Mailbox 
with a green diamond which alerts you to the response. Only users at the center 
where the Case originated will be able to see and read the Case and the Hotline’s 
response. Cases expire after 90 days. 


3 

PuMA 




Service Information 


This module is not meant to be an owner’s manual for PuMA but rather explain the 
process behind PuMA. Technicians should already familiar with the interface used in 
PuMA and how to submit PuMA cases. 

Procedure 

PuMA was established to assist center technicians who are faced with difficult to 
diagnose technical problems. In order to provide proper service to all centers, the follow¬ 
ing points must be adhered to before submitting a PuMA case: 

• The technician assigned to the vehicle must have training directly related to the 
vehicle or system. 

• All available resources must be reviewed; these include but are not limited to: 
Service Information Bulletins, Service Measures, TIS, DCS messages, Service 
Round Table, Training manuals, Repair Manual Instructions, DIS Functional 
Descriptions. Refer to attached Technical Protocol for more details. 

• Reguired checks must be performed. For example, diagnostic test plans, verifying 
circuit integrity, power and grounds, and reviewing vehicle service history. Refer to 
attached Technical Protocol for more details. 

• The Shop Foreman / Team Leader must be consulted. 

• Service Managers, Shop Foremen and/or Team Leaders are the only BMW center 
personnel who can submit regular PuMA cases. Note: All technicians who have 
completed the reguired training for the vehicle or system in guestion can still submit 
TeileClearing cases in PuMA. Please refer to SI BOO 03 07 (PuMA Enhancements 
forTeileClearing Process). 

• The vehicle must be in the shop. In order to aid the Regional Technical Engineer in 
diagnosis, your diagnostic tester must have transmitted FASTA data indicating that 
all relevant test modules have been completed. 

When not to submit a PuMA case: 

• A PuMA case should not be submitted for Warranty approval except for Enhanced 
Technical Support (refer to SI BOO 03 06) or other specific issues noted in DCS 
messages or Service Information Bulletins. 

• A PuMA case is not authorization for a warranty repair or work time, nor is it needed to 
validate test module results. Contact your Market Team where reguired by the 
Warranty Policies & Procedures Manual. 


PuMA 




• For Parts-related problems and information, the Parts Consultant Group should be 
contacted by your Parts department at (800) 272-0202 

• For radio security codes. You can obtain the security codes through DCS or faxing in 
your reguest to 201 930 8424 as per SI B65 05 99. 

• If you wish to inform us of a guality issue, and no technical assistance is reguired, 
please utilize PuMA to submit a QC Info (Pink Sheet). 

Creating a PuMA Case 

After exhausting all available resources, please ensure that all cases contain the following 
information before submitting a case: 

• A full detailed description of the complaint and whether or not the complaint has 
been verified. 

• A detailed description of the operating conditions, environment, road conditions, 
anything related to the complaint or conditions under which it can be duplicated. 
The details must sufficient to insure that the person reading your case will be able 
to understand the situation and or duplicate it if necessary. 

• Identify any work previously performed during each service visit, for the same 
complaint. 

• Results of tests performed, i.e. fuel pressure, fuel mixture adaptations, resistance 
values. Always provide specific readings, statements such as “in spec” and “good” 
are not adeguate. 

• When creating a case regarding Automatic Transmissions, please include “GM” or 
“ZF” in the subject line and the serial number of the installed transmission, in the 
“Work Performed” field of your case. Also include the transmission fluid level and 
condition. If the problem concerns shift characteristics, include the specific shift 
(i.e. 1 -2 or 5-4) that is causing the complaint. 

• Where fault codes are stored, include the name of the module concerned in “prob¬ 
lem description” and the actual fault codes in the “fault code” box. Use Capital let¬ 
ters only. 

• When a fuse is affected/blown please include the fuse number as a fault code. Use 
the format capital F###. As an example, if fuse 55 is blown please include this fault 
as F55 in the "fault code" box (see illustrations FC). 


5 

PuMA 




Note: PuMA cases not fulfilling the above mentioned rules will be rejected 
and returned without processing. Faxed-in requests will no longer 
be processed. 

The response will be shown by a green diamond next to the case in your PuMA inbox. If 
you resubmit your case for any reason, your case will be given a new time stamp. As a 
result, your response may be delayed because cases are processed on a first-in, first-out 
basis. When the vehicle complaint is corrected, update your case with detailed results. 


6 

PuMA 













URGENT PuMA CASE 


Only shop foremen or service managers may submit "Urgent" cases. In the event 
of a critical issue, submit a PuMA case and mark it as "Urgent". Then call your Regional 
Technical Engineer. The RTE will provide technical support via phone and then update 
the PuMA case at the next opportunity. 

This rapid response is only possible under the following conditions: 

• Applies only to critical cases reguiring immediate response. 

• A direct callback number (such as a cellular phone) is provided in the "Phone 
Number" field. 

• The reason the case is urgent is specified in the "Customer Complaint" field. 

• Occurs during BMW of North America, LLC business days. 


7 

PuMA 




Construction Groups 

Below you will find a list of construction groups. Please use this list to select the proper 
"Area" when creating your case. 

Drivetrain (Area Selection: Powertrain) 

11 Engine 

12 Engine Electrical including DME, starting and charging systems 
(For defect categorization of cruise control issues, use 6571.) 

13 Fuel Systems 

16 Fuel Supply Systems including tank senders 

17 Cooling Systems 

18 Exhaust Systems 

21 Clutch 

22 Engine and Transmission Mounts 

23 Manual Transmission including SMG 

24 Automatic Transmission including EGS and AGS 

25 GearShift Mechanism 

26 Drive Shaft 

27 Intermediate and Special Transmission 
31 Front Differential and Output Shafts 

33 Rear Axle Differential and Output Shafts 
71 Tools and Accessories (Engine-Chassis) 


9 

PuMA 



Electrical System (Area Selection: Electrics/Electronics) 

09 Coding and Car Key Memory 

61 General Electrical Systems including EWS, Central Locking and Power Windows 

62 Instruments 

63 Lights 

64 Heating and A/C 

65 Audio, Navigation, Monitors, Alarms, SRS 

66 Distance Systems, Cruise Control, Remote Control 
72 Safety Belts and Accessories (Body) 

84 Communication Systems 

Chassis (Area Selection: Chassis and Suspension) 

31 Front Axle 

32 Steering and Wheel Alignment including Servotronic and steering column 

33 Rear Axle excluding differential and output shafts 

34 Brakes and Stability Control Systems including ABS, ASC+T, DSC and DTC 

35 Pedals 

36 Wheels and Tires including flat tire monitoring system 

37 Special Suspension Systems such as EDC and EHC 
71 Tools and Accessories (Engine-Chassis) 

Body (Area Selection: Body and Trim) 

41 Body 

51 Body Eguipment including mirrors and doors 

52 Seats including fitted electrical components 

54 Special Roofs including sunroof and convertible top with fitted electrical compo¬ 
nents 

97 Corrosion Protection 
99 Paint Work 


10 

PuMA 



General 


06 Service Roundtable 


Note: Laminated cards reflecting the technical groups and their subjects was 
sent out free of charge to all centers to the attention of the BMW Service 
Manager. Additional copies may be ordered under SD92-201 through 
BMW TIS website as per SI B10 02 02. 

For additional information regarding BMW Group Technical Support 
please refer to bulletin SI BOO 04 02. 


11 

PuMA 



Procedures Flowchart 


12 

PuMA 



















































Procedures Flowchart (continued) 



13 

PuMA 

























Examples 


Case 1 


Case additions 


Case no. 

Subject 



1234567 

X5 3.0 LOW OIL LIGHT ON 



Status date 

Status 

Date created 


01/02/05 

In process by tech. Office 

01/01/05 


Dealer 

Organization 



123456, BMW of Place 

US, CAR 



Reporter 

Phone no. / Availability (from/to) 



Technician Case 1 

5551234567 



VIN no. (last 7 digits) 

Vehicle identification no. 



AB12345 

1ABCD123E4FG56789 

Details 

FBM 

E series 

Engine 

Production date 


E53 

M54 

12/4/02 


Gearbox 

Model 

First registration 


AUT 

X5 3.01 

10/6/03 


Country version 

Body 

Steering 


USA 

GEFZG 

LL 


Engine number 

Gearbox number 



28695210 

0752172RXU 



Mileage 

Workshop visits 



24208 mis 

2 



Fault 




Fault location 

Nature of fault 

Condition 


Drive, Engine 

Fails to operate, Switch-off 

Engine operation, Engine off 

Defect 




Main group 




12 Engine Electrical System 




Subgroup 




61 Oil pressure, oil temperature, oil level indicator 



Location 




00 Thermal oil level sensor (TOENS) 




Defect Code 

Defect text 



1261001400 

Thermal oil level sensor (TOENS) occasional malfunction 


Module 

Area 

Fault code 


40-44 

Electrics/Electronics 




Measure performed 


14 

PuMA 











Case 1 (continued) 


Measure no. 


Subject 


Customer complaint (in customer's own words) 

CHECK ENG OIL LEVEL MESSAGE COMES ON WHEN TURNING OFF CAR 


Workshop fault description and presumed cause 

INCORRECT SIGNAL FROM OIL LEVEL SENSOR. PERFORMED SHORT TEST NO FAULTS IN DME 


Work performed 

REPLACED OIL LEVEL SENSOR 


Work performed effective Tester diagnosis performed 

No Yes 

Urgency 

Reply requested 


Released Measure 

Measure no. Subject 


Assigned report Subject 

7654321 Technical - Unjustified Case | View | 


Previous recommendations/queries/additional information 

f 

Additional information 01/02/05 9:44AMEST Technical Hotline Specialist 
This is covered in SI B 11 07 03. 

New Additional information 


Vehicle return 
From 

123456, BMW of Place 

Tech. Office ref. case 

No 


To 


Ref. case AG 

No 


Date 


Keep defective part 

No 


Internal note 


© 2002-2004 BMW OF NORTH AMERICA, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 


15 

PuMA 















