Table of Contents 

Basic Diagnostic Certification 

Subject Page 

Basic Diagnostic Certification Process .3 

Purpose of the BDC .3 

Process .3 

Diagnostic Exercise.4 

Programming Exercise .4 

Information Resources Research Project .4 


Initial Print Date: 04/10 Revision Date: 









Basic Diagnostic Certification (BDC) 


IBIICTWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Know the proper use of the 3G equipment, such as test plan procedures as 
per the ISID/ISTA and basic circuit checks using the IMIB as instructed by the 
test plan. 

• Properly set up a vehicle for programming using ISTA-P and pulling up a mea¬ 
sures plan. 

• Utilize all of the available databases in BMW’s 3G and web-based Information 
System. This way the Technician will be able to research the necessary data so 
they can understand a given system and thus be able to diagnose it even if they 
haven’t been trained on such system. 


2 

Basic Diagnostic Certification 


Basic Diagnostic Certification Process 

Purpose of the BDC 

The ST050 certification process is broken down into 3 primary areas based on the skills 
the technician should know upon successful completion of the four (4) day instructor led 
class. These skills include: 

1. Know the proper use of the 3G equipment, such as test plan procedures as per 
the ISID/ISTA and basic circuit checks using the IMIB as instructed by the test 
plan. 

2. Properly set up a vehicle for programming using ISTA-P and pulling up a mea¬ 
sures plan. 

3. Utilize all of the available databases in BMW’s 3G and web-based Information 
System. This way the Technician will be able to research the necessary data so 
they can understand a given system and thus be able to diagnose it even if they 
haven’t been trained on such system. 

The technician will be assessed in all three areas and will be required to perform profi¬ 
ciently in all three (3) areas in order to receive credit for the ST050 Instructor led class. 

Process 

The certification process will be conducted in 3 parts as follows: 

1. One Diagnostic exercise with a live vehicle, applicable 3G equipment, and neces¬ 
sary tools for diagnosis. 

2. A two (2) part programming exercise which will include a live vehicle, applicable 
3G equipment, and a workshop PC. 

3. One information resources research project where the technician will look up 
applicable information on an instructor designated system on a specific vehicle. 
The technician will use this information to answer a 20 question assessment on 
this particular system. 


3 

Basic Diagnostic Certification 




Diagnostic Exercise 

The diagnostic exercise will be conducted in a 50 minute session and it is designed 
around a simple fault that will be installed by the instructor. The goal is to evaluate if the 
technician can successfully hook up the diagnostic eguipment, pull up the recommended 
test plans and follow the instructions of such test plans. It should also take the very basic 
recommended diagnostic checks via the IMIB and isolate the problem. 

The faults are of the most basic in nature and do not reguire extensive knowledge of the 
system being tested and the test plan should lead the technician to a definitive answer of 
the cause of the issue. The goal here as well is to see if the technician can properly 
implement the 5 steps to a diagnostic plan. 

Programming Exercise 

The programming exercise will be conducted in two (2) 25 minute parts. 

PART 1 : The technician will be asked to completely setup a vehicle with necessary 
eguipment for programming a vehicle with ISTA-P and to pull up a measures 
plan. 

PART 2: The technician will be given a programming guestionnaire with 10 guestions 
about programming and coding procedures. The technician will have access to 
his ST050 research manual to answer these guestions 

Information Resources Research Project 

During the “Features and Technology” and “Service and Maintenance” sections of the 
instructor led class, the technicians will be introduced to some of BMW’s core technolo¬ 
gies and some basic tasks such as KOMBI tests and emergency top procedures. Back at 
the dealer these entry level technicians will be called on to perform work on systems that 
they haven’t had prior training on. In essence the technician will have to be able to utilize 
BMW’s 3G and web-based information systems to gain background information to suc¬ 
cessfully work on an unfamiliar system. 

In the information resources research project a technician will be assigned a specific sys¬ 
tem on a specific vehicle in which they will have 3 hours during the testing sessions to 
pull necessary background information to complete a 20 guestion assessment: Technical 
Training, Repair Instructions, Service Information Bulletins, SBT’s, ETM’s, etc. Unless 
otherwise specified, the technician will not only have to write down correct answer to 
each guestion, but also give the reference material document where the information 
was found. 


4 

Basic Diagnostic Certification 



