Table of Contents 


MS45 - E85 with M54 Engine 

Subject Page 

MS45 .2 

Objectives of the Module .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components .4 

Power Supply.6 

Principle of Operation.7 

Workshop Hints .8 

Tools and Equipment .9 

Air Management .10 

Principle of Operation.18 

Workshop Hints .22 

Tools and Equipment .25 















MS45 


Models: E85 Z4 - with M54 Engine 


Production Date: Start of Production MY 2003 
Manufacturer: Siemens 

Pin Connector: 134 Pins - 5 Modular Connectors 


Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Describe the Power Supply for the Fuel Injectors and Ignition Coils. 

• Understand the EDK and Idle Air Actuator Operation. 

• Name the Differences of the MS45 Fuel Supply System. 

• List the Inputs Required for Fuel Injector Operation. 

• Describe Emission Optimized Function. 

• Name the Two Types of Emissions the ECM Controls. 

• Explain Why Two Sensors are Used to Monitor Accelerator Pedal Movement. 

• Understand DM TL Evaporative Leak Testing. 

• Describe Flow the Ignition System is Monitored. 


2 


MS45 




MS45 


Purpose of the System 

The MS45 system is an evolution of the MS43 system and manages the following func¬ 
tions: 


Air: 

• Idle Speed Valve 

• Electronic Throttle 

• Hot Film Air Mass Meter 

• Resonance-Turbulence 
Intake Control 


Fuel: 

I 

Ignition: 

• Fuel Supply (Non-Return) 


• Direct Ignition/Optimized 

• Fuel Injection 


• Knock Control 



• Ignition Monitoring 



Emissions: 

• OBD Compliant 

• Secondary Air Injection 

• Pre and Post Oxygen Sensors 

• Oxygen Sensor Heating 

• MAP Thermostat 

• Misfire Detection 

• Evaporative Emission Control and Leak 
Detection 

• Ambient Pressure Sensing 

• Malfunction Indicator Light 


Performance Controls: 

• Dynamic Driving Control “Sport” Mode 

• Dual VANOS Control 

• Electric Cooling Fan 

• Ebox Fan Control 

• PT CAN Bus Communication 

• EWS III (3.3) 

• Cruise Control 

• Alternator Interfacing (BSD) 

• ECM Programming 


3 


MS45 












System Components 

MS45 Engine Control Module: The Engine Control Module (ECM) features a single 
printed circuit board with two 32-bit microprocessors. 


The task of the first processor is to control: 

• Engine Load 

• Electronic Throttle 

• Idle Actuator 

• Ignition 

• Knock Control 

The task of the second processor is to control: 


• Air / Fuel Mixture 

• Emission Control 

• Misfire Detection 

• Evaporative Leak Detection 12550000.tiff 




X60001 X60002 X60003 X60004 X60005 

9 - Pin 24-Pin 52 - Pin 40 - Pin 9 - Pin 


The 134 pin ECM is manufactured by Siemens to BMW specifications. The ECM is the SKE 
(standard shell construction) housing and uses 5 modular connectors. Fortesting, use the 
Universal Adapter Set (break-out box) Special Tool # 90 88 6 121 300. 


4 


MS45 



































System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



MS45 


■ l;:h 
,1 heljw 


POWER 

SUPPLY 


A hW;l S-UHiL 


nESONAHEE- 
IHTMU: SYSTEM 


TYtHot-finmn 


dhO»: 


FUEL PlIHP 
BWI EPHT"SU 

MWTRI* ,hi| 


ERRMa-SUFT 
P&5HYOH 
, SEhJOH 


FUEL 

MANAGEMENT 


icianaH cm 
CQHTnnL iGP 


HNDCK 

RENtons 


IGNITION' 

MANAGEMENT 


iGCGMUR] A i 
ih.irr^iawnn ay 
MHTROL 


HMXAianiiULii 

TfVPrnAiuqr 

□ UTL 


EMISSION 

MANAGEMENT 


OXYGEN SENEGA! 


CAHEHiPT 

FljSIl'i-JN 

5FNE0RF.J, 


SLUTER MUCH 

__— iHTCJKE 

ulMIPM [UrittK.- 


PERFORMANCE 

gpNTflPi 


!>l'(in~ SWITCH 


AJCOOWPRE5SOF 


YFHICIf 
Yl-Lt:- hHLI 


HJPLLH& CoOI; 

;i.n i un. 


45-02-01 


5 


MS45 





Power Supply 



45 - 02-02 

KL30 - Battery Voltage: B+ is the main supply of operating voltage to the ECM. 


Power Supplies: The power supplies (KL15 
and ECM Relay) are fused to the MS45 ECM. 
The fuses are housed in the Engine Fuse Block 
located in the Electronics Box. 

KL15 - Ignition Switch: When the ignition is 
switched “on” the ECM is informed that the en¬ 
gine is about to be started. KL15 (fused) sup¬ 
plies voltage to the Engine Control Module 
Relay and the Fuel Injector Relay. Switching 
KL15 “off” removes the ECM operating voltage. 



55-01-01 

Engine Control Module Relay: The ECM Relay provides the operating voltage for: 


1 . 

ECM 

6. 

Ignition Coil 

2. 

Fuel Injection 

7. 

Evaporative Leak Detection Pump 

3. 

Idle Air Actuator 

8. 

Camshaft Sensor 

4. 

Evaporative Emission Valve 

9. 

Hot Film Air Mass 

5. 

Fuel Pump Relay 

10. 

Oxygen Sensor Heaters 


Ground: Multiple ground paths are necessary to complete current flow through the ECM. 


Connector X60001 

Connector X60005 

Pin 4 - Ground for ECM 

Pin 5 - Ground for ECM 

Pin 5 - Ground for ECM 


Pin 6 - Ground for ECM 


6 

MS45 Power Supply 

















































































Principle of Operation 

Battery Voltage is monitored by the ECM for fluctuations. It will adjust the output func¬ 
tions to compensate for a lower (6v) and higher (14v) voltage value. For example, the ECM 
will: 


• Modify pulse width duration of fuel injection 

• Modify dwell time of ignition 


When KL15 is switched “on” the ECM is ready for engine management. The ECM will acti¬ 
vate ground to energize the Engine Control Module Relay. The Engine Control Module 
Relay supplies operating voltage to the ECM and the previously mentioned operating com¬ 
ponents. Five seconds after the ignition is switched on and the voltage at the KL15 input 
is >9 volts, the ECM compares the voltage to the ECM Relay supplied voltage. If the volt¬ 
age difference between the two terminals is greater than 3 volts, a fault code will be set. 


When KL15 is switched “off” the ECM operating voltage is removed. The ECM will main¬ 
tain a ground to the Engine Control Module Relay for a few seconds to maintain ignition coil 
activation (Emission Optimized) and as long as three minutes to complete the DM TL test. 


Ground is required to complete the cur¬ 
rent path through the ECM. The ECM also: 


• Internal links a constant ground (1) to activate 
components 

• Switches ground (2) to activate components 



-04 


7 

MS45 Power Supply 



Workshop Hints 

Power Supply - Testing 


E85 Electronics Box - ECM and Fuses 


1. ECM (DME) 

2. EGS or SMG (if equipped) 

3. ECM main relay 

4. Fuel injector relay 

5. - SMG (if equipped) hydraulic pump relay 
- EGS (if equipped) reverse light relay 


Inadequate power and ground supply 
can result in: 



1. No Start 

2. Hard Starting (Long Crank Times) 

3. Inaccurate Diagnosis Status or ECM (not found) 

4. Intermittent/Constant “Engine Emission/EML” 
Light 

5. Intermittent/Constant Driveability Problems 


Power supply including fuses should be 
tested. 



The ignition (KL15) must be switched off 
when removing or installing the ECM 
connector to prevent voltage spikes (arc¬ 
ing) that can damage the Control 
Module! 


The Engine Control Module Relay (locat¬ 
ed in the Electronics Box) should be test¬ 
ed for: 

1. Battery Voltage and Switched Ground (1) 

2. Resistance (1) 

3. Battery Voltage and Voltage Drop (2) 





8 

MS45 Power Supply 














Tools and Equipment 


Power Supply 

When testing power supply to an ECM, the 
DISplus/GTI multimeter function as well as a 
reputable hand held multimeter can be used. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the MS45 
application should be used (#90 88 6 121 300). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 


When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located in the Electronics Box in the 
engine compartment), make sure the ignition is 
switched off. 



16550020 



12550003 


NOTE for MS45: Allow at least 3 minutes to 
elapse after the key was set to the “OFF’ posi¬ 
tion before disconnecting the ECM/ TCM. 

This will allow sufficient time to complete the 
DM TL test Voltage may be present (up to 3 
minutes) causing damage to the ECM/TCM if 
they are disconnected during this time period 
(arcing). 


The Engine Control Module Relay should be 
tested using the relay test kit (P/N 88 88 6 613 
010) shown on the right. 

This kit allows testing of relays from a remote 
position. Always consult the ETM for proper 
relay connections. 




12550001 

9 

MS45 Power Supply 









Air Management 



Throttle Valve: The throttle valve plate is electronically operated to regulate intake air flow 
by the ECM. The purpose is for precision throttle operation, OBD compliant for fault moni¬ 
toring, DSC and Cruise Control. This integrated electronic throttle reduces extra control 
modules, wiring, and sensors. Adjusting electronic throttles is not permitted, the throttle 
assembly must be replaced as a unit. The adaptation values must be cleared and adapta¬ 
tion procedure must be performed using the DISplus/GTI. 


The throttle assembly for the MS45 system is 
referred to as the EDK. The EDK is distin¬ 
guished by: 


• EDK does not contain a PWG, It is remotely mounted 
(integrated in the accelerator pedal assembly). 

• The accelerator pedal is not mechanically “linked” to the 
EDK. 



16550007 


Throttle Position Sensor: The accelerator 
pedal module provides two variable voltage sig¬ 
nals to the ECM that represents accelerator 
pedal position and rate of movement. 

Dual Hall Sensors are integral in the accelerator 
pedal module. The ECM compares the two val¬ 
ues for plausibility. The module contains internal 
springs to return the accelerator pedal to the 
rest position. 



10 

MS45 Air Management 


13550011 .eps 
















































The ECM provides voltage (5v) and ground for 
the Hall sensors. As the accelerator pedal is 
moved from rest to full throttle, the sensors pro¬ 
duce a variable voltage signal. 


• Hall sensor 1 (request) = 0.5 to 4.5 volts 

• Hall sensor 2 (plausibility) = 0.5 to 2.0 volts 


If the signals are not plausible, the ECM will use 
the lower of the two signals as the requested 
input. The throttle response will be slower and 
the maximum throttle response will be reduced. 



Throttle Motor and Feedback Position: The 

MS45 ECM powers the EDK motor using pulse 
width modulation for opening and closing the 
throttle plate. The throttle plate is also closed by 
an integrated return spring. 

Two integrated potentiometers provide voltage 
feedback signals to the ECM as the throttle plate 
is opened and closed. 



ELECTRIC THROTTLE 
VALVE (EDK) 


13550002 


• Feedback signal 1 provides a signal from 0.5v (closed) to 
4.5 V (Full Throttle) 


• Feedback signal 2 provides a signal from 4.5v (closed) to 
0.5V (Full Throttle) 


Potentiometer 1 is the primary feedback signal 
of throttle plate position and signal 2 is the plau¬ 
sibility cross check through the complete throt¬ 
tle plate movement. 



13550005 


11 

MS45 Air Management 
















































Idle Air Actuator: This valve regulates air by-passing 
the throttle valve to control the engine idle/low speed. 

The valve is supplied with battery voltage from the ECM 
Relay. The Idle Air Actuator is a two-coil rotary actua¬ 
tor. The ECM is equipped with two final stage transis¬ 
tors which will alternate positioning of the actuator. 



The final stages are "pulsed" simultaneously by the 
ECM which provides ground paths for the actuator. 
The duty cycle of each circuit is varied to achieve the 
required idle RPM. 

If this component/circuits are defective, a fault code will 
be set and the “Malfunction Indicator Light” will be illu¬ 
minated when the OBD II criteria is achieved. 





16550008 


Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM): The air volume 
input signal is produced electronically by the HFM 
which uses a heated metal film (180° C above intake air 
temperature) in the air flow stream. 



ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 



The ECM Relay provides the operating voltage. As air 
flows through the HFM, the film is cooled changing the 
resistance which affects current flow through the cir¬ 
cuit. The sensor produces a 1-5 volt varying signal. 
Based on this change the ECM monitors and regulates 
the amount of injected fuel. 



If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“Malfunction Indicator Light” will be illuminated when 
the OBD II criteria is achieved. The ECM will operate 
the engine using the Throttle Position and Engine RPM 
inputs. 


NOTE: The HFM is non-adjustable. 


13550017 



12 

MS45 Air Management 


13550004 
























































Air Temperature Signal: The HFM contains an integral air temperature sensor. This is a 
Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) type sensor. This signal is required by the ECM to 
correct the air volume input for changes in the intake air temperature (air density) affecting 
the amount of fuel injected, ignition timing and Secondary Air Injection activation. 


If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“Malfunction Indicator Light” will be illuminated when the OBD 
II criteria is achieved. The ECM will operate the engine using 
the Engine Coolant Sensor input as a back up. 



The ECM provides the power supply to the sensor which decreases in resistance as the 
temperature rises and vice versa. The ECM monitors an applied voltage to the sensor that 
will vary as air temperature changes the resistance value. 


13550004 


Notes: 


13 

MS45 Air Management 


Resonance/Turbulence Intake System: On the M54, the intake manifold is split into two 
groups of three (runners) which increases low end torque. The intake manifold also has 
separate (internal) turbulence bores which channels air from the idle speed actuator direct¬ 
ly to one intake valve of each cylinder (matching bore of 5.5mm in the cylinder head). 

Routing the intake air to only one intake valve causes the intake to swirl in the cylinder. 
Together with the high flow rate of the intake air due to the small intake cross sections, this 
results in a reduction in fluctuations and more stable combustion. 


VIAIN VIAINIFOLJ 



TURBULENCE BORE 3:5.5mm 135500011 


Resonance System: The resonance system provides increased engine torque at low 
RPM, as well as additional power at high RPM. Both of these features are obtained by 
using an ECM controlled resonance flap (in the intake manifold). 


During the low to mid range rpm, the resonance flap is closed. This produces a long/sin¬ 
gle intake tube which increases engine torque. 


During mid range to high rpm, the resonance flap is open. This allows the intake air to draw 
through both resonance tubes, providing the air volume necessary for additional power at 
the upper RPM range. 


14 

MS45 Air Management 






















































































The Resonance Flap (shown on the right) is 
closed when vacuum is applied and sprung 
open. This is a unitized assembly that is bolted 
into the intake manifold. 

The ECM controls a solenoid valve for reso¬ 
nance flap activation. At speeds below 3750 
RPM, the solenoid valve is energized and vac¬ 
uum supplied from an accumulator closes the 
resonance flap. This channels the intake air 
through one resonance tube, but increases the 
intake velocity. 



When the engine speed is greater than 3750 
RPM (which varies slightly - temperature influ¬ 
enced), the solenoid is de-energized. The reso¬ 
nance flap is sprung open, allowing flow through 
both resonance tubes, increasing volume. 

When the flap is closed, this creates another 
“dynamic” effect. 


• #1 Cylinder Intake Valve open low to Mid Range RPM 
(<3750 RPM). 


• #1 Cylinder Intake Valve closes #5 Intake Valve Open => 
Intake Air Bounce Effect low to Mid Range RPM (<3750 
RPM). 



13550010 


As the intake air is flowing into cylinder #1, the 
intake valves will close. 

This creates a “block” for the in rushing air. The 
air flow will stop and expand back (resonance 
wave back pulse) with the in rushing air to cylin¬ 
der #5. 


• #1 Cylinder Intake Valve closes #5 Intake Valve Open => 
Intake Air Bounce Effect Low to Mid Range RPM (<3750 
RPM)). 

The resonance “wave”, along with the intake 
velocity, enhances cylinder filling. 



13550009 

15 

MS45 Air Management 

















































When the engine speed is greater than 3750 
RPM the solenoid is de-energized. The reso¬ 
nance flap is sprung open, allowing flow through 
both resonance tubes, increasing volume. 


• #1 Cylinder Intake Valve Open - Intake air drawn from both 
resonance tubes. Mid to High Range (>3750 RPM) 



13550008 


• #5 Cylinder Intake Valve Open - Intake air drawn from both 
resonance tubes. Mid to High Range RPM (>3750 RPM). 

The resonance “wave”, along with the intake 
volume, enhances cylinder filling. 



13550000007 


Pressure Control Valve: The pressure control 
valve varies the vacuum applied to the 
crankcase ventilation depending on engine 
load. The valve is balanced between spring 
pressure and the amount of manifold vacuum. 

The oil vapors exit the separator labyrinth (2) in 
the cylinder head cover (1). The oil vapors are 
drawn into the cyclone type liquid/vapor sepa¬ 
rator (3) regulated by the pressure control valve 
( 5 ). 

The oil vapors exit the pressure control valve 
into the intake manifold. The collected oil will 
drain back into the oil pan (4). 



16 

MS45 Air Management 




































































The vapors exit the pressure control valve and are 
drawn into the intake manifold through an external dis¬ 
tribution tube (2). The tube has a splice at the front to 
equally distribute vapors to the back. 

As the vapors exit the pressure control valve, they are 
drawn into the intake manifold through this external 
tube for even distribution. 


At idle when the intake manifold vacuum is high, the 
vacuum reduces the valve opening allowing a small 
amount of crankcase vapors to be drawn into the 
intake manifold. 

At part to full load conditions when intake manifold 
vacuum is lower, the spring opens the valve and addi¬ 
tional crankcase vapors are drawn into the intake man¬ 
ifold. 


1. Engine Oil Vapors 

2. Collective Drain Back Oil 

3. Oil Vapors to the Intake Manifold 



Notes: 


17 

MS45 Air Management 





































Principle of Operation 


Air flow into the engine is regulated by the Throttle Valve and/or the Idle Air Actuator. Both 
of these air “passages” are necessary for smooth engine operation from idle to full load. On 
the MS45 system, the Throttle Valve and the Idle Air Actuator are electrically controlled. All 
of the ECM monitoring, processing and output functions are a result of regulated air flow. 



45-02-02 


The Accelerator Pedal Position (PWG) is monitored by the ECM for pedal angle posi¬ 
tion and rate of movement. As the accelerator is moved, a rising voltage signal from the 
potentiometers/Hall sensors requests acceleration and at what rate. The ECM will increase 
the volume of fuel injected into the engine, advance the ignition timing and open the Throttle 
Valve and/or Idle Air Actuator. 

The “full throttle” position indicates maximum acceleration to the ECM, and in addition to 
the functions just mentioned, this will have an effect on the air conditioning compressor 
(covered in Performance Controls). 

As the accelerator pedal is released (integral springs), a decrease in voltage signals the 
ECM to activate fuel shut off if the RPM is above idle speed (coasting). The Throttle Valve 
will be closed and Idle Air Actuator Valve will open to maintain idle speed. 

The ECM monitors the engine idle speed in addition to the accelerator pedal position and 
throttle position voltage. If the voltage values have changed (mechanical wear of throttle 
plate or linkage), the ECM will adjust the Idle Air Actuator to maintain the correct idle speed. 

The potentiometers/Hall sensors are non-adjustable because the ECM “learns” the throttle 
angle voltage at idle speed. If the throttle housing/accelerator pedal module is replaced, the 

adaptations must be cleared and adaptation procedure must be performed using the 
DISplus/MoDIC. If this is not performed, the vehicle will not start, or run in “fail-safe" mode. 

If this input is defective, a fault code will be stored and the “Malfunction Indicator and/or 
EML” Light will be illuminated. Limited engine operation will be possible. 


18 

MS45 Air Management 




The MS45 PWG pedal position sensor consists of two separate Hall sensors with differ¬ 
ent voltage characteristics and independent power supply (located in the accelerator pedal 
module). 


The pedal position sensor is mon¬ 
itored by checking each individual 
sensor circuit and comparing the 
two pedal values. Monitoring is 
active as soon as the sensors 
receive voltage (KL15). The ECM 
decides what operating mode the 
pedal position sensor is to 
assume. 


• Mode = Pedal position sensor fully 
operable. 

• Mode 1 = Failure of one pedal position 
position sensor (maximum engine speed 
is limited). 

• Mode 2 = Failure of both pedal position 
sensors (engine speed limited to 1500 



rpm). 


The Idle Air Actuator is controlled by the ECM modulating the ground signals (PWM at 
100 Hz) to the valve. By varying the duty cycle applied to the windings, the valve can be 
progressively opened, or held steady to maintain the idle speed. 


The ECM controls the Idle Air Actuator to supply the necessary air to maintain idle speed. 
When acceleration is requested and the engine load is low (<15%), the actuator will also 
supply the required air. 


The basic functions of the idle speed control 
are: 


• Control the initial air quantity (air temp <0° C, EDK is simul¬ 
taneously opened). 

• Variable preset idle based on load and inputs. 

• Monitor RPM range intake for each preset position. 

• Vaccum Limitation 

• Smooth out the transition from acceleration to decelera¬ 
tion. 


MAIN VIAINIFOLJ 



TUPBUL£NCE BORE Dro.Smm 

135500011 


19 

MS45 Air Management 







































Under certain engine operating parameters, the EDK throttle control and the Idle Air 
Actuator are operated simultaneously. This includes all idling conditions and the transition 
from off idle. As the request for load increases, the idle valve will remain open and the EDK 
will supply any additional air volume required to meet the demand. 

Backup Operation of Idle Air Actuator: 

If a fault is detected with the Idle Air Actuator, the ECM will initiate failsafe measures 
depending on the effect of the fault (increased air flow or decreased air flow). If there is a 
fault in the Idle Air Actuator/circuit, the EDK will compensate to maintain idle speed. The 
“Malfunction Indicator and/or EML” Light will be illuminated to inform the driver of a fault. 

If the fault causes increased air flow (actuator failed open), VANOS and Knock Control are 
deactivated which noticeably reduces engine performance. 

The MS45 EDK Feedback Signal Monitoring/Backup Operation when a fault is detected in 
the system is as follows: 

• The EDK provides two separate signals from two integrated potentiometers (Pot 1 and Pot 2) representing the 
exact position of the throttle plate. 

• EDK Pot 1 provides the primary throttle plate position feedback. As a redundant safety feature, Pot 2 is continu¬ 
ously cross checked with Pot 1 for signal plausibility. 

• If plausibility errors are detected between Pot 1 and Pot 2, MS45 will calculated the inducted engine air mass 
(from HFM signal) and only utilize the potentionmeter signal that closely matches the detected intake air mass. 

- The MS 43.0 uses the air mass signaling as a “virtual potentiometer” (Pot 3) for a comparative source 
to provides failsafe operation. 

- If MS 43.0 cannot calculate a plausible conclusion from the monitored Pots (1 or 2 and virtual 3) the EDK 
motor is switched off and fuel injection cut out is activated (Failsafe operation if not possible). 

• The EDK is continuously monitored during all phases of engine operation. It is also briefly activated/adapted 
when KL 15 is initially switched on as a “preflight check” to verify it’s mechanical integrity (no binding, 
appropriate return spring tension, etc). This is accomplished by monitoring both the motor control amperate 
and the reaction speed of the EDK feedback potentiometers. If faults are detected the EDK motor is switched 
off and the fuel injection cut off is activated (failsafe operation is not possible). The engine does however 
continue to run extremely rough at idle speed. 

• When in emergency operation, the engine speed is always limited to 130 RPM by fuel injector cutout, and 
activation of the “EML” light to alert the driver of a fault. 

• When in emergency operation, the engine speed is always limited to 1300 RPM by fuel injector cutout, and 
activation of the “EML” light to alert the driver of a fault. 

• When a replacement EDK is installed, the MS45 adapts to the new component (required amperage draw for motor 
control, feedback pot tolerance difference, etc). This occurs immediately after the next cycle of KL15 for approximately 
30 seconds. During this period of adaptation, the maximum opening of the throttle plate is 25%. 


20 

MS45 Air Management 



The Total Intake Air Flow Control is performed by the ECM simultaneously operating the 
EDK throttle control and the Idle Air Actuator. 


The ECM detects the driver’s request from the potentiometers/Hall Sensors monitoring the 
accelerator pedal position. This value is added to the Idle Air control value and the total is 
what the ECM uses for EDK activation. The ECM then controls the Idle Air Actuator to sat¬ 
isfy the idle air “fill”. In addition, the EDK will also be activated = pre-control idle air charge. 
Both of these functions are utilized to maintain idle RPM. 

The EDK is electrically held at the idle speed position, and all of the intake air is drawn 
through the Idle Air Actuator. Without a load on the engine (<15%), the EDK will not open 
until the extreme upper RPM range. If the engine is under load (>15%), the Idle Air Actuator 
is open and the EDK will also open. 

The Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM) varies voltage monitored by the ECM representing 
the measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by the ECM to determine the 
amount of fuel to be injected. 

The heated surface of the hot-film in the intake air stream is regulated by the ECM to a con¬ 
stant temperature of 180° C above intake air temperature. The incoming air cools the film 
and the ECM monitors the changing resistance which affects current flow through the cir¬ 
cuit. The hot-film does not require a “clean burn”, it is self cleaning due to the high operat¬ 
ing temperature for normal operation. 

If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the “Malfunction Indicator Light” will illu¬ 
minate when the OBD II criteria is achieved. The ECM will maintain engine operation based 
on the Throttle Position Sensors and Crankshaft Position/Engine Speed Sensor. 

The Air Temperature signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of intake air tempera¬ 
ture. The varying voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxy¬ 
gen found in cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust 
the amount of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on oxygen sensing 
ratio. 

The ignition timing is also affected by air temperature. If the intake air is hot the ECM retards 
the base ignition timing to reduce the risk of detonation. If the intake air is cooler, the base 
ignition timing will be advanced. The ECM uses this input as a determining factor for 
Secondary Air Injection activation (covered in the Emissions section). 

If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the “Malfunction Indicator Light” will illu¬ 
minate when the OBD II criteria is achieved. The ECM will maintain engine operation based 
on the HFM and Engine Coolant Temperature sensor. 


21 

MS45 Air Management 



Workshop Hints 

Air Management 

Unmetered air leaks can be misleading when diagnosing faults causing “Malfunction 
Indicator Light”/driveabiIity complaints. 

Crankcase Ventilation System 

A fault in this system can often “mislead” diagnosis. This type of fault can produce: 

Please refer to the following Service Information Bulletins for details on the Crankcase 
Ventilation System: 

• Mixture/misfire detected codes 

• Whistling noise 

• Performance/driveability complaints 


Throttle Position Sensors - Testing 


The Throttle Position Sensors can be tested with the following methods: 


• DISplus Status Page (appox. 0.5v. to 4.5v) 

• DISplus Oscilloscope - Select from the Present measure¬ 
ment which requires taking the measurement with the 
ECM and the Universal Adapter connected to the cirucuit 
as shown on the right). 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE WITHINTHE 



22 

MS45 Air Management 













Idle Air Actuator Valve - Testing 


• The Idle Air Actuator Valve and air circuit (passage ways) 
should be checked for physical obstructions. Visually 
inspect the sealing gasket, mounting bracket and air hose 
clamps. 

• The resistance of the valve winding should be checked 

• The ECM ouput and Idle Speed Control Valve operation 
can be tested by “Component Activation” on the DISplus/ 
GT1. 



13550009 


• The Pulse Width Modulation ground outputs from the ECM 
can be tested using the DISplus/GTI Oscillloscope. 

• Consult Technical Data for specified idle speed. 


NOTE: If the valve is blocked or contaminated, 
an HFM fault code can also be present. 


Air Temperature Signal - Testing 



13550011 


The HFM contains an integral air temperature 
sensor. NTC sensors decrease in resistance as 
the temperature rises and vice versa. The ECM 
monitors the sensor voltage which varies as 
temperature changes the resistance value. For 
example, as temperature rises: 


• Resistance through the sensor decreases. 

• Voltage drop across the sensor decreases. 

• Input signal voltage also decreases (5-0v). 

This sensor should be tested using: 


• DISplus/GTI Status Page 12550016 

• DISplus/GTI Multimeter (ohms) 



23 

MS45 Air Management 





























































































Hot-Film Air Mass Sensor 


This component is non-adjustable and tampering is not permitted. A faulty Hot-Film Air 
Mass Sensor can produce the following complaints: 


• Difficult To Restart When Engine Is Hot 

• Engine Starts Then Stalls 

• “Malfunction Indicator Light” Illuminated 

• Engine Starts and Runs Only With 
Accelerator Pedal Depressed 


Testing: The Hot-Film Air Mass 
Sensor can be tested with the fol¬ 
lowing methods: 


• DISplus/GTI Fault Code and 
Component Testing. 


• DISplus/GTI Status Page 




16550010 


• DISplus/GTI Oscillloscope-which requires taking 
the measurement with the ECM and the 
Universal Adapter connected to the circuit 
(engine running). 


NOTE: Visually inspect the sensor for damaged, missing or blocked screens. The screens 
affect air flow calibration. Also inspect the sealing rings where the sensor inserts in the air 
filter housing and intake boot. Ensure the pin connections are tight. 


24 

MS45 Air Management 



































































Tools and Equipment 


The DISplus/GTI as well as a reputable hand 
held multimeter can be used when testing 
inputs/components. 


It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 



DISplus 



GT-1 16550019 


The correct Universal Adapter for the MS45 
application should be used (#90 88 6 121 300). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located in the Electronics Box in the 
engine compartment), make sure the ignition is 
switched off. 


NOTE for MS45: Allow at least 3 minutes to 
elapse after the key was set to the “OFF’ posi¬ 
tion before disconnecting the ECM/ TOM. 

This will allow sufficient time to complete the 
DM TL test. Voltage may be present (up to 3 
minutes) causing damage to the ECM/TCM if 
they are disconnected during this time period 
(arcing). 


The Slack Tube Manometer Test Tool (#99 00 0 
001 410) should be used to troubleshoot 
crankcase ventilation valves. 


SKE BREAKOUT BOX SET 
P/N 90 88 6 121 300 


ENGINE CONTROL 
MODULE HARNESS 



4fO 


m ii ii— in 


26 
PIN 
BOX 
88 88 6 611 459 


134 PIN 
SKE 


26 

pin mg 

BOX M 
88 88 6 611 459 

16550020 



12550002 


25 

MS45 Air Management 
















































