Table of Contents 


MS45 - E85 with M54 Engine 

Subject Page 


Fuel Management .26 

Principle of Operation.32 

Workshop Hints .38 

Tools and Equipment .42 

Ignition Management .43 

Prinoiple of Operation.48 

Workshop Hints .52 

Tools and Equipment .58 











Fuel Management 


Siaitf L I 

-TrYT 

t 


_M.FWULE. 

fDarrtoH 




FEUPEFtATUnE 


CPUUUKSHArt 

posmoN 

^ENidn 


CAUBHftFT 
POaiTION 
9£NSOfa ±1 


©*■ 



Fuel Tank: The fuel tank is made 
of high density polyethylene 
(reduoed weight) whioh is manu- 
faotured to meet safety require¬ 
ments. 

A mid-ohassis mounted “saddle” 
type tank is used providing a tun¬ 
nel for the driveshaft but oreates 
two separate lower ohambers. 


1. Ventilation line 

2. Filler tube 

3. Operating vent valve 

4. Fuel pump assembly 

5. Filling vent valve 

6. Left fuel level sensor 

7. Left syphon jet 

8. Overpressure protection valve 

9. Fuel filter and fuel pressure regulator 

10. Anti-chafing pads (foam cushion) 



A syphon jet is required with this type of tank to 
transfer fuel from the left side, linked to the fuel 
return line. As fuel moves through the return, the 
syphon jet oreates a low pressure (suotion) to 
piok up fuel from the left side of the tank and 
transfer it to the right side at the fuel piok up. 

The fuel tank capacity is 55 liters (14.5 gallons). 
This includes a rerve capacity of 8 liters (2 gal.). 



26 

MS45 Fuel Management 


Detailed View of Syphon Jet 


16550030 








The E85 fuel tank design represents the next step in reducing the potentiai evaporative 
emissions. This design reduces the number of externai connections and openings by 
increasing the amount of “in tank” or integrai components. The fuel system is divided into 
two subsystems: fuel supply and fuel ventilation (evaporative oontaiment and oontrol - refer 
to Emissions Management seotion). 


MS45 Fuel Supply: 

1. Filler cap and tank grounding 

2. Filler tube 

3. Slosh baffle (anti-spitback valve) 

4. Fuel tank 

5. Baffle chamber with right fuel level sen¬ 
sor ^ 

6. Electric fuel pump (EKP) 

7. Right syphon jet 

8. Service access cap with fuel filter 

9. Fuel pressure regulator (3.5 bar) 

10. Left syphon jet 

11. Fuel supply line 

12. Injection rail 

kt-10749 

When the fuel pump is energized, it supplies fuel from the piokup area in the baffle oham- 
ber through the fuel filter to the fuel pressure regulator. The fuel supply pressure is eon- 
trolled by the 3.5 Bar fueipressure reguiator (integrated in the fuel filter assembly). The reg¬ 
ulator is influeneed by internal fuel pressure and not intake manifold vaeuum. The fuel exits 
the fuel pressure regulator supplying the fuel rail and the injeotors. The fuel rail distributes 
an even supply of fuel to all of the injeotors, and also serves as a volume reservoir. 

The fuel is supplied through a Non Return Fuel Rail System. The fuel return line is boated 
on the filter/regulator assembly whioh direots the unused fuel baok through the fuel tank. 
The fuel tank hydrooarbons are reduoed by returning the fuel from this point (lower tem¬ 
peratures) instead of from the fuel rail. 

As fuel moves through the return, the syphon jet oreates a low pressure (suotion) to piok 
up fuel from the left side of the tank and transfer it to the right side at the fuel piok up. A 
seoond syphon jet is mounted through the baffle ohamber to draw as muoh fuel as possi¬ 
ble from the right side of the tank into the baffle ohamber (oritioal for low fuel or reserve sit¬ 
uations). 



27 

MS45 Fuel Management 


























Fuel Pump: The electric fuel pump supplies constant 
fuel volume to the injeotion system. This system uses a 
single submersible (in the fuel tank) pump. The inlet is 
proteoted by a mesh soreen. 

When the fuel pump is powered, the armature will 
rotate the impeller diso oreating low pressure at the 
inlet. The fuel will be drawn into the inlet and passed 
through the fuel pump housing (around the armature). 
The fuel lubrioates and oools the intervals of the pump 
motor. 

The fuel will exit through a non-return oheok valve to 
supply the injeotion system. The non-return oheok 
valve is opened by fuel exiting the pump and will olose 
when the pump is deaotivated. This maintains a 
“prime” of fuel in the filter, lines, hoses and fuel rail. 



The pump oontains an internal overpressure relief valve that will open (reduoing roller oell 
pressure) if there is a restriotion in the fuel supply hardware. 


Fuel Supply Components: The fuel is transferred from the fuel pump to the fuel filter. The 
fuel filter “traps” oontaminants before they reaoh the fuel injeotors and should be replaoed 
at the speoified interval. The large filter size also serves as a volume reservoir (dampening 
fuel pump pulsations). 


Fuel Pressure Regulator: The Fuel Pressure Regulator maintains a oonstant pressure for 
the fuel injeotors. The fuel pressure is set to 3.5 bar by internal spring tension on the restrio¬ 
tion valve. The fuel pressure regulator is not influenoed by vaouum. 

The ECM determines the fuel quantity oompensation for manifold vaouum ohanges. This is 
based on throttle position, HFM and load for preoise oompensation. 

When the restriotion valve opens, unused fuel returns from the regulator/filter assembly 
baok through the fuel tank to the left side syphon jet. 


28 

MS45 Fuel Management 



Siemens Fuel Injectors: The Fuel Injectors are elec¬ 
tronically controlled solenoid valves that provide pre- 
olse metered and atomized fuel Into the engine Intake 
ports. The Fuel Injeotor Valve oonsists of: 

1. Fuel strainer 

2. Electrical Connector 

3. Solenoid Winding 

4. Closing Spring 

5. Solenoid Armature 

6. Needle Valve 

7. Pintle 

Fuel Is supplied from the fuel rail to the Injeotor body. 
The fuel Is ohanneled through the Injeotor body to the 
needle valve and seat at the tip of the Injeotor. Without 
eleotrloal ourrent, the needle valve Is sprung olosed 
against the seat. 


The Fuel Injeotors reoelve voltage from the Fuel Injeotor 
Relay. The ECM aotlvates ourrent flow through the 
Injeotor solenoid oreating a magnetio field that pulls the 15550013 
needle “up” off of Its seat. The pressurized fuel flows 
through the tip of the Injeotor that Is fitted with a dlreo- 
tlonal angle "plate" with dual outlets. This “fans out” 
the spray Into an angled patterns whioh helps to atom¬ 
ize the fuel. When the ECM deaotivates ourrent flow, 
the needle valve Is sprung olosed against the seat and 
fuel flow through the Injeotor Is stopped. The lower 
portion of the Injeotor body Isjaoketed In metal. 

The length of time that the ECM aotlvates the Fuel 
Injeotors Is very brief, the duration Is In mllll-seoonds 
(ms). This affeots the mount of fuel volume flowing 
through the Fuel Injeotors. The ECM will vary the 
length of time (ms) to regulate the alr/fuel ratio (mix¬ 
ture). 






A Fuel Injeotor Is faulty (meohanloal or eleotrloal). It oan produoe the following oomplaints: 


• Malfunction Indicator Light 

• Excessive Tailpipe smoke (leaking) 

• Engine Hydrolock (leaking) 


• Misfire/Rough Idle (Leaking or Blocked) 

• Long Crank Time (Leaking) 

• Oxygen Sensor/Mixture/Injector Related Fault Code 


29 

MS45 Fuel Management 














Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor (Hall Effect): This sensor provides the orankshaft 
position and engine speed (RPM) signai to the ECM for fuei pump and injeotor operation. 


A Haii sensor is mounted on the ieft side at the 
rear of the engine biook. The impuise wheei is 
mounted on the orankshaft inside the orank- 
oase, at the rear main bearing support. The 
impuise wheei oontains 58 teeth with a gap of 
two missing teeth. 

The Haii sensor is suppiied with voitage from 
the ECM. A digitai square wave signai is pro- 
duoed by the sensor as the teeth of the impuise 
wheei pass by. The “gap” aiiows the ECM to 
estabiish orankshaft position. 



SMOOTH RUNNING ENGINE 
(NOTE SQUARE WAVE SIGNAL) 


135500020 


The orankshaft position sensor is monitored as part of OBD ii requirements for Misfire 
Deteotion. if this input is fauity, the ECM wiii operate the engine (iimited driveabiiity) from the 
Camshaft Sensor input. A fauit with this input wiii produoe the foiiowing oompiaints: 


• Hard Starting/Long Crank Time 

• “Malfunction Indicator Light” 

• Driveability/Misfire/Engine Stalling 

Camshaft Sensors - Intake and Exhaust Camshafts 


The "static" Haii sensors are used so that the camshaft positions are recognized once igni 
tion is on (KL15) before the engine is started. The function of the intake cam sensor is: 


• Cylinder “work cycle” for injection timing 

• Synchronization 

• Engine speed sensor (if crankshaft speed sensor fails) 

• VANOS position control of the intake cam 

The exhaust cam sensor is used for VANOS 
position controi of the exhaust cam. if these sen-, 
sors faii there are no substitute vaiues, the sys¬ 
tem wiii operate in the faiisafe mode with no 
VANOS adjustment. The engine wiii stiii operate, 
but torque reduction wiii be noticeabie. 



NOTE: Use caution on repairs as not to bend the impuise wheeis. 


30 

MS45 Fuel Management 































































Engine Coolant Temperature: The Engine 
Coolant Temperature is provided to the ECM 
from an NTC type sensor looated in the ooolant 
jaoket of the oylinder head (left rear). The sensor 
oontains two NTC elements, the other sensor is 
used for the instrument oluster temperature 
gauge. 

The ECM determines the oorreot air/fuel mixture 
required for the engine temperature by monitor¬ 
ing an applied voltage to the sensor (5v). This 
voltage will vary (0-5v) as ooolant temperature 
ohanges the resistanoe value. 



TO INSTRUMENT 
CLUSTER 


13550015 



If the Coolant Temperature Sensor input is faulty, a fault oode will be set the ECM will 
assume a substitute value (80° C) to maintain engine operation. 


Throttle Position: For details about the sensor, refer to the Air Management seotion. As 
the throttle is opened, the ECM will inorease the volume of fuel injeoted into the engine. As 
the throttle plate is olosed, the ECM aotivates fuel shut off if the rpm is above idle speed 
(ooasting). 


Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM): The air volume input signal is used by the ECM to deter¬ 
mine the amount of fuel to be injeoted for oorreot air/fuel ratio. For details about the sen¬ 
sor, refer to the Air Management seotion. 


Air Temperature: This signal allows the ECM to make a oaloulation of air density. For 
details about the sensor, refer to the Air Management seotion. 

The varying voltage input from the NTC sensor indioates the larger proportion of oxygen 
found in oold air, as oompared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the 
amount of injeoted fuel beoause the quality of oombustion depends on oxygen sensing 
ratio. 


31 

MS45 Fuel Management 






























































Principle of Operation 


Fuel Management delivers fuel from the tank to the intake ports of the engine. To aooom- 
plish this, fuel supply must be available to the fuel injeotors. Then the fuel must be inject¬ 
ed in the preoise amount and at the oorreot time. The ECM does not direotly monitor fuel 
supply, although it does oontrol fuel supply. The Fuel Pump supplies fuel when it reoeives 
operating voltage from the Engine Control Module Relay supplying the Fuel Pump Relay. 
The ECM oontrols and monitors fuel injection. 



■tSt 

- ■= ^imHE 

t 

TWBPTTLE 
' POBITBN 



s- 

rEUPERATUnE 


CPtilNKSHAPt 

posfnoN 


lEniOli 



DAUE.-HftFT 
POSITION 
SEMSOna Si 


@4; 



45 - 02-04 


The Fuel Pump will be activated when 
the ignition (KL15) is switched “on” and 
the ECM supplies a ground circuit to 
activate the Fuel Pump Relay. The Fuel 
Pump Relay supplies operating power to 
the in-tank mounted fuel pump. This is a 
momentary activation to “pressurize” 
(prime) the fuel system. 

The ECM then requires an engine speed 
signal from the Crankshaft Position/RPM 
Sensor to maintain continuous Fuel 
Pump Relay activation. 

If the engine PPM signal is not present, 
the ECM will deactivate the Fuel Pump 
Relay. 


Operating Power 



13550012 


The Fuel Injectors will be opened by the ECM to inject pressurized fuel into the intake 
ports. The Fuel Injectors receive voltage from the Engine Control Module Relay. The ECM 
controls the opening by activating the ground circuits for the Solenoid Windings. The ECM 
will vary the duration (in milli-seconds) of “opening” time to regulate the air/fuel ratio. 


32 

MS45 Fuel Management 

































The ECM has six Final Stage output transistors 
that switoh ground to the six injeotor solenoids. 
The Injeotor “triggering” is first established from 
the Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. 


The ECM is programmed to aotivate the Final 
Stage output transistors onoe for every two rev¬ 
olutions of the orankshaft in two groups (Semi- 
Sequential Injeotion). 


The injeotors are opened in two groups for every 
oomplete “working oyole” of the engine. This 
delivers the fuel oharge for oylinders 1,5,3 dur¬ 
ing one revolution of the orankshaft and oylin¬ 
ders 6,2,4 during the seoond revolution of the 
orankshaft. This prooess enhanoes fuel atom¬ 
ization during start up. 


During start up, the ECM reoognizes the 
Camshaft Position (Cylinder ID) input. The 
oamshaft position is referenoed to the orank¬ 
shaft position. It then switohes the injeotion to 
Full Sequential. This prooess “times” the injeo- 
tion oloser to the intake valve opening for 
inoreased effioienoy. 



Semi-Sequential Injection 



= FUEL INJECTED I I = INTAKE VALVE{S) OPEN 

135500016 


Full Sequential Injection 


When aotivated, eaoh injeotor delivers the full 
fuel oharge at separate times during eaoh 
engine working oyole. 


If this input is faulty, the ECM will aotivate the 
injeotors in Parallel to maintain engine operation 
and set a fault oode. 


Cyl. 1 
Cyl.5 
Cyl. 3 
Cyl. 6 
Cyl. 2 
Cyl. 4 



0 180 

I =FUEL INJECTED 


360" 540” 720 

= INTAKE VALVE(S) OPEN 


135500015 


33 

MS45 Fuel Management 







































































The Injector “open” Time to maintain engine operation after it has been started is det¬ 
ermined by the ECM (programming). The ECM will oaloulatethe injeotion “timing” based on 
a oombination of the following inputs: 


• Battery Voltage 

• Throttle Position 

• Air Flow Volume/Mass 

• Air Temperature 

• Crankshaft PosItion/RPM 

• Camshaft Position (Cylinder ID) 

• Engine Coolant 

• Oxygen Sensor 
(Detailed In Emissions) 


13550014 

The injection ms value will be regulated based on battery voltage. When cranking, the volt¬ 
age is low and the ECM will increase the ms value to compensate for injector “lag time”. 
When the engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the 
injection ms value due to faster injector reaction time. 

Cold starting requires additional fuel to compensate for poor mixture and the loss of fuel as 
it condenses onto cold intake ports, valves and cylinder walls. The cold start fuel quantity 
is determined by the ECM based on the Engine Coolant Temperature Sensor input during 
start up. 

During cranking, additional fuel is injected (in Semi-Sequential) for the first few crankshaft 
revolutions. After the first few crankshaft revolutions, the injected quantity is metered down 
as the engine comes up to speed. When the engine speed approaches idle rpm, the ECM 
recognizes the Camshaft Position and switches to Full Sequential injection. 

When the engine is cold, optimum fuel metering is not possible due to poor air/fuel mixing 
and an enriched mixture is required. The Coolant Temperature input allows the ECM to 
adjust the injection ms value to compensate during warm up and minimize the the injected 
fuel at engine operating temperature. 



34 

MS45 Fuel Management 
























When the engine is at idle, minimum injection is required. Additional fuel will be added if the 
ECM observes low engine rpm and inoreasing throttle/air volume inputs (aooeleration 
enriohment). As the throttle is opened, the ECM monitors aooeleration and rate of move¬ 
ment. The ECM will inorease the volume of fuel injeoted into the engine by inoreasing the 
injeotion ms value. The “full throttle” position indioates maximum aooeleration and the ECM 
will add more fuel (full load enriohment). 

As the throttle is olosed, the ECM deoreases the injeotion ms value (fuel shut off) if the rpm 
is above idle speed (ooasting). This feature deoreases fuel oonsumption and lowers emis¬ 
sions. When the engine rpm approaohes idle speed, the injeotion ms value is inoreased 
(out-in) to prevent the engine from stalling. The out-in rpm is dependent upon the engine 
temperature and the rate of deoeleration. 

The Hot-Film Air Mass (HEM) signal provides the measured amount of intake air vol¬ 
ume/mass. This input is used by the ECM to determine the amount of fuel to be injeoted 
to “balanoe” the air/fuel ratio. 

The Air Temperature Signal allows the ECM to make an additional oaloulation of air densi¬ 
ty. The varying voltage input from the NTC sensor indioates the larger proportion of oxygen 
found in oold air, as oompared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the 
amount of injeoted fuel beoause the quality of oombustion depends on oxygen sensing 
ratio (details in Emissions). 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECM to start injeotion as well as providing infor¬ 
mation about the engine operation. This input is used in oombination with other inputs to 
determine engine load whioh inoreases/deoreases the injeotion ms value. Without this in¬ 
put, the ECM will not aotivate the injeotors. 

The Camshaft Position (Cylinder ID) affeots the injeotion timing (Semi-Sequential/Full 
Sequential). To aooomplish this, the ECM oontains six Final Stage output transistors that 
aotivate the injeotors individually. The engine operates suffioiently on Semi-Sequential 
Injeotion (two groups of three), but more effioiently on Full Sequential Injeotion (six individ¬ 
ual). If one of the fuel injeotor oirouits faulted, the engine oan still operate on limited power 
from the other remaining fuel injeotor oirouits. 


35 

MS45 Fuel Management 



Injection “Reduction” Time is required to 
control fuel economy, emissions, engine and 
vehicle speed limitation. The ECM will “trim” 
back or deactivate the fuel injection as neces¬ 
sary while maintaining optimum engine opera¬ 
tion. 

As the throttle is closed during deceleration, the 
ECM decreases the injection ms value (fuel shut 
off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). 
This feature decreases fuel consumption and 
lowers emissions. 



When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injection ms value is increased (cut-in) to 
prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon the engine temperature 
and the rate of deceleration. This function can be observed as displayed on the Fuel 
Economy (MPG) gauge. 


The ECM will selectively deactivate injectors to control maximum engine rpm (regardless of 
vehicle speed). When the engine speed reaches 6500 rpm, the injectors will be individual¬ 
ly deactivated as required to protect the engine from over-rev. 


As the engine speed drops below 6500 rpm, injector activation will be resumed. This rea- 
ture does not protect the engine from a forced over-rev such as improperly down¬ 
shifting a manual transmission equipped vehicle (driver error). 


Maximum vehicle speed is also limited by the 
ECM selectively deactivating the injectors 
(regardless of engine rpm). 

This limitation is based on the vehicle dimen¬ 
sions, specifications and installed tires (speed 
rating). 



36 

MS45 Fuel Management 










































The ECM will also protect the 
Catalytic Converter by deactivat¬ 
ing the injectors. 

If the ECM detects a “misfire” 
(ignition, injection or combustion) 
it can selectively deactivate the 
Final Stage output transistor for 
that cylinder(s). 

The injector(s) will not open, pre¬ 
venting unburned fuel from enter¬ 
ing the exhaust system. 

On the MS45 system, there are 
six individual injector circuits 
resulting in deactivation of one or 
multiples. This will limit engine 
power, but protect the Catalytic 
Converter. 


PRIMARY 


¥ 


SECONDARY 



^ SECONDARY 

I 


+ 


¥ 


SECONDARY 


xf J V 


PRIMARY 


SECONDARY 








3 






INJ 

#5 


INJ 

#6 


135500022 


Fuel Injection Control Monitoring is performed by the ECM for OBD II requirements. 
Faults with the fuel injectors and/or control circuits will be stored in memory. This monitor¬ 
ing includes: 


• Closed Loop Operation 

• Oxygen Sensor Feedbaok 

These additional corrections are factored into 
the calculated injection time. If the correction 
factor exceeds set limits a fault will be stored in 
memory. 

When the criteria for OBD II monitoring is ach¬ 
ieved, the “Malfunction Indicator Light” will be 
illuminated. 



ENGINE LOAD - > 

13550010 


37 

MS45 Fuel Management 



































Workshop Hints 


Before any service work is performed on any fuel system related component, 
always adhere to the following: 

• Observe relevant safety legislation pertaining to your area. 

• Ensure adequate ventilation. 

• Use exhaust extraction system where applicable (alleviate fumes). 

• DO NOT OPERATE THE FUEL PUMP unless it is properly installed in the fuel tank and is submersed in the fuel 
(fuel lubricates the pump). 

• Always wear adequate protection clothing including eye protection. 

• Use caution when working around a hot engine compartment 

• During fuel system repair that involves “sealing rings”, always replace them with a new COPPER rings only. 

• BMW does not recommend any UNAUTHORIZED MODIFICATIONS to the fuel system. The fuel system are 
designed to comply with strict federal safety and emissions regulations. In the concern of product liability, it is 
unauthorized to sell or perform modifications to customers vehicles, particular in safety related areas. 

• Always consult the Repair Instructions on the specific model you are working on before attempting a repair. 


Fuel 

Fuel quality should always be considered when diagnosing a driveability complaint. The 
type of fuel, proper AKI rating, impurities and moisture are not factored by the ECM. 

Please refer to the Owner’s Manual and following Service Information Bulletins regarding 
fuel: 


• Gasoline Fuel Quality S.l. #13 01 88 (1564) 

• Gasoline Additive S.l. #13 04 88 (1591) 


38 

MS45 Fuel Management 



Fuel Supply 

The fuel supply hardware should be visually Inspected for damage that can affect pick-up, 
transfer, pressure and return. Please refer to the Repair Instructions for details on fuel sup¬ 
ply hardware. 


Fuel Filter, Pressure Regulator, Pump and Sending Unit Access 

Caution! The fuel tank must be 
drained WM. before removing the 
Service access cap to perform 
any repair attempts. 

Consult the Repair Instructions 
for additional details and updated 
information. 

1. Fuel tank 

2. Service access cap 


The fuel filter, fuel pressure regulator, electric fuel pump, right fuel level sensor and syphon 
jet are accessed through the “Service access cap”. Remove the single 6 pin electrical con¬ 
nector (2 pins for the fuel pump, 2 for each level sensor - left/right). Remove the fuel sup¬ 
ply line by releasing the “quick” release coupling. 

The fuel tank Is secured by two straps to the body. 



kt-10392 


39 

MS45 Fuel Management 




The Fuel Injectors should also be tested using the DISplus/GTI for: 


• Resistance 

• Power Supply 

• Status Display - Fuel Injection Signal 

• ECM Final Stage transistor activation. This test functions is found 
under the oscilloscope Preset list - “Ti Injection Signal”. Install the 
Universal Adapter, Diagnostic cable, MFK 2 negative lead to ECM 
ground and MFK 2 positive lead to the ground activation circuit for the 
injector. This test is performed with the engine cranking or running. 



16550018 


Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Test system ti injection signal 


B+ Supply 
to Injector 


50 

45 

40 

30 

30 

25 

20 

15 

10 

5 


<1 


Cursor 1 


Memory 


Cursor 2 











In 

=-L. 










◄ 



n 

ir 



r 









1 
















r 











t 
















\ 
















1 
















1 










































EClvr 







5rf 

tiir 

d 






:tiyat( 

}S 





^Ul 

at 

on 

(IV 

IS) 





Rotation 

13550018.eps 


Hold Screen 


Zoom 



_ 

5 

15 

25 35 45 



-10 


0 10 

20 

30 40 50 

MS 







Rotation Speec 

V 


0 rpm 

A 



0/min 


40 

MS45 Fuel Management 


13550018 










































































































































Crankshaft Position/RPM 
Sensor 

This sensor should be tested 
using the DISplus/GTI for: 

• Power Supply 

• DC Voltage 

• Status Display 

• Oscilloscope Display found under Preset 
Measurements - “Engine Speed Sensor 
Signal” 


Engine Coolant Temperature 


CRANKSHAFT 
POSITION 
SENSOR 
(HALL EFFECT) 



BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 
V IWl 






SMOOTH RUNNING ENGINE 
(NOTE SQUARE WAVE SIGNAL) 


135500020 


NTC sensors decrease in resis¬ 
tance as the temperature rises 
and vice versa. The ECM moni¬ 
tors the sensor voltage which 
varies as temperature changes 
the resistance value. For exam¬ 
ple, as temperature rises: 




MS 41.1 

CONTROL 

MODULE 


• Resistance through the sensor decreases 


• Voltage drop of the sensor decreases 

• Input signal voltage also decreases (5-Ov) 


The Sensor should be tested 
using: 


w w 

TO INSTRUMENT 
CLUSTER 


• DISplus/GTI Multimeter degrees 0 
(dependent on engine temperature). 


• DISplus/GTI Multimeter ECM input 
2.250K ohms at 20° C Temp. Gauge 



COOLANT NTC SENSOR 
LOCATED ON INTAKE 
SIDE OF CYLINDER HEAD 


13550015.eps 


input 6.7 k ohms at 20° C Temperature. 


Gauge input 6.7 K ohms at 20° C. 


41 

MS45 Fuel Management 
























































































































































Tools and Equipment 


The DISplus/GT1 as well as a reputable hand 
held multimeter can be used when testing 
Inputs/components. 

It Is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method Includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the MS45 
application should be used (#90 88 6 121 300). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

When Installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located below the windshield on the pas¬ 
senger side of the engine compartment), make 
sure the Ignition Is switched off. 


NOTE for MS45: Allow at least 3 minutes to 
elapse after the key was set to the “OFF’ posi¬ 
tion before disconnecting the ECM/ TOM. 



DISplus 



GT-1 

16550019 



This will allow sufficient time to complete the 
DM TL test. Voltage may be present (up to 3 
minutes) causing damage to the ECM/TCM if 
they are disconnected during this time period 
(arcing). 



16550020 


42 

MS45 Fuel Management 










































Ignition Management 



ie#iri?w«ik w 

CCNTIWLDfiX) 2 



45-02-05 


Ignition Coils: The high voltage supply required to ignite the mixture in the oombustion 
ohambers is determined by the stored energy in the ignition ooils. The stored energy oon- 
tributes to the ignition duration, ignition ourrent and rate of high voltage inorease. The Coil 
oirouit inoluding primary and seoondary oomponents oonsists of: 


1. Coil Assembly 

• Primary Winding 

• Secondary Winding 

2. Boot Connector 

3. Spark Plug 

4. ECM Final Stage Transistor 




16550021 

The Coil Assembly contains two copper windings insulated from each other. One winding 
is the primary winding, formed by a few turns of thick wire. The secondary winding is 
formed by a great many turns of thin wire. 

The MS45 primary winding receives battery voltage from the ECM Main Relay which is acti¬ 
vated by the ignition switch KL15 (Emission Optimized). The ECM provides a ground path 
for the primary coil (Terminal 1) by activating a Final Stage transistor. The length of time that 
current flows through the primary winding is the “dwell” which allows the coil to “saturate” 
or build up a magnetic field. 

After this storage process, the ECM will interrupt the primary circuit at the point of ignition 
by deactivating the Final Stage transistor. The magnetic field built up within the primary 
winding collapses and induces the ignition voltage in the secondary winding. 


43 

MS45 Ignition Management 





The high voltage generated in the secondary 
winding is discharged through Coil Terminal 4 to 
the spark plug (insulated by the boot connec¬ 
tor). The primary and secondary windings are 
un-coupled, therefore, the secondary winding 
requires a ground supply (Coil Terminal 4a). 

There is an individual ignition circuit and coil for 
each cylinder on the MS45 system. The six indi¬ 
vidual ignition coils are integrated with the insu¬ 
lated connector (boot). The assemblies are 
mounted on top of the cylinder head cover. 

The coils are removed by lifting the swivel latch 
connector retainer to release the wiring harness, 
apply a slight twist and lift the assembly 
upwards. 

Spark Plugs: The spark plugs introduce the ignition energy into the combustion chamber. 
The high voltage “arcs” across the air gap in the spark plug from the positive electrode to 
the negative electrode. This creates a spark which ignites the combustible air/fuel mixture. 


The spark plugs are located in the center of the combustion 
area (on the top of the cylinder head) which is the most suit¬ 
able point for igniting the compressed air/fuel mixture. 

Note: High Performance Platinum Spark Plugs are approved 
for use. 

• NGK BKR6EQUP (quad electrode, non adjustable gap) 


Faults with the Ignition Output Components are monitored by the ECM. If there are 
faults with the ignition coil(s) output and/or spark plugs, the following complaints could be 
encountered: 

• “Malfunction Indicator Light” With Mixture Related Fault Codes 

• Poor Engine Performance 

• No Start/Hard Starting 

• Excessive Exhaust Emissions/Black Smoke 




Ssiondary 

Winding 



InsutaTtng 

Bool 



The ignition is monitored by the ECM via the secondary ignition feedback circuit and 
Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. If a Misfire fault is present, the “Malfunction Indicator 
Light” will illuminate when the OBD II criteria is achieved and the ECM will deactivate the 
corresponding fuel injector for that cylinder. Engine operation will still be possible. 

44 

MS45 Ignition Management 



























Knock Sensors: are required to prevent detonation (pinging) from damaging the engine. 
The Knook Sensor is a piezoeleotrio oonduotor-sound miorophone. The ECM will retard the 
ignition timing (oylinder seleotive) based on the input of these sensors. Detonation oan 
ooour due to: 


• High Compression Ratio 

• Poor Quality Fuel (Octane Rating) 

• High Level of Cylinder Filling 


• Maximum Timing Advance Curve 

• High Intake Air and Engine Temperature 

• Carbon Build-Up (Combustion Chamber) 


The Knock Sensor consists of: 

1. Shield Wire 

2. Cup Spring 

3. Seismic Mass ^ 

4. Housing 

5. Inner Sleeve 

6. Piezo-Ceramic Element 



A piezo-ceramic ring is clamped between a seismic mass and the sensor body. When the 
seismic mass senses vibration (flexing), it exerts a force on the peizo-ceramic element. 
Opposed electrical charges build up on the upper and lower ceramic surfaces which gen¬ 
erates a voltage signal. The acoustic vibrations are converted into electrical signals. These 
low voltage signals are transmitted to the ECM for processing. 


There are two Knock Sensors bolted to the 
engine block on the intake manifold side, (1) 
between cylinders 1 - 3 and (2) between cylin¬ 
ders 4 - 6. If the signal value exceeds the 
threshold, the ECM identifies the “knock” and 
retards the ignition timing for that cylinder. 

If a fault is detected with the sensor(s), the ECM 
deactivates Knock Control. The “Malfunction 
Indicator Light” will be illuminated when the 
CBD II criteria is achieved, the ignition timing 
will be set to a conservative basic setting and a 
fault will be stored. 



13550001 


45 

MS45 Ignition Management 



Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor: This sensor provides the orankshaft position and 
engine speed (RPM) signai to the ECM for ignition aotivation and oorreot timing. This input 
is aiso monitored for Misfire Deteotion. For detaiis about the sensor, refer to the Fuei 
Management seotion. 


A fauit with this input wiii produoe the foiiowing 
oompiaints: 


• No start 

• Intermittent Misfire/Driveability 

• Engine Stalling 


Camshaft Position Sensors (Cylinder Identification): The oyiinder iD sensor input 
aiiows the FCM to determine oamshaft position in reiation to orankshaft position, it is used 
by the ECM to estabiish the “working oyoie” of the engine for preoise ignition timing. For 
detaiis about the sensor, refer to the Fuei Management seotion. 

if the ECM detents a fauit with the Cyiinder iD Sensor, the “Maifunotion indioator Light” wiii 
be iiiuminated when the OBD ii oriteria is aohieved and the system wiii stiii operate preoise 
single ignition based on the Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. 

if the signai is impaired during a restart, the ECM wiii aotivate “double ignition”. The ignition 
ooiis wiii be aotivated on both the oompression and exhaust strokes to maintain engine 
operation. 



Engine Coolant Temperature: The ECM 

determines the oorreot ignition timing required 
for the engine temperature. For detaiis about 
the sensor, refer to the Fuei Management seo- 
tion. This sensor is iooated in the oooiant jaoket 
of the oyiinder head (ieft rear). 

if the Cooiant Temperature Sensor input is 
fauity, the “Maifunotion indioator Light” wiii be 
iiiuminated when the OBD ii oriteria is aohieved 
and the ECM wiii assume a substitute vaiue (80° 
C) to maintain engine operation. The ignition 
timing wiii be set to a oonservative basio setting. 



46 

MS45 Ignition Management 




























































































Hot-Film Air Mass Meter: This input is used by the 
ECM to determine the amount of ignition timing 
advanoe based on the amount of intake air voiume. For 
detaiis about the sensor, refer to the Air Management 
seotion. 

if this input is defeotive, a fauit node wiii be set and the 
“Maifunotion indioator Light” wiii iiiuminate when the 
OBD ii oriteria is aohieved. The ECM wiii maintain 
engine operation based on throttie position and the 
Engine Speed Sensor, and the ignition timing wiii be 
set to a oonservative basio setting. 



13550004 


Throttle Position: This provides the ECM with aooeierator pedai position and rate of 
movement. As the aooeierator pedai is depressed the ECM wiii advanoe the ignition timing. 
The “fuii throttie” position indioates maximum aooeieration to the ECM, the ignition wiii be 
advanoed for maximum torque. For detaiis about the sensor, refer to the Air Management 
seotion. 


Air Temperature: This signai aiiows the ECM to make a oaiouiation of air density. For 
detaiis about the sensor, refer to the Air Management seotion. 

The ECM wiii adjust the ignition timing based on air temperature, if the intake air is hot the 
ECM retards the ignition timing to reduoe the risk of detonation, if the intake air is oooier, 
the ignition timing wiii be advanoed. 

if this input is defeotive, a fauit oode wiii be set and the “Maifunotion indioator Light” wiii iiiu¬ 
minate when the OBD ii oriteria is aohieved. The ignition timing wiii be set to a oonservative 
basis setting. 


Notes: 


47 

MS45 Ignition Management 






























































Principle of Operation 


Ignition Management provides ignition to the oombustion ohambers with the required volt¬ 
age at the oorreot time. Based on the oombination of inputs, the ECM oaloulates and oon- 
trols the ignition timing and secondary output voltage by regulating the aotivation and 
dwell of the primary ignition circuits. The ECM controls and monitors the secondary igni¬ 
tion output including Misfire Detection. 



•€jx2 

- LMIAKF 

-T" 

t 

-^THRRmE. 

POBITtON 


THCIW 

^ TEMHEIUTIJnE 


cnANKsiArl 

posmoH 

1 ■. 

SENiatt 


■ 





KHDC 

idHITIDN 

UAJttAGCMENT 

liHWTIQhMCDc. ^ 





45 - 02-05 


The ECM has a very “broad” range of ignition timing. This is possible by using a Direct 
Ignition System, or sometimes referred to as “Static Ignition System” (RZV). Reliability is 
also increased by having separate individual ignition circuits. 


The Ignition Control is determined by the ECM (load dependent). The ECM will calculate 
the engine “load” based on a combination of the following inputs: 


Battery Voltage 
Air Temperature 

Camshaft Positions (Cylinder ID) 


• Accelerator Pedal Position 

• Engine Coolant 

• Knock Sensors 


• Air Flow Volume 

• Crankshaft Position / RPM 


The dwell time will be regulated based on battery voltage. When cranking, the voltage is 
low and the ECM will increase the dwell to compensate for saturation “lag time”. When the 
engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the dwell due to 
faster saturation time. 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECM to start ignition in firing order (1-5-3-6-2-4) 
as well as providing information about the engine operation. This input is used in combina¬ 
tion with other inputs to determine engine load which advances/retards the ignition timing. 
Without this input, the ECM will not activate the ignition. 


48 

MS45 Ignition Management 





Cold start is determined by the 
ECM based on the engine 
ooolant temperature and rpm 
during start up. A sold engine will 
orank over slower than a warm 
engine, the ignition timing will 
range between top dead oenter 
to slightly retarded providing opti¬ 
mum starting. 

When starting a warm engine, the 
rpm is higher whioh results in 
slightly advanoed timing. 

If the engine ooolant and intake 
air temperature is hot, the ignition 
timing will not be advanoed 
reduoing starter motor “load”. 



12550010 


Multiple Ignition Pulses ensure good spark 
quality during engine start up. The ECM will 
aotivate the ignition ooils 9 times (voltage 
dependent) per 720° of orankshaft revolution. 

The ignition timing will be progressively 
advanoed assisting the engine in ooming up to 
speed. As the engine speed approaohes idle 
rpm, the timing remains slightly advanoed to 
boost torque. When the engine is at idle speed, 
minimum timing advanoe is required. This will 
allow faster engine and oatalyst warm up. 


I Change I I End 


BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 




























— 






























flJ- 

fW. 

-(Uj- 


jw- 

(W 











-25 -15 -5 5 15 

-20 -10 0 10 20 


MULTIPLE 
IGNITION 
PULSES 
FROM 
EACH COIL 


HH & 


12550011 


The multiple pulsing switches to single pulse when: 


• Engine Speed >1350 RPM (varied with engine temperature) 


The timing will be advanced when the ECM observes low engine rpm and increasing throt¬ 
tle/air volume inputs (acceleration torque). As the throttle is opened, the ECM advances the 
timing based on engine acceleration and at what rate. The ECM will fully advance timing for 
the “full throttle” position indicating maximum acceleration (torque). 


49 

MS45 Ignition Management 


















































































































MS45 Emission Optimized - Ignition Key Off 


“Emission Optimized Ignition Key Off” is a 
programmed feature of the MS45 EOM. 

After the EOM deteots KL15 is switohed 
“off”, the ignition stays aotive (EOM 
Relay/voltage supply) for two more indi¬ 
vidual ooil firings. 


EMISSION OPTIMIZED IGNITION KEYOFF 
MS42 


■ in 



before “key off” 

IGNITION 





I start key off 


This means that just two oylinders are 
fired - not two revolutions. 

This feature allows residual fuel injeoted 
into the oylinders, as the ignition key is 
switohed off, to be oombusted as the 
engine runs down. 


MS45 


' — BAM — ■ 

1 - ^ 



I - nmrrrMMt 



IGNITION 





start key off | | ignition off 

12410009 



50 


MS45 Ignition Management 


























































The HFM signal represents the amount of intake air volume. This input is used by the ECM 
to determine the amount of timing advanoe to properly oombust the air/fuel mixture. 

The Air Temperature Signal assists the ECM in reduoing the risk of detonation (ping). If the 
intake air is hot the ECM retards the ignition timing. If the intake air is oooler, the ignition tim¬ 
ing will be advanoed. 

As the throttle is olosed, the ECM deoreases the ignition timing if the rpm is above idle 
speed (ooasting). This feature lowers the engine torque for deoeleration. When the engine 
rpm approaohes idle speed, the timing is slightly advanoed to prevent the engine from 
stalling. The amount of advanoe is dependent upon the engine temperature and the rate of 
deoeleration. 


Knock Control allows the ECM to further advanoe the ignition timing under load for 
inoreased torque. This system uses two Knook Sensors looated between oylinders 1,2,3 
and between oylinders 4,5,6. Knook Control is only in affeot when the engine temperature 
is greater than 35 °C and there is a load on the engine. This will disregard false signals while 
idling or from a oold engine. 


Based on the firing order, the 
ECM monitors the Knook Sen¬ 
sors after eaoh ignition for a nor¬ 
mal (low) signal. 

If the signal value exoeeds the 
threshold, the ECM identifies the 
“knook” and retards the ignition 
timing (3°) for that oylinder the 
next time it is fired. This prooess 
is repeated in 3° inorements until 
the knook oeases. 

The ignition timing will be adv¬ 
anoed again in inorements to just 
below the knook limit and main¬ 
tain the timing at that point. 



13550010 


If a fault is deteoted with the Knook Sensor(s) or oirouits, the ECM deaotivates Knook 
Control. The ignition timing will be set to a oonservative basio setting (to reduoe the risk of 
detonation) and a fault will be stored. The “Malfunotion Indioator Light” will be illuminated 
when the OBD II oriteria is aohieved. 


51 

MS45 Ignition Management 







Workshop Hints 


Before any service work is performed on any ignition system related component, 
always adhere to the following: 

• Observe relevant safety legislation pertaining to your area 

• Always wear adequate protection clothing including eye protection 

• Use caution when working around a HOT engine compartment 

• Always consult the REPAIR INSTRUCTIONS on the specific model you are working on before attempting a repair. 

• Always SWITCH OFF THE IGNITION (KL 15) before working on the ignition system. 

• Use only BMW approved test leads. 

• NEVER TOUCH COMPONENTS CONDUCTING CURRENT with the engine running. 

• Do not connect suppression devices or a “test light” to terminal 1 of the ignition coils. 

• Terminal 1 from the ignition coil to the ECM (High Voltage approximately 350 V) 


HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER! 

Caution! Hazardous voltages occur at: 

• Ignition Leads 

• Spark Plug Connector 

• Spark Plug 

• Ignition Coil (High Voltage at terminal 4 is approximately 40 KV) 

• Terminal 1 from the ignition coil to the ECM (High Voltage approximately 350V) 


52 

MS45 Ignition Management 



Ignition System Diagnosis 

A fault survey should first be performed using the DISplus/GT1 to determine If there Is a 
fault In the primary Ignition or seoondary Ignition. If there Is a fault In the primary Ignition, 
testing should Inolude: 


• Power Supply at the coil (KL 15) 



• Resistance of the harness and ignition coil primary winding 
- using the Universal Adapter with the ECM disconnected 




t 


16550021 


ECM Final Stage transistor aotivatlon. This test 
funotlon Is found under the Osolllosoope Preset 
list - “Ignition Signal Primary” (normal Terminal 1 
Signal shown on the right). 


Install the Universal Adapter, Dlagnostlo oable, 
MFK 2 negative lead to ECM ground and MFK 
2 positive lead to the ground aotivatlon oiroult 
for Terminal 1 of the Ignition ooll. This test Is per¬ 
formed with the engine oranklng/runnlng. 



53 

MS45 Ignition Management 











If there is a fault in the secondary ignition, testing should inolude: 


• Primary Ignition 


• Evaluation of Secondary Oscilloscope Patterns 


The Following are Examples of Secondary 
Oscilloscope Patterns (consult Repair 
Instructions for ignition pattern variations per 
coil manufacturer): 

This is a normal pattern for one ignition circuit 
with the engine at idle speed. 


• Normal Combustion Period 

• Normal Ignition Voltage Peak 



Multiple Ignition Pulses ensure good spark 
quality during engine start up. The ECM will 
activate the ignition coils 9 times per 720° of 
crankshaft revolution. 

This is a normal pattern for one ignition circuit 
when: 


1. Normal Combustion Period 

2. Normal Ignition Voltage Peak 


Long Spark Period (1) with Low Ignition Volt¬ 
age Peak (2). If Spark Period is Fluctuating: 


IPrint II II Change | | | End | | | Services 


BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 
















































































-p 

i 

'.fisj. 


-(Uj 

i 

J- 


(W 

(L 













■20-10 


10 20 


MULTIPLE 
IGNITION 
PULSES 
FROM 
EACH COIL 


12550011 


• Indicates Low Compression 

• Contamination on Spark Plug or Defective Spark Plug 


Short Spark Period (1) with High Ignition 
Voltage Peak (2). 


• Defective Ignition Connector or Resistive Adaptive Boot 



11 M ij i n H H f< H 11 H H I H 1 1 1111111 H m I ^ 

ioonig7onP9«»30'io v 


07550002 


54 

MS45 Ignition Management 














































































































Evaluation of Ignition Voltage Peaks at Idle 
Speed (Multiple Cylinders Displayed). 

1. Normal Attenuation (Voltage Reduction) Process 

2. Shorten Attenuation Process (arrow)-Defectlve Ignition Coll 

3. Absence of Attenuation (arrow )-Defective Ignition Coil 




Sudden Loads (Multiple Cylinders Displayed). 


• Defective Ignition Coil 

Decaying Process is considerably Higher than 
Ignition Voltage Peak (2): 

• Lean Mixture 

• Defective Fuel Injector 

• Low Compression 



07550006 


55 

MS45 Ignition Management 



The Repair Instructions should be oonsulted for additional Osoillosoope Patterns under var¬ 
ious engine speeds. 

In Summary, 

If the Seoondary Ignition Voltage is Too High (Excessive Resistance for Ignition): 


• Spark Plug Gap is to Large (Worn or Burned) 

• Incorrect Heat Range Spark Plug 

• Compression is too High (Carbon, etc.) 

• Interruption in the Secondary Ignition Connector or Resistive Adapter Boot 


If the Secondary Ignition Voltage is Too Low (Low Resistance for Ignition): 


• Spark Plug Gap is Too Small (Mishandled on Installation) 

• Incorrect Heat Range Spark Plug 

• Compression is Too Low 

• Voltage Leak in the Secondary Ignition Connector or Resistive Boot to Ground 


Spark Plugs 


The Spark Plugs should be inspected for the proper type, gap 
and replaoed at the speoified intervals. 

Refer to the Servioe Information Bulletin S.l. #12 01 99 for the 
proper type and a visual of the spark plug (showing effeots of 
oombustion, fouling, eto.) 



56 

MS45 Ignition Management 









Knock Sensors 


The Knock Sensors should be tested using the 
DIS/GT1 for: 

• Fault Codes 

• Status Display - Knock Control 
(active / not active) 

• Oscilloscope Display (Low DC Voltage -mV setting) 


When installing Knock Sensors: 



DO NOT MIX THE LOCATIONS or Engine 
Damage will result! The Knock Sensors use a 
combined connection to the engine harness. 
The Knock Sensor with the shorter cable is for 
cylinders 4 - 6. 

Do Not Over Tighten attaching bolt! - Piezo 
ceramic will be cracked. Torque to 20 nm. 

Do Not Under Tighten attaching bolt, a lose 
sensor can vibrate producing a similar signal to 
a knock. 



57 

MS45 Ignition Management 
































Tools and Equipment 


The DISplus/GT1 as well as a reputable hand 
held multimeter can be used when testing 
Inputs/components. 

It Is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method Includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the MS45 
applloatlon should be used (#90 88 6 121 300). 
This will ensure the pin oonneotors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

When Installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM, make sure the Ignition Is switohed off. 



NOTE for MS45: Allow at least 3 minutes to 
elapse after the key was set to the “OFF’ posi¬ 
tion before disconnecting the ECM/ TOM. 



SKE BREAKOUT BOX SET 



16550020 


This will allow sufficient time to complete the 
DM TL test. Voltage may be present (up to 3 
minutes) causing damage to the ECM/TCM if 
they are disconnected during this time period 
(arcing). 

When Testing the Seoondary Ignition System, 
use Speolal Tool (Seoondary Voltage Test Cable) 
#90 88 6 127 050. This provides a olamping 
surfaoe for the DISplus primary and seoondary 
Ignition adapter olamps. Refer to the HELP but¬ 
ton for additional (on soreen) oonneotlons. 

CautionI Observe Safety Precautions, High 
Voltage is Present with the Engine Running 




58 

MS45 Ignition Management 



































































The Spark Plugs should be properly Installed 
and torqued using the following Speolal Tools: 

• 12 1 200 Torque Adapter 
•12 1 171 Spark Plug Socket 


NOTE: NEVER USE AIR TOOLS FOR REM¬ 
OVAL OR INSTALLATION! 



13550020 


59 

MS45 Ignition Management 




