Table of Contents 


MS45 - E85 with M54 Engine 

Subject Page 


Performance Controls. 84 

Tools and Equipment.91 

Review Questions. 92 






Performance Controls 







- £ 

Jf swimn 

curmiiwncii 

Mu-fa .*■ 

IKJPT !WIITTt» . mum aici Hgraai.M 


f?i(* 

PEHKHHUUHSE 

1 ir-iiL 

■ v . -H", 

TOPHOH j-rr 





MPUL 

4 Vj--' IW«luSjI 

A™ 


cue menu* 

—T . _ d|| 




fiuy J itijii KK'n ~tr ^ 



Dynamic Driving Control (if equipped) 


The MS45 ECM contains two different throttle 
progression functions (Sport and Normal). The 
Dynamic Driving Control function is selected by 
pressing the “Sport” button located in the cen¬ 
ter console (1). 

The switch provides a ground signal (input) to 
the ECM when pressed. The MS45 activates 
the sport characteristics for the Electronic 
throttle control (EDK). This provides an increase 
in throttle opening and response time over the 
non-sport position. 



kt-10288 


When this function is activated, the function 
indicator light in the Sport button is illuminated 
by the Electric Power Steering (EPS) Control 
Module. When the ignition is cycled, this func¬ 
tion resets back to the non-sport function (it 
must be re-selected by the driver). 

The ECM additionally provides the request for 
the Dynamic Driving Control function over the 
PT CAN bus to the following control modules: 



kt-10057 


If equipped: 

• Electronic Power Steering (EPS) • Automatic transmission (EGS) 

• Instrument cluster (Kombi) • SMG 6-speed sequential manual gearbox 


Note: Refer to the respective sections for the function influence on these systems. 


84 


MS45 Performance Controls 






Cruise Control 


Cruise control functions are activated directly from the stalk 
(lever) to the ECM. The individual positions (requests) are dig¬ 
itally encoded and are input to the ECM over a serial data wire. 
The cruise control operational requirements are BMW “typi¬ 
cal”. The E85 does not have a “system on" indicator light. 

Cruise Control is integrated into the ECM because of the EDK 
operation. 



• The ECM controls vehicle speed by activation of the Electronic Throttle Valve (EDK). 

• The clutch switch disengages cruise control to prevent over-rev during gear changes. 

• The brake light switch and the brake light test switch are input to the ECM to disengage cruise control as well as 
fault recognition during engine operation of the EDK. 


Road speed is input to the ECM for cruise control as well as DSC regulation. The road 
speed signal for cruise control is supplied by the DSC Control module. 


Electric Fan 

The electric cooling fan is controlled by the ECM for engine cooling system and air condi¬ 
tioning system requirements. The ECM uses a remote power output final stage (mounted 
on the fan housing). The electric fan is controlled by a pulse width modulated signal from 
the ECM. 

The fan (and speed) is activated by the ECM based on: 


• Coolant outlet temperature 

• Catalyst temperature (calculated by the ECM) 

• Vehicle speed 

• Battery voltage 

• Air Conditioning refrigerant pressure (calculated by IHKA and sent via the PT CAN bus to the ECM) 



MS45 Performance Controls 







ECM Integrated Temperature Sensor 


The E Box fan is controlled by the MS45 ECM. The control module 
contains an integral NTC temperature sensor for the purpose of mon¬ 
itoring the E box temperature and activating the fan. 

When the internal temperature exceeds 65° C, the ECM provides a 
switched ground for the E Box fan to cool the E box control modules. 


Alternator Interface 

The alternator communicates data with the ECM via the BSD line (bit-serial data interface 
- single wire). This is necessary to allow the ECM to adapt its calculations and specific con¬ 
trol data to the alternator output. In addition, the ECM controls the following functions: 

• Activation/deactivation of the alternator. 

• Informimg the voltage regulator of the nominal voltage value to be set. 

• Controlling the alternator’s load response. 

• Diagnosing the BSD line. 

• Storing alternator fault codes. 

• Activating the charging indicator light in the instrument cluster. 

The charging indicator light operation has not changed from present vehicles. 

EWS III (3.3) 

The electronic driveaway protection system (EWS III) remains unchanged from the current 
E46 BMW models. 

PT CAN Bus Communication 

The ECM provides signals to other “driveline” related modules for torque control, shift qual¬ 
ity, diagnosis, safety enhancements, etc. This is covered in the appropriate sections. 



86 



MS45 Performance Controls 
























Dual VANOS Control 


Performance, torque, idle characteristics and exhaust emissions reduction are improved by 
Variable Camshaft Timing (VANOS). The VANOS unit is mounted directly on the front of the 
cylinder head and adjusts the Intake and Exhaust camshaft timing from retarded to 
advanced. The ECM controls the operation of the VANOS solenoid which regulates the oil 
pressure required to move the control piston. Engine RPM, load and temperature are used 
to determine VANOS activation. 

VANOS mechanical operation is dependent on engine oil pressure applied to position the 
control pistons. When oil pressure is applied to the control pistons (regulated by the sole¬ 
noids), the pistons move causing the splined adjustment shafts to move. The straight 
splines slide within the camshaft sleeves. The helical splines rotate the camshaft drive 
sprockets changing the position in relation to the camshaft position which advances/ 
retards the intake/exhaust camshaft timing. 



td 



135500066 


The operation of the VANOS solenoid is monitored in accordance with the OBD II require¬ 
ments for emission control. The ECM monitors the final stage output control and the signal 
from the Camshaft Position Sensors for VANOS operation. 


87 


MS45 Performance Controls 




Dual VANOS consists of the following parts: 


• Intake and exhaust camshafts with helical gear insert 


• Sprockets with adjustable gears 


• VANOS actuators for each camshaft 


• 2 three-way solenoid switching valves 


• 2 impulse wheels for detecting camshaft position 


• 2 camshaft position sensors (Hall effect) 



When the engine is started, the camshafts are in the “failsafe” position (deactivated). The 
intake camshaft is in the RETARDED position - held by oil pressure from the sprung open 
solenoid. The exhaust camshaft is in the ADVANCED position - held by a preload spring in 
the actuator and oil pressure from the sprung open solenoid. 

After 50 RPM (2-5 seconds) from engine start, the ECM is monitoring the exact camshaft 
position. The ECM positions the camshafts based on engine RPM and the throttle position 
signal. From that point the camshaft timing will be varied based on intake air and coolant 
temperatures. 

88 


MS45 Performance Controls 


















The dual VANOS system is “fully variable”. When the ECM detects the camshafts are in the 
optimum positions, the solenoids are modulated (approximately 100-220 Hz) maintaining 
oil pressure on both sides of the actuators to hold the camshaft timing. 

CAUTION: The VANOS MUST be removed and installed exactly as described in the Repair 
Instructions! 


NOTE: If the VANOS camshaft system goes to the failsafe mode (deactivated) there will be 
a noticeable loss of power. 

DEACTIVATED 


EXHAUST: Advanced -piston moved in 


INTAKE: Retard - piston moved out 



ACTIVATED 


EXHAUST: Advanced - piston moved 
out 


INTAKE: Retard - piston moved in 



89 


MS45 Performance Controls 






















ECM Programming - FLASH Control Modules 


The MS45 ECM is a programmable “FLASH” Control Module. The ECM contains a sol¬ 
dered in FLASH EPROM which can be programmed/updated up to 13 times. The EPROM 
has basic information always present in it referred to as “resident data”. This resident data 
gives the EPROM its identification and contains instructions for the programming of the 
operational maps. When you program, you are inputting operational maps to the ECM such 
as injection timing and ignition timing, etc. 

Always refer to the latest programming IDC Bulletin for a complete list of FLASH program¬ 
mable control modules and the latest program highlights. An unprogrammed control mod¬ 
ule will not allow the engine to start. DME (ECM) FLASH programming is performed with 
the DISplus/GTI using the latest software. 

Using the “automatic” determination process (preferred method), the GT1 compares the 
part numbers stored in the FLASH EPROM of the currently installed ECM with a list of pos¬ 
sible replacement part numbers stored in the DISPIus or GT1 memory. The comparison is 
done to: 


• Display the part number for the replacement programmable control module for that vehicle. 

• Determine if the GT1 can “ recommend” a replacement part number(s) from the list of part numbers stored in 
memory. 

• Identify a proper replacement program or control module 


90 


MS45 Performance Controls 



Tools and Equipment 


The DISplus/Gtl as well as a reputable hand 
held multimeter can be used when testing 
inputs/components. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the MS45 
application should be used (#90 88 6 121 300). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located below the windshield on the pas¬ 
senger side of the engine compartment), make 
sure the ignition is switched off. 

NOTE for MS45: Allow at least 3 minutes to 
elapse after the key was set to the “OFF’ posi¬ 
tion before disconnecting the ECM/ TOM. 

This will allow sufficient time to complete the DM 
TL test. Voltage may be present (up to 3 min¬ 
utes) causing damage to the ECM/TCM if they 
are disconnected during this time period (arc¬ 
ing). 



DISplus 



GT-1 

16550019 


SKE BREAKOUT BOX SET 



26 
PIN 
BOX 
88 88 6 611 459 


m ii in n 

BDBHB 


134 PIN 
SKE 



26 mTH 

PIN Bit 
BOX 

88 88 6 611 459 

16550020 


VANOS 

The electrical/hydraulic function can be checked 
“statically” by using the adapter tools and shop 
supplied regulated compressed air. 

Special Tool # 90 88 6 113 450 adapts regulat¬ 
ed compressed air to substitute for engine oil 
pressure required to move the VANOS piston. 
Special Tool # 90 88 6 126 410 allows battery 
voltage and ground to activate the solenoid. 





135500076 


91 


MS45 Performance Controls 
















































Review Questions 


1. Describe the Power Supply for the MS45 Fuel Injectors and Ignition Coils: 


2. Name the Components of the MS45 Fuel Supply System that are “integral” in the fuel 
tank: 


3. List the inputs required for Fuel Injector operation: 


4. Describe the Emission Optimized Function: 


5. Name two types of Emissions the ECM controls:._ 

6. What two sensors are used to monitor MS45 accelerator movement? 

7. Why are there two inputs from the Accelerator Module?._ 


8. Where is the DM TL located on an E85?__ 

9. Why does the MS45 have multiple ignition pulses? 

10. Flow is the ignition system monitored?_ 


92 


MS45 Performance Controls 



