Table of Contents 


E85 Transmissions 


Subject Page 

E85 Transmissions 3 

Transmission Codes.3 

GS6-37BZ Manual Transmission 6 

6 Speed Power Flow.10 

Workshop Hints.14 

Sequential Manual Gearbox (SMG) 6-Speed 15 

System Components.16 

Workshop Hints.21 

Review Questions 24 












E85 Transmissions 

Model: E85 

Production: Start of Production MY 2003 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

Identify the four different transmissions available for the E85. 

Explain why is extremely important to properly torque the 6 speed manual transmission 
mounting bolts to the engine block. 

Describe the changes to the transmission input shaft. 

List the systems influenced by the "Sport' 1 button. 

Explain where SMG system faults can be visually identified. 

Understand why "Teaching Gearbox" must be performed with the DISplus/GTl. 


2 


E85 Transmissions 




E85 Transmissions 


There are 4 different tranmissions offered for the E85: 

2 manual transmissions: 

GS5-20BG 5-speed manual transmission (known from the E46 as 55D-250G). The brief 
designation is the B-gearbox. 

GS6-37BZ 6-speed manual transmission. The brief designation is the H-gearbox. 
Automatic transmission: 

GA5HP19Z automatic transmission is available as an option (code 205). This transmis¬ 
sion is known from the E46 as the A55-325Z. 

Sequential Manual Gearbox: 

The Sequential Manual Gearbox (SM G) is available as an option (code 206). The basis of 
the SMG is the H-gearbox (known as H-SMG). 

The following table shows the engine/transmission combinations: 


Engine 

Manual 

SMG 

(optional) 

Automatic 

(optional) 

M54B30 

GS6-37BZ 

H-SMG 

GA5HP19Z 

(A5S-325Z) 

M54B25 

GS5-20BG 

(S5D-250G) 

H-SMG 

GA5HP19Z 

(A5S-325Z) 


Dynamic Driving Control (if equipped) 

For "sporty" driving, the optional Dynamic Driving Control function is activated by pushing 
the "Sport" button on the center console next to the gearshift lever. When this function is 
activated, the following control modules are also influenced: 

H-SMG Control Module - shorter gearshift times 

EGS Control Module - Sport shift mode. 

Note: Shifting the Automatic Transmission Gearshift Lever to the left from "D" into the "MS" 
position activates the Steptronic Transmission Sport Program. 

3 

E85 Transmissions 




m anuractu rer: 
G = Getrag 
J = J atco 
R = RMPT 
Z =ZF 


Manufacturer's serial r 


HP = Hydraulic planets 
R = Rear wheel drive 
T = Transmission 
Alternatively: gearbox t 
torque (Nm) 


Number of gears 1 to 
C = Continuously 


A = Automatic gearbo 
F = Research gearbox 
R = Reduction gearbo: 
Y = Hydrostatic gearbc 





M anutacturer: 
G = Getrag 
j =J atco 
R = RMPT 
Z =ZF 


B = Petrol gear ratio 
D = Diesel gear ratio 


Gearbox type 
37 = "H" 

39 = "F" 

53 = "G" 

20 = "B" 


M anual gearboxes: 

- = Standard with mar 
S = S M G 

X = All-wheel drive wit 
W = All-wheel drive wi 


Number of gears 1 to 
C = Continuously 


S = M anual gearbox 
F = Research gearbox 
R = Reduction gearbo 
Y = Hydrostatic gearb< 







E85 GS6-37BZ Manual Transmission (if equipped) 


Flanged damping block 

Aluminium bolts (connecting to engine block) 

Aluminium bolt (connecting case halves) 

Input shaft mounting in dual-mass flywheel 

Involute input shaft teeth 

Shift gate for guiding the selector shaft 

External shift without play in neutral position 

New dual-mass flywheel 



The GS6-37BZ 6-speed manual transmission (H-gearbox) is used in the E85 with the 
M54B30 engine. The gearbox is designed by Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen (ZF) and built 
and supplied by ZF and Getrag. This is why the gearbox designation bears the endings of 
both "Z" and "G." The changes to the GS6-37BZ compared with manual transmissions cur¬ 
rently used in B M Ws are 


Components 

The transmission consists of the following: 

Transmission case (front and rear half) 
Transmission shafts 
Gear sets 

Gear synchronizers 
Shift mechanism 


and the engine-side components: 

Dual-mass flywheel (ZMS) 
Clutch 



1. Selector sleeve, 5th/6th gear 

2. Selector sleeve, 3rd/4th gear 

3. Selector sleeve, lst/2nd gear 

4. Selector sleeve, reverse gear 

5. Output shaft 


6. Reverse gear 

7. 1st gear 

8. 2nd gear 

9. 4th gear 
10. 3rd gear 


11. 6th gear 

12. 5th gear (direct 1:1) 

13. Countershaft 

14. Input shaft 


6 

E85 Transmissions 



Transmission Case 


The casing is manufactured from diecast alu¬ 
minium and flanged mounted with aluminium 
bolts to the engine block (arrows). 

The front half of the casing is also bolted to the 
rear half with aluminium bolts. The casing is 
secured at the rear with 4 bolts to the damping 
block. 



Note: Refer to TIS for correct tightening torque! For 
additional and updated information, refer to the Repair 
Instructions. 

The bolted damping block (1) increases the transmis¬ 
sion application for different vehicles. Modifying the 
acoustic damping to different vehicle types is achieved 
by changing the damping block. 



Dual-mass Flywheel (ZMS) 

A specially developed dual-mass flywheel is used 
with the H-gearbox. Because the 6-speed manual 
transmission has more gears, the flywheel is mod¬ 
ified to compensate for vibration and noise. 

In this flywheel, the 2 masses are connected via 
inner and outer dampers (rubber like damping 
material). 

The masses are now supported by a plain bearing 
(no longer in a ball bearing). The plain bearing 
requires less space and enables an additional inner 
damper to be used. 



The transmission input shaft is supported through the flywheel in a 
needle bushing with a roller pilot bearing. The flywheel is connect¬ 
ed to the crankshaft flange with Torx socket bolts. 

Clutch: 03/2003 will introduce new heavy metal-free friction linings 
which satisfy the requirements of used car regulations. 



7 


E85 Transmissions 


Input Shaft 

The input shaft is approx. 25 mm shorter than 
that in the 5-speed. The input shaft longitudinal 
splines have an involute shape. 

Involute Toothing: This denotes the special 
shape (mathematical curve) of the toothed seg¬ 
ments of the input shaft splines (22 teeth total). 

This creates linear contact (dots shown to the 
right) with the toothed segments to the clutch 
drive plate center splines. The reduced friction 
of the linear contact provides easier declutching 
operation. 

The splined clutch drive plate hub and guide sleeve form a seal to decrease contamination 
of the input shaft. The involute shaped splines make it easierto remove and install the trans¬ 
mission. 



Transmission Shift Mechanism 

The "short shift" travel of the E85 gearshift handle required a modification to the selector 
forces of the internal gearshift mechanism. This changed the internal shift gate and shift- 
gate finger. The shift gate finger is permanently attached to the selector shaft and engages 
the shift gate. The shift gate and finger precisely guide the selector shaft, conveying a pre¬ 
cise gearshift sensation to the driver. This also provides a "passive lock" which prevents 2 
gears from being simultaneously engaged. 


1. Shift finger, 5/6 gear 

2. Shift finger, 3/4 gear 

3. Passive lock 

4. Shift finger, 1/2 gear 

5. Shift gate finger 

6. Shift gate 

7. Shift finger, reverse gear 


8 



E85 Transmissions 








The gears are shifted by selector forks. The design dictates that the selector fork for 1st 
and 2nd gears is transmitted as follows: When the selector shaft is pushed forwards 
(engagement of 1st gear), the selector fork forced is multiplied as it moves backwards to 
engage 1st gear. 

The "chamfered" shift gate precisely guides 
diagonal gearshifts (2nd to 3rd, 4th to 5th and 
vice-versa). 

1. Selector sleeve, 1/2 gear 

2. Shift gate 

3. Shift gate finger 



A further function of the shift gate and the shift gate finger is to absorb "misuse forces" cre¬ 
ated by the driver at the gearshift lever (previously transmitted via the selector shaft to the 
selector forks). A reduction of selector forces is achieved by low pretension springs at the 
5/6 gutter, reverse gear and 1/2 gutter (helical coiled spring). 


1. Spring, 5/6 gutter 

2. Helical coiled spring, 1/2 gutter 

3. Shift finger, 5/6 gear 

4. Spring, reverse gear 


Note: A correctly operating selectorforce mech¬ 
anism ensures that the gearshift lever is without 
play in neutral. 



Notes: 


9 

E85 Transmissions 





Transmission Gear Sets 


The G56-37BZ is designed for 5th gear to be direct and 6th gear as an overdrive 


Gear Ratios 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

R 

4.350 

2.496 

1.665 

1.234 

1:1 

0.851 

3.926 


Gear Synchronizers 

A triple-taper synchronizer is installed for 1st and 2nd gears. A double-taper synchronizer 
unit is installed for 3rd and 4th gears. A single-taper synchronizer unit is installed for 5th, 
6th and reverse gear. 


6-Speed Transmission Power Flow 

The individual gear powerflows forthe M 54B30 engine are illustrated in the next few pages. 
The powerflows illustrated are applicable to an input torque of 300 Nm at a speed of 3500 
rpm. The step-up ratio from the input shaft to the countershaft is 1.38. The input torque at 
the countershaft is 390 Nm. 

Power flow in 1st gear 

An input torque of 300 Nm produces an output torque of 1226 Nm. 



aaONrrt 


injs 

10 

E85 Transmissions 
























Transmissions 





ail 

ME' hES^E 

1 

SIS 

B. 

?! 

!n 


S 

























Power flow in 5th gear 

The transmission output torque is equal to the input torque (1:1 direct) 


<1 - 


H 

'III 


■ ■ i 




































Workshop Hints 

Removing Transmission 

The case is flanged mounted with aluminium bolts to the engine block (arrows). The front 
half of the case is also bolted to the rear half with aluminium bolts. These aluminium bolts 
may only be used 3 times. 


Note: Refer to TIS for correct tightening torque! 
For additional and updated information, refer to 
the Repair Instructions. 

The shortened input shaft with the involute teeth 
make it easier to remove and install the trans¬ 
mission. 



Installing Transmission 


A special lubrication procedure is required for the 
involute teeth on the input shaft. Lubrication is 
carried out with two special tools: 

Carefully slide the grease scraper sleeve 
(P/N 21 2 220) over the input shaft up to the 
guide tube. This removes any previous lubri¬ 
cation and debris. 

Carefully slide the grease application sleeve 
(P/N 21 2 221) over the input shaft up to the 
guide tube. 

Using a brush, spread the grease evenly on 
the teeth and the profile base up to the grease 
application sleeve. 

Carefully pull back the grease application 
sleeve over the shaft. This provides an equal 
distribution over the entire spline contact sur¬ 
faces. 




14 


E85 Transmissions 





E85 SMG 6-Speed Sequential Manual Gearbox (if equipped) 

The optional Sequential Manual Gearbox (H-SMG) is a further development of the E85 
GS6-37BZ 6-speed manual (H-gearbox). Compared to previous SMG technology, 
changes include: 

Completely new transmission 

Mounting positions of the hydraulic components and the sensors on the transmission 
housing. 

In combination with the SMG option, the customer also obtains the Dynamic Driving 
Control function. This function provides a "Sport" effect on driving by influencing the Engine 
Management, Transmission (SMG and EGS)and Electronic Power Steering (EPS) control 
systems. This function is activated with the "Sport" button. 


System Overview 
- Inputs/Outputs 

1. Power distribution box 

2. Instrument cluster 

3. Gearshift lever 

4. Illuminated shift gate 

5. EWS III 

6. MS45 ECM 

7. Dynamic Driving Control 
"Sport" button 

8. SMG assembly on transmission 

• Hydraulic unit 

• Shift travel sensor 

• Selection angle sensor 

• Input speed sensor 

• Clutch control travel sensor 

9. Reverse light relay 

10. Starter motor 

11. PT-CAN 

12. Diagnosis Bus- DISplus/GTl 

13. SMG steering wheel with 
shift paddles 

14. General Module - GM5 

15. Brake light switch 

16. SMG Control Module 


15 

E85 Transmissions 





System Components 


The H-S M G system is made up of the following components 
5 M G gearshift lever 
5MG steering wheel with shift paddles 
"Sport" button (Dynamic Driving Control) 

SMG hydraulic system 
SMG Control Module 
Reverse light relay 
Transmission 

Displays/indications in Instrument Cluster 


SMG Gearshift Lever 

The design of the lever and the shift gate is similar to the previously used SMG shift lever. 
The shift gate depicted on the gearshift knob features the "D" symbol instead of the “C" 
symbol for cruise mode. The lever is connected to the transmission by electric leads only 
and the gearshift lever positions are monitored by 7 Hall sensors. 

Operation 

A downshift is performed when the lever is pressed forward. 

An upshift is performed when the lever is pulled backward. 

The gearshift lever position display (indicated with LEDs) is integrated in the gearshift lever 
center console trim, behind the gearshift lever. 


SMG Steering Wheel with Shift Paddles 

A gearchange can also be performed using the 
shift paddles on the steering wheel. 

Operation 

An upshift is performed when either shift pad¬ 
dle is pulled backward 

A downshift is performed when either shift 
paddle is pressed forward. 



16 

E85 Transmissions 



Sport Button 


Pressing the "Sport" button (1) activates the 
Dynamic Driving Control function and selects 
sportier transmission performance (shorter 
gearshift times). This function can also be 
selected in cruise mode. 

The request signal is monitored by the MS45 
EC M which transmits the signal to the S M G and 
EPS Control Modules. 

If there are no faults in the Control Modules, the 
EPS Control Module illuminates the function 
light in the Sport button. 



SMG Hydraulic System 

The clutching operation and the gear shift is performed automatically by the S M G hydraulic 
system. The H-SMG hydraulic system has similar components and functions as the previ¬ 
ous SMG hydraulic system. 


Installation location 

In comparison with the previous S M G, the mounting positions of the hydraulic system com¬ 
ponents in the H-SMG have undergone significant changes, as can be seen in the follow¬ 
ing 5 illustrations: 

Left Side View 


1. Shift/selector actuator 

2. Pressure accumulator 

3. Connections for: 

• Shift travel sensor 

• Selection angle sensor 

4. Clutch control travel sensor 

5. Clutch actuator 



17 


E85 Transmissions 





1. Hydraulic pump 

2. Transmission input speed sensor 

3. Expansion tank 

4. Valve block 

5. Shift/selection actuator 


Bottom RearView 


Top RearView 


1. Selection angle sensor 

2. Shift travel sensor 

3. Shift/selection actuator 

4. Expansion tank 

5. Valve block 


6. Pressure accumulator 

7. Selector shaft connection 
mounting hole 

8. Clutch actuator with 
control travel sensor 


1. Shift/selection actuator 

2. Valve block 

3. Expansion tank 


4. Hydraulic pump 

5. Pressure accumulator 

6. Valve block guard 


18 

E85 Transmissions 












Rear View 


1. Shift/selection actuator 

2. Expansion tank 

3. Valve block 

4. Hydraulic pump 

5. Pressure accumulator 

6. Clutch actuator with clutch control 
travel sensor 



i 


a 


Compared with the previous 5MG hydraulic system, the H-5MG hydraulic system is slight¬ 
ly modified in the following areas: 

The electromechanical reverse light switch has been omitted. 

The valve block is located underneath the transmission. 

The expansion tank is located on the right side of the transmission with new min/max fill 
level markings. 

The electrohydraulic pump is located on the right side of the transmission. 

On the left side of the transmission, below the clutch actuator, is a central connector for 
the valve block (solenoid valves EVO to EV3, pressure sensor, voltage and ground sup¬ 
ply to the valves). 

Flexible high pressure hydraulic lines with quick-connect couplings are used. 


19 

E85 Transmissions 




1. Shift/selection actuator 

2. Shift travel sensor 

3. Selection angle sensor 

4. Pressure accumulator 

5. Clutch actuator with clutch control travel sensor 

6. Hydraulic pump 

7. Transmission input speed sensor 

8. Expansion tank 

9. Valve block 


SMG Control Module 

The SMG Control Module is located in the electronics box at the front left in the engine 
compartment. It is positioned next to the ECM, in place of the EGS Control Module. 


1. Engine Control Module (ECM) 

2. SMG Control Module 

3. ECM (main) relay 

4. Fuel injector relay 

5. SMG hydraulic pump relay 




20 

E85 Transmissions 





Displays/Indications 


The selected drive positions are displayed in 2 segments in the instrument cluster. The 
selected gear position (1-6) is displayed in the right segment (2). 



The drive mode is displayed in the left segment (1), "D" for automatic mode. No symbol 
appears in the left segment when the manual drive program is selected. Only the selected 
gears are displayed in the right segment. 


A fault can also be displayed in the left segment with "F." A serious gearbox 
fault is indicated by an indicator light in the instrument cluster. 


0 


Workshop Hints 

Central Connector 

To simplify access, a small central connector is located on the left side of the gearbox below 
the clutch sensor. The central connector incorporates the circuit connections for the fol¬ 
lowing hydraulic unit components: 

Wiring for hydraulic valves 

Signal line for pressure sensor 

Voltage and ground supply for pressure sensor 

Ground connection for hydraulic valves 

The gearshift lever accommodates a M icro-Quadlock system with a 12 pin pin tray. Two 
pins are additionally assigned in the US version. They are the outputs for the illuminated 
gearshiftlever position indicator, which is located on the driver's side next to the gearshift 
lever on the center console. 


21 


E85 Transmissions 




SMG Bus System Overview 




Diagnosis 

Diagnosis corresponds to E46 diagnostics and contains the following 

Read identification 
Read fault memory 
Delete fault memory 
Diagnosis request 


Programming 

The SMG Control Module is programmable. Programming must be performed whenever 
the SMG Control Module has been replaced. 


Notes: 


22 


E85 Transmissions 





Working on Hydraulic System 


Note: Prior to any work on the hydraulic system, the system pressure must be reduced with 
the service function "Before working on hydraulic system" in the DISplus/GTl. 

The hydraulic pump relay must be removed to prevent the hydraulic pump from activat¬ 
ing. The relay must not be reconnected for the entire duration of the repair work. 

The service function "After working on hydraulic system" must be implemented with the 
DISplus/GTl (to vent the hydraulic system). 

The service function "Teach gearbox" must be implemented with the DISplus/GTl. The 
hydraulic pump must not run when dry! 

After work is completed on the hydraulic system, the hydraulic fluid level must be 
checked and topped up if necessary. The hydraulic pump relay can be reinstalled. The 
hydraulic fluid level must be checked again. 


Teaching Gearbox 

The service function "Teaching gearbox" must be implemented with the DISplus/GTl when 
the following components are replaced: 

SMG Control Module 
S M G Transmission 
Clutch 

Clutch sensor 

Note; The SMG control system learns the clutching characteristic during the drive off oper¬ 
ation. There may be impaired comfort during the initial gearshift operations. 


23 

E85 Transmissions 



Review Questions 

1. List the four different transmissions available for the E85 


2. Why is extremely important to properly torque the 6 speed manual transmission mount¬ 
ing bolts to the engine block 7 

3. What does the term "Involute Toothing" refer to 7 _ 

4. The "Sport" button can influence what three systems in an E85 7 

5. Where can SM G system faults be visually identified by the driver 7 


6. What procedure must be performed after replacing any of the following components 
SMG Control Module, SMG transmission, clutch, clutch sensor 7 


24 


E85 Transmissions 



