TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Chassis Dynamics 

Subject Page 

Objectives of the Module .2 

Chassis .3 

Front and Rear Axle.3 

Springs and Dampers.4 

Parking Brake.4 

Electric Power Steering ..7 

Purpose of the System.7 

System Components.8 

Inputs and Outputs.11 

Principle of Operation.12 

Workshop Hints.14 

Dynamic Stability Control. 17 

Purpose of the System.17 

Inputs and Outputs.18 

System Components.19 

Run Flat Tire (RFT) Technology .20 

Purpose of the System.20 

Principle of Operation.20 

System Components.20 

Tire Deflation Warning (RPA).21 

Principle of Operation.21 

Initialization/Operation.21 

Wheel/Tire Styling Combinations .22 


Review Questions 


24 



























Chassis Dynamics 


Model: E85 

Production Date: Start of Production MY 2003 


Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Verify the correct inflation pressure in a RFT. 

• Perform the RPA Initialization procedure. 

• Identify when to “lock” the ASZE unit for service procedures. 

• Describe how the “Sport” button affects the EPS system. 

• Understand what must be performed on the EPS column for removal/installation. 

• Demonstrate how to activate DTC. 


2 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




E85 Chassis 


The proven chassis and suspension of the E46 serves as the basis for the E85. The com¬ 
bination of a rigid roadster body, lightweight aluminum suspension components, optimum 
weight distribution and rear-wheel drive are ideal prerequisites for pure driving pleasure with 
the BMW E85 Z4. The development objectives of E85 Z4 were to further improve the road¬ 
ster handling characteristics as compared to the predecessor while retaining the outstand¬ 
ing driveability for everyday use. 

The front axle has been taken directly from the E46. The service brakes, pedal assembly, 
hydraulics and brake calipers are essentially the same as the E46. Because of the widened 
track, the E85 has been given new brake discs with a different depth on the rear axle. 


Rear Axle 

The rear axle for the E85 is very similar to the E46. The roadster-adapted kinematics has 
resulted in several modifications: 

• The track width has been widened by 30 mm. 

• A reinforcement plate with cooling duct (for differential) is installed to increase rigidity. 

• The rubber bushings on the subframe and on the trailing arms are harder. 

• The brake hoses, brake pad wear sensor wire and the wheel speed sensor wires are 
routed on and underneath the trailing arms (additional brackets on arms). 

• Three different drive shafts (length) are used in the E85 depending on the transmissions. 

• Two different output shaft sets with constant-velocity joints: 

- M54B25 (manual and automatic) and M54B30 (automatic) 31.5 mm diameter. 

- M54B30 with GS6-37BZ manual 38 mm diameter. 

• Due to underbody aerodynamics, the rear-axle differential aluminium cover has cooling 
fins to ensure sufficient cooling (lifetime fluid fill). 

1. Rear subframe section 

2. Left upper control arm 

3. Left trailing arm 

4. Left lower control arm 

5. Reinforcement plate 

6. Reinforcement support bracket 

7. Rear subframe mount bushings (1 of 4) 

8. Right trailing arm bushing 



3 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



Springs and Dampers 


The spring/damper set is similar to the E46. 

• Front axle: spring struts with coil springs and gas-pressure dampers. 

• Rear axle: barrel springs and gas-pressure dampers. 

• Ride level is 10 mm lower compared with the E46. 

• Compared with the E85 standard suspension, the ride level of the sports suspension 
(when available) is a further 15 mm lower. 


Parking Brake 

The parking brake handle assem¬ 
bly is a new design. 

A mounting pan flanged to the 
floorpan houses the automatic 
cable adjuster with right/left cable 
equalization. 


1. Balance arm 

2. Mounting clip 

3. Automatic cable adjuster (ASZE unit) 

4. Parking brake warning switch 



Automatic Cable Adjuster (ASZE unit) 

The ASZE unit provides automatic cable adjustments (for normal stretch) and is located in 
the mounting pan. The ASZE unit consists of: 

• Cable tensioning spring 

• Rack extension 

• Locking clip and hook 

The ASZE unit holds both cables under equal tension via a balance arm. 

Note: Parking brake lining wear is not compensated by the ASZE unit (traditional adjust¬ 
ments at the wheels are still required). 

4 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




The possible positions of the 
automatic cable adjuster are 
shown in the following illustration: 


A. Operating position 

B. Position when a cable breaks (malfunc¬ 
tion) 

C. Mounting position (locked) 

1. Locking clip 

2. Locking hook 



The operating position of the automatic cable adjuster is represented by position A. If there 
is a cable break, the automatic cable adjuster is in position B. The tensioning spring is in 
the most untensioned position. The balance arm acts as a force-equalizing device and 
ensures the uniform distribution of actuating force to both cables. The mounting clip locks 
the cables in the balance arm and prevents the cable ends from being forced out. 


Workshop Hints 

Removing Cables: In order to change the cables, it is necessary for the mounting pan to 
be removed downwards to such an extent that the balance arm can be accessed for dis¬ 
connecting and connecting the cables. To accomplish this, the drive shaft must be 
removed beforehand. The parking brake lever must be in the release position and the ASZE 
unit must be locked. 

A screwdriver must be used to press back the locking clip of the tensioning spring until the 
locking hook engages the locking clip of the tensioning spring (position C). In position C the 
tensioning spring is pretensioned to maximum effect and the balance arm with the cables 
is in the maximum release setting. The ASZE unit must also be locked when replacing the 
parking brakes shoes. 

Remove the mounting clip (1) and slide the 
cable sweges out of the locating recesses in 
the balance arm (2). 

The cables can now be disconnected from 
the parking brake shoe actuators (at the 
wheels). 






Installing Cables: The parking brake lever must be in the "released" position. The cables do 
not automatically feed themselves into the balance arm on insertion, but must be guided 
with a screwdriver into the correct position. 

Attach the mounting clip (1) to secure the cables in the balance arm (2). The mounting pan 
can be resecured in position. Connect the cables to the parking brake actuators (at the 
wheels). 

Adjustment: The basic clearance of the parking brake shoes is adjusted at the adjustment 
wheel (screw) of the parking brake shoes in the traditional manner. The parking brake is 
automatically adjusted when the ASZE unit is unlocked. The pretension of the tensioning 
spring is relieved at the automatic cable adjuster with a screwdriver by moving the locking 
hook out of the locking clip. 

The parking brake lever can be tightened in a low notch setting (pull upwards - 1 click) for 
this procedure. This makes it easier to access the locking hook. When the locking hook is 
released, the automatic cable adjuster returns to the operating position. The cables are 
retensioned. 


Notes: 


6 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



Electric Power Steering (EPS) 

Purpose of the System 

With a conventional power assisted (hydraulic) steering system, a belt driven pump pro¬ 
vides pressure to the control valve which is integral in the power steering rack. When the 
steering shaft is turned, the control valve provides pressure to assist (decrease effort) in 
turning the steering gear. 

On some BMW vehicles, this control pressure is reduced by increasing vehicle speed via 
an electronically controlled bleed off valve (Servotronic). However; hydraulic power assited 
steering systems utilize a reservoir, hydraulic fluid, pump, hoses/lines, cooler, hydraulic 
valve/steering rack, Servotronic valve, purpose built steering shaft and column. 

Electric Power Steering (EPS) is used for the first time by BMW in the E85. It provides the 
typical BMW power assisted steering characteristics and “feel”. The EPS is a very direct, 
sporty steering element with a change-over between normal and “Sport” mode by the 
Dynamic Driving Control (Sport) button. 

The EPS differs from the conventional hydraulic power assisted steering system by utilizing 
electrical/electronic components to provide power assisted steering while retaining a com¬ 
plete mechanical connection. The EPS is a "dry system", the hydraulic components and oil 
are not required. 

The programmed EPS control functions are 
influenced by vehicle speed and provide addi¬ 
tional benefits regarding steering tuning, 
absorption adjustments and active steering 
return characteristics. 

The EPS system includes: 

1. EPS Control Module 4. Steering Rack 

2. EPS Electric Motor 5. Steering Gears 

3. Lower Steering Column 6. Steering Angle Sensor 

The advantages of EPS are: 

• Less maintenance and assembly 

• Improved driving dynamics 

• Increased comfort 

• Increased driving safety 

• Weight reduction 

• Increased environmental compatibility 

• Less power consumption 



7 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




Improved Driving Dynamics: 

- The EPS Electric Motor provides good power assisted steering control characteristics. 

- Active return to center. 

- Switchable steering characteristic (Dynamic Driving Control). 

- Use of light weight sport steering wheels (1 kg less than other steering wheels). 

Increased Driving Comfort: 

- Decouples unnessesary steering oscillations (from road disturbances) while maintaining 
relevant road feel information (different road conditions) to the driver. 

- Speed dependent steering assist force (parking vs. high speed driving). 

Increased Driving Safety: 

- EPS provides a direct mechanical connection to the steering gear , conveying direct road 
feel. 

- Speed dependent steering actively absorbs left/right roll. 

Increased Environmental Compatibility: 

- Reduced fuel and engine power consumption 

- Leak free "dry system" 

System Components 

The EPS system is divided into 3 component groups: 

• Upper steering column assembly • Steering gear with rack 

• Lower steering spindle 

Upper Steering Column Assembly 

The upper steering column mechanical section starts at the steering wheel and ends at the 
connection to the lower steering spindle. The upper steering column is secured by 4 bolts 
to a bracket which is welded to the instrument panel support frame. In addition, the sup¬ 
port frame bracket is secured by 4 bolts to the body. 

The electrical section pertains to the EPS 
servo unit which consists of the EPS 
Control Module and the electric motor. 

The remaining upper steering column 
section contains the steering lock with 
ignition switch and the steering column 
adjustment mechanism (manual tilt and 
telescopic). 

8 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




Servo Unit 


The servo unit provides active steering-effort assistance as required by steering force and 
vehicle conditions. The servo unit is located on the upper steering column and is protect¬ 
ed in the passenger compartment, it consists of: 

• Electric motor 

• Worm gear 

• Control unit 

• Internal sensors for electric motor speed, steering torque, temperature and voltage. 

• Coil-spring cassette for the internal steering torque sensor. 


1. Magnet wheel 

2. Steering torque sensor 

3. EPS control module 

4. Electric motor 

5. Worm gear shaft 

6. Steering angle sensor 

7. Shipping/service 
steering locking pin 

- Install before remov¬ 
ing steering column. 

- Remove after 
installing column. 

8. EPS housing 

9. Driven gear (meshes 
with worm gear) 

10. Torsion bar 



The electric motor and the worm gear in the servo unit produce a new acoustic pattern in 
the passenger compartment. The system acoustics can be heard in particular situations: 


• When the steering wheel is spun quickly 

• When the steering wheel is turned while the car is stationary 

• When the steering wheel is turned in a quiet atmosphere (e.g. radio not turned on) 


This acoustic pattern is not a system fault. The conventional sounds generated by hydraulic 
steering systems (pump modulation, limiting valve) are eliminated. 

Note: The EPS Control Module cannot be replaced separately, the entire assembly with the 
exception of the Steering Angle Sensor must be replaced as a unit (VIN specific part #). 


9 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



Lower Steering Spindle 


The lower steering spindle connects the upper steering column to the steering gear. It runs 
in the engine compartment from the bulkhead through two universal joints to the steering 
gear. The lower steering spindle is encased in a plastic sleeve for corrosion protection. The 
sleeve is made from high temperature resistant plastic. The two parts of the lower steering 
spindle interslide in a ball-bearing mounting. 

The ball-bearing mounting is neces¬ 
sary for: 

• Self adjusting length 

• Equalization during steering 
wheel height adjustment 

• Telescopic colapsing in event of a 
crash 

1. Ball bearing mounting 

2. Telescopic compartment 



Steering Gear 

The steering gear is a purely mechanical rack and pinion system. The steering deflection 
forces are counteracted by a damped thrust member, which is integrated in the steering 
gear. 

This thrust member has an integral damper element in addition to the tension spring. In the 
event of rapid steering movements, the rack is not influenced by high deflection forces. 
Without a damped thrust member, the rack would cause noises when returning at high 
speed. 


1. Steering gear 

2. Position lug 

3. Thrust member 


Note: The thrust member 
preload is not adjustable. 

10 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 






EPS - Input and Output Signals 



1. MS45ECM 6. 

2. Fusebox 7. 

3. Upper steering column with EPS 8. 

servo unit and control module 9. 

4. Electric motor internal speed sensor 10. 

5. Internal steering torque sensor 


Dynamic Driving Control “Sport” button illumination 
DISplus 

DSC control module 
Steering angle sensor (LWS) 

Dynamic Driving Control “Sport” button - function 
request via ECM 


Notes: 


11 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 






Principle of Operation 


EPS controls servo assistance for steering. In addition to the measuring the driver’s steer¬ 
ing torque, the EPS Control Module also monitors further inputs such as: 

• Vehicle speed • Dynamic Driving Control (Sport) button 

• Steering angle velocity • Internal system temperature 

• Steering angle 

The EPS calculates an assistance setpoint. The electric motor is activated via the integrat¬ 
ed power electronics and the torque is transmitted through the worm gear to the driven 
gear (attached to the steering column output shaft). 

The Servotronic function (vehicle speed dependent steering assistance) is also integrated. 
The corresponding assistance and damping characteristics are stored in the EPS Control 
Module. The required assistance torque is gradually increased when the engine is started 
and reduced (with a delay) when the engine is switched off. 


Steering Torque Measurement 

The driver’s steering torque is measured by a steering torque sensor integrated in the servo 
unit. The function is based on the magnetoresistive principle, these sensors are curently 
used in BMWs include wheel speed sensors (DSC III MK60) and Valvetronic position sen¬ 
sors (E65 - N62 engine). The magnetoresistive elements resistance changes as a function 
of the magnetic field acting on them. 

The input shaft of the upper steering spindle is connected by a torsion bar to the output 
shaft. A magnet wheel is mounted on the input shaft. The magnetoresistive element is 
mounted on the output shaft. 

The magnetic field lines are deflected by the magnet 
wheel as a result of the rotation of the input shaft with 
respect to the output shaft (slight twist due to the 
resistance from the tires on the road, steering gear, 
etc.). This deflection generates a resistance change 
(in one of the resistors) causing a voltage change in 
the evaluation electronics. 

Two output signals (different voltage values) are generated which are constantly monitored 
for plausibility by the EPS Control Module. Based on this voltage change, the EPS calcu¬ 
lates the extent of the driver’s steering torque. The leads for signal transmission, power 
supply and ground run in a coil spring cassette mounted on the pinion shaft. The coil spring 
cassette is located in the worm gear housing. 



12 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



Steering Angle Measurement 


To be able to perform active steering wheel resetting (return to center), the EPS Control 
Module requires the following: 


• Steering wheel center position 

• Present steering wheel angle 

The above information is input to the EPS Control 
Module by the steering angle sensor (LWS), in addition 
to the DSC system requirement. The steering angle 
sensor is located on the lower steering column in the 
passenger compartment. 

Note: The steering angle sensor must be calibrated 
(like the E46 DSC). 



4. Steering angle sensor (LWS) 


Dynamic Driving Control Function 


When the Dynamic Driving Control function is selected with the “Sport” button, the engine 
management system directs the request signal via the PT-CAN Bus to the EPS Control 
Module. 


The EPS Control Module switches 
to sporty vehicle handling. This 
provides higher steering and hold¬ 
ing forces. 


1. MS45 ECM 

2. Dynamic Driving Control “Sport” button 

3. EPS servo unit and control module 

4. Steering angle sensor (LWS) 

5. DSC control module 




13 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




Indicator Light 


The instrument cluster contains an indicator light for the EPS system. This light alerts the 
driver to significantly reduced steering effort assistance or to a complete shutdown of assis¬ 
tance. This may be caused by: 


• Fault in the EPS Control Module or an associated control module (DSC, 
ECM). 

• Undervoltage/overvoltage 

• Overloading of EPS 



Workshop Hints 

Servo Assistance Reduction or Shutdown 

When the EPS system is overloaded, it protects itself by reducing or shutting down servo 

assistance while retaining a complete mechanical connection for steering. The driver 

notices the increased steering torque and receives a visual signal from the indicator light. 

The following causes will implement protective measures: 

• Servo assistance is reduced/shut down if a fault relevant to EPS is detected in an asso¬ 
ciated Control Module/sensors (ECM, DSC Control Module, Steering Angle Sensor). A 
fault code is stored and the indicator light in the instrument cluster illuminates in the event 
of complete assistance shutdown. 

• Power assisted steering is reduced as EPS internal temperature increases (due to over¬ 
loading). When reduction of the power is not sufficient to cool the system down, servo 
assistance is reduced down to zero. A fault is stored and the indicator light in the instru¬ 
ment cluster illuminates. When the temperature cools down, servo assistance returns 
within 2 seconds to the present requested value. 

• In the event of overvoltage (> 17 V), servo assistance shuts down immediately to protect 
the output transistors. A fault is stored and the indicator light in the instrument cluster 
illuminates. When the voltage drops (< 16 V), servo assistance returns within 2 seconds 
to the present requested value. 


14 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



• If an undervoltage (< 9 V) is detected, servo assistance is immediately reduced down to 
0. A fault is stored and the indicator light illuiminates in the event of complete assistance 
shutdown. When the voltage returns to a level > 10 V, servo assistance increases with 
in 2 seconds to the requested value. In all cases, the indicator light goes out when the 
fault is no longer present. 


Default Structure 

Default 1 - Complete shutdown (Control Module, under/over voltage, no assist. 

Default 2 - When the steering is held in left/right lock position > 40 seconds, power is 
reduced by 50% (due to increasing internal temperature). 

Default 3 - Vehicle speed signal is missing, Servotronic feature is deactivated. 

Default 4 - When the Steering Angle Sensor (LWS) input is defective, active return center¬ 
ing is deactivated. 


Working on Steering Column 

Before performing any work on the steering column, it is required that the steering locking 
pin is engaged in the “centering” position! This prevents turning of the steering spindle dur¬ 
ing installation. 

7. Shipping/service steering locking pin 

- Install before removing column. 

- Remove after installing column. 


If the steering spindle is turned, 
this will break the internal sensors’ 
connecting harness to the EPS 
Control Module. 

The connecting harness is located 
in the coil spring. The spring is 
installed in the servo unit housing. 

When the lower steering spindle is disconnected from the steering gear, it is important 
when reinstalling to ensure that the center marking on the lower steering spindle is aligned 
with the center marking on the steering gear. The upper steering spindle and the steering 
gear are equipped with plastic lugs which determine the correct installation position of the 
lower steering spindle. 



15 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



General Information 


Caution: The mass balance spring is under 
extreme tension. Be careful not to bend the 
spring tab mounting retainers. 

Note: Only the ignition starter switch, the lock 
cylinder and the Steering Angle Sensor (LWS) 
can be replaced as separate components on 
the upper steering column. 



The mass balance spring (arrow) should be disconnected when work is performed on the 
upper steering column. 


Diagnosis 

System faults and additional information pertaining to vehicle responses are stored in the 
EPS Control Module’s fault memory and can be diagnosed with DISplus/GTI. 


K-Sus 





LWS 

EPS 

DSC 


pm can 




l '.-it: i 




D53 



16 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




Dynamic Stability Control 

Purpose of the System 

The Dynamic Stability Control system (DSC MK 60) currently in the E46 is carried over to 
the E85. In addition to the ABS, ASC and CBC functions, the DSC system incorporates a 
further function in the E85, Dynamic Traction Control (DTC). The DTC function can be acti¬ 
vated with the DSC button and provides two subfunctions: 

• Sports tuning of the Automatic Stability Control (ASC) + Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

• Improved traction, particularly on ground surfaces with a low coefficient of friction 

All other functions have essentially remained the same. A "DTC" indicator light illuminates 
in the instrument cluster when the DTC function is activated. The DSC warning light in the 
instrument cluster flashes when intervention is necessary and takes priority over all other 
functions (as in current E46 vehicles). 

In certain situations (i.e. accelerating on an uphill gradient on a snow covered road), the pre¬ 
vious ASC function provided brake intervention at the spinning wheel and extremely 
reduced the engine output. Although the vehicle remained extremely stable, minimal 
propulsion was available. 

DTC achieves maximum possible traction essentially by expanded ASC and DSC control 
thresholds. Compared to the ASC/DSC function, DTC mode allows a little more "drift" at 
low speeds and transverse acceleration (increased rear wheel spin is permissible up to a 
speed of approx. 45 mph). This allows the engine power output to remain without an 
extreme reduction of power, improving propulsion. 

On approaching higher speeds and transverse acceleration (measured by the yaw rate sen¬ 
sor), the DTC function acts more and more like the "normal" ASC and DSC function and 
the slip thresholds are reduced back to a conservative mode for stability reasons. 


Brake Force Display 

To improve the reaction of other drivers in a panic stop, 
the E85 has a Brake Force Display system. If a decel¬ 
eration of more than 5m/S2 or an ABS signal is detect¬ 
ed, the bulbs in compartment 3 are activated by the 
light switch center. They will then receive the full 21 
Watts of power and the brake light plus Brake Force 
Display function is illuminated. 



17 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 













System Components 

The DSC system consists of following compo¬ 
nents: 

• DSC Control Module (MK60) 

• DSC button 

• Wheel speed sensors 

• DSC yaw rate sensor 

Control Module 

The DSC Control Module (MK 60) is located in the engine compartment at the left front on 
the strut tower (as shown above). The Control Module is mounted on the valve block 
assembly. 

DSC Button 

The DSC button is located in the center console 
switch center (1) next to the RPA button. DTC 
mode is activated by briefly pressing the DSC 
button. 

A DTC symbol in the instrument 
cluster provides the driver with 
visual confirmation. 

By pressing and holding the DSC button for longer than 3 seconds the DSC function 
switches off completely and the DSC symbol is illuminated in the instrument cluster. The 
ABS function is always on line. 

The DSC function is reactivated by briefly pressing the DSC button once again. The visual 
symbol goes out. The DSC symbol flashing signals to the driver that a DSC control inter¬ 
vention is active. By cycling the ignition switch, DTC will be deactivated and DSC is auto¬ 
matically on line (DTC or DSC deactivation must be reselected by the driver). 

DSC Sensor 

The DSC sensor is located under the passenger’s seat 
on the seat mounting brace/floor pan (1). The sensor is 
connected via a separate CAN (DSC-CAN High and 
DSC-CAN Low) to the DSC module. It registers the 
transverse acceleration and the yaw rate. 






19 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 





E85 Run Flat Tire (RFT) Technology 

Purpose of the System 


BMW Run Flat Tire (RFT) Technology which was first introduced on the Z8, is standard on 
the E85 (Z4). RFT technology offers large advantages to the customer in dynamic stability 
with slow or sudden air pressure loss and Deflation Warning. In addition, the spare wheel 
and jacking equipment in the trunk is deleted which provides additional storage space. 

A tire with back up running ability (RFT) will be differentiated from 
a non-run flat tire by the encircled letter designation on the side- 
wall (for example: RSC - Runflat System Component). ft 


Principle of Operation 

If slow or sudden inflation pressure loss occurs in a RFT, it is still mobile because of the 
additional high temperature rubber reinforcements that strengthen the side wall. 

These reinforcements prevent side wall damage when the tire is deflated and also provides 
support during extreme loads (even when negotiating curves). In addition, the special RFT 
wheel (rim) grips the tire for sufficient steering, braking and accelerating power. 



System Components 

Comparison (cross section) of a standard tire 
to a self supporting RFT: 

1. Standard tire (deflated) 

2. Self supporting RFT (deflated) 

A. High temperature rubber 

reinforcements 


Note: Because of the self supporting charac¬ 
teristics of the RFT, it is difficult to visualize a 
deflation, therefore; always verify air pressure 
with a tire pressure gage (refer to RPA initial¬ 
ization). 




20 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 





Note: 


- With a sudden inflation pressure loss the vehicle can be driven with a maximum 
speed of 50 mph for a maximum distance of approx. 100 miles. 

- With a slow inflation pressure loss the vehicle can be driven with a maximum 
speed of 50 mph for a maximum distance of approx. 1200 miles. 

- A winter profile RFT will also be offered. 

- In an extreme case, standard tires can be temporarily substitued on the same 
wheel (rim) if RFT is not available. 

Tire Deflation Warning (RPA) 

When a slow inflation pressure loss is present, it is more difficult for the driver to recognize 
the gradually increasing “spongy” handling of the vehicle (this constitutes approx. 80% of 
flat tire cases). The condition is more dificult to detect with RFT because of the increased 
sidewall rigidity. The Tire Deflation Warning (RPA) monitors tire deflation and will alert the 
driver. 


Principle of Operation 

The Tire Deflation Warning (RPA) function is performed by the DSC Control Module. When 
a tire loses air pressure, the radius and dynamic rolling circumference is reduced. This 
increases the rotational speed as compared to the other tires on the vehicle. The RPA func¬ 
tion measures the number of wheel revolutions from the four DSC wheel speed sensors and 
performs a diagonal comparison for a speed average. 

If there is a difference, this is recognized as pressure loss. The RPA can 
inform the driver after a short drive, approx. 1-3 minutes, from a vehicle 
speed > 10 mph via an indicator light (red) in the Instrument Cluster. 



Initialization/Operation 

The system must be initialized when the tire 
inflation pressures are changed or when the 
wheels/tires are replaced. 

The RPA switch (1) in the center console switch¬ 
ing center must be pressed to start initialization 
(as follows on the next page). 



KT-10410 

21 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 






With KL15 “on”, press the RPA switch until the RPA indicator light in the 
Instrument Cluster illuminates in “yellow”. 

After a a short drive (approx. 1-3 minutes), from a vehicle speed > 10 mph, 
the system learns the new wheel speed sensor reference values and the RPA 
indicator light (yellow) goes out. 



KT-9982 


When an inflation pressure loss is determined, the RPA indicator light illuminates in “red”. 
The driver is informed of a RPA system failure by the “yellow” illuminated RPA indicator light. 


Wheel/Tire Styling Combinations 

All wheels are cast aluminum. Different Special equipment (SA) wheel stylings are available 
for all body/engine combinations. 


mm 



Styling 





M54B22, 

M54B25 

7 J x 16 EH2 IS47 

Reifen 225/50 R 16 

104 




M54B30 

8 J x 17 EH2 IS47 

Reifen 225/45 R 17 

103 


# * 



Note: The wheel lugs (same as the E46) must be torqued to 120 Nm. 


22 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 


















Additional Wheel/Tire Styling Combinations 


-5S- 




M54Bxx 

7 J x 16 EH2 IS47 

Reifen 225/50 R 16 

102 




M54Bxx 

8 J x 17 EH2 IS47 

Reifen 225/45 R 17; 

8,5 Jx 17 EH2 IS50 

Reifen 245/40 R 17 

105 




M54Bxx 

8 J x 17 EH2 IS47 

Reifen 225/45 R 17 

106 




M54Bxx 

8 J x 18 EH2 IS47 

Reifen 225/40 R 18; 

8,5 J x 18 EH2 IS50 

Reifen 255/35 R 18 

107 




M54Bxx 

8 J x 18 EH2 IS47 

Reifen 225/40 R 18; 

8,5 Jx 18 EH2 IS50 

Reifen 255/35 R 18 

108 





23 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 

























Review Questions 

1. What is the only reliable method to verify the correct inflation pressure in a RFT? 

2. List the RPA Initialization procedure: 

3. The ASZE unit must be in the “locked” position for what two service procedures? 

4. How does the “Sport” button affect the EPS system? 

5. What must be installed in the EPS column before removal and be removed after instal¬ 
lation? 

6. How is DTC activated? 

7. When the EPS indicator light is illuminated, what does this indicate? 

What could be the causes? 


24 

Running Gear/E52 



