Table of Contents 

Advanced Safety Electronics (ASE) 

Subject Page 

Advanced Safety Electronics (ASE).3 

Purpose of the System .4 

Advance Safety Electronics.4 

Advantages of the ASE System .4 

Advanced Safety Electronics IPO .5 

System Components.6 

byteflight.6 

Control Units.8 

SIM.8 

Power Supply.8 

Bus Master Functions.9 

Gateway.10 

Gateway from K Bus to byteflight.10 

Gateway from byteflight to the K-Bus.10 

B-Pillar Satellites (SBSL and SBSR) .11 

Sensors .11 

Door Satellites (STVLySTVR).11 

Seat Occupancy Sensor.12 

B+ Cable Monitoring.12 

Seat Belt Switches.13 

Airbag Switch.13 

Actuators .14 

Driver’s Airbag .14 

Passenger Airbag.14 

Side Airbags.15 

Knee Airbags .15 

Seat Belt Tensioner.16 

Battery Safety Terminal.16 

Airbag Indicator Lamp .17 


Initial Print Date:9/02 Revision Date: 
































Principle of Operation.17 

Airbag Triggering.19 

Triggering in the event of errors .19 

Triggering in the event of a crash .19 

Front-end crash .19 

Side-on collision.20 

Rear crash .20 

Knee Airbag .20 

Battery Cable Monitoring .21 

Service Notes.22 

Battery cable diagnosis.22 

Safety battery terminal .22 

Airbag warning lamp.22 

Review Questions .23 


2 

Advanced Safety Electronics 

















Advanced Safety Electronics (ASE) 

Model: E85 

Production: Start of Production MY 2003 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you should be able to: 

• Relate the ASE component locations. 

• Understand the operation of the ASE System. 

• Explain the operation of the Battery Cable Monitioring System. 


3 

Advanced Safety Electronics 




Purpose of the System 

Advance Safety Electronics 

Advanced Safety Electronics ASE is the passive safety system on the E85. The system is 
based on the same technology as the Intelligent Safety and Integration System (ISIS) of the 
E65/E66. 

The ASE system consists of the Safety Information Module SIM and several control units, 
called satellites, that are linked across the byteflight bus. In the case of the MRS system 
there was only one central control unit. On the E85, the acceleration sensors are integrat¬ 
ed into the satellites. 

The actuators are directly connected to the satellites and are activated by the satellites. The 
satellites are fitted at strategic points in the car. The distributed sensor system in the car 
enables measurement of the accelerations occurring as close as possible to the outer shell 
of the body and at the location of the collision. 

The direct recording and processing of the information in the control unit mean that signif¬ 
icantly shorter reaction times can be achieved. The mechanical time lag within the body to 
a central control unit is eliminated. 

The distributed sensors in the satellites provide redundant information that is interchanged 
via the byteflight. This leads to even more reliable trigger decisions. In comparison to the 
MRS systems used to date, the ASE enables, (for example in the event of a side-on colli¬ 
sion) earlier triggering. 

Advantages of the ASE System 

• Networked airbag control system with optical bus byteflight 

• More exact crash detection regarding the direction and strength ofthe impact 

• Battery cable diagnosis with cutoff of the safety battery terminal when required 

• Airbag switch for deactivation/activation of the front airbags on passenger side, side 
airbags and knee airbag on US models 

• Deployment of a knee airbag for driver and passenger on US model 

The crash situation is detected more precisely than on the multiple restraint system MRS. 
In the event of a crash, only those actuators are triggered that are necessary for optimum 
protection of the driver and passenger. This leads to lower repair costs and thus more 
favourable insurance classifications. 

A number of acceleration sensors in the vehicle record the vehicle deceleration. The satel¬ 
lites exchange acceleration data. This provides an exact picture of the crash situation, 
enabling a timely and selective triggering of the actuators depending on the crash situation. 

4 

Advanced Safety Electronics 



Advanced Safety Electronics IPO 



1. Instrument Cluster 

2. DME Control Unit 

3. GM V 

4. Fuel Pump Relay 

5. Driver’s Side Front Airbag 

6. Left Side Airbag 

7. Left Knee Airbag 

8. Left Seatbelt Tensioner 

9. Airbag Indicator Lamp 

10. Passenger Side Front Airbag 


11. Right Side Airbag 

12. Right Knee Airbag 

13. Right Seat Belt Tensioner 

14. BST 

15. SBSR 

16. Seat occupancy sensor 

17. Right seat belt switch 

18. Transverse sensor in SBSR 

19. Longitudinal sensor in SBSR 

20. Trunk Battery Connection 


21. Transverse Sensor in SIM 

22. Longitudinal Sensor in SIM 

23. Airbag Switch 

24. SIM 

25. Under Flood Battery Connection 

26. Transverse sensor in SBSL 

27. Longitudinal Sensor in SBSL 

28. Left Seatbelt Switch 

29. Telephone Emergency Call 

30. SBSL 


5 

Advanced Safety Electronics 





System Components 

The ASE system consists of the following components: 

• byteflight bus 

• Control Units 

SIM - With acceleration sensors 

SBSL - satellite b-pillar on left side of vehicle 

SBSR - satellite b-pillar on right side of vehicle 

• Sensors 

STVL - pressure sensor left door 
STVR - pressure sensor right door 
Seat occupancy sensor 
B+ Cable Monitoring 

Seat Belt Switches -Driver and Passenger 
Airbag Switch 

• Actuators 

Driver’s Side Airbag (2 stage) 

Passenger Side Airbag (2 stage) 

Side Airbags (2) 

Knee Airbag Driver’s Side 
Knee Airbag Passenger Side 
Seat Belt Tensionsers (2) 

BST 

Airbag Indicator Light 

byteflight 

The increasing complexity of in-car electronics and the growing amount of sensors, actua¬ 
tors and electronic control units place higher demands on the high-speed data communci- 
ation protocols. 

None of the communication solutions available until now have been able to fulfill all these 
demands. 

BMW together with several semi-conductor companies have developed byteflight a new 
protocol for safety-critical applications in automotive vehicles. 

The byteflight is the bus system used exclusively for the ASE System (Intelligent Safety 
Integration System). This ASE Sytem of the E85 contains the Safety and Information 
Module (SIM) and 4 additional satellite control modules. 

The ASE System is a bus composed of Fiber Optic cables and control modules arranged 
in a STAR pattern with the SIM at the center of the system. 

6 

Advanced Safety Electronics 



Since the byteflight is a star structure as opposed to the continious ring structure of the 
MOST bus, the fiber optic cables carry the data bi-directionally, a single fiber optic cable 
connects each satellite directly to the SIM. 

Each satellite contains a transmitter/receiver module for receiving and sending data to the 
SIM. The SIM contains 4 transmitter receiver modules for communication with the satellites 
simultaneously. 

All information from each satellite is made available to every other satellite by the SIM. 

Note: 

Repairs to the byteflight fiber-optic cable are not permitted. Damaged cables must be 
replaced with new fiber optic cables. 



SSSL SBSR ASE byteflight Bus System 

SJM 


STVL" STVR* 
bytcllight 


Because of the use of byteflight, the ASE system has the following advantages: 

• High communication speed 

• Highest level of system security 

• Faster trigger decisions 

• Redundant information provided by the sensor 

• Software update via bus 

• Self-diagnostic procedure 

• Mechanical safety switch is unnecessary 

• No electromagnetic disturbances due to fiber-optic communication 

• No electrical connection between transmitter and receiver module 

• Simple system upgrade 


7 

Advanced Safety Electronics 





Control Units 
SIM 

Located on the transmission tunnel behind the 
handbrake assembly, the Safety and Information 
Module (SIM) performs the following functions: 



• Supplies voltage to the satellites and the pressure sensors (SBSL.SBSR and 
STVL.STVR) and supplies the voltage reserve for component activation. 

• Bus Master functions for the optical bus communication system {byteflight). 

• Gateway functions between byteflight and K-bus. 

• Triggers Emergency Call System (If Phone equipped) 

• Signals the DME for deactivation of fuel pump. 

• Signals the GM to switch on interior lights, hazard warnings and unlock the doors. 

• Monitors the integrated acceleration sensors. 

• Allows airbag activation. 

• Allows BST activation. 



1. Instrument Cluster 

2. DME 

3. Mayday Function (Not available at this time) 

4. GM V 

5. Switching Controller 

6. Voltage Regulator 

7. Microprocessor 

8. Airbag Switch 

9. Airbag Indicator Lamp 

10. Longitudinal Acceleration Sensor 

11. Transverse Acceleration Sensor 

12. Star Coupler 

13. Distributor 

14. Energy Reserve Capacitor 

15. Right B-Pillar Satellite 

16. Left B-Pillar Satellite 

17. Battery 

18. Ignition/Starter Switch 


Power Supply 

The SIM is supplied with voltage KL terminals 30 and ground from KL31. If the vehicle volt¬ 
age is sufficient then a switching controller is supplied first, which supplies voltage to the 
intelligent Star Coupler and the power supply. 

The second switching controller is supplied by KL 30 during operation and is controlled by 
the microprocessor via the cable SHDN 2. The capacitor is charged as of KL R. 

The charging of the capacitor forms the emergency energy reserve. The capacitor voltage 
is 33V. (Energy Reserve in the E65 is 400v.) 


8 

Advanced Safety Electronics 









Bus Master Functions 

The SIM has two tasks to perform as Bus Master for the byteflight. 

• Generation of the synchronization pulses (Sync. Pulse) 

• Setting the satellites in alarm mode (Alarm Pulse) 

In the ASE, the SIM is configured as byteflight master (bus master). In principle, any satel¬ 
lite can be configured by software as bus master. However, there may only be one bus 
master in the system. 

All other satellites (bus slaves) use the sync pulse for internal synchronization. Each slave 
can transmit telegrams between the sync, pulses on the byteflight. 

The SIM provides the synchronization pulses at intervals of 250|is. The alarm mode is 
transmitted across the width of the sync, pulse. The duration of a sync, pulse in alarm sta¬ 
tus is approx. 2|is. Normally, the synchronization pulse lasts approx. 3|is. 

The duration of a complete telegram can vary between 4.6 to 16|is. 

On the basis of all the available information provided by the sensors, the bus master (SIM) 
must decide whether the satellites are to be set in the alarm mode. 

When the alarm mode is set by the SIM, all the trigger circuits (B+) of the ASE are placed 
on trigger standby. 





Tfltegramme 


Zyhlu34 


ZykhitJ 


ZykJuiJ 


*-Zykluil 


- 5 ! *- 

a 


A f- 


l *Vf1 A 


4 fc- 
r 


■i K- 

c.»Vfi a 


■ iyrn.hr(¥ii«iti(Hit-Pnls*-Alrinnn 
t_syn_n = Syinnror sn:ioni Piiiin linn'i.il 


9 

Advanced Safety Electronics 



Gateway 

The SIM contains the gateway function between the byteflight and K-bus. This means that 
telegrams can be sent by the byteflight to the K-bus and vice versa. 

The gateway function transfers both the content of functional telegrams as well as the 
telegrams for diagnosis. 

Gateway from K Bus to byteflight 

Information and messages for the ASE system are forwarded by the K-bus as telegrams to 
the byteflight (gateway function of the SIM). The telegrams are processed in the SIM. 

The following telegrams are transmitted: 

• Terminal status 

• Kilometre reading 

• Vehicle identification number 

Gateway from byteflight to the K-Bus 

The messages and information from the byteflight that are meant for other nodes on the K- 
bus are converted by the gateway function into a K-bus telegram. The following signals 
are transmitted in a telegram (crash telegram): 

• Switch on airbag warning lamp, AWL 

• Switch off electric fuel pump 

• Switch off alternator 

• Transmit emergency call 

• Open central locking system 

• Switch on passenger-compartment lighting and hazard warning light 

Notes: 


10 

Advanced Safety Electronics 




B-Pillar Satellites (SBSL and SBSR) 


The left side B-Pillar Satellite (SBSL) controls and monitors the actuators for the left front 
airbag, the left side airbag (in the drivers door), the left seat belt tensioner and the left knee 
airbag. 

The right side B-Pillar Satellite (SBSR) controls and monitors the actuators for the right front 
airbag, the right side airbag (in the passenger door), the right seat belt tensioner, the right 
knee airbag and the BST. 

Both B-Pillar Satelittes function as monitors for the BST. 



SBSL Location SBSR Location 


The B-Pillar satellites are connected to the SIM via the byteflight. The power supply of the 
satellites is also from the SIM and it is buffered by the memory backup capicitor. 

An accleration sensor for the longitudinal and transversal acceleration is integrated in each 
B-Pillar satellite. The sensor provides voltage as a measured variable and transfers the value 
via the byteflight to the SIM and all other satellites. 

The voltage signal is a measurement of positive and negative car acceleration and is eval¬ 
uated in each satellite. The voltage signal is continuoulsy provided to the SIM and other 
satellites. 


Sensors 

Door Satellites (STVL/STVR) 

The Door Satellites (STVL/STVR) are located in the left/right passenger doors. 

The door satellites are connected to the SIM via the byteflight. Power supply for the door 
satellites is also provided by the SIM and is buffered by the memory backup capcitor. 


11 

Advanced Safety Electronics 




A pressure sensor, which constanlty monitors the pressure in the door, is integrated into 
each door satellite. Pressure changes in the door that occur during penetration of the outer 
door skin are evaluated and passed on through the SIM for airbag deployment activation. 



Seat Occupancy Sensor 



10662 


T Voltage Regulator 

2. Microprocessor 

3. Pressure Sensor 

VS_SIM Voltage Supply 

KL3T Terminal 31~ 

LWL byteflight 

S/E Transmitter/Receiver 



A seat occupancy detection mat is installed in the seat cushion of the passenger seat. 

The sensor mat is identical to the mats used in previous models for the MRS systems. The 
sensor system consists of pressure sensors that use an electronic evaluation unit (SBE) to 
detect whether there is weight on the seat. 

When a weight (such as a passenger) is added to the seat, the system recognizes the seat 
as occupied. The electronic evaluation unit of the seat occupation mat is connected to the 
SBSR satellite. 


The information regarding seat occupation is required for activation of the following 
functions: 


• Airbag activation 

• Activation of the seatbelt tensioners 

B+ Cable Monitoring 

The E85 B+ Battery Cable is routed from trunk area along the underside of the car into the 
engine compartment. If the cable is damaged in an accident or while driving over an obsta¬ 
cle, the BST is activated, protecting the vehilce from further electrical problems. 


12 

Advanced Safety Electronics 





B+ Monitored Battery Cable 

1. Outer insulation 

2. Monitoring Shield 

3. Insulation of aluminum cable 

4. Aluminum cable 35mm2 


The battery cable monitoring occurs via the low impedence shield of the battery cable, the 
monitoring shield. The monitoring point in the trunk at the BST is connected to the SBSR 
and the other monitoring connection in the engine compartment is connected to the SBSL. 

Seat Belt Switches 

The Seat Belt Switches are located in the seatbelt buckles of the driver and passenger seat 
belt. The switch is a two wire hall switch and is supplied with voltage by the respective left 
and right B-Pillar satellites (SBSLySBSR). The voltage is pulsed to the switch to reduce volt¬ 
age consumption. 

The seat belt switches are used to detect whether or not the seat belts have been fastened. 
The input from the switches is required for the following functions: 

• Selective triggering of actuators in the event of a crash 

• Activation of the Seat Belt Warning Lamp 

• Out of the accoustic warning 

Airbag Switch 



13 

Advanced Safety Electronics 





The airbag switch is located on the right side of the dashboard at the A-Pillar and the indi¬ 
cator lamp for is located in the center console. 

The airbag switch makes its possible for the driver to determine if the passenger front and 
side bags are active. The front passenger and passenger side airbag are activated or deac¬ 
tivated together only. 

To prevent accidental activation or deactivation of the passenger airbags the switch may 
only be operated by the ignition key while the car is not moving and the passenger door is 
open. 

The airbag indicator lamp consists of a number of LED’s controlled by the SIM. 


Actuators 
Driver’s Airbag 

The Driver’s Airbag is located in the impact pad 
of the three spoke steering wheel. 

The Bag is equipped with a 2-stage gas gen¬ 
erator and has a volume of approxiamately 60 
liters. 

Three colors are availbable to match the interi¬ 
or colors. (Black, Brown, Grey) 




1. Stage 1 

Passenger Airbag 2 stage 2 


The Passenger Airbag is located beneath an invisible flap in the dashboard. The airbag is 
a 2-stage design with a volume of approximately 125 liters. Depending on the severity of 
the crash, the two stages are ignited so the the bag can unfold in a defined manner. 


14 

Advanced Safety Electronics 





Side Airbags 



E85 Side Airbag in door 



E85 Side Airbag Module 


The side airbags in the doors reduce the risk of occupant injury in the torso region of the 
body in the case of a side-on crash. 

The side airbags are located behind the door trim. The side airbags are secured to the inner 
door panel with 3 screws. 

The side airbags are folded up in an aluminium housing with a plastic cover. The plastic 
cover has defined breaking points. 


Passenger Knee Airbag 

1. Passenger Knee Airbag 

2. Glove Compartment 


Knee Airbags 



Drivers Knee Airbag 

1. Dirvers Side Knee Airbag 



15 

Advanced Safety Electronics 











In the event of a crash, the knee airbag supports the knee, especially if the driver or pas¬ 
senger are not wearing seatbelts. This initiates a controlled forward shift of the upper body, 
which is cushioned by the relevant airbag. 

The knee airbag is a one-stage airbag with gas generator. The volume is approx. 13 litres. 

Seat Belt Tensioner 

The pyrotechnic seatbelt tensioner has the task in the event of a crash to remove or reduce 
any belt slack in the pelvic and shoulder region. 

The seatbelt tensioner is located on the driver's and/or passenger seat. The seat belt ten¬ 
sioners form a unit with the seat belt buckle. 

The seatbelt tensioner consists of priming cap, generator, plunger and operating cable. The 
belt buckle switch is integrated in the seatbelt buckle. 




Seat Belt Tensioner 


Battery Safety Terminal 


Battery Safety Terminal 

In the event of a crash of sufficient severity or if the battery cable diagnosis is activated, the 
starter/alternator line is electrically and mechanically cut from the positive terminal of the 
battery. 

The safety battery terminal is located directly at the positive terminal of the battery. 


16 

Advanced Safety Electronics 





Airbag Indicator Lamp 

The airbag indicator lamp is activated when the 
airbag switch assigns the state "Passenger 
Airbag OFF." 

The airbag indicator lamp is activated by the 
SIM. 

The airbag indicator lamp is diagnosed and 
monitored. If a fault is found in the power sup¬ 
ply or at the lamp, a fault entry is made in the 
SIM. 

The airbag warning lamp is activated. 



Principle of Operation 

The SIM now has 4 transmit/receive modules to which the satellites are connected. 

The energy reserve in the SIM has been reduced to 33 V (ASE 400 V), as now only 4 satel¬ 
lites have to be supplied with voltage in the event of a crash. 

New additions are the acceleration sensors for the X/Y direction. 

The acceleration sensors for the X/Y direction measure the longitudinal and transversal 
acceleration of the vehicle and are evaluated in the SIM. The sensors continuously provide 
the values determined. The values are transferred across the byteflight to all satellites, as 
are the measured values of the satellites. The algorithms in the satellites work with these 
measured values. The SIM compares the values and triggers the alarm mode via synchro¬ 
nization pulses if the severity is sufficient. 

The alarm mode places the satellites in a triggerable state. Depending on the crash sever¬ 
ity and the stored trigger algorithms, the actuators required in each case are activated. 

Note: 

If an airbag switch is fitted and the switch is in the position "deactivated," the front airbag 
on the passenger side and the side airbag are not placed in the triggerable state. The knee 
airbag and the seat belt tensioner are also not place in the triggerable state. 

The vehicle centre satellite has been eliminated, as the SIM is fitted in the middle of car and 
the acceleration sensors are integrated in the SIM. 


17 

Advanced Safety Electronics 




1 . 

Instrument cluster 

11. Transverse Acceleration sensor 

2. 

DME Control Unit 

12. Star Coupler 

3. 

Telephone Emergency Call (Not Available at SOP) 

13. Distributor 

4. 

General Module GM V 

14. Energy Reserve 

5. 

Switching controller 

15. Right B-Pillar Satellite 

6. 

Voltage Regulator 

16. Left B-Pillar Satellite 

7. 

Microprocessor 

17. Right Door Satellite 

8. 

Airbag Switch 

18. Left Door Satellite 

9. 

Airbag Indicator Lamp 

19. Battery 

10 

. Longitudinal acceleration sensor 

20. Ingition/Starter Switch 


18 

Advanced Safety Electronics 






Airbag Triggering 

Numerous crash and road tests under extreme conditions have been used to set the BMW 
triggering thresholds for all possible types of accidents. 

The triggering thresholds are primarily divided into 4 groups according to crash severity: 

• CS 0: no crash (parking damage) CS=Crash Severity 

• CS 1: light crash 

• CS 2: crash of medium severity 

• CS 3: severe crash 

The triggering thresholds have been set depending on the crash severity and including 
other factors such as direction, overlap on collision, and depending on the evaluation as to 
whether the occupant was wearing a seatbelt or not. 

This results in the various trigger thresholds for the activation of the various restraint sys¬ 
tems. 

Triggering in the event of errors 

If a fault is detected in the seatbelt buckle detection system, it is assumed that the seatbelt 
is not fastened. The triggering threshold is lowered. In spite of the fault recognition, an 
attempt is made to activate the seatbelt lock tensioner. 

If a fault is detected in the seat occupation detection system, it is assumed that the seat is 
occupied. The restraint systems are activated. 

If a fault is detected in the airbag switch, it is assumed that a child's seat is fitted. The front 
airbag and side airbag on the passenger side are not triggered. 

Triggering in the event of a crash 

The following examples illustrate the actuators that can be activated: 

• Front-end crash 

• Side-on collision 

• Rear crash 

Front-end crash 

In the event of a front-end crash, a distinction is made between crash severity "light to 
medium collision" or "severe collision" (CS 3). 

In the case of crash severity from light to medium collision (CS 1/CS 2), the driver's/front 
passenger's airbag are not triggered if it is detected that the occupants are wearing seat- 
belts. 


19 

Advanced Safety Electronics 




If the occupants are not wearing seatbelts, the driver's and front passenger's airbag would 
be triggered. 

The seatbelt tensioners are triggered in all cases. 

As of crash severity CS 2, the driver's/front passenger's airbag as well as the seatbelt ten¬ 
sioners are triggered. The safety battery terminal is activated, the electric fuel pump is 
switched off, and an emergency call is placed if a correspondingly prepared telephone is 
present in the vehicle. 

In the US version, the knee airbags are also triggered. 

Side-on collision 

In the event of a side-on collision, a crash severity distinction is made between medium and 
severe collisions. 

As of crash severity of CS 2 (medium collision), the side airbag is triggered on the impact 
side. In the event of crash severity CS 3 (severe collision), the safety battery terminal is also 
activated, the electric fuel pump is switched off, and an emergency call is placed if a cor¬ 
respondingly prepared telephone is present in the vehicle. 

Rear crash 

As of crash severity CS 2 (medium collision), the seatbelt tensioners are triggered. 

In the event of crash severity CS 3 (severe collision), the safety battery terminal is also trig¬ 
gered, the electric fuel pump is switched off, and an emergency call is placed if a corre¬ 
spondingly prepared telephone is present in the vehicle. 

Knee Airbag 

In the event of a crash of sufficient severity, the gas generator is ignited. The escaping gas 
fills the airbag, which tears open the cover of the knee airbag so that the airbag can 
emerge. 

The airbag spreads out beneath the steering column and/or in front of the glove compart¬ 
ment and cushions the lower thighs of the occupant. 

The support of the lower thighs initiates a controlled forward shift of the upper body, which 
is cushioned by the driver or passenger airbag. 

The knee airbags can only be seen by the lettering "AIRBAG" on the cover of the airbag 
module as well as on the cable connection for the airbag module. 


20 

Advanced Safety Electronics 




Block Diagram Battery Cable Monitoring 

G Generator 
M Starter 

1. Battery Cable 

2. Monitoring Shield 

3. Battery Safety Terminal BST 

4. Battery 

SBSL Left B-Pillar Satellite 
SBSR Right B-Pillar Satellite 
up Microprocessor 


Battery Cable Monitoring 

The battery cable is diagnosed by a special circuit between the SBSL and SBSR satellites. 

The battery cable diagnosis takes place across the low impedance shield of the battery 
cable (monitoring shield). The monitoring shield monitors the state of the battery cable 
as follows: 

There are connections to the left B-pillar satellite and the right B-pillar satellite at both ends 
of the shield. This means that there is usually the same voltage at the 
analog/digital converters in the satellites. If the voltages differ, there is a fault. 

The monitoring shield consists of a low-impedance metal mesh. A connection cable exits 
from each end of the monitoring shield (at the safety battery terminal in the luggage com¬ 
partment and at the battery earth point in the engine compartment). 

The connection at the safety battery terminal in the luggage compartment is connected to 
the right B-pillar satellite. The second connection cable in the engine compartment is con¬ 
nected to the left B-pillar satellite. 

The satellites contain analog/digital converters that are connected to the microprocessor of 
the satellite. The connection cables of the battery cable diagnosis are connected to the A/D 
converters. 

The right B-pillar satellite contains a pull-up resistor. 

The left B-pillar satellite contains a pull-down resistor of the same size. 

The voltage supply of the satellite (approx. 10 V) is applied at the pull-up resistor. Ground 
is applied at the pull-down resistor. 

The very low-impedance cable and the resistors of the same size mean that around half the 
voltage (approx. 5 V) is applied at the A/D converters. 


21 

Advanced Safety Electronics 




Every 250 [js, the values are measured, triggered by the synchronization pulse. If the bat¬ 
tery cable is OK, the values are transferred every 20 ms to the SIM. If a significant deviation 
of the values occurs, the new values are transferred immediately. 

In the following cases, the battery cable is cut off by the safety battery terminal from the 
battery and the alternator is switched off: 

• Short circuit to ground (body) 

• Short to battery positive 

If the outer insulation is damaged (e.g. due to friction/scuffing), but the monitoring shield 
has no connection toground, the following case could occur: 

Moisture (rain) would mean that the voltage would gradually fall. A short circuit to ground 
would be detected, but the safety battery terminal would not be triggered. 

The entry "Implausible measured value" is set in the fault code memory. This would be indi¬ 
cated to the driver by the airbag warning lamp. 


State 

Measured Value 

SBSL 

Measured Value 

SBSR 

Battery Cable OK 

5V 

5V 

Interuption of the diagnostic connection 

OV 

10V 

Short circuit to ground 

OV 

OV 

Short to B+ 

12v 

12v 


Service Notes 


The following must be observed by Service: 

• Battery cable diagnosis 

• Safety battery terminal 

• Airbag warning lamp 

Battery cable diagnosis 

If the shielding of the battery cable is damaged, the battery cable must be replaced com¬ 
pletely. It is not permitted to repair the shielding. 

Safety battery terminal 

If the safety battery terminal is activated, the battery cable must be replaced completely. 
Repair is not intended. 

Airbag warning lamp 

If there is a fault and the airbag warning lamp is switched on, the mileage is also docu¬ 
mented in the fault code memory in the instrument cluster. 

A mileage reading that has been entered can not be overwritten. For this reason, in the case 
of an airbag fault, the fault code memory in the instrument cluster must also be 
checked and deleted. 


22 

Advanced Safety Electronics 













Review Questions 


1. The byteflight system is a arranged as a structure. 

2. What advantages does the byteflight fiber optic system offer over a copper wired bus 
system. 

3. What functions does the SIM perform ? 

4. What is the purpose of the STVLYSTVR Satellites? 

5. What conditions must be met for the airbag switch to activate or deactivate the airbags? 

6. Which airbags are activated/deactivated by the airbag switch? 

7. What component supplies the voltage to the battery monitoring cable in the trunk? 

8. Damage to ONLY the outer insulation of the monitored battery cable would result in 
what action being taken at the BST? 

9. When must the monitored battery cable be replaced? 

10. How is the ASE warning light in the Instrument cluster turned off? 


23 

Advanced Safety Electronics 



