Table of Contents 

Central Body Electronics 

Subject Page 

Central Body Electronics .5 

Introduction .5 

General Module V (GM V).5 

Power Windows.7 

Purpose of the System.7 

Components.7 

Door Locks with Hall-Effect Sensors.7 

General Module 5.8 

Power-Window Switches .8 

Window Regulator .8 

Central Locking System .9 

Purpose of the System.9 

New System Features.9 

Components.10 

General Module .11 

Driver's-Door Lock.11 

Central Locking Servo Units.11 

Storage Compartment .11 

Fuel Filler Flap.12 

Trunk Lock.12 

Emergency Trunk Release .13 

Power Seat.13 

Purpose of the System.13 

System Overview Seat adjustment .13 

Seat Heating.14 

Wiper System.14 

Purpose of the System.14 

Components.15 

Rain/Light Sensor.15 


Initial Print Date: 08/02 


Revision Date: 
































Subject Page 

Fully Automatic Soft-Top .17 

CVM4.17 

Purpose of the System.17 

Fully Automatic Soft-Top Components.17 

CVM 4 .18 

Soft-top Position Sensors.19 

Windshield Top-Rail Lock.19 

Lock Servo Unit .19 

Hydraulic Pump .19 

Soft-Top Relays .20 

Stowage Compartment Switch.20 

General Module V.20 

Instrument Cluster .20 

Heater Control Panel .20 

Rear Window Heater .20 

Soft-Top Control Buttons .21 

Principle of Operation.21 

Note for Service .24 

Diagnosis .24 

Faults on peripheral systems .25 

Status signals from Soft-top module 4.25 

General module 5 window regulator safety function .25 

Manual Soft-Top.25 

Components of Manual Soft-Top .26 

Manual Soft-Top System Functions .26 

Hardtop Detection .26 

Button Lock for Manual Soft-Top .26 

Hardtop.27 

Hardtop Components.27 

Hardtop System Functions.27 

Electronic vehicle immobilizer.27 

Purpose of the System.27 

Antitheft alarm system .28 

Purpose of the System.28 

New System Features.28 

Disabling Interior Movement Detector and Tilt Sensor.28 

System Overview .28 

System Functions.29 

Emergency Trunk Release .29 










































Subject Page 

Park Distance Control.29 

Introduction .29 

System Overview .29 

Central Body Electrical System.29 

Introduction .29 

Changes compared to E46.30 

System Functions.30 

Diagnosis .31 

Door mirrors.32 

Introduction .32 

New system features .32 

System overview.32 

Components.32 

Lights .33 

Headlights .33 

System overview.33 

Front Light Clusters .35 

Rear light clusters.35 

Rear/brake light .35 

Brake Force Display.36 

Sidemarker Lights .36 

Bi-xenon Headlights.36 

Light switch center.36 

Rain/light sensor (RLS).37 

Interior lights .38 

Changes Compared to E46 .39 


Review Questions 


40 






























Model: E85 

Production: Start of Production MY 2003 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you should be able to: 

• Understand the Lay-out of the Central Body Electronics System. 

• Locate the components of the major systems of ZKE. 

• Know the operation of the Soft-Top. 


4 




Central Body Electronics 

Introduction 

The central body electronics of the E85 are based to a large degree on the central body 
electronics of the E46. 

General Module V (GM V) 

New features of the GM V include: 

• A more powerful processor 

• 2 outputs for switching off electrical equipment (VA1 and VA2) 

• Pulse-width modulated output for the interior lighting 

Central locking system 

• The glove compartment is not integrated in the central locking system 

• The storage compartment is integrated in the central locking system 

• The Low lock is fitted on the driver's side 

• The contact for the hotel setting (trunk lock barrel) is not fitted 

Seat adjustment/memory functions 

• The memory functions are only available for the driver's seat 

Soft-top module (CVM) 4 

• The enable signal for relay 2 for activating the rear window heater is generated by the 
Soft-top module 4. 

• The soft-top position is only detected at the limits of movement in either direction. 

Antitheft alarm system 

• Operation of the trunk emergency release sets off the alarm if the anti-theft alarm 
system is armed. 

Temperature switch 

• The temperature switch is located at the front on the left under the cover on the vehicle 
underbody. 


5 

Central Body Electronics 




1 . 

Drivers Door Mirror 

15. Remote Control 

29. Passenger Door Mirror 

2. 

Drivers Central Lock Servo 

16. Seat Module 

30. Passenger Central Lock Servo 

3. 

Lock Assembly Drivers Side 

17. Air Conditioning 

31. Passenger Door Switch 

4. 

Drivers Door Switch 

18. Soft Top Module CVM4 

32. Passenger Window Regulator 

5. 

Drivers Window Regulator 

19. EWS 

33. Alarm LED 

6. 

Drivers Window Switch Assy. 

20. LSZ 

34. Storage Compartment Servo 

7. 

Hood Contact 

21. GMV 

35. Footwell Light 

8. 

Alarm Switch 

22. Instrument Cluster 

36. Footwell Light 

9. 

Trunk Release Button 

23. Windshield Washer Pump 

37. Interior Light Assembly 

10 . 

Tilt Sensor 

24. Headlight Washer Pump 

38. Storage Compartment Light 

117 

Siren 

25. Wash-Wipe System 

39. Storage Compartment Light 

12. 

SDR (Not Used in USA) 

26. Washer Relay 

40. Trunk Light 

13. 

Central Lock Button 

27. Twin Wiper Relay Module 

41. Fuel Filler Cap Servo 

14. 

Steering Column Switch 

28. Passenger Window Switch 

42. Trunk Lock Servo 


6 

Central Body Electronics 










Power Windows 


Purpose of the System 

The function of the power windows is based on the function of those fitted on the E46 con¬ 
vertible. 


1. Driver’s Side Switch 

2. Passenger Side Switch 

3. Driver’s Side Door Switch 

4. Passenger Side Switch 

5. GM 5 

6. Passenger Side Window Regulator 

7. Driver’s Side Window Regulator 



Components 

The system consists of the following components: 

• Door locks with Hall-effect sensors 

• General module 5 

• Power window switches 

• Window regulator motors 

Door Locks with Hall-Effect Sensors 


The door locks each contain a Hall-effect sensor for detecting the door position. In addi¬ 
tion, there are two Hall-effect sensors in the driver's door which monitor the position of the 
lock barrel. 

The Hall-effect sensors signal to the general module 5 that one of the doors is being 
opened, for example. The general module 5 briefly lowers the window in the door con¬ 
cerned. The window has to be lowered in order that the door can be opened. 


General Module 5 


7 

Central Body Electronics 




The General Module is attached to the lower trim behind the glove compartment. The gen¬ 
eral module controls the powerwindow functions. It receives the input signals from the door 
locks and the switch units, and monitors the power consumption of the electric motors that 
drive the window regulator mechanisms. 

The E85 has no anti-trap function available. Consequently, one-touch closing on the pas¬ 
senger side is not allowed. One-touch closing on the driver's side is possible at key posi¬ 
tions starting from terminal 15. 

One-touch opening is possible at key positions starting from terminal 15 on the driver's and 
passenger sides. 


Power-Window Switches 



The power-window switches are integrated in the arm rests of the door trim panels. The dri- 
ver's-side power-window switch unit also incorporates a switch for the passenger-side win¬ 
dow, the buttons for the door mirrors and the mirror folding button. 

Each power-window switch has four positions. Those positions trigger different functions 
depending on country-specific variations and the programming of the general module. The 
passenger-side power-window switch also has four positions. 

Window Regulator 

The window regulator mechanisms are cable operated. The drive motor is not monitored 
by Hall-effect sensors. 


Central Locking System 

8 

Central Body Electronics 







Purpose of the System 


The central locking system function is based to a large extent on the function of the sys¬ 
tem on the E46. 

New System Features 

• The storage compartment is integrated in the central locking system function. 

• The glove compartment is not operated by the central locking system. 

• The trunk lock does not have a hotel setting switch that operates in conjunction with the 
lock barrel. It is locked by means of a cable mechanism. 

• The driver's door lock is the Low lock from the E65. 

• The Easy Open/Close function cannot be activated with the remote control. 


1. Trunk Release Button 

2. Driver’s Door Lock 

3. Central Lock Button 

4. DWA deactivation Button 

5. Remote Control Receiver 

6. Driver’s Door Switch 

7. Passenger Door Switch 

8. GM 5 

9. Driver’s Door Lock Motor 

10. Passenger Door Lock Motor 

11. Fuel Filler Flap Actuator 

12. Storage Compartment Actuator 

13. Trunk Actuator 



Components 


9 

Central Body Electronics 




The system consists of the following components: 

• General module 5 

• Driver's door lock 

• Central locking servo unit, driver's side 

• Central locking servo unit, passenger side 

• Central locking servo unit, storage compartment 

• Central locking servo unit, fuel filler 

• Central locking servo unit, trunk 

• Trunk lock switch for "deactivating" the anti-theft alarm system 

• Trunk release button in passenger compartment 

• Centerlock button 

• Remote control receiver in rear-view mirror base 

General Module 



E46 lock: E46 Driver’s door lock barrel 



E85 lock (Low lock) 


0: Center position 

1: Hall effect sensor 1 (SNU 1) 

3: Mechanical lock/unlock 


0: Center position 
1: Hall-effect sensor 1 (SNU 1) 
2: Hall-effect sensor 2 (SNU 2) 
3: Mechanical lock/unlock 




E46 Signal 

1: Hall-effect sensor 1 (SNU 1) 
50 ms 


1: Hall-effect sensor 1 (SNU 1) 
2: Hall-effect sensor 2 (SNU 2) 
2 to 1000ms 


10 

Central Body Electronics 






The General Module controls the central locking functions on the E85. 

Driver's-Door Lock 

The driver's door lock on the E85 is an Low lock. The same lock was previously fitted as a 
Low lock on the E66. Compared with the lock used on the E46, this unit incorporates two 
Hall-effect sensors. The general module analysis the signals from those sensors and 
locks/thief-proofs or unlocks the vehicle accordingly. 

The order of the signals determines how they are interpreted, i.e. as lock/thiefproof or 
unlock. By the use of two Hall-effect sensors and the intelligent analysis of their signals, 
errors when locking/thiefproofing or unlocking the vehicle are prevented. 

Detection of a rising edge starts a counter which is stopped again as soon as both signals 
(SNU 1 and SNU 2) are present. Within a valid time window, the request to lock/thiefproof 
or unlock is set. As long as the key is held in the turned position, the request to lock/thief¬ 
proof or unlock remains valid. If either of the two signals (SNU 1 or SNU 2) is lost, the 
request is reset again. 

Central Locking Servo Units 

The door lock is a single unit. That unit incorporates the servo motor, the door lock mech¬ 
anism and the Hall-effect sensors. 



Storage Compartment 


The storage compartment is integrated in the central locking system and can be 
locked/unlocked using the remote control, the driver's-door lock or the Centerlock button. 
Inside the trunk on the bulkhead there is an emergency release. 

The storage compartment is between the passenger seat and the driver's seat in the bulk¬ 
head trim. 


11 

Central Body Electronics 





1. Trunk Lock 2. Cable 1. Storage Compartment Locking Servo 

3. Trunk Lock Barrel 4. Emergency Release Handle 2. Storage Compartment Retainer 

5. Cable for Emergency Trunk Release 


Fuel Filler Flap 

The fuel filler flap is incorporated in the central locking system. There is an emergency 
release for the fuel filler flap inside the trunk on the right side under the trunk lining. 

Trunk Lock 

The trunk lock and lock barrel are identical with those on the E46. The difference between 
the E85 and the E46 is the linkage between the lock and the lock barrel. Instead of a rod 
linkage, a cable is used. The lock is released (manually) by a cable mechanism operated 
by the key. The switch for the anti-theft alarm system is incorporated in the lock barrel. 

The trunk lock can be operated manually or electrically. The Basic module 5 controls the 
motor in the trunk lock by means of the "Trunk lock, motor unlock" signal. The locking pawl 
is moved to the release position by the drive pin. The locking pawl releases the latch 
which can then rotate into the disengaged position by the action of the tension spring. The 
trunk can then be opened. The locking pawl releases the microswitch button from the 
depressed position. The microswitch switches the trunk light on. 

The trunk can be unlocked from the lock barrel. The trunk lock can be unlocked by means 
of a cable operated by the lock barrel. 

The locking pawl is pulled to the release position by the cable. The locking pawl releases 
the latch which can then rotate into the disengaged position by the action of the tension 
spring. The trunk can then be opened. 


Emergency Trunk Release 

12 

Central Body Electronics 





The emergency trunk release operates in a similar manner to the mechanical method using 
the key. The only difference is the actuating device. 

A person locked inside the trunk can pull the release handle on the inside of the trunk (see 
illustration KT-10297). The handle is connected to a release cable. Pulling the release han¬ 
dle releases the trunk lock in a similar manner to the preceding description (mechanical 
method) so that the trunk can be opened. 

Power Seat 

Purpose of the System 

The seat adjustment and memory functions are based to a large degree on those on the 
E46. The memory functions are only available for the driver's seat. 

System Overview Seat adjustment 




1. Driver’s Seat Adjustment Controls 

2. Driver’s Seat Module 

3. Driver’s Seat Adjustment 

4. Passenger Seat Adjustment Controls 

5. Passenger Seat Adjustment 



Seat Heating 


13 

Central Body Electronics 



The seat heating functions are based on those on the E46. The seat heater is activated and 
controlled by means of the seat heater button integrated in the centre console. 



Seat Heating 


1. Fuse Box 

2. Passenger Seat Heating Switch 

3. Passenger Seat Backrest Heater 

4. Passenger Seat Heater 

5. Driver Seat Heating Switch 

6. Driver’s Seat Backrest Heater 

7. Driver’s Seat Heater 



Wiper System 

1. Wiper Motor 

2. Wiper Switch 

3. Light Switch Center 

4. DSC 

5. RLS 

6. GM5 

7. Wiper Twin-Relay Module 

8. Wipe-wash system 

9. Windshield Washer Relay 

10. Windshield Washer Pump 

11. Left Washer Jet 

12. Right Washer Jet 

13. Headlight Washer Relay 

14. Headlight Washing Pump 

15. Left Headlight Washer 

16. Right Headlight Washer 


Wiper System 

Purpose of the System 

The function of the wash-wipe system is based on that of the E46 wash-wipe system. 


Components 


14 

Central Body Electronics 





The Wiper system consists of the following components: 

• Windscreen washer system 

• Steering-column switch 

• Rain/light sensor 

• Headlight washer system 


Rain/Light Sensor 



1. DSC 

2. RLS 

3. Wiper Motor 

4. Twin Relay Module 

5. Relay for Headlight Washer 

6. Pump for Headlight Washer 

7. Windshield Washer Pump 

8. GMV 

KI.30 Terminal 30 
K-Bus Body Bus 
PT-CAN Powertrain CAN 


A rain/light sensor is available as an option on the E85. The headlights are switched on/off 
automatically by the rain/light sensor according to the ambient light conditions. The 
rain/light sensor detects the presence of water on the windscreen and switches the wind¬ 
screen wiper on and off accordingly. 

The rain/light sensor is fitted in the base of the rear-view mirror and it consists of optical 
sensors. The RLS has 2 optical sensors integrated in the casing of the automatic interval 
control module. The 2 new sensors supplement the otherwise unchanged wiper interval 
control function of the automatic interval control module as follows: 

• An ambient-light sensor detects the light intensity above the vehicle within a wide 


15 

Central Body Electronics 





scanning angle. 

• A forward light sensor detects the light intensity within a narrow scanning angle 
directly ahead of the vehicle. 

An internal processor calculates from the readings taken by the ambient and forward light 
sensors whether the preconditions for switching on the lights are present. 

The RLS checks the following preconditions for switching on the headlights: 

- Twilight 

- Complete darkness 

- Entry in underground car park 

- Entry in tunnel 

If any of the above conditions is met, the rain/light sensor on the E85 sends the informa¬ 
tion via the K-bus to the light switch centre. In order to be able to control the headlights 
automatically, the rain/light sensor must be activated by a separate light switch setting on 
the light switch centre. 

If the light switch on the light switch centre has been set to the position for automatic con¬ 
trol of the headlights, the exterior/instrument panel lights are switched on by the light switch 
centre. The preconditions for switching on the lights are as follows: 

- One of the rain/light sensor conditions listed above is met. 

- The fog lamps are switched on. 

Note: 

If the above conditions exist, the lights can only be switched off by switching off 
the fog lamps. In addition, the lights are switched on if any of the following faults 
occur: 

- The rain/light sensor detects a sensor fault. 

- There is a fault in communication between the rain/light sensor and the light 
switch centre. 

The following lights are controlled by the light switch centre: 

- If terminal R is "ON," the side lights, the number-plate light and the instrument panel 
lights are switched on. 

- If terminal 15 is "ON," the dipped-beam headlights are also switched on. If only the 
side lights are required at that setting, the switch on the light switch centre must be 
manually set to Side lights "ON." 

- When the ignition switch is at position "0," the exterior/instrument panel lights are 
switched off. 

The switching thresholds of the rain/light sensor can be set to 2 different levels using the 
Car Memory function. 


Safety note: 

16 

Central Body Electronics 



Automatic control of the headlights is not a substitute for individual assessment of the 
light/visibility conditions (e.g. fog) by the driver. In order to avoid safety risks in such situa¬ 
tions, the lights must be switched on manually by the driver. 

The rain sensor controls the windscreen wiper interval in rain or snow. 

Note: 

If the wiper switch is set to intermittent wipe, the activation condition is detected 
above a certain wiper frequency. When the vehicle leaves the factory, that wiper 
frequency is set to 15 wiper cycles per minute. The sensitivity of the rain sensor 
can be set to four different levels using the knurled adjuster on the wiper switch. 

Fully Automatic Soft-Top 

CVM4 

Purpose of the System 

The E85 will be available with a manual or an electro-hydraulic soft-top. On vehicles with 
the electro-hydraulic soft-top, the Soft-top module IV will be fitted. There will also be a hard¬ 
top for the E85. 

The system has the following predecessor systems: 


Predecessor Systems Series 


Model 


Dates 


Soft-top Module 1 

E36 

Convertible 

1995-3/2000 

Soft-top Module 2 

E46C 

Convertible 

03/2000 to present 

Soft-top Module 3 

E52 

Z8 

03/2000 to present 


Fully Automatic Soft-Top Components 


The system consists of the following components: 

• Fully automatic soft-top 

• Soft-top module 4 (CVM4) 

• Hall-effect sensors (2) for Soft-top position 

• Hall-effect sensors (2) for Windshield Rail lock position 

• Locking servo unit, front 

• Hydraulic pump 

• Hydraulic pump relays (2) 

• Left (hardtop detection) and right hardtop locating socket contacts 

• Microswitch for variable-size soft-top stowage compartment 

• General module 5 

• Instrument cluster 

• Heater control panel 


17 

Central Body Electronics 



























1. Soft-Top Control Panel 

2. Windshield Rail Hall-Effect Sensors 

3. Hardtop Detectors 

4. Soft-Top Position Sensors 

5. Storage Compartment Microswitch 

6. Instrument Cluster 

7. Temperature Sensor 

8. Drivers Door Lock 

9. CVM 4 

10. Heater Control Panel 

11. Relay 1 For Heated Rear Window 

12. Relay 2 For Heated Rear Window 

13. Rear Window Heater 

14. Down Relay for Soft-Top Pump 

15. Up Relay for Soft-Top Pump 

16. Hydraulic Pump 

17. Windshield Rail Lock 

18. GM V 

19. Drivers Window Regulator 

20. Passenger Window Regulator 



• Relay 1 for rear window heater 

• Relay 2 for rear window heater 

• Rear window heater 

• Soft-top control button with LED (for soft-top DOWN) 

• Soft-top control button with LED (for soft-top UP) 


CVM 4 



The Soft-top module controls and monitors the 
hydraulic and electrical positioning and locking 
systems of the soft-top. In addition, it registers 
the position of the soft-top and records any faults 
that occur. 

The Soft-top module IV is located behind the dri¬ 
ver's seat and underneath the top part of 
side trim panel. 


Soft-top Position Sensors 

18 

Central Body Electronics 









The Hall-effect sensors detect the soft-top 
position when it is fully raised or fully lowered 
into the stowage compartment. The two sen¬ 
sors are fitted to the left-hand main pillar. 
Hall-effect sensor 1 signals to the Soft-top 
module 4 that the fully automatic soft-top is in 
the fully raised position. Hall-effect sensor 2 
signals to the Soft-top module 4 that the fully 
automatic soft-top is in the fully lowered posi¬ 
tion in the stowage compartment. 



Windshield Top-Rail Lock 

The Hall-effect sensors (2) on the wind¬ 
screen top-rail locking mechanism sig¬ 
nal the position of the locking latches. 
They are located on the left-hand lock¬ 
ing mechanism on the front roof bow of 
the fully automatic soft-top. 


Lock Servo Unit 

The lock servo unit locks and unlocks 
the windscreentop-rail lock. The lock 
servo unit is positioned centrally on the 
front roof bow of the fully automatic 
soft-top. 


Hydraulic Pump 

The hydraulic pump generates the nec¬ 
essary pressure for the hydraulic piston 
to move the soft-top. The hydraulic 
pump is part of the hydraulic servo unit 
on the left main bearing of the fully auto¬ 
matic soft-top. 





Soft-Top Relays 


19 

Central Body Electronics 








The relays control the hydraulic pump for raising/lowering the soft-top. The relays are fit¬ 
ted behind the passenger airbag. The relays (colour: pink) for the hydraulic pump are 
plugged into a relay panel on the K-bus junction box. The junction box is located behind 
the glove compartment and the passenger airbag. 

Stowage Compartment Switch 

The microswitch signals to the Soft-top module 4 that the stowage compartment base is 
at its lowest position. That signal is one of the preconditions for lowering the soft-top. 

The microswitch is located inside the trunk. The microswitch is fitted inside the trunk on 
the positioning mechanism (in the centre of the trunk bulkhead) for the stowage compart¬ 
ment base. 

General Module V 

The GM V controls the function of the window regulators when the fully automatic soft-top 
is being raised or lowered. 

Instrument Cluster 

The instrument cluster calculates the vehicle road speed and the outside temperature from 
the information supplied by the sensors (wheel-speed and outside-temperature sensors). 
The vehicle road speed and the outside temperature are placed on the K-bus where they 
can be read by the Soft-top module 4. 

The vehicle road speed and the outside temperature are among the preconditions for 
enabling raising/lowering of the soft-top. 

Heater Control Panel 

The heater control panel receives the enable signal for the rear window heater and switch¬ 
es the rear window heater on. 

The button for the rear window heater is integrated in the heater control panel. The heater 
control panel receives the enable signal for relay 2 for the rear window heater. For details of 
the operation of the rear window heater, refer to the section "System functions" in this doc¬ 
ument. 

Rear Window Heater 

The rear window heater is supplied with power via relay 1 and relay 2 and is switched on 
by the rear window heater button. Relays 1 and 2 for the rear window heater pick up, there¬ 
by connecting the rear window heater to terminal 30. Relay 2 must have been enabled. 

Soft-Top Control Buttons 


20 

Central Body Electronics 



The soft-top control buttons are fitted in the center con¬ 
sole. 

The soft-top control buttons are make-switches that con¬ 
nect to ground. The Soft-top module 4 controls the soft- 
top UP or DOWN movement. 


Principle of Operation 

The Soft-top module IV controls the raising and lowering of the electro-hydraulic soft-top in 
response to the commands from the soft-top control buttons. 

Preconditions for raising/lowering that are detected directly by the Soft-top module IV: 

• Hall-effect sensor 1 for the windscreen top-rail lock signals that the windscreen top-rail 
lock is disengaged (soft-top unlocked) 

• Hall-effect sensor 2 for the windscreen top-rail lock signals that the windscreen top-rail 
lock is engaged (soft-top locked), 

• The Hall-effect sensor (for soft-top raised) on the hinge of the main pillar signals that the 
soft-top is raised, or 

• The Hall-effect sensor (for soft-top lowered) on the hinge of the main pillar signals that 
the soft-top is stowed in the stowage compartment 

• The hardtop detector signals that no hardtop is fitted 

• The microswitch of the variable-size stowage compartment indicates that the stowage 
compartment base it at its lowest position 

• The Soft-top module IV has not detected any faults on the system as a whole during its 
internal system test 

Other conditions that are detected indirectly by the Soft-top module IV: 

• Ignition key at position R at least 

• Window not closed 

• Vehicle stationary (road speed < 4 km/h) 

• No short circuit and no circuit break present 

• Outside temperature is not below the limit of approx. -20 °C 

• Soft-top button pressed 

The Soft-top module IV exchanges information via the K-bus. The Soft-top module IV mon¬ 
itors the Hall-effect sensors for plausibility of the signals and correct function. There are 2 
Hall-effect sensors fitted to the hinge of the main pillar. There are 2 Hall-effect sensors on 
the front roof bow of the electrohydraulic soft-top. 

Response to high/low voltage 



21 

Central Body Electronics 







The voltage range of the Soft-top module IV is 9 V to 16 V. 

Method of operation of soft-top stowage compartment lock 

The soft-top stowage compartment lock holds the soft-top in place when it is fully stowed 
in the compartment. When the softtop is raised, it locks onto the windscreen top rail. 

Operation of soft-top stowage compartment lock when lowering soft-top 

When the electro-hydraulic soft-top is fully lowered into the stowage compartment it is 
automatically locked in position. This is effected by the electro-hydraulic soft-top being low¬ 
ered to a position in the stowage compartment where the mechanical locking mechanism 
engages. 

The Hall-effect sensor on the hinge of the right-hand main pillar signals to the Soft-top mod¬ 
ule IV that the electrohydraulic soft-top is in the fully lowered (stowed) position. The 
locking latches on the electro-hydraulic soft-top are then also engaged. The locking latch¬ 
es are controlled by the Soft-top module IV. 

When the electro-hydraulic soft-top is in the fully lowered (stowed) position, the Soft-top 
module IV switches the hydraulic pump off. The relay is switched off by virtue of the fact 
that it is no longer enabled by the Soft-top module IV. 

The electro-hydraulic soft-top is now fully lowered into the stowage compartment. 

Operation of soft-top stowage compartment lock when raising soft-top 

When the electro-hydraulic soft-top is raised, the stowage compartment catch is released, 
the locking latches disengaged and the soft-top raised out of the stowage compartment. 
On the windscreen top-rail, the locking latches engage and lock the electro-hydraulic soft- 
top in position. 

Operation of soft-top stowage compartment lock 

The soft-top stowage compartment lock mechanism engages the latches of the fully auto¬ 
matic soft-top when it is fully lowered into the stowage compartment.When the fully auto¬ 
matic soft-top is raised, the latches are engaged in the windscreen top rail. 

The fully automatic soft-top is now fully lowered into the stowage 

Operation of soft-top control buttons 

The soft-top control buttons for controlling the soft-top UP and DOWN actions are switch¬ 
es that connect to ground. Closing the connection to ground signals to the Soft-top mod¬ 
ule 4 that raising or lowering of the fully automatic soft-top has been requested. 

Operation of Hall-effect sensors 

The Hall-effect sensors signal the position (LOCKED or UNLOCKED) of the locking latches 
to the Soft-top module 4. 


Operation of soft-top Relays 

22 

Central Body Electronics 



The Soft-top module 4 controls the relays. The 2 relays for the hydraulic pump are con¬ 
trolled as required (for raising or lowering soft-top) by the Soft-top module 4. 

The relays are wired in such a way that the hydraulic pump action is reversible. The relays 
are controlled by the Soft-top module 4 via Highside switches. On a High-side switch, the 
transistor connects positive through. 


Soft-top latch for locking to windscreen top rail 

The locking latches are closed when they locate in the windscreen top rail. The left and 
right locking latches are closed when they locate in the windscreen top rail. The rotation of 
the DC motor is transmitted to spindles. The spindles drive linkages. The action of the link¬ 
ages is transmitted to the locking latches. The locking latches lock/unlock the fully auto¬ 
matic soft-top to/from the windscreen top rail. 

The position of the locking latches is detected by Hall-effect sensors 1 and 2 

Microswitch for variable-size soft-top stowage compartment 

The microswitch signals to the Soft-top module 4 that the stowage compartment base is 
at its lowest position. The Soft-top module 4 is informed by the microswitch that the mov¬ 
able stowage compartment base is at its lowest position. The microswitch is a make-switch 
that connects to earth. 

GM5 

The general module 5 opens or closes the windows on instruction from the Soft-top mod¬ 
ule 4. The general module 5 stores the current status of trunk and window position. The 
general module 5 places the following information on the K-bus when it starts up: 

• Current status of trunk and windows 

• Changes to current status of trunk and windows 

Examples of current status information are: 

• Window closed; window open, 

• Trunk closed; trunk open. 

(The signal for the trunk status is present but is not required by the Soft-top module 4) 

The general module 5 receives the control commands for raising and lowering the windows 
from the Soft-top module 4. The Soft-top module 4 sends the control commands via the 
body electronics bus before and after raising/lowering the soft-top. The precondition for 
lowering the windows is that at least one window is closed. 

If the windows are already open before the soft-top is raised/lowered, and if one of the two 
soft-top control buttons remains pressed (2 s) after the soft-top has been fully raised/low¬ 
ered, the windows are closed. Closing of the windows is stopped as soon as either of the 
softtop control buttons is released or the window mechanism detects that the window is 
closed (at limit of movement). 

Soft-top stowage compartment lock 


23 

Central Body Electronics 



The locking latches are closed when the soft-top is stowed in the stowage compartment 
and the soft-top locked in position. As soon as the fully automatic soft-top is stowed in the 
stowage compartment, the locking latches close. 

Note for Service 

Soft-top module IV time-out function 

If the soft-top control button remains pressed after the soft-top has stopped moving, the 
Soft-top module IV detects a fault. The fault is interpreted as "Short to ground on soft-top 
button or one of the leads" and the fault is recorded in the Soft-top module fault memory. 
However, the electro-hydraulic soft-top can still be moved to a safe parked position using 
the other soft-top control button/ lead, which is still functioning. If the button is released 
while the soft-top is still in motion, the soft-top is stopped (safety function). 

Once the fault has been rectified and terminal R switch off and on again, the electro- 
hydraulic soft-top can be controlled by the soft-top button again. 

Diagnosis 

The diagnostic functions of the Soft-top module IV are to a large degree identical with those 
on the E46. However, fewer signals are analyzed on the E85 than on the E46 because there 
are fewer components on the E85. 

Soft-top module 4 internal check 

The internal functions of the Soft-top module 4 are checked under the following circum¬ 
stances: 

• When the power is switched on 

• When terminal R is ON 

• Before the soft-top is raised/lowered 

If a system fault is detected, movement of the soft-top is stopped immediately. The fault 
detected is recorded in the fault memory of the Soft-top module 4. If the nature of the fault 
allows, the soft-top can be moved to the nearest safe parked position using one of the soft- 
top control buttons. 

Control button for raising soft-top 

A short circuit on the control button for raising the soft-top would raise the soft-top. The 
soft-top can still be moved to a safe parked position using the functioning control button 
for lowering the soft-top. 

Control button for lowering soft-top 

A short circuit on the control button for lowering the soft-top would lower the soft-top. To 
prevent the soft-top lowering, the functioning control button for raising the soft-top can be 
used to move the soft-top to a safe parked position. 

Electric locking system 

24 

Central Body Electronics 



The electric locking system is fitted with an overload protection circuit. The overload pro¬ 
tection circuit has a time-out function as well as the hardware systems. In the event of mis¬ 
use, e.g. while the soft-top is in motion, the time-out function disables the fully automatic 
soft-top function. After a certain time (when time-out has elapsed) the fully automatic soft- 
top function is restored. 

Faults on peripheral systems 

During the internal check and while the soft-top is being raised/lowered, the signals from 
peripheral systems are checked for plausibility. Those signals must be within the defined 
valid operating ranges. 

Examples of peripheral system signals are: 

• Outside temperature 

• Vehicle stationary signal 

• Signals from the fully automatic soft-top, etc. 

Storage of faults 

Faults are stored in the order in which they occur. The Soft-top module 4 has up to 16 
"fault storage locations" available in its fault memory. Each fault storage location has a fre 

Status signals from Soft-top module 4 

The Soft-top module 4 supplies the general module 5 and all other bus nodes with the cur¬ 
rent status signals. The Soft-top module 4 provides the following status signals: 


• Reset 

• Status request 

• Ready after reset 

General module 5 window regulator safety function 

The general module 5 stops the windows being closed immediately with the loss of the 
Close windows signal. 


Manual Soft-Top 
Components of Manual Soft-Top 



1. Hall-Effect Sensor for Relay 
enable Rear Window Heater 

2. GMV 

3. Heater Control Unit 

4. Relay 1 for Heated Window 

5. Relay 2 for Heated Window 

6. Rear Window Heater 


25 

Central Body Electronics 




The system consists of the following components: 

• Manual soft-top 

• General module 5 

• Heater control 

• Left and right hardtop locating socket contacts 

• Relay 1 for rear window heater 

• Relay 2 for rear window heater 

• Rear window heater 

• Hall-effect sensor for detecting when soft-top is raised and locked to the windscreen 
top rail (enable signal for relay 2) 

• Button lock for manual soft-top 

Manual Soft-Top System Functions 
Rear Window Heater 

The rear window heater cannot be switched on until the relay is enabled according to the 
enabling conditions. 

As with the hardtop, the rear window heater is switched on by the rear window heater but¬ 
ton. Relays 1 and 2 for the rear window heater pick up, thereby connecting the rear win¬ 
dow heater to terminal 30. Relay 2 must have been enabled. 

Relay enabling 

Relay 2 is enabled by the Basic module 5 which sends a message via the K-bus to the 
heater control panel. The general module 5 does not send that message unless the follow¬ 
ing preconditions are satisfied: 

• The Hall-effect sensor on the manual soft-top signals that the soft-top is raised and 
locked to the windscreen top rail. 

Hardtop Detection 

Hardtop detection prevents the soft-top being raised when the hardtop is fitted. 

When a hardtop is fitted, the right-hand hardtop locating socket contact is used to detect 
the presence of the hardtop. The hardtop's rear window heater is supplied with power via 
the left-hand hardtop locating socket contacts (right and left). 

Button Lock for Manual Soft-Top 

The button lock is integrated in the central locking system. 

When stowed in the stowage compartment, the soft-top is locked in place by a catch. That 
catch has to be released in order to raise the manual soft-top. The button at the top of the 
bulkhead trim is for releasing the catch. 


Hardtop 

26 

Central Body Electronics 




Hardtop Components 

The system consists of the following components: 

• Hardtop 

• Heater control 

• Left and right hardtop locating socket contacts 

• Relay 1 for rear window heater 

• Rear window heater 


Hardtop System Functions 
Rear Window Heater 

The rear window heater is switched on by the rear window heater button. The button is fit¬ 
ted in the heater control panel (centre console). The button is a make-switch that connects 
to earth; the LED lights up when the switch is on. 

Relay 1 for the rear window heater picks up, thereby connecting the right-hand hardtop 
locating socket contacts to terminal 30. When the hardtop is fitted, the left-hand hardtop 
locating socket contact is the input (terminal 30) of the rear window heater. The righthand 
hardtop locating socket contact is connected to earth. 

Note (Rear Window Heater Button): 


When the button is pressed in, the LED is always on, regardless of whether the 
rear window heater can actually be operated or not. 

Electronic vehicle immobilizer 


Purpose of the System 


The familiar version 3.3 electronic immobi¬ 
lizer is fitted on the E85. 


1. Clutch Switch Module 

2. DME 

3. Ignition Lock 

4. Instrument Cluster 

5. EWS Module 

6. DME 

7. Starter Motor Relay 

8. Starter Motor 

9. Transmission control Module 



27 

Central Body Electronics 






Antitheft alarm system 

Purpose of the System 

The anti-theft alarm system on the E85 is based on the system used on the E46. 

New System Features 
Disabling Tilt Sensor 

The tilt sensor are temporarily disabled under certain circumstances. 

Trunk Emergency Release 

If the trunk emergency release is operated from inside, the alarm is set off if the anti-theft 
alarm system is armed. 

System Overview 



i 



11 




1. Anti-Theft Alarm System LED 

2. Driver’s Door Switch 

3. Passenger Door Switch 

4. SDR (Not Used in USA) 

5. Tilt Sensor 

6. Trunk Lock Switch 

7. Trunk Lock Assembly 

8. Trunk Position Switch 

9. GMV 

10. Siren 


y 



■ i 



o 


28 

Central Body Electronics 



System Functions 
Disabling Tilt Sensor 

The the tilt sensor are temporarily disabled under the following circumstances: 

• For the first 30 seconds after the anti-theft alarm system is armed 

• Once the anti/theft alarm system has been armed, while either of the doors or the trunk 
is open (30-second inhibition period does not start until they are all closed) 

Emergency Trunk Release 

The trunk can be released from inside the trunk in an emergency. Operation of the trunk 
emergency release sets off the alarm if the anti-theft alarm system is armed. 

Park Distance Control 


Introduction 


The Park Distance Control system is familiar. On the E85, it is a 4-channel system. 


System Overview 






V- 

I 



1/4. 

Ultrasonic Transducers 

* 

5. 

PDC Control Unit 

6. 

Gong 


cm 

Central Body Electrical System 

Introduction 

This chapter describes the alterations to the central body electrical system (ZKE), "electri¬ 
cal consumer unit shutdown" (VA) and "sleep mode" as compared to the E46 electrical sys¬ 
tem. 


29 

Central Body Electronics 





Changes compared to E46 


Consumer unit shut-down 

There are 2 outputs for consumer unit shut-down. 

Sleep mode 

New conditions 

K-bus messages 

New messages 

System Functions 
Consumer Shut-Down 

The outputs VA1 and VA2 are available for consumer unit shut-down. The general module 
5 has been expanded. There is now a second output available for consumer unit shut-down 
(VA). The consumer unit shut-down function switches consumer units to Sleep mode after 
16 min. 

Consumer unit shut-down 1 (VA1) 

Consumer unit shut-down output 1 is factory-configured as a pulse-width modulated out¬ 
put. The consumer units connected to consumer unit shut-down output 1 are the 
following: 

• Storage compartment light 

• Trunk light 

• Reading lights 

In the event of an overload or short circuit, consumer unit shut-down output 1 is switched 
off by the general module 5 unless there is no load connected to the output (open load). 
Once switched off, the output is switched on again by terminal R "OFF/ ON" provided the 
fault (overload or short circuit) is no longer present. 

Consumer unit shut-down 2 (VA2) 

Consumer unit shut-down output 2 is available as a permanent general module 5 output. 
Consumer unit shut-down output 2 is overload and short-circuit proof. The consumer units 
connected to consumer unit shut-down output 2 are the following: 

• Illuminated shifting gate on centre console (USA version) 

• Sequential Manual Transmission control unit 

The permanent consumer unit shut-down output 2 is intended for electronic control units. 
The electrical control units require a permanent output as otherwise they would not be able 
to function. 


30 

Central Body Electronics 



Sleep Mode 

The preconditions for Sleep mode are the following: 

• Window regulators deactivated for 1 s 

• Consumer unit shut-down and interior lighting passive 

• Diagnostic mode not active 

• K-bus in Sleep mode 

• On "Goto Sleep Mode" signal after 1 s or within 30 s of the anti-theft alarm system being 
armed 

K-Bus Messages 

The K-Bus now contains messages that may be addressed to all or multiple control units. 

Diagnosis 

Consumer unit shut-down 

The diagnostic capabilities of the general module 5 have been extended. The general mod¬ 
ule 5 can distinguish between the following load conditions at the consumer unit shut-down 
outputs: 

• Overload 

• Short circuit 

• No load connected (open load) 

The various faults can be diagnosed. 

Consumer unit shut-down output 2 (VA2) is overload and short-circuit proof. An overload is 
detected by the general module 5. 


31 

Central Body Electronics 



Door mirrors 


Introduction 


The functions of the door mirrors on the E85 are largely the same as on the E46. 

Options offered on the E85 are electrochromatic mirrors, the mirror folding function and the 
winter package. 


New system features 

The temperature switch for the heated washer jets is at the front on the left under the cover 
on the vehicle underbody. 


System overview 

i 


Fuse Box 

Driver’s Switch Unit 
Drivers Door Mirror 
Passenger Switch Unit 
Passenger Door Mirror 
Temperature Switch 
Left Heated Washer Jet 
Right Heated Washer Jet 


f _ ~ 

•i 


Components 







The system consists of the following components: 

• Door mirrors on driver's side and passenger side 

• Mirror adjuster button, driver's side 

• Rear-view mirror (if electrochromatic option fitted) 

• Mirror folding module (Located at the base of the A pillar) 

• Mirror heater 

• Temperature switch 

• Heated washer jets 

• Temperature switch (switches on the heaters for the heated washer jets) 


32 

Central Body Electronics 



Lights 

Headlights 


The E85 headlights are fitted with halogen bulbs as standard for both the low and high 
beams. 

Bi-xenon bulbs are available as an option. If the bi-xenon option is fitted, a dynamic beam- 
height adjustment system is also fitted. Lighting configurations for the E 85 are as follows: 

• US version with halogen headlights without manual beam height adjustment 

• US version with dynamic beam-height adjustment and bi-xenon headlights 


The US versions also have two sidemarker LEDs. They are 
side sections of the rear bumper. 


System overview 






EH? 

a ft Wi 



foil oil o 


^ I J ]l 


1. 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 
11 . 
12 . 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18 . 

19. 

20 . 
21 . 
22 . 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 


integrated in the left and right 


Fuse Box 

Brake Light Switch 
Hazard Warning Switch 
RLS 
LSZ 

Bi-xenon Headlight 
Front Turn Signal 
Side Repeater 
Fog Light Relay 
Fog Light 
Fog Light 
Side Repeater 
Front Turn Signal 
Bi-xenon Headlight 
Rear Sidemarker 

Rear/Brake Light (Compartment 1) 
Rear/Brake Light (Compartment 2) 
Rear Turn Signal 
License Plate Lights 
3rd Brake Light 

Rear/Brake Light (Compartment 1) 
Rear/Brake Light (Compartment 2) 
Rear Turn Signal 
Rear Sidemarker 
Transmission Control Module 
Back-up Light Relay 
Back-up Light 
Back-up Light 
Bi-xenon adjusting motor 
Bi-xenon adjusting motor 
Height sensor, front 
Height sensor, rear 


33 

Central Body Electronics 








34 

Central Body Electronics 




































Front Light Clusters 



1. Turn Signal Indicators 

2. Fog Lamps 

3. Low Beam Lights 

4. High Beam Lights 


Rear light clusters 



1. Rear/Brake Lights 

2. Turn Signal Lights 

3. Brake Force Display Lights 

4. Back-up Lights 

5. 3rd Brake Light 

6. License Plate Lights 


Rear/brake light 

The rear-light and brake-light bulbs are in separate compartments in the left and right light 
clusters. When the headlights are switched on, all bulbs in compartments 1 and 3 are 
switched on. Those bulbs have a power rating of 21 Watts. For the rear light function, all 
four bulbs are controlled by pulse-width modulation. This dims all four bulbs to 5 Watts. 

During braking, the light switch centre receives a signal from the brake light switch. The light 
switch centre then applies 21 Watts to the bulbs in compartment 1. In that way, the brake 
light function is performed. 


35 

Central Body Electronics 






Brake Force Display 

In order to improve the reaction of other drivers to 
an emergency stop, the E85 has a Brake Force 
Display system. Its purpose is to reduce the likeli¬ 
hood of being driven into by the vehicle behind. 

The Brake Force Display function will only be 
available on the US version at series launch. 

If a deceleration of more than 5m/s2 or an ABS 
signal is detected, the bulbs in compartment 3 are 
activated by the light switch centre. They too then 
receive the full 21 Watts of power. In this way, the 
brake light plus Brake Force Display function is 
performed. 

Sidemarker Lights 

The US version has two sidemarker lights in the rear plastic bumper panel. They are LED 
light units. 

Bi-xenon Headlights 

The optional bi-xenon headlights represent a major advance in road illumination and head¬ 
lamp range. Their function is identical to the bi-xenon headlights on the E46. 

When the headlights are switched on using the steering column stalk, an electromagnet 
controls a movable beam-pattern screen in the ellipsoid module of the dipped-beam head¬ 
light. That screen then uncovers the high part of the headlight beam. 

Note: 

If the headlight flasher function is required, the bi-xenon beam-pattern screen is 
not activated. Only the high-beam headlight (H7) is activated. The bi-xenon light 
reacts too slowly 
to that signal. 

Light switch center 

The light switch centre controls the entire exterior lighting system. The following compo¬ 
nents are integrated in the light switch centre, depending on equipment level. 

• Light switch 

• Switch for fog lamps 

• Dimmer control for dashboard, instrument cluster and locator lighting (terminal 58) 

• Photocell for detecting ambient light conditions 



1 ) 3 ; 

1. Normal Brake Light 

2. Rear Tail Light plus Brake Force Display 


36 

Central Body Electronics 



The light switch centre has the capability of 
adjusting the effective voltage at all outputs by 
means of pulse-width modulation. With the 
exception of those for the bi-xenon headlights 
and their beam-pattern screens, all output volt¬ 
ages are pulse-width modulated. 

Control of the effective voltage levels by pulse- 
width modulation allows brightness fluctuations 
due to variations in the load on the vehicle's 
electrical system to be evened out. The electri¬ 
cal system voltage has to be higher than the 
desired effective voltage. 

Rain/light sensor (RLS) 

The E85 is available with a rain/light sensor (RLS) as an option. The headlights are switched 
on/off automatically by the rain/light sensor according to the ambient light conditions. 
There are two additional optical sensors for the RLS integrated in the casing of the auto¬ 
matic interval control (AIC) module. The two new sensors supplement the otherwise 
unchanged wiper interval control function as follows: 

• An ambient-light sensor detects the light intensity above the vehicle within a wide 
scanning angle. 

• A forward light sensor detects the light intensity within a narrow scanning angle 
directly ahead of the vehicle. 

An internal processor calculates from the readings taken by the sensors whether the pre¬ 
conditions for switching on the lights are present. 

The following conditions are checked for: 

• Twilight 

• Complete darkness 

• Entry in underground car park 

• Entry in tunnel 

• Precipitation such as rain or snow 

Note: 

If the wiper switch is set to intermittent wipe, the precondition for switching on the lights is 
detected once the wiper frequency exceeds a pre-defined level (factory setting is 15 wiper 
cycles per minute). If the wiper switch is set to Speed I or II, the precondition for switching 
on the lights is constantly satisfied. 

If any of the above conditions is met, the RLS on the E85 sends the information to the light 
switch centre. 



37 

Central Body Electronics 



In order to be able to control the headlights automatically, the RLS must be activated by a 

separate light switch setting on the light switch centre. 

In addition, the lights are switched on if any of the following faults occur: 

• The RLS detects a sensor fault. 

• There is a fault in communication between the RLS and the light switch centre. 

The following lights are controlled by the light switch centre: 

• If terminal R is "ON," the side lights, the number-plate light and the instrument panel 
lights are switched on. 

• If terminal 15 is "ON," the side lights, the dipped headlights, the number-plate light and 
the instrument panel lights are switched on. If only the side lights are required at that 
setting, the switch on the light switch centre must be manually set to Side lights "ON." 

• When the ignition switch is at position "0," the exterior/instrument panel lights are 
switched off. 

The sensitivity of the RLS can be set by means of the Car Memory function. 

Safety note: 

Automatic control of the headlights is not a substitute for individual assessment 

of the light/visibility conditions (e.g. fog) by the driver. In order to avoid safety risks 

in such situations, the lights must be switched on manually by the driver. 


Interior lights 



1. Driver’s Door Contact 

2. Passenger Door Contact 

3. Remote Receiver 

4. Driver’s Door Lock 

5. LSZ 

6. GMV 

7. Interior and Reading Lamp Module 

8. Passenger Footwell Light 

9. Driver Footwell Light 

10. Luggage Compartment Light 

11. Storage Box Lighting 1 

12. Storage Box Lighting 2 

13. Driver Inside Handle Lighting 

14. Passenger Inside Handle Lighting 

15. LSZ 


38 

Central Body Electronics 







Changes Compared to E46 

The interior lighting is controlled by the general module V. In order to even out the light 
power fluctuations that are made more likely by the use of the NG engines (probability of 
high power draw by Valvetronic electric motors), the voltage for the vehicle lights is provid¬ 
ed by means of a pulse-width modulated signal with a fixed frequency of 100 Hz. By vary¬ 
ing the pulse width, and thereby the voltage, applied to the light bulbs, the fluctuations 
referred to above can be compensated for. 


The general module V has a fault feedback function. If the power driver in the general mod¬ 
ule V detects the failure of a bulb, the output on the general module V is shut down. That 
means that no power is available at that output any longer. If the defective bulb is replaced 
and terminal R switched OFF/ON, power is available at the general module output again. 
The interior door handle lights and centre console lights as well as the ambience lights in 
the interior light unit are controlled by the light switch center. 

The storage compartment also has a light. That light has a microswitch and two bulbs. 



5 



Ji 







1. Driver’s Door Switch 

2. Passenger Door Switch 

3. Driver’s Footwell Light 

4. Interior and Reading Lights 

5. Passenger Footwell Light 

6. LSZ 

7. GMV 

8. Passenger Inside Handle Light 

9. Storage Compartment Light 

10. Trunk Light 

11. Trunk Lock 

12. Driver’s Inside Handle Light 



39 

Central Body Electronics 



Review Questions 


1. Why is One-Touch closing not allowed on the passenger side window? 


2. How does the GM V determine if a lock or unlock signal is received from the Drivers 
Door Latch assembly? 


3. How many Hall-Effect Sensors are used to determine Soft-Top Positions ? And what are 
their locations? 


4. What are the preconditions for raising and lowering of the Soft-Top (Fully Automatic)? 


5. When are the internal functions of the CVM 4 checked? 

6. What changes have been made to the K-Bus messaging? 

7. Under what conditions is the Brake Force Display active? 

8. Where is the GM V located? 

9. Where is the CVM 4 located? 

10. How is the Heated Rear Window controlled? 

11 .Why is the voltage supplied to the interior lights a PWM signal? 


40 

Central Body Electronics 



