Table of Contents 
Communications 

Subject Page 

Information/Communication.5 

Introduction .5 

Radio Systems.5 

Audio Systems.5 

Telephone Systems.5 

Navigation Systems .5 

Radio and CD changer .6 

New Features of the System.6 

Components .7 

BMW Business radio-CD .7 

BMW central information display radio (CID radio) .7 

Design of the central information display.8 

CD changer .10 

BMW aerial systems.10 

Rod aerial.10 

Aerial diversity.11 

Components .11 

Rod aerial.11 

FM aerial in bumper .11 

Aerial diversity.11 

Aerial amplifier .12 

Service mode for Radios .12 

Service Mode for Business-CD.12 

Service Mode for Radios CID .13 

Notes for Service .13 

Diagnosis .14 

Coding .14 

Car & key memory .14 

Audio systems.15 

New features .15 

System comparison - sound pressure .15 

System comparison - linearity.16 


Initial Print Date:08/02 


Revision Date:09/02 



































Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Advantages of the systems.16 

HiFi System .16 

HiFi amplifier.16 

Low-range speakers (woofers) .17 

High-range speakers (tweeters) .18 

Mid-range speakers .18 

Top-HiFi System.20 

Top-HiFi Amplifier.20 

Front low-range speaker (woofer).20 

High-range speakers (tweeters) .20 

Mid-range speaker.21 

Carver woofers (low-range speakers), rear.21 

Carver Woofer Operating principle .21 

System Operation Top-HiFi.23 

Top-HiFi with radio Business-CD, or CID radio.23 

Principle of Operation.23 

HiFi amplifier.23 

Top-HiFi amplifier .24 

Improved overall acoustic impression.24 

Loudness .24 

Speed-dependent volume control.24 

Vehicle-specific equalizing.25 

Dynamic equalizing.25 

Dynamic compression .25 

Internal Temperature Monitoring .25 

Deactivation of the Top-HiFi amplifier during a telephone call .25 

Notes for Service .25 

Diagnosis .25 

Coding .25 

Navigation .26 

New features .26 

Components of System .26 

Central information display.27 

CID control panel .28 

Navigation computer DVD .28 

GPS Aerial .28 

Wheel speed sensor.28 

Reverse light switch .29 









































Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Principle of Operation.29 

More accurate calculation of arrival time.29 

Improved direction .30 

Improved map presentation on the CID .30 

New map presentations .30 

Digitized maps on DVD.30 

Operation .30 

Service Information.31 

Diagnosis .32 

Coding .32 

Car & key memory .32 

Service Mode Menus.33 

Explanations.34 

Review Questions .35 

















Model: E85 

Production: Start of Production MY 2003 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you should be able to: 

• Relate the Radio Options available. 

• Know the component locations and removal procedures. 

• Understand the CID operation. 


4 


Communications 




Information/Communication 


Introduction 

The E85 has soared to be the new dynamic leader in the market segment of premium road¬ 
sters. Its breathtaking design and even sportier handling place it distinctly higher than the 
E36/7. 

In keeping with its top-of-the-range status, the Z4 offers new features in the field of infor¬ 
mation and communication systems. 

Radio Systems 

The radios have been redesigned and 
equipped with a CD drive in line with the 
vehicle's premium status. It features a 
new central information display radio 
specifically designed for the menu in the 
central information display. 

Audio Systems 

In addition to the "HiFi" audio systems, a "Top-HiFi" system is offered in the Z4. This sys¬ 
tem satisfies the most demanding requirements with regard to sound quality and sound 
impression. This is achieved by the use of Carver low-range speakers or woofers. This new 
speaker technology enables high sound pressures and distortion-free basses in conjunc¬ 
tion with compact speaker dimensions. 

Telephone Systems 

At this time No factory installed phone systems are available in the Z4. 

Navigation Systems 

A further highlight is the high navigation system. The Z4 is the first BMW roadster equipped 
with a display for presenting maps for the navigation system. The navigation information is 
shown on a central information display located in the middle of the instrument panel. The 
central information display features a folding function and is folded away neatly in the instru¬ 
ment cluster when not in use. 



5 


Communications 




Radio and CD changer 

The following radios are available for the E85: 

• BMW Business radio-CD 

• BMW central information display radio CID radio 


All radios are new generation radios (NG radios). The radios feature a K-bus connection via 
which they communicate with other control units. 

The AF input (audio signals) of the CD changer was increased from 0.5 V to 2.0 V in order 
to increase the signal-to-noise ratio. The new generation radios detect whether they com¬ 
municate with a 0.5 V CD changer (old) or a 2.0 V CD changer (new) and switch over the 
input accordingly. 

A 6-CD changer is additionally available 
for the E85. 



Standard Business Radio-CD 


A radio with a cassette drive is no 
longer available. 



New Features of the System 


Central Information Radio-CD (CID) 


The central information display radio is a new feature on the E85 and serves as the control 
panel for the CID. The CID radio combines the radio functions with operation of the navi¬ 
gation system, on-board computer, DSP amplifier, settings as well as deactivation of the 
CID. 


6 


Communications 



















Components 

The radios can be optionally fitted at the factory in the following combinations: 

• BMW Business Radio-CD 

• BMW Central Information Display Radio (CID Radio) 

BMW Business radio-CD 

The BMW Business radio-CD can be ordered together with the HiFi or Top-HiFi system. 

A CD changer can be additionally connected. In connection with the HiFi audio system, 
the BMW Business radio-CD is the standard unit in the US. 

The BMW Business radio-CD is a world radio and can be coded for the different regions. 
The Business radio-CD is the basic radio in the US version. The radio functions correspond 
to the previous BMW Business radio. The only difference is in the drive. The radio is now 
equipped with a CD drive. The BMW Business radio-CD features aerial diversity. 

In the system network, the BMW Business radio-CD facilitates the display and control of 
following components: 

• CD changer 

• Settings for HiFi and Top-HiFi 

• AUX socket if fitted (option for auxiliary inputs such as MP3 players) 



BMW central information display radio (CID radio) 

The CID radio is the control panel for the central information display. The CID is the High 
navigation system. The CID radio is offered together with a CD. The CID radio can be 
ordered together with the HiFi or Top-HiFi system. A CD changer can be additionally con¬ 
nected. 

The central information display radio is offered worldwide as the display and operating unit 
for the High navigation system. The CID radio consists of the control panel with the radio 
functions in the center console and the central information display in the instrument panel. 
The CID radio features a CD drive. A CD changer can be ordered additionally. The CID 
radio features aerial diversity. 


7 


Communications 










In the system network, the central information radio facilitates the display and control of fol¬ 
lowing components: 

• Central information display (CID) 

• Navigation computer 

• CD changer 

• Settings for HiFi and Top-HiFi 

• On-board computer functions 

• AUX socket if fitted (option for auxiliary inputs such as MP3 players) 


Workshop Note 

To remove the radio, first remove the vent 
assembly, then remove the two screws for 
the radio. 



1. ON/OFF Volume Control 

9. Button for Sound Settings 

2. CD Compartment 

10. FM Button 

3. Telephone Acceptance/Info Button 

11. AM Button 

4. Selector Button for Audio/Last Menu 

12. Station Memory Buttons 

5. CD Eject Button 

13. Forward Scan 

6. Push-Button/Rotary Knob 

14. Mode Button 

7. SEL Button 

15. Backward Scan 

8. Menu Button 



The central information display is located in the center of the instrument panel above the 
ventilation outlet. 

Design of the central information display 

The central information display (CID) includes the following components: advanced TFT dis¬ 
play, crossed-coil motor and mounting with switches. 

• Advanced TFT display 

The LC display is designed as a 6.5" advanced TFT display. The display is of identical 
design as the 6.5" display of the onboard monitor in the E46. The advanced TFT dis¬ 
play adapts automatically to the brightness of the ambient light. The display has a visi¬ 
ble range of 144 mm x 79.5 mm and a resolution of 400 x 240 Pixels. The display is 
an analogue unit and is controlled by RGB signals. 

The display is mounted such that it can rotate and is moved by a crossed-coil motor. 


8 


Communications 






• Crossed-coil motor with gear mechanism (Stepper Motor) 

The crossed-coil motor is a brushless DC motor. The positions of the display are 
detected by Hall sensors on the gear mechanism. 

• Mounting 

The display and the crossed-coil motor are accommodated in a mounting. The mount¬ 
ing is located in the center of the instrument panel so that the same component can be 
used for left-hand drive and right-hand drive vehicles. The mounting is screwed flush 
with the surface of the instrument panel. 

• Switch 

Lett and right switches are integrated in the trough. The left switches serves the pur¬ 
pose of finely setting the display to improve the readability corresponding to the seat 
position and light conditions. The right switch serves to fold the display in and out. 

When raised, the position is between 35-108 degrees. The position last stored (last func¬ 
tion memory position) is raised. The display can now be finely adjusted in steps (1 step = 
1.2 degrees) using the left-hand switch. The signal from the switch is sent directly to the 
stepper motor and is not transferred via the K-bus. 

Manual fine adjustment of the display is also possible in a range from 35-108 degrees. In 
an area below this range (< 35 degrees), the CID is closed automatically as it can no longer 
be read effectively in this position. The right-hand switch can be used to close the display. 

Navigation directions are not interrupted if the display is closed while the navigation system 
is active. When terminal R is switched off, the CID is always closed and the last position 
stored. The display can be switched off by means of a button in the main menu. 

If the display is closed manually or electrically while driving, the display will remain closed at 
the start of the next trip (last function memory position). The display must first be raised 
again by pressing the switch. 


1. Screen 

2. Switch for Opening/Closing 

3. Mounting 

4. Switch for Fine Adjustments 

5. Stepper Motor with Gear Mechanism 


Workshop Note 

If the radio station is changed while the 
CID is closed, it will open. 

The CID does NOT have Anti-trap 
protection. 

9 



Communications 











CD changer 


The optional CD changer is the same 6-CD changer as 
fitted on the E46. The CD changer is adapted to the 
new generation radios and features a 2.0 V AF output. 
The CD changer is located in the lockable compartment 
in the center of the partition. The compartment is locked 
with the central locking system. 

BMW aerial systems 

The radio aerials for AM/FM are described in the follow¬ 
ing. The other aerials are described in the respective 
chapters. 

The E85 features the following aerial systems: 

- Rod aerial for AM/FM 

- FM aerial in rear bumper 

- GPS aerial for navigation system 



Rod aerial 


The rod aerial is a common part from the E46 convertible. The aerial is designed for AM/FM 
reception and additionally features an integrated telephone aerial. 

The rod aerial is mounted on the rear left side panel. The aerial amplifier is screwed to the 
aerial from below. 


The rod aerial consists of the aerial rod, aerial head and aerial base with integrated aerial 
amplifier. 


1. Aerial Rod 

2. Aerial Head 

3. Body Panel 

4. Aerial Amplifier 



10 



Communications 





Aerial diversity 

The E85 features aerial diversity for the higher grade radios. Aerial diversity comprises fol¬ 
lowing components: 

- Rod aerial with amplifier 

- FM aerial in bumper 

- FM aerial amplifier 

- Aerial diversity 

The aerial amplifier and aerial diversity are fitted in the rear left of the luggage compartment. 
The second FM aerial is located on the rear left in the bumper. 

Components 

The aerial diversity system includes the rod aerial with amplifier and the FM aerial in the 
bumper. 

Rod aerial 

The rod aerial is identical to that of the E46 convertible. The rod aerial is designed for the 
following wavebands: 

• AM 522 kHz - 1710 kHz 

• FM 87.5 MHz - 108 MHz 

FM aerial in bumper 

The FM aerial consists of a 73 cm long 
line. The FM aerial is mounted in the 
bumper on adjustable clips. The FM 
aerial is adapted precisely to the vehicle. 

For this reason, no 

changes must be made to the aerial. 

The FM aerial is connected to an aerial 
amplifier. 



Aerial diversity 

In the E85, 2 physical aerials are connected to the radio aerial diversity, i.e. the rod aerial 
and the aerial in the bumper. The aerial diversity function switches over to another aerial as 
soon as the system undershoots a defined threshold. Changeover takes place in such a 
way that no interruption can be heard. Depending on the reception situation, reception on 
both aerials simultaneously is also possible. 


11 


Communications 




Aerial amplifier 

The aerial amplifier is designed for FM recep¬ 
tion. The aerial amplifier is connected to the 
aerial diversity by means of a coaxial cable. 


Service mode for Radios 

Service mode is used for a quick check of the most important radio functions. In the event 
of a customer complaint or malfunction, several important functions can be checked direct¬ 
ly at the radio with the aid of the service function. It is necessary to access service mode 
for this purpose. 

Service Mode for Business-CD 

• Switch on radio 

• Press the "m" button within 8 seconds and hold for at least 8 seconds 

• The functions listed in the following table are now possible via the service menu 

• Switch off the radio to exit service mode 



12 


Communications 







Service Mode for Radios CID 


• Switch on radio 

• Press the "SEL" button within 8 seconds and hold for at least 8 seconds 

• The functions listed in the following table are now possible via the service menu 

• Switch off the radio to exit service mode 


Menu 

Screen Contents 

Explanation 

Serial Number 

xl001035 

Serial number of Device 

Software Version 

37-99 30 

Software Statue WW/YY version 

GAL 

1-6 

Stage of speed dependent volume 
adjustable with station buttons 

FM 

Frequency 

Station Identifier 

F... 

Q... 

D210 

Frequency of Station 

Station Identifier being received 

Field Strength 

Quality of Station 

RDS identifier 

DSP 

0 

Whether vehicle is equipped with DSP 
1 =DSP 

TP volume 

0 

Not used in USA 

AF (Alternate Frequencies 

Auto 

Not used in USA 

Area 

USA 

2 = USA 

Index 

03 

Revision index 


Notes for Service 

• FM aerial 

The FM aerial must be checked in the event of damage to the bumper (accident). The aer¬ 
ial line must neither be shortened nor lengthened. 

The correct position of the spacers for the aerial must be ensured. The aerial is matched 
to the metallic body structure. Changes to the body structure greatly influence the aerial 
function. 


13 


Communications 




Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the radio without CID comprises the following: 

• Read identification 

• Read fault code memory 

• Delete fault code memory 

• Activate components, e.g. button functions, individual channels 

• Diagnosis query, e.g. field strength, setting of speed dependent volume control 

Coding 

Coding in the radio comprises the following functions: 

• New coding (country-specific functions) 

• Retrofitting 

• Conversion 

Car & key memory 

The following functions can be stored in the car & key memory: 

• Sound settings 

• Audio source 

• The last station is stored 

Notes: 


14 


Communications 



Audio systems 

The following audio systems are available for the E85: 

• HiFi audio system 

• Top-HiFi audio system 

New features 

For the first time at BMW, binding audio standards have been defined for the E85 which will 
also be adopted in successor models. In addition to the minimum requirements relating to 
the systems, Carver speaker technology is used for the first time worldwide in a motor vehi¬ 
cle (Top-HiFi audio system). This system achieves substantial improvements in the low fre¬ 
quency range. 

The audio standards stipulate the following requirements: 

• Classification in 2 audio systems: HiFi and Top-HiFi 

• Symmetry of sound field: All systems ensure uniform distribution of the sound field in the 
vehicle and convey the overall acoustic impression that the source of the music is in 
front of the driver and passenger. 

• Sound pressure 

• Linearity of stereo signal 

With the aid of the Carver speaker technology, high sound pressures can be achieved 
although there is only a low resonance volume (space behind the speakers) available in the 
roadster. 

System comparison - sound pressure 

The sound pressure in the vehicle is the measure for establishing the total volume up to 
which distortion-free sound reproduction is possible. 

The higher the sound pressure the greater the volume. When the sound pressure is 
increased by approx. 10 dB, the volume is subjectively doubled. 


d 

113 

113 

1 




















Itf 








t ! 








B ) 

33 















a'] 

EH 








. fr- Hx 

85 ■ 

2: 

1 

E 

3 IM 

HU 





1. Top Hi-Fi 

2. HiFi 

3. Stereo 


15 


Communications 




System comparison - linearity 

A frequency response as linear as possible is the prerequisite for sound reproduction true 
to the original. 



1. Top Hi-Fi 

2. HiFi 

3. Stereo 


Advantages of the systems 

The following advantages characterize the 2 new audio systems: 

• Compared to the E36/7, distinct improvements in the low frequency range have been 
achieved. 

• Due to the dynamically set parameters (adaptive filters) of the Top-HiFi amplifier, the 
sound impression is adapted to the driving noise characteristic of a roadster. 

• The HiFi and Top-HiFi audio systems can be combined with virtually all radios. 

HiFi System 

The HiFi audio system consists of following components: 

• Radio Business-CD or CID 

• HiFi amplifier 

• Front left and right low-range speakers (woofers) 

• Front left and right high-range speakers (tweeters) 

• Front left and right mid-range speakers 

• Rear left and right low-range speakers (woofers) 

• Rear left and right mid-range speakers 

• CD changer (optional) 

HiFi amplifier 

The HiFi amplifier is designed as an analogue 10-channel amplifier. The 4 input channels 
are divided via frequency gates and equalizing filters over 10 channels. The HiFi amplifier 
is installed in the luggage compartment trough next to the vehicle battery. 

The output power is: 

• Low-range 4x40 W 

• High range/mid-range 6x25 W 

The channels are divided over a 3-way speaker system at the front and a 2-way speaker 
system at the rear. 

16 


Communications 






1. Radio 

2. Low-Range Speaker, Front 

3. High-Range Speaker, Front 

4. Mid-Range Speaker, Front 

5. CD Changer (optional) 

6. Low-Range Speaker, Rear 

7. Mid-Range Speaker, Rear 

8. HiFi Amplifier 


Low-range speakers (woofers) 

The front woofers (low-range speakers) are mounted at the bottom in the A-pillars on the 
left and right. The woofers are arranged transversely with respect to forward direction. 

The resonance volume is approx. 10 I and utilizes a part of the sill area. 

Rear woofers are additionally installed in the partition behind the seats. 



17 


Communications 





High-range speakers (tweeters) 

The tweeter has a diameter of 26 mm and a fabric cap or calotte. The maximum load 
capacity is 25 W. The tweeter (high-range speaker) covers a frequency range from 4000 Hz 
to 20,000 Hz. The tweeter is connected to the woofer. 

The frequency range of the high-range speaker is set by means of a capacitor. 

The tweeter (high-range speaker) is located in a panel mounted in the mirror triangle. 

The output direction of the tweeter is directed at the head area of the occupant opposite. 
The tweeter (high-range speaker) is based on a sealed design. 


Mid-range speakers 

The mid-range speakers have a diameter of 100 mm and a paper cone. The maximum load 
capacity is 25 W. The mid-range speaker covers a frequency range from 100 Hz to 15,000 
Hz. The front and rear mid-range speakers are of identical design. 

The front mid-range speakers are fitted in the doors. The rear mid-range speakers are 
mounted behind the seats. The front mid-range speakers emit sound transversely with 
respect to forward direction. The mid-range speakers utilize the resonance volume of the 
doors. The output of the rear mid-range speakers is aligned in forward direction. The res¬ 
onance volume is approx. 2 I. 



1. Rear Mid-Range Speakers Door Mounted Mid-Range Speaker 

2. Rear Woofers 


18 


Communications 







1. Instrument Cluster 

2. Radio 

3. FM Aerial Diversity 

4. FM Amplifier 

5. FM Aerial #2 

6. AM/FM Aerial #1 

7. High-Range Speaker, Front 


8. Mid-Ranger Speaker, Front 

9. Low-Range Speaker, Front 

10. CD Changer 

11. Mid-Range Speaker, Rear 

12. Low-Range Speaker, Rear 

13. HiFi Amplifier 


19 


Communications 










Top-HiFi System 

The Top-HiFi audio system consists of following components: 

• Radio Business-CD or CID 

• Top-HiFi amplifier 

• Front left and right low-range speakers (woofers) 

• Front left and right high-range speakers (tweeters) 

• Front left and right mid-range speakers 

• Rear left and right mid-range speakers 

• Rear left and right low-range speakers (woofers) in Carver technology 

• CD changer (optional) 

Top-HiFi Amplifier 

With regard to its functionality, the Top-HiFi amplifier corresponds to the previous DSP 
amplifier as already used in other model series. The special features on the E85 are the two 
high voltage output stages (30 V) for the Carver woofers. 

The Top-HiFi amplifier has 2 analogue inputs (left and right). In addition, the Top-HiFi ampli¬ 
fier features a digital input for the CD changer connection (coaxial cable). This arrangement 
achieves a higher signal quality. 

The top HiFi amplifier is installed in the luggage compartment next to the vehicle battery. 



Top-HiFi Amplifier 



1. Top-HiFi Amplifier 


Front low-range speaker (woofer) 

The woofer has a diameter of 160 mm and a paper cone. The maximum load capacity is 
50 W. The woofers (low-range speakers) cover a frequency range from 50 Hz to 500 Hz. 
The front woofers (low-range speakers) are mounted at the bottom in the A-pillars on the 
left and right. 

High-range speakers (tweeters) 

The tweeter has a diameter of 26 mm and a fabric cap or calotte. The maximum load 
capacity is 25 W. The tweeter (high-range speaker) covers a frequency range from 4000 Hz 
to 20,000 Hz. 

The frequency range of the high-range speaker is set by means of a capacitor. 


20 


Communications 








The tweeter (high-range speaker) is located in a panel mounted in the mirror triangle. 

The output direction of the tweeter is directed at the head area of the occupant opposite. 
The tweeter (high-range speaker) is based on a sealed design. 

Mid-range speaker 

The mid-range speaker has a diameter of 100 mm and an aluminum cone. The maximum 
load capacity is 50 W. The mid-range speaker covers a frequency range from 100 Hz to 
10,000 Hz. The front and rear mid-range speakers are identical. 

The front mid-range speakers are fitted in the doors. The rear mid-range speakers are 
installed in the partition behind the seats. 

Carver woofers (low-range speakers), rear 

The Carver woofers have a diameter of 160 mm and a paper cone in Carver technology. 
The maximum load capacity is 100 W. The Carver woofers cover a frequency range from 
30 Hz to 150 Hz. 

The rear Carver woofers are accommodated in the partition behind the seats. The reso¬ 
nance volume is approx. 10 I. 



1. Centering Swing Arm 

2. Displacement Cylinder 

3. Moving Coil 

4. Pole Core 

5. Permanent Magnet 

6. Iron Core 

7. Ventilation Hole 

8. Diaphragm Displacement 


Carver Woofer Operating principle 

High sound pressure is required for achieving a rich bass. The Carver woofers (low-range 
speakers) produce this sound pressure with their small diameter by increasing the 
displacement of the diaphragm. The sound pressure is produced by movement in the vol¬ 
ume of air. 

The volume of air moved is derived from the diaphragm area multiplied by the displace- 

21 


Communications 




ment. To date to achieve this, the largest possible diaphragm area (diameter of the speak¬ 
er) was used in conjunction with relatively low displacement (approx. 3-10 mm). A match¬ 
ing resonance volume is additionally required. 

In vehicle construction applications, this technology leads to a conflict between vehicle 
design and vehicle equipment: Due to the design and comprehensive level of equipment, 
there is little package space available for large bass speakers. 

Carver technology represents a new approach in solving this problem. Thanks to Carver 
technology, a high sound pressure is produced with a small speaker diameter by increas¬ 
ing the diaphragm displacement (approx. 30 mm). 

Due to the greater diaphragm displacement Carver woofers (low-range speakers) require a 
higher voltage supply than conventional speakers. 

A special DSP amplifier with high voltage output stages (30 Vrms) is required for the Top- 
HiFi audio system. It is necessary to greatly increase the magnetic force in order to achieve 
greater diaphragm displacement. The solenoid was adapted accordingly. A high magnet¬ 
ic force also means that a high back emf is produced in the solenoid (back emf Uemf=B.l.v). 

The back emf counteracts the output voltage of the amplifier thus reducing the effective 
voltage at the solenoid. 

It is not possible to operate Carver speakers with the amplifiers (radio output stages 6 Vrms) 
previously used. 




22 


Communications 



System Operation Top-HiFi 


The Top-HiFi audio system features a 10-channel analogue amplifier with DSP technology 
as used in the current vehicles. The Top-HiFi amplifier is controlled with a constant audio 
signal via the two analogue output channels of the radio. In addition, the Top-HiFi amplifier 
features a digital input for the CD changer. The speakers are connected to the 10 output 
channels. 

The Top-HiFi audio system has following output ratings: 

- Medium-range and high-range speakers: 6x20 W 

- Low-range speakers: 2x40 W 

- Carver low-range speakers: 2x100 W 

Top-HiFi with radio Business-CD, or CID radio 

Depending on the type of radio installed, programmed sound settings can be selected or 
freely programmed. In connection with the radio Business-CD, one of the following 3 pro¬ 
grammed sound settings can be selected in the "Tone" 

(sounds) menu: 

• Jazz 

• Hall 

• Cathedral 

The radio CID radio with the central information display offers the following features: 

• 3 preset menus (see above) 

• 3 freely programmable menus 

In the case of the CID radio, the overall acoustics can be set individually by means of a 7- 
band graphic equalizer. 

Principle of Operation 

All audio systems are controlled via the radio. The differences between the systems are in 
the control of the amplifiers. The HiFi and Top-HiFi amplifiers do not feature direct control 
functions. 

HiFi amplifier 

The HiFi amplifier is controlled via the radio. 

The required settings are selected in the radio and output via 4 radio outputs to the ampli¬ 
fier. The amplifier amplifies the settings and distributes them over 10 channels. 

No variable matching takes place in the HiFi amplifier. Vehicle-specific equalizing is inte¬ 
grated in the HiFi amplifier. 


23 


Communications 



The following functions can be set in the radio: 

• Volume 

• Bass 

• Treble 

• Balance (left/right) 

• Fader (front/rear) 

• Loudness 

• Speed-dependent volume control 

Top-HiFi amplifier 

The Top-HiFi amplifier is also controlled via the radio. The Top-HiFi amplifier receives a con¬ 
stant audio signal for the left and right (via the two audio inputs) from the radio. The required 
settings are transferred via the K-bus and formed in the amplifier. 

The following functions can be set: 

• Volume 

• Bass 

• Treble 

• Balance (left/right) 

• Fader (front/rear) 

In addition, the overall acoustics can be set individually (CID only) by means of a 7-band 
graphic equalizer. 

Improved overall acoustic impression 

With the aid of software, adaptations were implemented in the Top-HiFi amplifier for the pur¬ 
pose of improving the overall acoustic impression. 

The following adaptations in the amplifier are conducted automatically: 

• Loudness 

• Speed-dependent volume control 

• Vehicle-specific equalizing 

• Dynamic equalizing 

• Dynamic compression 

• Internal temperature monitoring 

Loudness 

To improve the listening nuance, the low frequencies are raised slightly at low volume set¬ 
tings. 

Speed-dependent volume control 

The volume is raised as the driving speed increases. 6 characteristic curves are available 
for this purpose. The characteristics can be set individually in the service functions. 


24 


Communications 





Vehicle-specific equalizing 

The acoustics are matched to the vehicle interior. 

Dynamic equalizing 

The acoustics are adapted to increasing driving noise. 

Dynamic compression 

The dynamics must be compressed to avoid overloading the system. The upper level of 
effective dynamics is limited by the output power of the amplifier and the load capacity of 
the speakers. For this reason, the speed-dependent volume cannot be increased infinitely, 

Internal Temperature Monitoring 

In the event of excessively high temperature, the output of the output stages is reduced in 
order to cool them. 

The temperature of the output stages is permanently monitored. 

Notes for Service 
Diagnosis 

No diagnosis functions are provided for the audio systems. 

Coding 

No variant coding functions are provided for the audio systems. 

Car & key memory 

No functions are available for the car & key memory. 


25 


Communications 



Navigation 

New features 

For the first time for a roadster, a High navigation system with map presentation on a dis 
play has been developed for the E85. 

The navigation system of the E85 is based on the familiar MK-3 navigation system. The nav 
igation computer has been further developed and optimized for the E85 and is now 
known as navigation computer DVD. 

The specific features of the new system include: 

• DVD drive 

• Faster processor 

• Larger memory 

Advantages of New System 

• Map presentation for navigation in the Z4 roadster 

• The use of the DVD drive now facilitates presentation of all of the USA on one DVD 

• Extended destination entry functions 

• More accurate calculation of arrival time 

• Improved route planning 

• More exact traffic control management 

• New display presentation 

• Data on CD or DVD 

Components of System 

The High navigation system consists of following components: 

• Central information display CID 

• CID control panel 

• Navigation computer DVD 

• GPS aerial 

• Wheel speed sensor 

• Reversing light switch 

• Video module 


26 


Communications 






1. Instrument Cluster 

2. Central Information Display 

3. CID Control Panel 

4. Navigation Computer DVD 

5. Wheel Speed Signal 

6. GPS Aerial 

7. Reverse Light Switch 

8. Fuse Box 


Central information display 

The central information display is the display unit for the High navigation system. The dis¬ 
play is designed as a 6.5" advanced TFT display for presenting the operating interface and 
maps. 

To optimize the legibility, the display can be precision adjusted by means of a switch. 

The central information display is located in the center of the instrument panel above the 
ventilation outlet. 



27 


Communications 









CID control panel 

The central information display is located in the center of the instrument panel below the 
ventilation outlet. 

The functions presented in the CID can be controlled with the rotary push-button on the 
right and the menu key on the CID control panel. 

Navigation computer DVD 

The navigation computer is located in the lockable compartment between the seats in the 
partition between the vehicle interior and luggage compartment. 

The navigation computer DVD incorporates the main functions for the navigation system, 
and contains the following components: 

• DVD drive for reading information of the digitized road maps on DVD or CD 

• GPS receiver for determining position before start of journey 

• Yaw rate sensor for calculating position while driving 

• Powerful processor for fast calculation of data 

• Memory modules for buffering data 

• Interfaces for communication with other systems and evaluating sensor data 

• Interfaces for outputting image data and voice information 

• GPS aerial 

GPS Aerial 

The GPS aerial receives the signals from GPS satellites and transfers the data (degrees lon¬ 
gitude, degrees latitude, Greenwich meantime (GMT)) to the GPS receiver in the navigation 
computer DVD for the purpose of calculating the position. This is of particular importance 
during initial or re-initialization of the system. These data are also read in during the restart 
procedure. 

The GPS aerial is located in the middle of the roof frame behind the interior lamp. 

Wheel speed sensor 

The wheel speed sensor determines the rotary motion of the wheel. The information is rout¬ 
ed to the ABS/DSC control unit and the corresponding distance calculated. The condi¬ 
tioned signal is then made available to the navigation computer. The ABS sensor at the rear 
left is used for the purpose of determining the speed signal. 


28 


Communications 




Reverse light switch 

With the aid of the reverse light switch, the navigation system detects whether reverse gear 
is engaged. On manual transmission vehicles, the reverse light switch is located in the 
manual gearbox. On automatic vehicles, the reverse signal comes from the selector lever 
switch. 


Principle of Operation 

The navigation computer DVD represents a further-development of the MK-3 computer. 
The computing capacity of the navigation computer DVD has been doubled (from previ¬ 
ously 54 MHz to 108 MHz). Likewise, the capacity of the memory modules has been 
enlarged and a new flash module integrated to allow for considerably faster flashing (from 
previously 15.6 MIPS to 70.0 MIPS, million instructions per second). 

The previous functions of the MK-3 computer have been fully adopted. Only the new or 
modified functions are outlined in the following section. 

The following functions are new: 

• Additional destination inputs 

• More accurate calculation of arrival time 

• Improved direction 

• Improved map presentation on the CID 

• New map presentations 

• Digitized road maps on DVD 

The following new destination inputs are possible: 

• Direct input of border crossing points 

• Address book extended to 100 entries (20) 

• Storage of last 20 destinations (10) 

More accurate calculation of arrival time 

Abstract: By including traffic information (TMC), e.g. in the event of a traffic queue ahead, 
an alternative route is calculated and displayed. 

The expected time of arrival is calculated more accurately by including the average vehicle 
speed corresponding to the type of road. 

For this purpose, the average speed of the last 7 minutes is stored corresponding to the 
type of road (motorway, major trunk road, district road). Based on the selected route, the 
computer calculates the share of different types of road and the determined average speed 
so it can calculate the arrival time more accurately. 


29 


Communications 




Improved direction 

When changing from one motorway to another, the number of 
the new motorway is announced (voice information). 

Improved map presentation on the CID 

In future, the maps will be presented in up to 256 colors. The indicator for the current posi¬ 
tion has been enlarged. 

New map presentations 

The scaling of the maps has been extended to 1000 miles. The scales 200 miles, 500 miles 
and 1000 miles have been additionally introduced. As a result, all the USA can be shown 
on the display. The selected route is highlighted in white. 

In addition, 3 maps can be shown in different scales. 

The following scales can be presented: 

- The scale bar on the display corresponds to 1000 miles 

- The scale bar on the display corresponds to 500 miles 

- The scale bar on the display corresponds to 200 miles 

The 200 miles, 500 miles and 1000 miles scales can only be presented in connection with 
DVD maps. The previous CD maps only provide scales of up to 100 miles. 

The map scales are selected in the "Settings" menu under "Announcement." 

Digitized maps on DVD 

The navigation computer DVD is equipped with a DVD drive. The navigation computer DVD 
is retro-compatible and can be used in all MK-x systems. It can also read the previously 
used CDs. 

Operation 

The High navigation system is controlled by selecting the "GPS navigation" menu in the 
main menu of the central information display. 

Basic settings are possible under the menu item “Settings” in the main menu to adapt the 
display to country specific requirements. The various settings can be carried out in the win¬ 
dows. The red markings correspond to the current settings. 

With the “Screen” menu item in the Settings menu it is possible to switch between full and 
split screen. 

As a result, it is possible to show the map and the navigation arrow simultaneously. 

Navigation is represented with arrows while in split screen or using the OBC functions. 

30 


Communications 



The mask for entering the destination is accessed after selecting the "GPS navigation" 
menu. A submenu is selected by pressing the rotary push-button on the CID control panel. 

In the "Announcement" menu, the last voice announcement is repeated by pressing the 
button. By pressing the button for longer than 2 seconds, the announcement is deactivat¬ 
ed or activated depending on the setting. 

"Route selection" menu 

Destination input 

By pressing the button, current directions are ended in the "Destination input" menu and 
the input mask is selected in order to enter a new destination. 

New route 

It is possible to switch between map presentation mode and arrow presentation mode in 
the "Route map" menu. 

Information on the current traffic situation can be selected in the 
"Traffic information" menu. 

"New route" menu 

Corresponding to the traffic situation, e.g. accident, traffic congestion etc., it is possible to 
calculate an alternative route. The distance for the route to be newly calculated can be 
selected between 1-10 miles. 

Service Information 

Conversion 

The navigation computer DVD is retrocompatible for all MK-x systems. The following point 
must be observed when the navigation computer DVD is fitted in a vehicle with MK-1 sys¬ 
tem: 

The GPS receiver must be disconnected as the navigation computer DVD features an inte¬ 
grated GPS receiver. 

Service mode 

Service mode in the High navigation system supplies information for system diagnosis. 


31 


Communications 



Accessing service mode 

The test functions can be selected via the “Settings" menu in the central information dis¬ 
play. Proceed as follows: 

• Terminal R active 

• Select main menu 

• Select "Settings" menu 

• Press and hold rotary push-button for 8 seconds 

• Select the required menu item from the list that now appears 

• Confirm selected menu item with the rotary push-button 

Switch off terminal R to end the test functions. 

Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the navigation systems comprises the following features: 

• Read identification 

• Diagnosis enquiry, e.g. gyro value, wheel speed, eject button 

Coding 

Coding of the navigation systems comprises the following functions: 

• Recoding a control unit 

• Retrofitting a control unit 

Car & key memory 

No functions are available for the car & key memory. 


Notes: 


32 


Communications 




Service Mode Menus 


Menu 

Submenu 

Display 

CID 


SW-Status 

03 



HW-Status 

02 



Diag-lndex 

03 



Bus-Index 

01 



Coding Index 

01 



Supplier 

17 

GPS 

Version 

Receiver 

8.6 



SW Date 

dd.mm.yy 


Status 

Latitude 

Degrees/M in/Sec 



Longitude 

Degrees/Min/Sec 



Altitude 

Meters 



Date 

dd.mm.yy 



Time 

Hour:Min 



G Speed 

Meter/Sec 



Heading 

Degrees 



Rec-Start 

Pos-Src 

POS 



PDOP 

1.8 



HDOP 

1.4 



VDOP 

2.2 


Tracking Info 

CH 

1 



PRN 

07 



S/N 

5.1 



Visible Sat 

08 



Almanac 

Yes 

Video Module 


SW-Status 

11 



HW-Status 

04 



Diag-lndex 

02 



Bus-Index 

11 



Coding Index 

02 



Supplier 

09 

Sensor Check 


Wheel 

835 RL Navi 
835 RR Navi 



Satellites 

05 



GPS Status 

Position Known 



Gyro 

2500 



DIR 

Forward/Reverse 

Telematics 


VIN 

Last 7 



Vehicle Type 

Color 

E85 Roadster 



Registration Number 



SMS Code Number 
D1 

BMW Information 

ON/OFF 



Auto Emergency Call ON/OFF 



Initialization 

ON/OFF 



Sign-off 

ON/OFF 


33 


Communications 
















Explanations 


Menu 

Display 

Explanation 

G PS/Status 

G Speed 

Relative Vehicle Speed over the ground 


Heading 

Direction of Travel 


Rec-Start 

Search/Track/Position Receiver Status 


Pos-Src 

Number of Satellites available for analysis 


PDOP 

Accuracy of calculated position 


HDOP 

< 8 Sufficient determination of position 


VDOP 

< 4 Very goo determination of position 

GPS/Tracking Info 

CH 

Channel 


PRN 

Satellite Detection 


S/N 

Better Reception = Higher Value 


Visible Sat 

The number of visible satellites, signals receivable 
depends on time of day and constellation 


Almanac 

Satellite Database, automatically loaded after 15 min. 

Sensor Check 

Wheel 

ABS Sensors, pulses/minute, neg. when reversing 


Satellites 

Number of satellites currently received 


GPS Status 

07: 3 Satellites received, position possible 

11: 2D Position Determined 

12: 3D Position Determined 


Gyro 

+,-, 400: mV setpoint value, halted or driving straight 
ahead, >right-hand, <left-hand curve 


Direction 

Reverse Signal Detection 

Telematics 

VIN 

Vehicle Indentification Number 


Color 

Color Code 


D1 

Telephone network/contact number 


BMW Information 

Customer Specific Information 


Auto emergency Call 

Status ON/OFF 


Initialization 

Telematics service status ON/OFF 


Sign-Off 

Log out of telematics service 


34 


Communications 


















Review Questions 

1. Which radios are available as factory options in the Z4? 

2. Which of the radio options are available with the Top-HiFi system? 

3. What is the procedure for radio removal on vehicles equipped with the CID? 

4. In case of a malfunction what portions of the CID may be replaced separately? 

5. Where is the aerial diversity unit located? 

6. What is the location of the Top-HiFi amplifier? 

7. Why does the Navigation system now use a DVD player? 

8. What is the location of the GPS aerial? 


35 


Communications 



