Table of Contents 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

Subject Page 

Chassis and Suspension.7 

Front Axle .8 

Virtual Pivot Point.9 

New Rear Axle.10 

Rear Axle Data .11 

Rear Axle Alignment Procedures .11 

Damping and Suspension.18 

Brakes .19 

Technical Data, front brakes.19 

Technical Data, rear brakes .19 

Tires and Wheels .19 

Steering.20 

Dynamic Driving Systems .24 

History of Dynamic Driving Systems.24 

Bus System Overview for Dynamic Driving Systems.25 

Changes to Driving Dynamics Control .28 

New Control Units .29 

Expansion stages of ICM control unit .29 

Expansion stages of VDM control unit.29 

ICM Control Unit.30 

Location and Mounting of the ICM Module .31 

Ride-height Sensors.32 

Design and Principle of Operation .32 

Versions.32 

Interface with ICM Control Unit.32 


Initial Print Date: 01/09 


Revision Date: 08/09 




























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Integrated Chassis Management.34 

Function with ICM Control Module .35 

Input Signals from External Sensors .35 

Output Signals .35 

Driver Assistance Functions.35 

Central Driving Dynamics and Steering Control Function.35 

Signal Provision .36 

Driving Dynamics Control.36 

ICM Calibration.36 

Higher-level Driving Dynamics Control.37 

Observation of the Driving Condition.37 

Central Driving Dynamics Control.37 

Coordinated Intervention by the Dynamic Driving Systems .38 

Driving Dynamics Control .40 

History .40 

Driving Dynamics Switch .40 

Operation and Display .42 

Longitudinal Dynamics.48 

DSC FOx.49 

DSC Functional Overview .49 

DSC Displays and Controls.50 

New DSC Symbols .50 

DSC Modes .51 

Integration in Dynamic Handling Control .51 

DSC Functions in Detail .51 

ADB active even when DSC is off .51 

Brake Modulation for Increasing Agility.52 






























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Automatic Hold.53 

Slide Detection.53 

Interface for Adaptive Braking Assistance.54 

Relationship of DSC and ICM.55 

Electromechanical Parking Brake (EMF) .57 

Emergency Release.57 

Installation Mode .57 

Running-in the Brakes.57 

EMF Actuating Unit.57 

Roll-away Monitoring.58 

Schematic EMF.59 

Lateral Dynamics Systems.62 

Integrated Active Steering.62 

Schematic, Integral Active Steering.63 

Overview .64 

Signals from External Sensors .64 

Control and Modulation of Steering.65 

Distributed Functions .66 

Components of Integrated Active Steering.67 

Rear Axle Steering Control.67 

Functions of Integrated Active Steering.70 

Low Speed Range.70 

High Speed Range .71 


























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Handling stabilization by IAL when understeering.72 

Handling stabilization by Integrated Active Steering under u-split braking conditions .72 

A) Without DSC .72 

B) With DSC .73 

C) With DSC and AL.73 

D) With DSC, dynamic handling controller and Integrated Active Steering .73 

Integrated Active Steering special function .74 

Automatic snow chain detection .74 

Vertical Dynamics Systems.78 

Vertical Dynamics Control.78 

Signal Processing .80 

Signal Processing/VDC (2) Controller .80 

Damping Force Adjustment.80 

VDC System Components .81 

VDM Control Module .81 

Ride Height Sensors.81 

EDC Satellite with Damper .81 

VDC II Damper Operation .82 

Comparison of VDC 1 to VDC 2 Damper.82 

Control Strategy.83 

Active Roll Stabilization (ARS) .84 

Vertical Dynamics Control .84 

Overview of ARS Components.84 

VDM Module.84 

VDM Control Unit Inputs .85 

VDM Control Unit Outputs.85 





























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Oscillating Motor .86 

Active Anti-roll Bar, front.86 

Rear Suspension Active Anti-roll Bar .87 

ARS Hydraulic Valve Manifold .87 

Tandem Pump .88 

Radial Piston Pump.88 

New Feature.88 

Electronic Ride Height Control (EHC).90 

EHC Circuit Diagram.91 

DCC and ACC.94 

Trusted Driver Assistance Systems.94 

Dynamic Cruise Control.95 

Operation and Display.95 

Active Cruise Control with Stop & Go function.97 

Operation and Display.97 

Behavior in response to the driver's intention to get out .99 

Adaptive Brake Assistant with Warning Function .100 

New warning function.100 

Setting the advance warning.101 

Issuing of the warning.101 

Fault states .102 

Components for ACC Stop and Go.103 

Long-range radar sensor.103 

Short-range radar sensors.103 

Driver Assistance Systems Operating Unit .105 

Multifunction steering wheel button pad .105 





























6 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Workbook - Module 2 

Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 

■BIECIIMB 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the changes to the front and rear suspension systems on the new 7 Series 

• Understand the changes to chassis dynamics systems on the new 7 Series 

• Locate and identify components of the Integrated Chassis Management 


Understand the operation of DCC and ACC Stop and Go. 



Chassis and Suspension 


Through intelligent design layout and optimum package space 
utilization on the new F01/F02, the basis has been created for 
distinctly increasing the driving dynamics while improving comfort 
and vehicle handling. 

At virtually identical wheel loads, a greater track width and a larger 
wheelbase have been realized compared to the predecessor, the 
E65. 

The development of the new generation chassis and suspension 
systems in the new F01/F02 focused on revolution instead of evo¬ 
lution. The aim was to set a new benchmark. 

The lightweight construction philosophy was consistently pursued 
in the design of the chassis and suspension systems. 


This is reflected in the widespread use of aluminum, representing 
an important contribution to increasing comfort and reducing C02 
emissions. 

For the first time, a BMW Sedan is fitted with a double wishbone 
front axle made of aluminum, a steerable integral-V rear axle, 

BMW integral active steering (IAL) and the innovative damper 
system, the 2nd generation vertical dynamics control (VDC 2). 

The integrated chassis management (ICM) intelligently links all 
chassis and suspension control systems, thus achieving a new 
level of functional guality. Further highlights include "Dynamic 
Drive" (ARS) and a fully variable power steering pump to improve 
fuel economy. 



E65/E66 

F01/F02 

Front Axle 

Double pivot spring strut front axle 

Double wishbone front axle 

Suspension/damping, front 

Steel spring/EDC 

Steel spring/VDC 2 

Stabilizer bar, front 

Passive or Active (ARS) 

Passive or Active (ARS) 

Rear axle 

Integral IV 

Integral V 

Suspension/damping, rear 

Steel spring or Air spring/EDC 

Steel spring or Air spring (VDC2) 

Stabilizer bar, rear 

Passive or Active (ARS) 

Passive or Active (ARS) 

Brake, front 

Disc brake with rotor diameter of 348mm 

Disc brake with rotor diameter of 373mm 

Brake, rear 

Disc brake with rotor diameter of 345mm 

Disc brake with rotor diameter of 368mm 

Parking brake 

Drum brake with EMF 

Drum brake with EMF 

Wheels/tires 

Standard tires 

Runflat tires (as standard) 

Steering 

Power steering (w /Servotronic) 

Power steering with Servotronic (optional IAL) 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

7 







Front Axle 


8 

F01 Workbook 


A double wishbone front axle as known from the E70 and E71 
is now also fitted in the F01/F02. 

In comparison with the double pivot spring strut front axle on the 
E65, this front axle design offers the following advantages: 

• Higher transverse acceleration is reflected in greater vehicle 
agility. 

• Improved cornering/steering and transition characteristics 
which are particularly favorable in terms of rolling motion. 

• Reduced interference means greater comfort. 

• Shock absorbers that are subjected to virtually no transverse 
forces provide greater comfort. 

• The design layout of the double wishbone front axle facilitates 
vertical dynamics control (VDC) and all-wheel drive (as on the 
E70/E71) without the need to adjust height and no spring 
travel loss. 

• Double wishbone front axles improve directional stability. 

The outstanding driving dynamics, the excellent driving comfort as 
well as the exceptional directional stability are factors of this double 
wishbone front axle design solution that contribute to a high degree 
of driving pleasure and safety while making the vehicle ideal for 
every day use and providing the most relaxing drive on long 
journeys. 

The introduction of a second control arm level for wheel control, 
which is arranged above the wheel, results in additional degrees 
of freedom for the kinematics of the front axle as well as for the 
suspension/damping compared to other designs such as a spring 
strut front axle. 


Module 2 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Spring strut 

6 

Transverse control arm, bottom 

2 

Transverse control arm, top 

7 

Stabilizer bar 

3 

Swivel bearing 

8 

Tension strut with hydraulic mount 

4 

Wheel bearing 

9 

Front suspension, subframe 

5 

Stabilizer link 






















Virtual Pivot Point 

The steering pivot axis (1) of the wheel suspension is now formed 
by a joint at the top A-arm and the virtual pivot point of the lower 
arm. This allows the steering pivot axis to be positioned in such a 
way as to produce a small kingpin offset at hub (3) with sufficient 
weight recoil. 



Description (Front axle data) 

E65/E66 

F01/F02 

Kingpin offset at hub (mm) 

88.1 

56.3 

Track width (mm) 

1578 

1611 

Camber 

-0° 20' ±20' 

-0° 12' ±15' 

Camber difference 

0° ±30' 

0° ±30' 

Total toe-in 

10' ±8' 

16' ± 6' 

Turning circle (m/ft) 

11.92/39.10 

12.15/39.86 

Kingpin offset (mm) 

0 

0.5 

Toe angle difference (toe out on turns) 

1° 27' ±30' 

o 

C\J 

o 

CM 

Caster angle 

7° 27' ± 30' 

-nI 

o 

O 


This kingpin offset at hub is a direct influence on the scrub radius 
which is decisive for transmitting the irregularities on the road sur¬ 
face to the steering wheel. 

The lower and upper arm levels now move simultaneously in 
response to wheel deflection. As a result, as the spring compress¬ 
es, the wheel pivots in such a way that the camber does not 
decrease as much as is the case with a spring strut front axle. 

Since the two control arm levels undertake the wheel control, the 
damper is virtually no longer subjected to transverse forces and 
rotational motion. 

This makes it possible to do without a roller bearing assembly on 
the spring strut support. Instead of this conventional roller bearing, 
a damping and support unit is installed that takes up all three load 
paths. The load paths are the damper piston rod, the inner auxiliary 
spring and the bearing spring. This damping and support unit is still 
referred to as the "strut mount". 

Due to the lack of transverse forces, the piston rod can be made 
thinner, resulting in a similar displacement volume in the push and 
pull direction of the damper. This serves to improve the design 
layout of the damper and is the prerequisite for the innovative 
damper control system - vertical dynamics control (VDC). 

Due to the substantially lower friction at the circumference of the 
piston rod, the damper can respond more sensitively. 

By connecting the stabilizer bar via the stabilizer link to the spring 
strut, the torsion in response to body roll motion is eguivalentto the 
total wheel lift from the inside to the outside of the curve (in other 
suspension setups, the stabilizer bars are connected to a 
transverse control arm and therefore achieve only a fraction of the 
torsion angle). 

Despite being highly effective, this high degree of torsion allows for 
the stabilizer bar to be made relatively thin which has a favorable 
effect on driving comfort and dynamics as well as saving weight. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

9 



















10 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


New Rear Axle 

The rear axle design on the F01/02 is a newly designed axle known as the “integral-V”. This differs from the previous 7 Series which used 
the familiar and already proven “integral IV”. The integral IV rear axle design was introduced on the E38 in 1995 and has been in use on 
subseguent 5, 6 and 7 series models as well as both generations of theX5. 



Integral V axle with HSR 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Actuator, rear axle slip (thrust) 
angle control (HSR) 

6 

Integral link 

2 

Track rod, left 

7 

A-arm (swinging arm) 

3 

Transverse control unit, top 

8 

Thrust strut 

4 

Wheel carrier 

9 

Rear axle carrier 

5 

Wheel bearing 





Of \o\ 


Integral V axle without HSR 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Track rod, left 

3 

Track rod, right 

2 

Bearing assemblies, track rod 








































Now, there are new challenges to meet with regard to rear axle 
design. While the integral IV axle met and exceeded all of the 
requirements of BMW chassis dynamics, the integral V was 
developed to meet some of the new requirements of the F01/02 
including: 

• Larger vehicle dimensions 

• Greater total weight 

• Greater drive output 

• Higher drive torque 

• Run flat tires (RSC) 

In addition, the demanding objectives relating to driving dynamics 
and comfort have been correspondingly adapted while the new 
system integrates driving dynamics systems required for this 
purpose. 

An additional design requirement of the new rear axle is the ability 
to allow changes in the thrust (slip) angle. This accommodation 
allows for a small degree of movement to execute slight steering 
movements. This is part of the new Integral Active Steering 
System which includes HSR. 

The Integral IV axle from the E65 is capable of executing rear 
steering movement, but the design of the axle would require a 
much larger actuator. Therefore, the Integral V axle was introduced 
to meet these needs. 

There are two axle designs for the F01/F02. One is the standard 
rear axle (w/o HSR), the other has the actuator for the HSR which 
includes modified track rods. 


Rear Axle Data 


Description (Rear axle data) 

F01 (Standard) 

F01 (optional HSR) 

Wheel base (mm) 

3070 

3070 

Track width 

1628 

1650 

Camber 

-1 ° 50' ±15’ 

-1° 50' ±15’ 

Camber difference 

0° ±30' 

0° ±30' 

Total toe-in 

14'±10’ 

16'±6' 

Thrust angle 

0° ±12' 

0° ±12' 


Rear Axle Alignment Procedures 

Due to the design of the Integral V rear axle, the alignment 
procedure differs from previous models. When performing a rear 
axle alignment on all models previous to the F01, rear Camber is 
always adjusted before rear Toe. This has been the common 
practice up to this point. 

The new rear axle geometry on the F01 is such that any adjust¬ 
ments to the Camber or Toe eccentrics will influence both 
adjustments. Therefore, it is necessary that Camber is the 
last adjustment rather than Toe. 

Refer to the latest repair instructions in Group 32 under 
“Steering and Alignment” under “Adjust Rear Axle”. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

11 




12 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Workshop Exercise - Vehicle Alignment 

Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• To learn how to plot rear suspension adjustments using the appropriate graph. 


• Align rear suspension using plotted adjustment points. 

• Learn the correct procedures reguired when aligning a vehicle with Integrated Active Steering. 


How to perform a front camber adjustment on a F01/F02. 





Workshop Exercise - F01/F02 Vehicle Alignment 


Using the designated vehicle perform a four wheel alignment following the steps outlined in the following exercise. 
Connect ICOM to vehicle and perform vehicle test. Locate wheel alignment and ride height specifications using ISID. 



Note: Remove turnlate pins and thoroughly settle 

suspension prior to ride height measurement. 

If vehicle is equipped with EHC adjust rear axle ride height if 
required. 

What should be done prior to performing a wheel alignment on a 
vehicle with EHC? 


Is the vehicle equipped with HSR? YES or NO 

If so execute the test plan to be sure the rear steering actuator 
is centered. 

When executing the rear steering test plan what value must be 
achieved before adjusting the rear suspension? 
o 


Install wheel adapters and targets and begin wheel alignment. 


Important!!! 


Suspension must be thoroughly jounced 
prior to taking any alignment readings. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

13 














































































14 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 



Workshop Exercise - F01/F02 Vehicle Alignment 


Do either of the rear wheels need to be adjusted? If so plot the adjustments on the graph provided. 


Left Rear: 

Where does the plotted point intersect line D? 

Left Rear Camber_' (Conversion -_ 0 _') 

Left Rear Toe_' 

Perform intermediate adjustment using the “control arm 
eccentric” (upper link). The camber and toe should now 
match your plotted points from the answers above! 

Identify the rear camber and toe specs from graph. 

Left Rear Camber (spec)_' (Conversion -_ 0 _ 

Left Rear Toe (spec)_' 

Perform final adjustment using the “swing arm eccentric’ 
to bring camber and toe where line C & D intersect on graph. 


Right Rear: 

Where does the plotted point intersect line D? 

Right Rear Camber_' (Conversion -_ 0 _ 1 ) 

Right Rear Toe_' 

Perform intermediate adjustment using the “control arm 
eccentric” (upper link). The camber and toe should now 
match your plotted points from the answers above! 

Identify the rear camber and toe specs from graph. 

) Right Rear Camber (spec)_' (Conversion -_ 0 _') 

Right Rear Toe (spec)_' 

Perform final adjustment using the “swing arm eccentric” 
to bring camber and toe where line C & D intersect on graph. 


What is the torgue specification for the control arm (upper) nut? 

_Nm 

What is the torgue specification for the swing arm (lower) nut? 

_Nm 

Should the eccentric nuts be replaced? YES or NO 


Important!!! 


After adjusting the second wheel on the rear axle be sure that the first wheel is still in specs. 
It may be necessary to readjust first wheel after setting the second wheel if the vehicle was 
severely out of specifications. If a second adjustment is required the points must be plotted. 




Chart for Adjusting F01/F02 Rear Axle 



15 


Left Rear Wheel 


Key: 

Unit of measurement in diagram: [min] 


A 

Toe 

B 

Camber 

C 

Control Arm 

D 

Swinging Arm 



























































Chart for Adjusting F01/F02 Rear Axle 


16 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 



Right Rear Wheel 


Key: 

Unit of measurement in diagram: [min] 


A 

Toe 

B 

Camber 

C 

Control Arm 

D 

Swinging Arm 



























































Workshop Exercise - F01/F02 Vehicle Alignment 



How is the front camber adjustment performed? Are there any spe¬ 
cial tools needed to perform camber adjustment? If so please list 
and explain. 


When asked if a wheel alignment is necessary? Answer: YES 

What is the tolerance for the virtual steering angle sensor? 


What other BMW vehicles use this method of front camber adjust¬ 
ment? 


Important!!! 


This value must be maintained 
during front toe adjustment! 


Note: Adjust front camber as required! 

Note: If vehicle is equipped with Active Front Steering then 
execute the Initialization/Adjustment Procedure! 


Front Toe (BEFORE ADJUSTMENT) 

LEFT_' RIGHT_ 

Front Toe (AFTER) 


List at least three conditions that will reguire Active Front Steering 
initialization._ 


Important!!! 


Install Steering Wheel Level at this time 
to insure accuracy and center steering. 


When asked in the Test Plan “Is there a customer complaint 
about steering wheel askew”? Answer: YES 

Your Instructor will demonstrate when to answer “NO” later. 
Continue in test plan. Did AL warning lamp illuminate? YES or NO 


LEFT_' RIGHT_' 

After completing the front toe adjustment is the AL warning lamp 

on? YES or NO 

If “NO” was answered then no further initialization is 
required. Vehicle should be road tested to insure proper 
center steering. 

What are some other systems on the F01 that might reguire cali¬ 
bration after a wheel alignment? 


Continue to follow procedure exactly as described. - 

Was the procedure completed successfully and did the AL warning _ 
lamp go out? YES or NO 

This procedure must be completed successfully in order 
to continue with front toe adjustment. Repeat if necessary. 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 

17 





18 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Damping and Suspension 

The F01/F02 is equipped as standard with the latest variation of 
vertical dynamics control (VDC 2) featuring electronically controlled 
damper systems. 

The standard chassis and suspension system of the F01 features 
steel springs on the front and rear axle. The standard chassis and 
suspension on the F02 has steel springs on the front axle with the 
“single axle” air suspension (EHC) fitted on the rear axle. 

In addition, the following combinations are available: 

• Standard suspension with “single axle” air spring (on rear) 

• Dynamic drive (ARS) with steel springs and VDC dampers 

• Dynamic drive (ARS) with 2 steel springs and single axle air 
spring and VDC dampers. 

BMW is the first car maker to offer a standard, continuously 
controlled adjusting damper system which has different properties 
regarding the tension/compression phases. 

The outstanding properties of this new (VDC2) adjusting damper 
are: 


• Advanced opening adjustment for improved body stabilization. 
Realized by adjustments even at low damper speeds. 

• Difference between "soft" and "hard" in connection with 
driving dynamics control easily identifiable by the customer. 

• The 2 EDC data-map valves (per damper) allow for different 
characteristics between compression and extension phases 
(jounce and rebound). 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

VDC damper (front) with steel spring 

2 

VDC damper (rear) with air spring 

3 

Front EDC satellite control unit 

4 

Rear EDC satellite control unit 

5 

EDC data-map valve for compression control 

6 

EDC data-map valve for extension control 

7 

EDC data-map valve for extension control 

8 

EDC data-map valve for compression control 



















Brakes 


Tires and Wheels 


Function-optimized lightweight construction brakes are used on 
the F01/F02. Lightweight brake discs with riveted aluminum hub 
are installed on the front axle. The rear axle brakes consist of a 
conventional, cast iron brake rotor. 

Floating brake calipers are fitted on the front and rear axle. 
However, the front calipers are lightweight aluminum, while 
the rear are cast iron. 

The brake system in the F01/F02 features the known brake 
wear monitoring system for the CBS indicator. 

Technical Data, front brakes 


Technical data, front brakes 

Specification 

Brake caliper, piston diameter (mm) 

60 

Brake disc, thickness (mm) 

36 

Brake disc diameter (mm) 

373 

Brake disc diameter (inches) 

14.7 

Brake disc construction 

Aluminum (riveted) 

Brake caliper construction 

Aluminum 


Technical Data, rear brakes 


Technical data, rear brakes 

Specification 

Brake caliper, piston diameter (mm) 

44 

Brake disc, thickness (mm) 

24 

Brake disc diameter (mm) 

368 

Brake disc diameter (inches) 

14.5 

Brake disc construction 

Cast iron 

Brake caliper construction 

Cast iron 


Unlike the E65 predecessor, the F01/F02 is fitted with the Run Flat 
System Component (RSC) package on board as standard. 

The BMW Group has put together a safety package with the aim of 
avoiding such accidents as well as the risk involved with changing 
a tire at the side of the road, at night or in wet conditions, in tunnels 
or at road construction sites. 

The BMW runflat safety system: 

• Warns the driver in good time of imminent tire pressure loss 
so that countermeasures can be taken 

• Allows the journey to be continued for a defined distance even 
in the event of complete loss of tire pressure 

• Keeps the tire safely on the rim even in the event of sudden 
tire pressure loss at high speed. 

The system consisting of the RSC tires, rims with EH2+ contour 
and the electronic tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS). 

With its reinforced side walls, additional strip inserts and heat- 
resistant rubber mixtures, even when completely depressurized, the 
"self-supporting tire" makes it possible to continue the journey for a 
limited distance at a maximum speed of 50 mph. 

Refer to the owners manual for the maximum driving range after 
puncture or deflation occurs. 

ABS, ASC and DSC remain fully operational even in the event of 
complete tire pressure loss. 

When driving with a run flat tire with no pressure, the standard VDC 
automatically distributes the vehicle weight over the remaining 
wheels so as to relieve the load on the depressurized tire with the 
aim of achieving the highest possible range for continued 
operation. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

19 




20 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Steering 

The steering column in the F01/F02 is designed to conform with 
the most demanding reguirements in terms of ergonomics, 
comfort and passive occupant safety all coupled with characteristic 
BMW steering properties. 


The F01/F02 is eguipped with an electrically operated steering 
column with infinitely variable horizontal and vertical adjustment 
as standard. 

• Outstanding ergonomics ensured by an optimum adjustment 
range for the steering wheel position: 

- Horizontal ± 30 mm 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Splined tube 

4 

Crash tube 

2 

Flexible coupling 

5 

Actuator motor, right 

3 

Actuator motor, left 

6 

Steering gear 


- Vertical ± 20 mm 

• Additional comfort function provided by easy entry and exit: 

- When getting in and out of the vehicle, the steering wheel 
temporarily moves into the topmost position thus providing 
maximum freedom of movement. 

• Outstanding crash safety provided by the familiar, innovative 
BMW crash system, specifically tuned and featuring force 
dependent energy absorbers. 

The steering column has a motor for in/out adjustment and a motor 
for up/down adjustment with a specially developed gear 
mechanism. 

Each of these low-noise drive units is mounted acoustically decou¬ 
pled executes the adjustment with the aid of motor/driven flexible 
spindles. 

The components of the steering column are optimized in terms of 
rigidity in the comfort relevant freguency range to reduce vibration 
and avoid disturbing steering wheel vibration and have been 
developed in line with a magnesium and aluminum lightweight 
construction concept. 

The flexible coupling fitted in the steering column represents the 
perfect means of finely tuning the steering characteristics and 
driving comfort. Vehicle-specific coupling packages are vulcanized 
in elastomer in this flexible coupling, allowing extremely high torgue 
to be transmitter reliably and precisely. 
















The steering column is thus successfully decoupled from 
disturbing influences caused by excitation from the road surface 
(axial impact or radial torgue peaks). 

The innovative crash system essentially consists of a crash adapter 
and crash tube. In the event of a crash, the impact energy is 
progressively reduced for the driver by the crash tube breaking 
open and deforming, thus providing the advantage of reduced 
stress on the occupants in the event of a crash (integral part of the 
5-star philosophy at BMW). 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Normal position (0 mm) 

2 

Crash position (travel 80 mm) 


In addition, the lower and center steering shaft collapses during the 
crash thus preventing penetration of the steering column into the 
passenger compartment. The system design also prevents the 
back displacement of all components in the engine compartment 
and possible damage to the bulkhead. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

21 











22 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 



Classroom Exercise - Review Questions F01 Chassis and Suspension 


1. What type of rear axle is used on the F01 ? (circle one) 

HAV Integral IV 

Integral V Central-link 

2. What is different about the tires used on the F01 ? 

(as compared to the E65) 


3. How is front Camber changed on the F01/02? 


4. What is different about the dampers (struts) on the F01? „ , , ,,, , , r , , , w 

6. Label the above adjustment points forth Integral V axle on 

the F01/F02. 



ri 

u 

M 



5 . 


What must be considered when making adjustments to the 
rear axle on the F01/F02? 


7. 


List some of the benefits of the “double wishbone” front 
suspension: 



























| Classroom Exercise - F01/F02 Comparison of Standard/Optional Systems 


With instructor assistance, work through the chart below. 

Fill in the optional/standard chassis systems on the F01 in comparison to the E65. 


Dynamic Driving System 

E65/E66 

F01/F02 


Standard 

Optional 

Standard 

Optional 

Higher Level Driving Dynamics Systems 





Integrated Chassis Management 





Driving Dynamics Control 





Longitudinal Dynamics 





Dynamic Stability Control 





Electro-Mechanical Parking Brake (EMF) 





Lateral Dynamics 





Servotronic 





Integrated Active Steering (IAL) 





Vertical Dynamics 





Electronic Damping Control (continuous) EDC-K 





Vertical Dynamics Control 2 (VDC 2) 





Active Roll Stabilization 





Electronic Height Control 





Driver Assistance 





Cruise Control (FGR) 





Cruise Control with braking function (DCC) 





Active Cruise Control (ACC) 





Active Cruise Control with Stop and Go (ACC Stop and Go) 






F01 Workbook - Module 2 

23 








Dynamic Driving Systems 


F01 


History of Dynamic Driving Systems 

Since the introduction of the previous 7 Series, the E65, there 
have been many developments in the area of dynamic driving 
systems on all BMW models. 



Now, with the introduction of the F01, these past developments 
are now combined with the latest innovations to make for a truly 
“Dynamic” driving experience. 

For example, the introduction of the longitudinal dynamics man¬ 
agement system in the BMW 3 Series (E9x) was the first step in 
this direction. The longitudinal dynamics control functions, 
Dynamic Cruise Control and Active Cruise Control, were integrat¬ 
ed into one control unit - the LDM control unit. These integrated 
functions considerably enhanced the harmony and coordination 
of drive and brake actuation. 


- Module 2 


24 

kbook 


The Vertical Dynamics Management made its debut in the BMW 
X5 (E70) with the VDM control unit: the integrated Vertical 
Dynamics Control (VDC) function controls the adjustable 
dampers. 

In contrast to the earlier system, not only ride-level heights and 
vertical acceleration are used as the input signals. Instead, the 
higher-level control strategy of the Vertical Dynamics Control takes 
all signals relevant to driving dynamics into account including, for 
example, road speed, and longitudinal/lateral acceleration. 

The VDM control unit also coordinates the Vertical Dynamic 
Control and Active Roll Stabilization (ARS) functions. Overall, this 
meant that wheel contact with the road surface was improved and 
the vertical movement of the body reduced for a wider variety of 
road situations. 

In addition to the VDM control unit, the BMW X6 (E71) was also 
equipped with an ICM control unit that for the first time incorpo¬ 
rates both the longitudinal and lateral dynamics control functions. 

The longitudinal and lateral motion of the vehicle is evaluated 
centrally in the ICM control unit. Following on from this develop¬ 
ment, the dynamic driving systems Active Steering and Dynamic 
Performance Control are now used and their interaction is of 
course also coordinated by the ICM control unit. 

Significant at this stage is the definition of the ICM as the main 
control unit for the control functions. The actuators on the other 
hand are activated by control units specially intended for this 
purpose. 





Bus System Overview for Dynamic Driving Systems 



F01 Workbook - Module 2 

25 






























































26 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 



Workshop Exercise - Component Location - Integrated Chassis Management 


On an F01/F02, locate the components on the vehicle, then fill in the chart by using the supplied bus charts and wiring diagrams in 
ISTA to determine the electrical connections to the vehicle network (refer to example). 





(§> ® 


Index 

Explanation 

Connected to 

by way of 

1 

EDC, SVL 



2 

Ride height sensor, FL 



3 

EW Valve 



4 

Servotronic valve 



5 

Ride height sensor, FR 



6 

EDC, SVR 



7 

JB electronics 



8 

VDM 



9 

ICM 



10a 

EMF buttons 



10b 

Auto-Elold button 



11 

Driving Dynamics switch/DTC 
button 



12 

SZL/LWS 



13 

AL (AS) 



14 

DSC 




© 

































Workshop Exercise - Component Location - Integrated Chassis Management 


On an F01/F02, locate the components on the vehicle, then fill in the chart by using the supplied bus charts and wiring diagrams in 
ISTA to determine the electrical connections to the vehicle network (refer to example). 



Index 

Explanation 

Connected to 

by way of 

1 

EMF Control module and 
actuating unit 



2 

Ride height sensor, right rear 



3 

EDC, SHR 



4 

TPMS Control module 



5 

EHC Control module 



6 

HSR control module 



7 

HSR actuator 



8 

Ride height sensor, rear left 



9 

EDC, SHL 




F01 Workbook - Module 2 

27 
























F01 


Changes to Driving Dynamics Control 

In the F01/02, the management of chassis systems has been 
further developed to improve the performance and interaction of 
the individual dynamic driving systems. 

The integration of the ICM module into the new 7 series allows the 
desired dynamic effect in each road situation. Also, the most 
suitable actuator can now be selected and activated. 



For example, in some instances it might be necessary to activate 
the brakes for individual wheels (DSC) while superimposing a 
steering angle using the Integral Active Steering (IAL). 


- Module 2 


28 


A further task of the ICM control unit is to make the driving dynam¬ 
ics condition available throughout the entire vehicle through in the 
form of signals. This is why the DSC sensor in the F01/F02, which 
was previously fitted separately, has now been integrated into the 
ICM control unit. 

This means that all systems have access to the same information 
provided by the ICM control unit. As a consequence, the potential 
for errors, particularly in networked systems, is reduced and the 
system reliability of systems is increased. 

Further, this simplifies the diagnosis of the interconnected system 
as the fault code memory entries for the driving dynamics signals 
are now stored centrally in the ICM control unit and are no longer 
distributed between many control units. 

The result for the customer is perfect harmony in terms of vehicle 
handling - irrespective of the equipment specification and road 
situation. This uses the possibilities for maximizing convenience, 
agility and stability to the fullest. 

The customer's experience of this harmony in terms of vehicle 
handling is especially enhanced by the new Driving Dynamics 
Control function. 

This offers several particularly distinctive vehicle characteristics that 
determine how the vehicle handling as a whole is perceived by the 
driver and passengers. 

The driver can use the driving dynamics switch to select a charac¬ 
teristic that perfectly matches the specific driving requirement or 
section of road. 




New Control Units 

Two newly developed control units for dynamic driving systems will 
also be used in the F01/F02: 

• Integrated Chassis Management (ICM) and 

• Vertical Dynamics Management (VDM). 

Although their names are already familiar from the E70/E71, they 
differ considerably in their functional range and design. A multitude 
of driving dynamics functions is concentrated in these control units. 


In addition to central signal provision, the essential functions of 
the ICM control unit are concerned with longitudinal and lateral 
dynamics. These include the control function for the new Integral 
Active Steering, for example. 

The vertical dynamics functions on the other hand are incorporated 
in the VDM control unit. These include: 

• Vertical Dynamics Control 2 (2nd generation) 

• Active Roll Stabilization (ARS a.k.a Dynamic Drive). 


Driving dynamics signals provided by the ICM 




X I 3y 

S3 


\ 


® 

DSC 


AL 

® 

HSR 

© 

VDM 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

DSC sensor integrated 
into the ICM 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

2 

ICM control unit 

AL 

Active Steering 

V 

Road speed 

HSR 

Rear axle slip angle control 

a x 

Longitudinal acceleration 

VDM 

Vertical Dynamics Management 

a y 

Lateral acceleration 




Although both control units are standard eguipment, two expansion 
stages are available in each case, depending on the options fitted 
to the vehicle. 

Expansion stages of ICM control unit 

The basic version of the ICM control unit is fitted as standard in the 
F01/F02. In this case, the vehicle is provided with the Servotronic 
steering system and cruise control driver assistance function with 
braking function (DCC). 

The high-performance version of the ICM control unit is used if 
one or both of the following options are ordered by the customer: 

• Integral Active Steering 

• Active Cruise Control with Stop & Go function 

Expansion stages of VDM control unit 

The basic version of the VDM control unit contains the Vertical 
Dynamics Control function. This is included in the standard eguip¬ 
ment of the F01/F02. 

The high-performance version of the VDM control unit is fitted if 
the customer also orders the optional ARS. The high-performance 
version also incorporates the output stages reguired for activation 
of the hydraulic valves in the ARS. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

29 


























30 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


ICM Control Unit 

An ICM control unit is installed in every F01/F02. Each ICM control 
unit contains the following, irrespective of the equipment installed 
in the vehicle: 

• Two microprocessors 

• A FlexRay controller 

• Output stages for activating valves in the steering system 

• Integrated sensor system for driving dynamics variables 
(previously: DSC sensor). 

The essential tasks of one of the microprocessors are the calcula¬ 
tion of control functions, communication processing and activation 
of the output stages. 

The main task of the second processor is to monitor safety relevant 
functions and bring about a system shut down in the event of a 
fault. 

The other components of the ICM control unit listed above are 
described in the following chapters. 

Two versions of the ICM control unit exist. The version installed in 
the vehicle depends on the equipment. 

The internal layout of the high-performance version differs from the 
internal layout of the basic version in the following ways: 

• Larger microprocessor (required to calculate the Integral Active 
Steering control and active speed control) 

• Redundant sensor system for lateral acceleration and yaw rate 
(safety requirement for Integral Active Steering). 

The sensors that were previously accommodated in the DSC sen¬ 
sor are now housed in the ICM. Therefore there are no independ¬ 
ent DSC sensors on the F01. 


ICM Control Module, basic version 



ICM Control Module, high performance version 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Acceleration sensor (longitudinal and lateral acceleration) 

2 

Output stages for Servotronic and EW valves 

3 

Controller for FlexRay connection 

4 

Two microprocessors 

5 

Yaw rate sensor (2 for HP version) 


The following graphics make these differences clear. 
















Location and Mounting of the ICM Module 

The ICM control unit is installed in the center console behind the 
central sensor for the ACSM. This means that the position of the 
control unit and its integrated sensor system in the vehicle, near to 
its center of gravity, is ideal from the point of view of driving dynam¬ 
ics. 

The mounting points on the body are precisely determined and are 
measured when the vehicle is manufactured and must not be 
replaced with any other mounting points. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Upper section of housing 

4 

Spacer sleeve 

2 

Mounting bolt 

5 

Lower section of housing 

3 

Connector 




A secondary task of this mounting is to conduct heat away from the 
control unit to the body. 

For the mounting to be able to perform these tasks, the following 
points must be observed when mounting and replacing the ICM 
control unit: 

• Use only the correct spacer sleeves and mounting bolts. 

• The mounting bolts must be tightened in the correct order 
(See repair instructions) 

• The tightening torgue specified in the repair instructions must 
be observed without fail. 

• A check must then be carried out to make sure the control 
unit is mounted securely and free of play. 

• To ensure sufficient heat dissipation and to avoid vibrations, 
the sides and top of the control unit housing must not come 
into contact with other vehicle components. 

• In the center console, where the ICM is located, the provided 
“air space” must be maintained. Harnesses and cables should 
be routed correctly and must not contact the ICM. 

• Aftermarket accessories should not be in the vicinity of the 
ICM. 

• The wiring harness that runs in the center console in particular 
must never be routed in, or even pushed into, the spaces on 
either side of the ICM control unit. 


The housing of the control unit is connected to the metal body of 
the transmission tunnel with four screws and spacer sleeves made 
of aluminum. The control unit must be mounted on the vehicle 
body free of play as otherwise vibrations may be induced in the 
control unit housing which would severely impair the operation of 
the integrated sensor system. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

31 














F01 


Ride-height Sensors 

Design and Principle of Operation 

The angle of a pivoting arm is converted to a voltage signal via the 
ride-height sensors. The greater the angle (with reference to a 
defined starting position), the greater the output voltage generated 
by a Hall sensor element. 

Versions 

Four ride-height sensors are installed in every F01/F02. However, 
the ride-height sensors installed in the vehicle are in different 
versions. Different ride-height sensors are used on the left and 
right of the front axle. 

Different ride-height sensors are also used on the rear axle. 

The reasons for this in both cases are the available installation 
space and the starting position of the pivoting arm. 

Double or single-type ride-height sensors are used at the rear axle, 
depending on whether the vehicle is equipped with electronic 
ride height control (EHC). Single-type ride-height sensors are 
always used at the front axle. 



- Module 2 


32 


Interface with ICM Control Unit 

Each ride-height sensor (irrespective of the version) is connected 
to the ICM control unit by three wires. The double-type ride-height 
sensors at the rear axle are also connected to the EHC control unit 
according to the same principle via three additional lines. 

Power is supplied by the ICM control unit to the ride-height sensor 
via one of the lines. The sensor uses the second line to deliver its 
measurement signal (0-5 V DC voltage). The third line is connect¬ 
ed to a common earth inside the ICM control unit. 

The measurement signal is evaluated by means of voltage 
measurement in the ICM control unit. The ICM control unit cannot 
calculate the actual ride-level heights in millimeters on the basis of 
this information alone. 

To perform this calculation, the ICM control unit must be able to 
map the voltage signals it receives to reference values. This is the 
only way to establish a relationship between the measurement 
signals and the actual ride-level heights. 

These reference values are determined during a synchronization 
procedure. 

The ride-height signals in the ICM must be synchronized in the 
following cases: 

• following replacement of the ICM control unit, 

• following replacement of a ride-height sensor or 

• if prompted to do so by the test schedule of the diagnostic 
system (due to a fault code memory entry in the ICM). 

The synchronization does not have to be carried out if a wheel has 
been changed. 



34 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Integrated Chassis Management 

With the E71, the notion of a higher-level driving dynamics control 
system was implemented for the first time in a standard model. 
This central function is also referred to as "Integrated Chassis 
Management" ("ICM" for short) and is integrated in the control unit 
of the same name in the E71. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Longitudinal dynamics 

ICM 

Integrated Chassis Management 

2 

Lateral dynamics 

VDM 

Vertical Dynamics Management 

3 

Vertical dynamics 




The previous strategy was to use one control unit to perform the 
control tasks for each main movement direction. This approach was 
not employed in the E71 or the F01/F02. 

As is the case in the E71, the new ICM control unit in the F01/F02 
essentially performs the calculations for the control functions that 
influence the longitudinal and lateral dynamics. 

The actuators are activated by separate control units (e.g. AL 
control unit). The functional range of the ICM control unit in the 
F01/F02 has grown considerably when compared to the E71. 


The Vertical Dynamics Management (VDM) is still responsible for 
controlling the vertical dynamics. The vertical dynamic control and 
dynamic drive functions are therefore accommodated in the VDM 
control unit. 

Signals that provide information on the current driving situation are 
obviously exchanged between the ICM and VDM. 

The main focus of this section is to describe the functions of the 
ICM control unit. An introductory overview of these functions is 
provided in the following sections. 


Responsible 
Control Module 
(primary processing) 

Vehicle Dynamics 
Systems 

Specific Systems 

ICM 

Longitudinal Dynamics 

DSC 

EMF 

Lateral Dynamics 

Servotronic 

IAL 

Driver Assistance 

DCC 

ACC Stop and Go 

2 


VDC 

O 

Vertical Dynamics 

ARS 

> 


EHC 




















Function with ICM Control Module 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Input signals from external sensors 

2 

ICM 

3 

Output signals (target values at actuators and actuator control units) 

4 

Driver assistance functions 

5 

Central driving dynamics and steering control function 

6 

Sensor signal processing and signal provision 

7 

Driving Dynamics control function 

8 

DSC sensor (integrated in ICM) 

9 

Redundant DSC sensor (integrated in ICM) 


Input Signals from External Sensors 

The ICM receives numerous amounts of signal data from various 
sources which include (but are not limited to): 

• Wheel speed information from DSC via FlexRay 

• Steering angle from SZL via FlexRay 

• Actuator positions from IAL via FlexRay 

• Ride height sensors (4) via direct analog input 

Output Signals 

The ICM processes all signal information and provides this 
information to other control modules via FlexRay. This information 
includes wheel speed, steering angle and ride height information. 
The ICM also makes available, via FlexRay, the information from the 
integrated DSC sensors. In addition to sensor data, the ICM 
provides target values for actuators and actuator control units (i.e. 
AL and HSR). 

Driver Assistance Functions 

Systems such as ACC Stop and Go and DCC are incorporated into 
the ICM. In addition, the ICM coordinates the activation of the 
vibration actuator in the steering wheel for the Lane Departure 
Warning and Active Blind Spot Detection via a bus signal over the 
FlexRay. 

Central Driving Dynamics and Steering Control Function 

The central driving dynamics control system in the ICM firstly 
evaluates the current driving condition and driver's command, also 
taking the dynamic driving systems installed in the vehicle into 
account (i.e. IAL). 

On the basis of this information, the system decides whether or not 
to intervene in the driving dynamics, and also the extent the inter¬ 
vention. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

35 














36 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


The highly intelligent dynamic driving systems permit slight and 
barely noticeable interventions as soon as e.g. a tendency towards 
understeering is detected. 

A coordinator function ensures that the most suitable actuator is 
activated in each case. Where several actuators are used simulta¬ 
neously, a great deal of importance has been placed on ensuring 
that these interventions are in perfect harmony. 

Signal Provision 

The sensors that were previously accommodated separately in the 
DSC sensor are now installed in the ICM control unit. The follow¬ 
ing variables can be recorded with these sensors: 

• Longitudinal acceleration and pitch of the road or vehicle in 
the longitudinal direction 

• Lateral acceleration and pitch of road or vehicle in lateral 
direction 

• Rotational speed around vertical axis (yaw rate). 

The sensor signals are initially referenced to the sensor housing. 
However, to be useful to the dynamic driving systems, these 
variables must be referenced to the vehicle coordinate system. 

The ICM control unit performs the necessary signal conversion. 

A synchronization process is carried out when the ICM control unit 
is started up during which appropriate correction values are 
determined and saved. 

Driving Dynamics Control 

The driving dynamics control provides the driver with the choice of 
one of four driving dynamics settings (Normal, Comfort, Sport and 
Sport+). 

By making this choice, the driver influences the central driving 
dynamics control system and therefore all dynamic driving systems 
and drive train systems. 


All systems are matched appropriately to every setting and, most 
importantly, their interaction with each other within one specific 
setting is also perfectly coordinated. 

The status of the Dynamic Stability Control is also taken into 
account thus ensuring that two additional driving dynamics specifi¬ 
cations are possible. 

The ICM control unit is also responsible for the Servotronic func¬ 
tion including valve actuation. This steering control function is also 
influenced by the driving dynamics control. 

ICM Calibration 

Calibration of the sensors integrated into the ICM control unit is 
necessary in the following cases: 

• the ICM control unit has been replaced or 

• if requested by the test schedule in the diagnostic system due 
to a fault code memory entry. 

The calibration must be performed with the vehicle standing on a 
level surface in the longitudinal and lateral direction. The ignition 
must be switched to Terminal 15. 



Higher-level Driving Dynamics Control 

Observation of the Driving Condition 

The Integrated Chassis Management (ICM) control unit calculates 
the current driving situation from the signals listed below. 

This essentially means the longitudinal and lateral dynamic driving 
condition: 

• Wheel speed signals from all four wheels 

• Longitudinal acceleration 

• Lateral acceleration 

• Yaw rate. 

The ICM control unit therefore knows how the vehicle is actually 
moving at this point. To be able to optimize the vehicle behavior, 
the dynamic driving systems reguire information about how the 
driver wishes the vehicle to move. The driver's command is deter¬ 
mined from the following signals: 

• Accelerator pedal angle and current engine torgue and 
gear ratio 

• Application of the brake pedal and current brake pressure 

• Effective steering angle and steering-angle speed (rate). 

The driving condition and driver's command are provided both 
internally and externally by the ICM control unit. The central driving 
dynamics control acts as a receiver internally in the ICM control 
unit. The control units of the dynamic driving systems (e.g. DSC) 
are the external receivers. 

They receive the driving condition and the driver's command from 
the ICM control unit via the FlexRay bus system. 


Central Driving Dynamics Control 

The aim of the interventions by the dynamic driving system is to 
improve agility and traction. If reguired, they can of course also 
restore the stability of the vehicle. 

In previous vehicles, separate systems existed that were designed 
to do this and although they in fact communicated with each other, 
they tended to have a more restricted range of tasks. 

The interaction of all systems that ultimately determines the overall 
driving characteristics was therefore difficult to coordinate. 

The Integrated Chassis Management of the F01/F02 incorporates 
the central driving dynamics control. This compares the command 
given by the driver with the actual movement of the vehicle at that 
point and therefore determines whether intervention of the dynam¬ 
ic driving system is reguired, and also the extent of the intervention. 

The yawing force is an output variable of the central driving dynam¬ 
ics control system. This produces a rotation of the vehicle that is 
superimposed on the existing movement of the vehicle. This can 
be used to "readjust" the driving characteristics if the result 
identified does not match the driver's command. 

Classic examples of this are understeering or oversteering driving 
characteristics. A new feature of the ICM installed in the F01/F02, 
however, is that the dynamic driving systems are already deliberate¬ 
ly activated before a deviation of this nature is identified. 

The interventions of the dynamic driving systems therefore take 
place long before the driving characteristics become unstable. 

This produces a far more harmonious effect in the vehicle than 
would be possible from a conventional chassis design. The vehicle 
reacts neutrally in many more situations and does not even begin 
to understeer or oversteer. 

This new function is possible through the use of extremely precise 
computing models and new control strategies that can be used to 
evaluate and influence the driving characteristics. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

37 



38 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Coordinated Intervention by the Dynamic Driving Systems 

The following intervention options for producing the yawing force 
calculated by the central driving dynamics control system have 
been available up till now (and will of course remain available) - the 
corresponding dynamic driving systems are shown in brackets: 

• Individual activation of the wheel brake (DSC) 

• Adjustment of the current engine torgue (ASC+T, DSC, MSR) 

• Adjustment of the steering angle of the front wheels, regard¬ 
less of the driver's input (Active Steering). 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Correction of unstable driving characteristics 

B 

Intervention at an early stage to achieve neutral driving characteristics 

1 

Braking intervention at individual wheels in order to correct understeering 

2 

Braking intervention at individual wheels in order to prevent understeering 

3 

Course of an understeered vehicle 

4 

Course of a vehicle with neutral driving characteristics 

M 

Yawing force that acts on the vehicle due to braking intervention 
(at individual wheels) 


In the F01/F02, the optional Integral Active Steering (IAL) makes 
available front as well as rear active steering for the first time in a 
BMW. The rear axle slip angle control (HSR) is only available as an 
optional package with Active (front) Steering. The two systems 
together make up IAL. 

A function referred to as "Actuator coordination" follows the central 
driving dynamics control. This decides which dynamic driving 
system should be used to produce the yawing force in the specific 
road situation. 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Prevention of understeering by means of braking at individual wheels 

B 

Prevention of understeering by means of steering intervention at rear axle 

1 

Braking intervention at individual wheels 

2 

Steering intervention at the rear axle 

3 

Course of an understeered vehicle 

4 

Course of a vehicle with neutral driving characteristics 

M 

Yawing force that acts on the vehicle due to braking intervention 
(at individual wheels) 









































For example, if the vehicle has a tendency to sharply understeer 
this can be counteracted by means of selective braking interven¬ 
tion at the back wheel on the inside of the curve. 

If the vehicle is equipped with Integral Active Steering, the same 
objective can be achieved more seamlessly by applying an appro¬ 
priate steering angle at the rear axle. 

As both actuating options are limited, it may also be beneficial to 
apply both at once. If understeering is avoided the driver becomes 
aware of this due to the considerable increase in agility. 

The F01/F02 is the first instance where genuine functional 
networking between the integrated chassis management and 
Vertical Dynamics Management functions also takes place. 

This does not simply mean that the ICM records and processes 
ride-height information and then delivers it to the VDM. 

The ICM is also responsible for the control of the Active Roll 
Stabilization as an integral part of central driving dynamics control 
in order to influence the self-steering characteristics. 

As the conventional chassis design already demonstrates, a more 
rigid anti-roll bar on one axle means that the overall achievable 
cornering stability on the same axle is lower. 

The effects of more or less rigid anti-roll bars can be emulated with 
the aid of the hydraulic motors in the anti-roll bars of the Dynamic 
Drive. 

This means that the central driving dynamics control of the ICM 
can selectively influence the degree of available lateral force on one 
axle via the active anti-roll bars of Dynamic Drive. 

If the vehicle is currently oversteering, the cornering force at the 
rear axle is insufficient. The roll stabilizing torque at the rear axle 
tends to reduce in this case. This loss of torque is compensated 
for by additional cornering stability at the rear axle which helps 
stabilize the vehicle. 


F01 


The activity of the central driving dynamics control in the ICM 
control unit is summarized in the input/output graphic below. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Input signals from external sensors 

8 

VDM control module 

2 

Integrated Chassis Management 

9 

Active anti-roll bar 

3 

Dynamic Stability Control 

10 

“Actuator coordination function” 

4 

AS (AL) control module 

11 

Central driving dynamics 
control function 

5 

AS (AL) actuating unit 

12 

“Sensor signal preparation” function 

6 

HSR control module 

13 

DSC sensor (in ICM) 

7 

HSR actuating unit 

14 

Redundant DSC sensor (in ICM) 


39 


- Module 2 



















40 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Driving Dynamics Control 

History 

Over the years, there have been several versions of switches that 
modify some aspect of driving dynamics. Some of the earliest 
versions of these switches included such systems as EDO. 

This console mounted switch was usually used to modify the 
harshness of the damping and included modes such as Comfort or 
Sport. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

SPORT button 

2 

VDC control with electronically 
controlled dampers 


More recently, these control switches allowed for the functions of 
multiple systems to be modified. For example, the Z4 used a 
SPORT switch on the center console to modify throttle response, 
steering effort and transmission shift characteristics. This switch 
was referred to as the SPORT button or FDC switch. 

More recently, there have been similar switches on various vehicles, 
although with different functions. For example, the E70/71 uses a 
SPORT button next to the shifter which influences only the 
damping control (VDC). 

With the introduction of the F01/02, there is a new Driving 
Dynamics Control switch which influences several systems within 
the vehicle for maximum control and comfort. 


Driving Dynamics Switch 

The driving dynamics switch and DTC button are located in the 
center console. Both the DTC button and driving dynamics switch 
are ground inputs to the ICM. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

DTC button 

2 

Driving dynamics switch, SPORT selection 

3 

Driving dynamics switch, COMFORT selection 



















The new driving dynamics control in the F01/F02 contains two 
groundbreaking new features when compared to the E85/E86. 

All drive and dynamic driving systems installed in the vehicle are 
comprehensively switched over via the driving dynamics and DTC 
switch. 

The ICM control unit imports the control signals then determines 
on the basis of this which new mode the driving dynamics control 
should adopt. 

The driving dynamics switch in the center console allows the 
selection of 4 modes: 

• Sport plus 

• Sport 

• Normal 

• Comfort 

In addition to the 4 modes available with the driving dynamics 
switch, the DTC button allows for 2 additional modes: 

• Traction 

• DSC off 

The driving dynamics system is now capable of several settings. 
The system affected include: 

• DME - Accelerator pedal sensitivity 

• EGS - Transmission shift points and shift speed 

• Steering - Servotronic and IAL (AL and HSR) 

• VDM - damping modes for VDC 

• ARS - increased stiffness of the anti-roll bars 

• DSC - modes - DTC/DSC Off 


The changeover operations for many drive and driving dynamics 
functions are therefore bundled in the driving dynamics control of 
the F01/F02. The vehicle as a whole then behaves as the driver 
would expect in accordance with his/her chosen setting. 

Conversely, many individual, and also sometimes meaningless, 
combinations are avoided (example: sports steering combined with 
comfort-oriented damping). 

The ICM control unit also prompts the display of the relevant mode 
in the instrument cluster and also in the Central Information Display. 
In addition to selecting a mode, the driver can use the controller to 
make further settings. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

DTC Button 

2 

Driving Dynamics Switch (FDC) 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

41 







42 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Operation and Display 

After the vehicle is started, the driving dynamics control is always in 
"Normal" mode. 

The switch will change the 4 modes of driving dynamics in a 
seguential manner. Each subseguent press of the switch will move 
through the 4 modes in either direction. 

The modes will be displayed under the the tachometer as shown. 
After a few seconds, a more compact display will be shown after 
the switch is no longer pressed. 




Driving dynamics mode display Compact display 

The DTC button provides the driver with two additional modes, 
Traction (DTC) and DSC off. 

The "Traction" mode can be activated by briefly pressing the DTC 
button. This works irrespective of which driving dynamics control 
mode was previously active. "DSC off" is activated by holding the 
DTC button pressed for a longer period. 

The "Traction" and "DSC off" modes can be switched off by press¬ 
ing the DTC button again. The driving dynamics control subse- 
guently returns to "Normal" mode. 

The two modes "Traction" and "DSC off" present a special case in 
terms of their display reguirements. In addition to the text entry, the 
yellow DSC indicator and warning lamps must be activated. 



“Traction” display (DTC) “DSC off” display 


The new DSC symbols used for the first time in the F01/F02 
replace the symbols previously used. 

Two different symbols were formerly used for the two states "DTC 
mode" and "DSC off" and were displayed in the instrument cluster. 

Since the launch of the F01/F02, only one symbol has been used 
for both states. The new symbols are being gradually introduced in 
all newly developed vehicles. 

The reason for this are changes to legislation that reguire automo¬ 
bile manufacturers to produce a uniform display format. This legis¬ 
lation also specifies that the text message "off" must be displayed 
as soon as the DSC function is restricted, as is the case in the 
"Traction" and "Sport+" modes. 







When the DTC button or the driving dynamics switch is pressed, 
there is an additional assistance window which appears in the CID. 

The name of the newly selected mode appears there together with 
an explanatory text. This assistance window can be turned on or 
off via the Settings/Central Display option in the CID. 

In the "Sport" mode, the driver also has the option of configuring 
which systems are affected by this selection. Assisted by the con¬ 
troller, the driver can choose whether to apply the "Sport" mode to 
the drive systems, or the dynamic driving systems or both. 




F01 Workbook - Module 2 

43 




44 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 



Workshop Exercise - Driving Dynamics Control 


Using an instructor assigned F01, use the driving dynamics control switches and DTC Button to select the various modes in driving 
dynamics. Follow the exercise below: 


Using the driving dynamics switch, toggle between the various 
modes (i.e. Sport, Comfort etc.). 

Does anything change in the CID? 


Using the controller, go to the following menu: 

“Settings > Control Display” 

and check the box for “Display Driving Settings”. 

Repeat the first step by toggling through the various driving 
dynamics modes. 

What is different about the CID display? 


Using the controller, go to the following menu: 

“Vehicle Info > Owner’s Manual” 

and enter the selection for “Dynamic Driving Control”. 

Scroll down until you see the text “Automatic Program Change” 
and read about the conditions in which the driving dynamics will 
switch to “NORMAL”. 

Under what conditions will the driving dynamics switch to 
“NORMAL”? 


Switch to Sport Mode. 

What options are available in the CID? 


In the main menu of the “owners manual”, look for Active Cruise 
Control. 

What happens to the driving dynamics setting when the Active 
Cruise Control is switched on while driving? 


What changes are possible to the driving dynamics? 




Workshop Exercise - Driving Dynamics Switch Modes 


\S_ 

Using the supplied posters, work with your instructor to determine which driving dynamics systems are affected by the driving 
dynamics and DTC switches. Complete exercise by filling in the chart below. 


Vehicle Systems 

Driving Dynamics Switch 

DTC Switch 

Comfort 

Normal 

Sport 

Sport + 

Normal 

Traction 

DSC Off 

Drive Systems 








Accelerator pedal characteristic 


Normal 






Shift program, automatic transmission 


Normal 






Shift speed, automatic transmission 


Normal 






Chassis and dynamic driving systems 








Power steering assistance 


Normal 






Integral Active Steering (IAL) 


Normal 






Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 


DSC On 






Vertical Dynamics Control (VDC) 


Normal 






Active Roll Stabilization 


Normal 







F01 Workbook - Module 2 

45 




46 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 



Workshop Exercise - Modes of Driving Dynamics 


Using the illustration below, complete the exercise as outlined on the following pages. 































Workshop Exercise - Driving Dynamics Switch Modes 


2 

Using the graphic on the previous page and the poster chart, work with ISTA to complete the chart below: 


Index 

Explanation 

Communicates with 

Via Pathway 

For (function) 

1 

Controller 

ICM 



2 

Driving Dynamics Switch 

ICM 



2b 

DTC Button 

ICM 



3 

ICM 

All drive and drive 
dynamics systems 



4 

Accelerator pedal/DME 

ICM 



5 

Automatic transmission/EGS 

ICM 



6 

Steering- Servotronic 

ICM 



6b 

Steering - IAL 

ICM 



7 

VDC/VDM 

ICM 



8 

ARS/VDM 

ICM 



9 

DSC 

ICM 



10 

Instrument cluster 

ICM 



11 

CID 

ICM 




F01 Workbook - Module 2 

47 






Longitudinal Dynamics 


F01 


For the F01, the longitudinal dynamics systems described in this 
document include the following: 

• Dynamic stability control (DSC) and 

• Electromechanical parking brake (EMF). 

Both DSC and EMF are standard eguipment on all F01/F02 
models. Both systems are based on the technology used on the 
E70/E71. 



- Module 2 


48 

<book 


However, many specific details have had to be changed. Those 
changes were essential to ensure that DSC and EMF could be 
seamlessly integrated in the new dynamic handling system 
complex on the F01/F02. 

As far as the Dynamic Stability Control was concerned, coordina¬ 
tion with the central dynamic handling controller on the ICM 
master control unit had to be taken into consideration. 

And the new "dynamic handling control" function also affects the 
way the DSC operates. The thresholds and the nature of the DSC 
interventions have to be adapted to suit the setting selected. 

Thus the DSC doesn't simply contain a setting that suits a luxury 
class vehicle such as the F01/F02. Instead, several different 
chassis settings have been developed which correspond to the 
characteristics of the various dynamic handling control settings. 

In addition to adaptation to handling characteristics, there are 
numerous other changes to the Dynamic Stability Control on the 
F01/F02 which relate to location, display features, fault diagnosis 
and repair. 

Starting from the basis of the system on the E70/E71, the electro¬ 
mechanical parking brake has been adapted to the requirements 
of the F01/F02. That includes such things as component location 
and attachment to the vehicle. 

In addition, design enhancements have been introduced to make 
the EMF actuator quieter in operation. 







DSC FOx 


DSC Functional Overview 


The Dynamic Stability Control on the F01/F02 (DSC FOx) includes 
many of the same functions as on the E70/E71 (DSC E7x). 

As the DSC FOx is based on the same highly advanced technology 
as the DSC E7x, all DSC functions on the F01/F02 achieve 
outstanding performance in terms of: 

• dynamic response (brake pressure can be generated 
extremely quickly) 

• control precision (brake pressure can be adjusted extremely 
precisely and without significant fluctuation) 

• noise emission (operation of the valves and the hydraulic 
pump is quieter than the previous generations) 

• tactile response (unpleasant feedback from the brake pedal 
has been substantially reduced, e.g. pedal vibration during 
brake modulation). 

Differences between the DSC functions on the E70/E71 and 
F01/F02 arise from the different drivetrain configurations (4-wheel 
drive/rear-wheel drive). 

Therefore, the DSC FOx does not include the "Hill Descent Control 
(HDC)" function specific to 4-wheel drive vehicles. 

Instead of the 4-wheel-drive version of the automatic differential 
brake (ADB-X), the DSC FOx uses the version for vehicles with 
rear-wheel drive (ADB). 

A new subfunction of the ADB is that traction control brake modu¬ 
lation is available even when the DSC is switched off. This sub¬ 
function is called "Electronic Differential Lock Control" and is 
described in the following pages. 


Function 

DSC ON 

Traction 

DSC OFF 

Anti-lock braking system (ABS) 

• 

• 

• 

Electronic brake force distribution (EBV) 

• 

• 

• 

Cornering Brake Control (CBC) 

• 

• 

• 

Engine drag torque control (MSR) 

• 

• 

• 

Automatic Stability control (ASC) 

• 

X 


Automatic Differential Brake (ADB) 

• 

X 

X 

Dynamic Handling Control (FDR) * 

• 

X 


Brake modulation for increased agility 

• 

• 


Dry braking 

• 

• 

• 

Start assist 

• 

• 

• 

Braking readiness 

• 

• 

• 

Fading assistance 

• 

• 

• 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

• 

• 

• 

“Auto Hold” combined with EMF * 

• 

• 

• 

Condition based service 

• 

• 

• 


Symbols: 

* indicates that the function can be switched on/off by the driver 

* indicates that the function is active 

X indicates that the function has adapted control thresholds 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

49 







50 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


DSC Displays and Controls 

New DSC Symbols 

There is a new set of symbols for the indication of DSC operation. 
Starting on the F01/F02, this new DSC symbol set replaces the 
symbols previously used. 

Previously, there were two different symbols displayed on the 
instrument cluster for the statuses "DTC mode" and "DTC off". 

As of launch of the F01/F02, there is now only one symbol for both 
statuses. 


DTC 

IPMH 




<><> ! 



OFF 

__ 


However, the driver can distinguish between the two statuses by 
means of additional information in text form. 


The regulations also reguire that even merely limited DSC function 
must result in display of the word "off". That is the case in "DTC 
mode", in which the stabilizing interventions take place at a later 
stage. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

DTC button 

2 

DSC indicator and warning lamp on the instrument cluster 

DSC switched off, or DSC in DTC mode 

3 

DSC indicator and warning lamp on the instrument cluster 

DSC control sequence active (flashing) or DSC failure (permanently lit) 


The new DSC symbol set relates not only to the display but also 
the labeling of the DTC button. 

The new symbols will gradually be introduced on all new vehicles 
as they are phased in. The reason for the change of symbols are 
the new legal reguirements which oblige all car manufacturers to 
use standardized display symbols. 

That will enable motorists to immediately recognize the controls 
and displays of a DSC system as such regardless of the brand of 
car they are driving. 















DSC Modes 

As familiar from previous vehicles, the Dynamic Stability Control on 
F01/F02 incorporates the following function modes: 

• DSC on 

• DTC (Dynamic Traction Control) 

• DSC off. 

In the "DSC on" mode, all DSC functions are fully active. 

The stabilizing interventions in brake and engine function take 
place at an early stage. That makes it easier for less expert drivers 
to regain control of a vehicle that is becoming unstable. 

In "DTC mode" the stabilizing interventions take place at a slightly 
later stage. The Automatic Stability Control and Automatic 
Differential Brake functions allow a greater degree of wheelspin. 
That improves traction when pulling away on loose surfaces such 
as uncompacted snow. 

The dynamic handling control function does not come into action 
until a larger sideslip angle is reached than in "DSC on" mode. 

In "DSC off" mode, the stabilizing interventions by the Dynamic 
Handling Controller and the Automatic Stability Control are 
switched off. 

Especially safety-critical DSC functions such as ABS remain fully 
active in all DSC modes, however. 

The mode "DSC off" is aimed at the undiluted driving experience, 
the direct connection between the driver, vehicle and the road. 

Integration in Dynamic Handling Control 

A new feature of the DSC modes on the F01/F02 is that they are 
integrated in the dynamic handling control function and can be 
activated by the console mounted DTC and driving dynamics 
buttons. 


DSC Functions in Detail 

ADB active even when DSC is off 

The DSC function ADB has been around for a long while on a wide 
variety of BMW vehicles and especially in the form of the ADB-X 
version on the xDrive models. 

If one of the wheels of a driven axle is spinning, it cannot transmit 
any driving force (torgue) to the road. And because the differential 
distributes the torgue egually between the two wheels, the other 
wheel on the axle can not transmit any driving force either. 

ADB brakes the spinning wheel so that the driving torgue and 
braking force are in eguilibrium on that wheel. Then, by virtue of 
the differential, an egual amount of driving torgue is applied to the 
wheel that is not spinning. 

And because that wheel is offered grip by the road surface, a 
driving force can be transmitted that results in forward motion of 
the vehicle. 

Thus ADB increases traction on slippery surfaces and has a similar 
effect to a differential lock. 

• On the xDrive models, ADB-X remains active even when the 
DSC is switch off in order to achieve improved traction. 

• On vehicles with rear-wheel drive, that individual braking of the 
driving wheels was previously only active when the DSC was 
active or in "DTC" mode. 

• On the new F01/F02 (as well as the 135i and E9X) that ADB 
subfunction remains active even when the DSC is switched 
off. 

That function is called "Electronic Differential Lock Control" and 
uses the DSC to emulate the effect of a differential lock on the 
driving wheels. In contrast with previous arrangements, such brake 
modulation for the purposes of increasing drive transmission takes 
places even if the driver has switched off the DSC. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

51 



F01 


Brake Modulation for Increasing Agility 

The highly advanced hardware of the DSC FOx enables brake 
modulation to be carried out without unpleasant feedback for the 
driver. 


On the F01/F02, that capability is utilized to influence the vehicle's 
self-steering characteristics is a specifically targeted way. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Course of an understeering vehicle 

2 

Course of a vehicle with neutral handling 

3 

Individual modulation of brakes to prevent understeer 

4 

Increased engine torque to compensate for braking force 

M 

Yaw force acting on the vehicle as a result of individual wheel braking 


- Module 2 


52 


If the vehicle begins to understeer, e.g. when cornering quickly, the 
central dynamic handling controller on the ICM detects the very 
first indications that it is starting to happen. 

A required setting is transmitted to the DSC requiring it to apply 
the brake on the rear wheel on the inside of the bend. 

The DSC sensitively applies the required setting and without 
generating a level of noise perceptible by the driver. The uneven 
braking effect thus produced, creates a yaw force acting around the 
vehicle's center of gravity. 

As a result, the vehicle turns towards the inside of the bend, 
doesn't understeer and corners with absolutely neutral handling. 

This type of brake modulation increases road safety because it 
prevents the vehicle drifting towards the outside of the bend. 

The disadvantage, however, is that the vehicle is slowed slightly 
by the application of the brake and thus a degree of momentum 
is lost. 

In this case, the solution is taken a step further. Whenever handling 
stability considerations allow, the engine torque is increased simul¬ 
taneously with brake application. 

The higher engine torque is transmitted to the road by the wheel 
on the outside of the bend that is not being braked. The control 
strategy ensures that the increase exactly matches the retardation 
by the brake application. 

While that DSC function is active, there is no display of any kind on 
the instrument cluster. In that way, highly advanced components 
(DSC) and intelligent control strategies are combined to produce 
an overall effect that substantially improves agility without impairing 
the handling stability of the vehicle. 




















Automatic Hold 

This function has been around since the E65, on which it was 
called "Auto-P". The Automatic Hold function was also used on 
the E70/E71. 

As with the previous Auto-H equipped vehicles, this function works 
in conjunction with DSC to provide the needed brake pressure. 

The EMF module and actuator are also used to apply the parking 
duo-servo parking brake when the engine is off. 

When the Automatic Hold function is active, the driver first of all 
brakes the vehicle to a standstill. It is then held stationary by the 
DSC hydraulic modulator. 

That is achieved by maintaining the final brake pressure applied by 
the driver. If the vehicle starts to roll on an incline, the DSC 
hydraulic modulator actively generates brake pressure. Pressing the 
accelerator causes the brake pressure to be released and the vehi¬ 
cle starts to move again. 

After the engine is started, the function can be activated until the 
next time the engine is switched off. To do so, the driver's door 
must be closed and the driver's seatbelt fastened. 

The function can, of course, also be manually deactivated before 
the engine is switched. The footwell module reads the signal from 
the door switch. The ACSM control unit analyzes the signal from 
the seat belt buckle contact. 

The two signals are transmitted to the DSC control unit via the bus 
systems. One signal that is not analyzed for the Automatic Hold 
function on the F01/F02 is the driver's seat occupancy signal. 

Conversely, the Automatic Hold function is automatically deactivat¬ 
ed if the driver's door is opened and the driver's seatbelt unfas¬ 
tened. To prevent the vehicle rolling away in that situation, the EMF 
parking mode is activated. 


As long as the engine is running, the parking mode is effected by 
means of the DSC hydraulic modulator. If the driver switches the 
engine off, the function is taken over by the EMF actuator unit. 

Before the vehicle is driven into a carwash, the Automatic Hold 
function has to be deactivated as otherwise the brakes are applied 
when the vehicle is stationary and it can not be rolled. 

The Automatic Hold function is activated and deactivated by 
means of the button marked "AUTO H" on the center console. 
There is an LED in the button as well as an indicator on the instru¬ 
ment cluster. 

The various function statuses and how they are indicated are sum¬ 
marized on the following page. 

Slide Detection 

When Automatic Hold is holding the vehicle stationary, two addi¬ 
tional internal DSC subfunctions are activated: roll-away monitoring 
and slide detection. 

The roll-away monitoring function is described in EMF section. 

The slide detection function is designed to intervene if the vehicle 
starts to slide after stopping, i.e. if all four stationary wheels start to 
slip on a slippery surface on a hill. If the driver were holding the 
vehicle stationary and became aware of such a situation, he/she 
would release the brake. In that way the vehicle can at least be 
steered as it rolls down the slope. 

The slide detection function is based on exactly the same principle. 
When the vehicle is being held stationary by Automatic Hold, the 
slide detection function monitors the signals from the wheel-speed 
sensors. 

The DSC alternately releases the pressure on one of the brakes in 
while keeping the others under pressure. If the DSC detects a 
movement from the wheel on which the brake is released, then 
obviously the entire vehicle must be moving. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

53 



F01 


Status of Auto-H 
Function 


Status of indicator 
lamp (in button) 


Status of indicator 
lamp (in cluster 


Switched Off 




Switched On and on 
Standby 
(vehicle moving) 




Switched On and Active 
(vehicle stationary) 




AUTOH \ 

1 


Deactivated by driver 
exiting vehicle or 
switching engine OFF 




- Module 2 


54 


That means that the other wheels, on which the brakes are applied, 
must be sliding while locked. Under those circumstances, the con¬ 
dition "sliding" would be detected. 

The response to detection of sliding is progressive release of brake 
pressure so that the vehicle becomes steerable. The driver is 
made aware of the critical situation by a CC message and an audi¬ 
ble warning signal. 

Interface for Adaptive Braking Assistance 

The function "Adaptive Braking Assistance" implemented as a co¬ 
ordinated strategy by the DSC and ACC with Stop & Go function. 

The interface relates to two functions on the DSC: 

• brake standby and 

• dynamic braking control. 

"Brake standby" can be activated by a reguest signal transmitted 
by the ICM control unit. That happens when a potential collision 
situation has been detected with the aid of the radar sensors. 

Brake standby is also activated if the internal DSC criteria familiar 
from previous models are met (minimum speed, rapid release of 
accelerator pedal). 

The threshold for triggering dynamic braking control can be 
influenced by ACC Stop & Go. If a potential collision situation is 
detected, the ICM control unit sends out a signal reguesting lower¬ 
ing of the activation threshold. To be precise, the activation thresh¬ 
old is the rate of increase of brake pressure applied by the driver 
that has to be exceeded in order to dynamic braking control (brak¬ 
ing assistance). 

That makes it easier for the driver to trigger dynamic braking 
control. This function is the only means by which a driver braking 
hesitantly can activate dynamic braking control. 
















Relationship of DSC and ICM 

On previous vehicles, the DSC control unit contained the central 
dynamic handling control functions. A dynamic handling control 
complex remains part of the DSC FOx. 

However, it is controlled by the central dynamic handling controller 
on the ICM (as are the other dynamic handling systems). 

The ICM calculates the current handling status and the vehicle 
response desired by the driver. To do so, it makes use not only of 
the signals from the DSC sensor integrated in the ICM but also of 
those from external sensors such as the steering angle sensor and 
the wheel-speed sensors. 

If a difference between the response desired by the driver and the 
reaction of the vehicle is detected, the central dynamic handling 
controller on the ICM calculates a reguired compensatory yaw 
force. 

The purpose of that yaw force is to bring about a yawing motion on 
the part of the vehicle that is superimposed over the existing move¬ 
ment of the vehicle. In that way, the vehicle handling can be 
corrected retrospectively, so to speak, when it threatens to become 
unstable. 

The highly advanced DSC technology and the central dynamic 
handling controller on the ICM even make is possible to optimize 
handling characteristics in advance. 

Subordinate to the central dynamic handling controller on the ICM 
is an "actuator coordination" function. It decides whether and to 
what degree the DSC dynamic handling system is to contribute to 
producing the reguired yaw force. 

The reguired force is signalled to the DSC's dynamic handling 
controller, which puts it into action by operating the actuators rep¬ 
resented by the brakes and drivetrain. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

SZL (and Steering Angle Sensor) 

7 

DSC 

2 

Wheel speed sensors 

8 

Dynamic handling control function 
(on DSC) 

3 

ICM 

9 

Actuator control function on DSC 

4 

Integral DSC sensors 
(lateral/longitudinal/yaw rate) 

10 

Brake 

5 

Dynamic handling control function 
(on ICM) 

11 

Powertrain 

6 

Actuator coordination function 




F01 Workbook - Module 2 

55 













56 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Simple implementation of the settings specified by the ICM is, 
however, not the only task of the DSC's dynamic handling 
controller on the F01/F02. It also continues to independently 
perform the following original DSC functions: 

• Anti-lock braking system (ABS) 

• Cornering Brake Control (CBC) 

• Automatic Stability Control (ASC) 

• Engine drag torque control (MSR) 

• Automatic Differential Brake (ADB) 

The numerous additional functions over and above pure handling 
dynamics control are also carried out largely independently by the 
DSC and without intervention by the ICM: 

• Functions which help to reduce stopping distance: they 
include brake drying, brake standby, brake fade prevention and 
dynamic brake control. The efficiency of the brake standby 
and dynamic brake control functions is further improved in 
combination with the "ACC Stop & Go" option. 

• Convenience functions which make driving easier, e.g. 
Automatic Hold, which is performed by the DSC and EMF in 
combination. 

• The stresses on and wear of brake components are monitored 
with the aid of computation models. Based on information 
such as brake pressure and brake temperature and the signals 
from the brake-pad wear sensors, a remaining service life 
expressed as a mileage is calculated. The owner can view that 
information as a subfunction of Condition Based Service and 
use it as an aid to planning servicing appointments. 



Electromechanical Parking Brake (EMF) 

The EMF is applied/released by means of the parking brake button 
on the center console control panel. The parking brake status is 
indicated by the function indicator lamp on the button and an 
indicator lamp on the instrument cluster. 

The EMF can be applied in all logical terminal statuses 
(Terminal 0, Terminal R, Terminal 15, Terminal 50). 

The conditions for release of the EMF are: 

• Terminal 15 active and brake pedal depressed or 

• automatic transmission parking lock engaged. 

Emergency Release 

The EMF can be released in an emergency by means of a cable. 
That cable is accessible through the trunk and is under the trunk 
floor trim. To effect emergency release of the EMF, the red T- 
shaped handle from the vehicle tool kit is required. 

Caution: Secure vehicle to prevent it rolling before operating the 
emergency release! 

After a power supply failure, it may still not be possible to move the 
vehicle even after releasing the brake with the emergency release 
facility. The automatic transmission parking lock may still be 
engaged. In that case, the parking brake must first be released 
using the emergency release method. 

Then, the automatic transmission parking lock must be released 
using the emergency release facility. The tool must remain 
engaged in the parking lock emergency release for that purpose. 

When the parking brake is to be used again after an emergency 
release, it can only be done by pushing in the parking brake button. 

The familiar conditions for releasing the parking brake must also be 
met. 


Installation Mode 

Installation mode sets the EMF actuator unit to the installation 
position (brake cables extended to maximum). It also prevents the 
EMF being accidentally applied, e.g. when carrying out repairs. 1 

Installation mode can be cancelled either by means of a service 
function or by driving the car. 

Running-in the Brakes 

While running-in the parking brakes, the EMF applies a defined 
force to the duo-servo parking brakes. 

The function for running-in the parking brakes only has to be 
carried out if: 

• the linings of the duo-servo parking brakes have been 
replaced or 

• the rear brake discs have been replaced. 

The precise procedure for running-in the parking brakes is 
described in the Repair Instructions under the heading "Adjusting 
the parking brake". The instructions given there must be followed 
exactly. 

EMF Actuating Unit 

The EMF actuator unit is made up of the following main compo¬ 
nents: 

• EMF control unit 

• Electric motor 

• Gearbox 

• Force sensor. 

In the event of a fault, the EMF actuator unit can only be replaced 
as a complete unit. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

57 



58 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


The following are available as separate parts: 

• the EMF actuator unit itself 

• the bracket for the EMF actuator unit and 

• the cables. 

The EMF control unit detects vehicle standstill on the basis 
of the following signals: 

• Road speed (from ICM) 

• Rear axle speed (calculated from DME) 

• Wheel-speed signal "DFA_EMF" (from DSC). 

Only when those three signals definitively indicate vehicle standstill 
does the EMF control unit allow operation of the actuator unit. 

The EMF control unit is connected to the PT-CAN. Integrated in 
the EMF control unit is a terminal resistor for the PT-CAN. 

The EMF control unit is connected to the wake-up line. 

if the driver operates the parking brake button at Terminal 0, the 
EMF control unit is woken up. The EMF control unit in turn wakes 
up the other control units on the vehicle via the wakeup line. 

On vehicles with the Integrated Active Steering optional extra, the 
bracket for the EMF actuator unit is bolted to the bracket for the 
HSR actuator. 

On vehicles without Integrated Active Steering, the bracket for the 
EMF actuator unit is bolted to the rear suspension subframe. 


Roll-away Monitoring 

The roll-away monitoring function is computed on the DSC control 
unit. It is active while the vehicle is being held stationary by: 

• the DSC hydraulic modulator or 

• the EMF actuator unit. 

The condition for activation of roll-away monitoring is thus that 
either the EMF parking brake function or the Automatic Hold func¬ 
tion is active. 

Roll-away monitoring observes the signals from the wheel-speed 
sensors. If any of the wheel-speed sensors signals movement of 
the wheel, that indicates that the vehicle is rolling. 

Since, however, the vehicle is supposed to be stationary by virtue of 
the brake pressure applied by the hydraulic system or the EMF 
actuator, the roll-away monitoring function has to intervene. 

The hydraulic brake pressure is increased by control signals to the 
DSC hydraulic modulator or EMF electric motor in order to increase 
the braking force. In that way the rolling is counteracted. 



Schematic EMF 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Dynamic Stability Control 

2 

Central Gateway Module 

3 

Footwell Module 

4 

Car Access System 

5 

Instrument cluster 

6 

Parking brake button with function indicator and illumination 

7 

Fuse for parking brake button (front fuse board, junction box electronics) 

8 

Fuses for EMF electronics and electric motor (rear fuse board in trunk) 

9 

EMF control unit 

10 

EMF force sensor 

11 

EMF electric motor 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

59 
































































F01 


| Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. To which module are the ride height sensors connected and 
how are they connected? 


2. What criteria determines which version of the ICM will be 
installed? (i.e. High or basic version) 


3. Which control module contains the DSC sensors (yaw etc.)? 
DME AL HSR DSC ICM 


4. Which two control modules below contain the “dynamic 
handling controller” functions? (circle 2) 

DME AL HSR DSC ICM 


- Module 2 


5. Two technicians are discussing the DSC sub-function of 
ADB on the F01. 

Technician A says that the ADB function is active when the 
DSC is OFF. 

Technician B says that the ADB function is active when 
DSC is ON. 

Who is correct? 

A. Technician A B. Technician B 

C. Both A and B D. Neither 





62 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 

Lateral Dynamics Systems 


In this section of the training manual, the systems covered include: 

• Servotronic for F01/F02 

• Integrated Active Steering (IAL) 

IAL represents the combination of the already familiar Active 
Steering (front) and the new Rear Axle Slip Angle Control (HSR). 

Integrated Active Steering 

Integrated Active Steering is an innovative and logical develop¬ 
ment of the Active Steering system developed by BMW. 

With Active Steering, a steering angle amplification factor reduces 
the steering effort on the part of the driver and combines the 
capabilities of "steer by wire" systems with authentic steering 
feedback. 

By intervening in the steering independently of the driver's 
actions, it is also able to perform a stabilizing function in terms of 
vehicle handling. 

In order to move further ahead in terms of handling dynamics, the 
familiar Active Steering has now been logically extended by the 
addition of active rear-wheel steering on the new BMW 7 Series. 

Active Steering of the rear wheels is a logical extension of Active 
Steering and the two are now combined as an all-in one system 
referred to as Integrated Active Steering. 

Integrated Active Steering is available as an option on the 
F01/F02 because the standard steering system is the Servotronic. 


CO (?) 3 «'(*) (•) ® (a)(5) 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

DME 

9 

Rear-wheel steering actuator (HSR) 

2 

Front power distribution box 

10 

SZL 

3 

CAS 

11 

ZGM 

4 

Brake light switch 

12 

Active Steering actuator control unit 

5 

Instrument cluster 

13 

DSC 

6 

Integrated Chassis 
Management (ICM) 

14 

Active Steering actuator motor with 
motor angular position sensor and lock 

7 

Rear power distribution box 

15 

Electronic volumetric flow control 
(EW) valve 

8 

HSR control unit 

16 

Servotronic valve 




























Schematic, Integral Active Steering 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Active Steering lock 

12 

Instrument cluster 

2 

Active Steering electric motor 

13 

Steering column switch cluster 

3 

Active Steering motor angular 
position sensor 

14 

Brake light switch 

4 

Electronic volumetric flow 
control (EW) valve 

15 

Integrated Chassis Management 

5 

Servotronic valve 

16 

Right rear power distribution box 

6 

Dynamic stability control 

17 

Battery power distribution box 

7 

Digital Motor Electronics 

18 

Rear suspension slip angle control 

8 

Central Gateway Module 

19 

HSR electric motor 

9 

Active Steering 

20 

Hall-effect sensor 

10 

Car Access System 

21 

Track-rod position sensor 

11 

Front power distribution box 




F01 Workbook - Module 2 

63 


















































































































F01 


Overview 

Implementation of the Integrated Active Steering function has 
essentially been made possible by the new ICM system complex 
on the F01/F02. 

The Servotronic function including valve control is also taken over 
by the ICM control unit. That steering control function is also influ¬ 
enced by the driving dynamics control switch. 

Advantages of Integrated Active Steering: 

• Extension of Active Steering (AL) by the addition of rear-wheel 
steering (FISR) 

• Variable steering-gear ratio (steering angle amplification factor) 

• Independent control of rear-wheel steering angle (steer by 
wire) 

• Servotronic 

• FHandling stabilization functions 

• Reduction of braking distance under split surface braking 
conditions. 

Signals from External Sensors 

The ICM control unit reads the following signals that are essential 
to the Integrated Active Steering from external sensors: 

• Four wheel-speed signals sent via Flexray by the DSC 

• Steering angle sent via FlexRay by steering column switch 
cluster 

• Status of AL and HSR actuators transmitted via Flexray. 

However, because the rear-wheels are steerable, the steering angle 
of the front wheels alone is not definitive for dynamic handling 
control purposes. 


- Module 2 


64 

oook 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

SZL 

5 

Servotronic valve 

2 

Wheel speed sensor 

6 

Integrated Chassis Management 

3 

Dynamic Stability Control 

7 

“Steering Control” function of ICM 

4 

Electronic volumetric flow 
control valve (EVV) 




Therefore, the ICM control unit also takes the steering angle of the 
rear wheels into account. Ultimately, the effective steering angle is 
calculated from the two steering angles (front and rear wheels). 


The effective steering angle indicates the angle to which the front 
wheels would have to be turned to bring about the same vehicle 
response without steerable rear wheels. 

That variable is the easiest for all vehicle systems to use to analyze 
the steering action. 













Control and Modulation of Steering 

Both the basic steering system and the optional Integrated Active 
Steering on the F01/F02 incorporate the Servotronic function. 

That speed-sensitive power assistance function is effected byway 
of the Servotronic valve on the steering gear. 

The Servotronic valve is always controlled by the ICM control unit 
regardless of the eguipment options fitted. 

Accordingly, the Servotronic function algorithm is stored on the 
ICM control unit. 

Similarly regardless of eguipment options, the steering system also 
always incorporates a proportional control valve which is controlled 
by the ICM control unit. With the aid of that valve, the power steer¬ 
ing pump's volumetric flow rate can be electronically adjusted. 

For that reason it is also referred to as the "electronic volumetric 
flow control" valve (EVV valve). 

That valve too is controlled by the ICM control unit. 

Depending on the degree of power assistance demanded at the 
time, the volumetric flow rate delivered by the power steering pump 
is split between the steering valve and a bypass circuit. 

The ratio of that split can be infinitely varied. The less power assis¬ 
tance is reguired, the more hydraulic fluid is diverted into the 
bypass circuit. As the hydraulic fluid does not have to do any work 
in the bypass circuit, less power is reguired to drive the power 
steering pump. 

Conseguently, the proportional control valve helps to reduce fuel 
consumption and C02 emissions. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

65 



F01 


Distributed Functions 

ICM and actuator control units The distribution of functions 
between the ICM and the other dynamic handling control units in 
the case of Integrated Active Steering is described below. 

The Integrated Chassis Management is the control unit which 
computes the higher-level dynamic handling control functions for 
the Integrated Active Steering. 

From the current vehicle handling status and the desired course 
indicated by the driver, the Integrated Chassis Management calcu¬ 
lates individual settings for the variable steering gear ratio and the 
superimposed yaw rate. 

Once they have been prioritized, the ICM provides a reguired 
setting in each case for the AL and HSR control units. The setting 
specified is a required steering angle to be applied to the front and 
rear wheels respectively. 






(?) 


- Module 2 


66 

DOOk 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wheel speed sensors 

7 

HSR actuating unit 

2 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

8 

ICM 

3 

SZL (with steering angle sensor) 

9 

Input and Output signals (other) 

4 

Active Steering control module 

10 

Integrated DSC sensor linear, 
lateral acceleration and yaw rate 

5 

Active Steering Actuating Unit 

11 

Integrated DSC sensor 
lateral acceleration and yaw rate 

6 

HSR control module 

12 



The AL control unit receives the required setting and has the main 
job of controlling the actuators so as to correctly apply the speci¬ 
fied setting. Thus, the AL Active Steering control unit is purely an 
actuator control unit. 

The same applies to the HSR control unit. It too is an actuator 
control unit. Like the AL control unit, it is responsible only for 
implementing the required steering angle specified by the ICM. 

With the introduction of the ICM on the E71, this type of function 
distribution was used for the first time. On the F01/F02, it has 
been expanded to the extent that 

• the ICM now controls all linear and lateral dynamics systems 
(AL, HSR and also DSC) and 

• the ICM is the master control module both for linear dynamics 
and unstable handling situations. 

The interface between the Integrated Chassis Management and 
the Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) represents a special case. 













Components of Integrated Active Steering 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hydraulic fluid reservoir 

9 

SZL 

2 

Power steering cooler 

10 

ICM 

3 

DME 

11 

Hydraulic pump 

4 

ZGM 

12 

Electronic volumetric flow 
control (EVV) valve 

5 

CAS 

13 

Lock 

6 

Instrument cluster 

14 

Servotronic valve 

7 

DSC 

15 

Actuator unit electric motor 

8 

AL 

16 

Motor angular position sensor 


Rear Axle Steering Control 

The special actuator on the rear suspension is fixed underneath a 
mounting plate on the rear suspension subframe. 

The electro-mechanical actuator is positioned between the two 
new track rods of the Integral V rear suspension. The rear-wheel 
steering system has its own actuator control unit which is responsi¬ 
ble for controlling and monitoring the actuator. 

It was previously the state of the art that control systems were 
largely independent of one another. 

On the F01/F02, the Integrated Chassis Management (ICM) sys¬ 
tem brings the separate systems together. 

A central ICM control unit in the ICM architecture replaces the 
previous dynamic handling sensors and forms a central dynamic 
handling controller. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

67 


Components and system complex for Active Steering (front) 

























68 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Mounting plate 

4 

Right track rod 

2 

Left track rod 

5 

HSR control module 

3 

HSR actuator 




The electromechanical actuator essentially consists of an electric 
motor which moves the two track rods by means of a worm-and- 
nut steering gear. 


The worm-and-nut rear-wheel steering gear is self-inhibiting. That 
means that if the system fails, the vehicle adopts exactly the same 
handling characteristics as a vehicle without rear-wheel steering. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Left track rod joint 

7 

Right shaft bellows (gaiter) 

2 

Left shaft bellows (gaiter) 

8 

Right track rod joint 

3 

Worm shaft 

9 

Iron jacket 

4 

Worm nut 

10 

Stator windings 

5 

Electric motor 

11 

Permanent magnet 

6 

Electrical connector 

12 

Carrier armature winding iron core 


The actuator is designed for a maximum travel of ± 8 mm, which 
brings about a maximum steering angle of ± 3° at the wheels. 


























70 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Functions of Integrated Active Steering 

Low Speed Range 

The variable steering-gear ratio of the Active Steering component 
reduces steering effort to approximately 2 turns of the steering 
wheel from lock to lock. 

In the low speed range up to approximately 37 mph, the variable 
steering-gear ratio for the front wheels is combined with a degree 
of opposite rear-wheel steer. The effect is to increase the vehicle 
agility. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Conventional steering system 

M2 

Momentary axis 2 

B 

Integrated Active Steering 

1 

Vehicle center point 

Ml 

Momentary axis 1 




When the steering wheels of a vehicle are turned, it follows a 
curved path around what is called the momentary axis "M". 

In the case of conventional vehicles, that momentary axis is posi¬ 
tioned at a point along the extension of a line passing through the 
center of the rear wheels. 

Active Steering intervention turns the rear wheels in the opposite 
direction at speeds up to approximately 37 mph. 

The conseguence of the rear-wheel steering intervention is that the 
axis of rotation moves closer to the center of the vehicle with the 
same amount of steering effort. 

In terms of agility and dynamic handling, that is eguivalent to a 
vehicle with a shorter wheelbase. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Conventional steering system 

1 

Vehicle center point 

B 

Integrated Active Steering 

2 

Straight line through center of rear 
wheels 

M2 

Momentary axis 2 

3 

Axis of rotation, closer to vehicle 
center 

























High Speed Range 

As the vehicle speed increases, the degree of steering angle 
amplification by the Active Steering component is reduced. 

The steering gear ratio becomes less direct. 

At the same time, the steering strategy adopted by the Integrated 
Active Steering changes. Whereas, at low speeds, the rear wheels 
are steered in the opposite direction to the front wheels, at higher 
speeds the rear wheels are steered in the same direction as the 
front. 

The momentary axis moves further back, equivalent to a vehicle 
with a longer wheelbase, producing more stable straight line 
handling. The radius of the curve becomes longer. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

Ml 

Momentary axis 1 

1 

Vehicle center point 

M2 

Momentary axis 2 




By the combination with the Active Steering, an additional amount 
is added to the steering angle of the front wheels so that the radius 
of the curve and the required amount of steering lock remain at the 
familiar level. 

All in all, co-ordination of the steering interventions at front and rear 
makes lane changes and steering maneuvers considerably easier 
to negotiate without sacrificing agility or balance. 

Combination of the Active Steering with the new rear-wheel steer¬ 
ing system offers benefits for the driver at all speeds. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

Ml 

Momentary axis 1 

1 

Vehicle center point 

M2 

Momentary axis 2 

2 

Straight line through center of rear 
wheels 

A 

Effective wheelbase increase 

3 

Axis of rotation further from vehicle 
center 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

71 




















F01 


Handling stabilization by IAL when understeering 

When changing lanes quickly, all vehicles have a tendency to 
produce a significant yaw response and can sometimes start to 
oversteer. 

If the ICM dynamic handling controller detects a difference 
between the response desired by the driver and the reaction of thr 
vehicle, it initiates co-ordinated steering interventions on the front 
and rear wheels. 



Index 

A 

B 

1 

2 

3 

4 


M 


Explanation 

Prevention of understeer by individual brake modulation (DSC) 


Prevention of understeer by rear-wheel steering intervention (IAL) 


Individual brake modulation (DSC) 


Rear-wheel steering intervention (IAL) 


Course of an understeering vehicle 


Course of a vehicle with neutral handling 


Yaw force acting on the vehicle as a result of dynamic 
handling system intervention 


- Module 2 


72 


The speed of the stabilizing intervention is such that it is hardly 
discernible by the driver. Braking interventions by the DSC, which 
have a decelerating effect, can be largely dispensed with. 

The end result is that the vehicle is more stable and more effective¬ 
ly damped. If the driver underestimates how sharp a bend is when 
driving guickly on a country road, he/she can be caught out by 
sudden understeer. 

By virtue of its inherent features, Active Steering was only able to 
react to vehicle oversteer. Integrated Active Steering incorporating 
active rear-wheel steering is now also able to make corrective 
interventions when the vehicle is oversteering and thus further 
increases active safety. 

Handling stabilization by Integrated Active Steering 
under p-split braking conditions 

Hard braking on road surfaces which provide less grip for the 
wheels on one side of the vehicle than on the other causes the 
vehicle to yaw towards the side with more grip. 

Under emergency braking, the driver of a conventional vehicle then 
has to correct the vehicle's course. 

Under such p-split braking conditions, the dynamic handling 
controller generates a stabilizing yaw force by opposite steering 
interventions on the front and rear wheels. 

A) Without DSC 

In the case of a vehicle without DSC, maximum braking effect is 
achieved by the wheels on the dry side of the road, while those on 
the wet or icy side produce very little retardation. 

As a result, a very substantial yaw force acting in an counterclock¬ 
wise direction is produced, causing the vehicle to swerve to the 
right. 






























Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Vehicle without DSC 

C 

Vehicle with DSC and AL 
(i.e. E90 w/yaw force compensation 

B 

Vehicle with DSC 

D 

Vehicle with DSC and IAL 


B) With DSC 

A vehicle equipped with DSC brakes the individual wheels more 
sensitively in order to keep the yaw force within manageable limits 
for the driver, which however, slightly increases the braking 
distance. 

C) With DSC andAL 

The additional "yaw force compensation" function represents a sig¬ 
nificant safety feature. 

When braking on road surfaces with differences in frictional coeffi¬ 
cient between one side of the vehicle and the other (tarmac, ice or 
snow), a turning force is generated around the vehicle's vertical axis 
(yaw force) rendering the vehicle unstable. 

In such cases, the DSC calculates the required steering angle for 
the front wheels and the Active Steering implements it by actively 
applying opposite lock. 

As a result, an opposing yaw force around the vertical axis is gener¬ 
ated, "compensating" for the original yaw force (cancelling it out, 
i.e. the vehicle is stabilized by intelligent co-ordination of DSC brake 
modulation and AL steering, constituting a safety feature unique in 
this class of vehicle). 

D) With DSC, dynamic handling controller and Integrated 
Active Steering 

Under such p-split braking conditions, the dynamic handling 
controller generates a stabilizing yaw force by opposite steering 
interventions on the front and rear wheels. 

That counteracts the slowing of the vehicle caused by the uneven 
braking forces. At the same time, maximum braking force can be 
applied in order to achieve a short braking distance. 

IAL is a logical development from the Active Steering systems. The 
functions of the systems complement each other perfectly, taking 
the driving experience to a new dimension. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

73 









































74 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Integrated Active Steering special function 

Quite obviously, Active Steering systems must not be capable of 
being switched on or off by the driver. 


In the case of Integrated Active Steering, there is a special feature 
in that regard because if snow chains are fitted to the rear wheels, 
Active Steering of the rear wheels must be disabled. 




Tire chains FM 104.3 



\ 

g/T ire chains installed 



1 / 

Rear wheel steering is deactivated 



1 

when tire chains are installed. Observe 




maximum permitted speed of 30 mph 


( (p) 

' 4 ► FI 

(50 km/h) when tire chains are 

+ 


! 

installed. 



When snow chains are fitted, the rear-wheel steering is deactivated 
in order to ensure that the wheels are always free to rotate. 


Automatic snow-chain detection assists the driver and indicates 
the detected status on the Control Display. This does not remove 
the responsibility for manually changing the setting. 

When show chains are used, the setting on the iDrive Settings 
menu must be changed to "Show chains fitted". 

If the maximum speed of 30 mph for driving with snow chains is 
exceeded, the rear-wheel steering is reactivated regardless of the 
"Snow chains fitted" setting. 

Automatic snow chain detection 

It is possible to detect from the wheel-speed sensor signals a 
characteristic pattern produced by the motion of the wheel when 
show chains are fitted (only with BMW approved show chains). 
From that characteristics signal pattern, the control unit is able to 
detect whether show chains are fitted on each individual wheel. 




76 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


f Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1, Which control module contains the output stages for the 5. 
EVV and Servotronic solenoid? (circle one) 

ICM VDM ACSM DSC 

2. On an F01 with IAL, what happens to the rear wheels when 
braking on a split frictional surface (i.e. right wheels on ice, 

left wheels on dry ground)? ~ 


3. How are the snow chains “automatically” detected? And, 7. 
what is the maximum speed for driving with snow chains 
before the rear steering is re-activated? 


4. On an F01 with IAL, what happens to the rear wheels when 
the vehicle is “understeering” on a turn? 


What is the maximum travel of the HSR actuator? And, 
what is the maximum change of the steering angle at the 
rear wheels? 


How is the HSR actuator connected to the HSR control 
module? (bus,hardwire) 


Two technicians are discussing the active steering systems 
on the F01/02. 

Technician A says that the Active (front) Steering can be 
ordered independently of the option for rear wheel steering. 

Technician B says that both systems are optional, but can 
only be ordered together as part of the IAL system in the 
"Sport Package". 

Who is correct? 

A. Technician A B. Technician B 

C. Both A and B D. Neither 





78 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 

Vertical Dynamics Systems 


The following systems are available on the F01/F02: 

• Vertical Dynamics Control 2 (VDC II) 

• Active Roll Stabilization (ARS) 

• Electronic ride-height control (EHC) 

VDC II is fitted as standard on the F01/F02. ARS is an option 
on the FOIand F02, whereas EFIC is standard on the F02. 

Vertical Dynamics Control 


<5 ® ® 0 ® 6 ® ® 9 ® 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

EDC, SVR 

8 

EDC, SHR 

2 

Ride-height sensor, front right 

9 

Ride height sensor, rear left 

3 

Front power distribution box 

10 

EDC, SHL 

4 

VDM 

11 

ZGM 

5 

Driving Dynamics switch 

12 

Ride height sensor, front left 

6 

ICM 

13 

EDC, SVL 

7 

Ride height sensor, rear right 




When driven vigorously or on an uneven road surface, a vehicle 
tends to respond with undesirable body movements. BMW first 
developed Vertical Dynamics Control for the E70 and was able to 
effectively reduce such body motion as a result. 

VDC improves the following driver-perception related vehicle char¬ 
acteristics according to road surface conditions: 

• Body-related ride comfort (primary ride comfort) 

• Road wheel-related ride comfort (secondary ride comfort) 

• Dynamic handling (transitional response, agility) even with 
more comfortable suspension setting. 

BMW is the first manufacturer to offer a damper adjustment 
system that is continuously controllable independently of damper 
compression/extension as is the case with the VDC (2) on the 
F01/F02. 



























The essential improvements compared with VDC (1) are: 

• 2 EDC control valves per damper, 1 for damper extension 
control and 1 for damper compression control 

• "Pre-opening adjustment" for improved body stabilization 
(has adjustment effect even at low damper rates) 

• Driver-perceptible broad spread in conjunction with the driving 
dynamics switch (difference between soft and hard character¬ 
istics) 

• Separately adjustable characteristic for road wheel-related ride 
comfort (extension characteristic independent of compression 
characteristic) 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Front damper, VDC 2 

2 

Front damper, VDC 1 



VDC 1 

VDC 2 

Model 

On E70/E71 included in Adaptive 
Drive Equipment package 

Standard equipment in F01/F02 

Program 

selection 

Sport button next to gear selector 

Handling setting switch next to 
gear selector 

Program 

type 

Sport/Comfort 

Coordinated integration in 
all dynamic handling control 
functions 

Control unit 

VDM control module, right rear of 
luggage compartment 

4 EDC satellite control 
modules directly on damper units 

VDM control module, 
front right A-pillar 

4 EDC satellite control 
modules directly on damper units 

Damper 

Twin tube, gas filled shock 
absorbers 

Twin tube, gas filled shock 
absorbers 

Fault 

diagnosis 

VDM and EDC satellite 
control modules fully 
diagnosable 

VDM and EDC satellite 
control modules fully 
diagnosable 

Programming 

VDM and EDC satellite 
control modules flash- 
programmable 

VDM and EDC satellite 
control modules flash- 
programmable 

Coding 

VDM and EDC satellite 
control modules codable 

VDM and EDC satellite 
control modules codable 

Malfunction 

display 

Messages in the Control Display 
or instrument cluster 

Messages in the Control Display 
or instrument cluster 

Testing 

BMW diagnostic systems 

BMW diagnostic systems 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

79 


























80 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Signal Processing 

• The vertical movement of the wheels is detected by the wheel- 
acceleration sensors integrated in the EDC satellite control 
modules. 

• From the wheel acceleration rates and the ride height signals 
(FlexRay bus) the vehicle body motion is calculated. 

• In addition, signals such as the vehicle road speed are read 
from the FlexRay bus for the purpose of determining reguired 
damping forces. 

Signal Processing/VDC (2) Controller 

Individual damping forces are calculated for each individual wheel 
according to the vehicle body motion, the wheel motion and the 
additional signals read from the FlexRay bus, and are sent every 2.5 
ms to the EDC satellite control units. 

Damping Force Adjustment 

• Stored on each EDC satellite control unit is the actual individ¬ 
ual damper characteristic, making it possible to minimize 
differences from the specified characteristic arising from 
manufacturing tolerances. 

• From the specified damping force and the damper character¬ 
istic data-map, the EDC satellite control units calculate the 
reguired current to be applied to the damper extension valve 
and compression valve. 



VDC System Components 


VDM Control Module 

The location of the VDM control unit is located near the right hand 
A-pillaras previously mentioned on page 20. 

There are two different versions of the VDM control unit according 
to the equipment options fitted on the vehicle: 

• The basic version of the VDM control unit is used if the vehicle 
has only the standard VDC equipment 

• The “high” version of the VDM control unit is used if, as well 
as the standard VDC system, the vehicle also has ARS Active 
Roll Stabilization (Dynamic Drive). 

In that case, the output stages for controlling the ARS valve mani¬ 
fold are also integrated in the VDM control unit. 



Ride Height Sensors 

All F01 and F02 vehicles have ride height sensors. The sensors 
are direct hardwired input to the ICM. 



More information for the ride height sensors can be found on 
page 27 in this workbook or in the reference material on ICR 

EDC Satellite with Damper 

The VDC dampers on the rear suspension are either steel-spring 
or air-spring versions depending on the optional equipment fitted. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

VDC Damper with steel spring 

2 

VDC damper with air spring 

3 

Front EDC satellite module 

4 

Rear EDC satellite module 

5 

EDC data-map valve for 
compression control 

6 

EDC data-map valve for 
extension control 

7 

EDC data-map valve for 
extension control 

8 

EDC data-map valve for 
compression control 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

81 













82 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 



VDCII Damper Operation 

Comparison of VDC 1 to VDC 2 Damper 

A VDC (1) damper with only one EDC data-map valve uses 
combined extension/compression adjustment which has to be 
cycled extremely rapidly. 

With this type of control, the damper adjustment is based on wheel 
frequency. The wheel frequency is the frequency at which the 
wheel oscillates along the z-axis (vertically). 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Damper tube 

B 

FC = Compression force 

2 

EDC satellite control unit 

C 

VE = Extension velocity 

3 

EDC data-map valve for extension 
and compression control 

D 

VC = Compression velocity 

A 

FE = Extension force 

E 

Extension and compression charac¬ 
teristic data-map 


Damper tube 


EDC data-map valve 
for compression 


A VDC (2) damper with two EDC data-map valves uses independ¬ 
ent extension/compression adjustment which does not demand 
such a high cycling rate. 

With this type of control, the damper adjustment can be based on 
body frequency. The body frequency is the frequency at which the 
body oscillates along the z-axis (vertically). 

The two EDC data-map valves firstly enable independent extension 
control and, therefore, data-map compatible design, and secondly 
independent compression control and, therefore, data-map 
compatible design. 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Extension progression 

2 

EDC data-map valve for extension 

B 

Compression progression 

3 

EDC satellite control unit 

1 

Damper tube 

4 

EDC data-map valve 
for compression 

































































4 ( 3 ) 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

EDC data-map valve 
for compression 

B 

FC = Compression force 

2 

EDC data-map valve for extension 

C 

VE = Extension velocity 

3 

Force/direction of piston 
rod movement 

D 

VC = Compression velocity 

4 

Fluid medium 

E 

Extension data-map 

5 

Data-map control 

F 

Compression data-map 

A 

FE = Extension force 




Control Strategy 

The fundamental control principle is known as the "Skyhook sys¬ 
tem", which means, in theory, primary control objective of holding 
the vehicle stationary in a vertical direction regardless of driving sit¬ 
uation as if suspended from a "hook in the sky". 

To achieve this highest of all comfort objectives, the movements of 
the entire body have to be evaluated. Thus an overall analysis is 
performed of the ride height data and z-axis acceleration rates. 


foi 



Furthermore, VDC regulation takes into consideration steering 
inputs based on the steering angle curve. If VDC detects a rapid 
increase in the steering angle, the driving dynamics control func¬ 
tion infers that the vehicle is entering a bend and can preventively 
adjust the dampers on the outside of the bend to a harder setting 
in advance. 

Thus VDC assists the ARS system, if fitted, and contributes to 
reducing vehicle roll (roll tendency). 

Moreover, VDC is able to detect the braking operations by the 
driver based on the brake pressure information supplied by DSC. 

A high brake pressure normally results in pitching of the vehicle 
body; VDC counteracts that effect by setting the front dampers to 
higher damping forces. This also results in an improvement in the 
front/rear brake force distribution, which in turn reduces the braking 
distance (by comparison with a vehicle without VDC). 

With the introduction of the handling setting switch, the VDC set¬ 
ting is incorporated in a number of modes which bring about a 
coordinated overall setting across all systems. 


book 

83 


- Module 2 










































































84 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Active Roll Stabilization (ARS) 

Active Roll Stabilization was first fitted on the 7 Series predecessor, 
the E65/E66, and has been used in similar form since on the E6x 
and E7x models. 

This section only describes the essential details and modifications 
of the ARS on the F01/F02. 

As Vertical Dynamics Control (VDC) is fitted as standard on the 
F01/F02, the ARS is now an option. 

In customer communications, ARS continues to be marketed 
under the name "Dynamic Drive" on the F01/F02. 

Vertical Dynamics Control 

VDC and ARS have to respond with the appropriate speed in the 
event of rapid lane changes, rapid cornering or rapid changes of 
direction on winding country roads. 

Overview of ARS Components 

The components of the ARS system of the F01 are much the 
same as on past ARS systems. 

The ARS control module is no longer used, the control of the ARS 
system (via ARS valve block) has been assumed by the VDM 
module. 

VDM Module 

The VDM module contains the appropriate output stages for 
controlling the ARS valve block. The system architecture on the 
F01/F02 now features two different versions of the VDM control 
module: 

• If ARS is not fitted, the VDM has no output stages for ARS 
valve manifold control 

• If ARS is fitted, the VDM has output stages for ARS valve 
manifold control 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

DME 

11 

Rear hydraulic motor 

2 

EDC, SVR 

12 

Ride height sensor 

3 

Ride height sensor 

13 

EDC, SHL 

4 

Front power distribution box 

14 

SZL 

5 

VDM 

15 

ZGM 

6 

ARS valve manifold 

16 

DSC 

7 

Instrument cluster 

17 

Ride height sensor 

8 

ICM 

18 

EDC, SVL 

9 

Ride height sensor 

19 

Hydraulic fluid reservoir 

10 

EDC, SHR 

20 

Front hydraulic motor 






























The VDM control module is located in the passenger compartment 
near the right-hand A-pillar. It receives its power supply via KL15N 
and is protected by a 5A fuse. 

The VDM control unit is activated exclusively by the Car Access 
System (CAS) via a Terminal 15N lead as of status "Ignition ON". 

A vehicle authentication process takes place when the system is 
started. 

All outputs (valve solenoids and sensors) are subjected to a 
comprehensive check for short circuits and circuit breaks. If there 
is a fault, the system switches the actuators to a safe-driving mode. 

The VDM control unit switches off if the voltage is too low/too high. 

VDM Control Unit Inputs 

From the input signals, the VDM control unit calculates the control 
signals to the actuators. The input signals are also checked for 
plausibility and used for system monitoring. 

The VDM control unit receives the following input signals: 

• FlexRay bus 

• Front-suspension circuit pressure (analog) 

• Rear-suspension circuit pressure (analog) 

• Switch position detector reading (analog) 

• Fluid level sensor signal (analog) 

The most important control signal for the ARS function is the lateral 
acceleration measured by the ICM control unit, which is sent to the 
VDM via the FlexRay bus. Additional lateral dynamics information 
from the FlexRay bus which is also provided by the ICM comprises 
the road speed signal and the steering angle. 

From that, the stabilization reguirement is calculated and the 
relevant active forces are applied. The road speed and steering 
angle information is also used to improve the reaction time of the 
system. 


VDM Control Unit Outputs 

All outputs are compatible with diagnostics and protected against 
short-circuit. The outputs include controls for: 

• Pressure regulating valves for front and rear axle 

• Failsafe valve 

• Directional valve 

• Intake restrictor valve 

• 5 V power supply for the sensors: 

- Pressure sensors at the front and rear axle 

- Switch-position detector (SSE) 

The valves are controlled by the supply of current regulated by 
pulse-width modulation (PWM). 

The valve currents are mutually checked for plausibility on a contin¬ 
uous basis. Therefore, the pressure can be set more precisely and 
the switch valves can be monitored electronically. 

Fault symptoms of the output signals are: 

• Short circuit to Terminal 30 and Terminal 

• Open circuit and 

• Valve short circuits 

• Sensor power supply faults 

A message is sent to the DME via the FlexRay bus from the central 
dynamic handling controller on the ICM. The message contains 
information on how much power the tandem pump currently 
reguires to supply the active anti-roll bars. 

In this way, output at the engine can be increased to satisfy the 
additional power reguirement. A regular data signal (alive signal) is 
broadcast and read by other VDM control units to identify whether 
the system is still active. In addition, a function status signal is 
broadcast which communicates the status of the ARS function. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

85 



86 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


The VDM control unit transmits an additional status message via 
the FlexRay to the instrument cluster in order to actively initiate 
display messages. That status message is assigned a priority 
among all suspension/steering messages by the message coordi¬ 
nator on the ICM control unit and passed to the instrument cluster. 

All signal faults are recorded and permanently stored in the fault 
memory. If the alive signal fails, the ICM control unit automatically 
sends a message to the instrument cluster to activate the ARS 
warning lamp. 

Oscillating Motor 

The hydraulic motor and the hydraulic motor body are each 
attached to one half of the anti-roll bar. The active anti-roll bar 
consists of the oscillating motor and the anti-roll bar halves fitted to 
the oscillating motor, with press-fitted roller bearings for their 
connection to the axle carriers. The use of roller bearings ensures 
optimum comfort thanks to better response and reduced control 
forces. A thin coating of grease on the roller bearing does not 
impair the function of the active anti-roll bar. 



Active Anti-roll Bar, front 

The anti-roll bar is mounted on the front suspension subframe. 

The anti-roll bar links are attached to the pivot bearing. There are 
two pressure relief valves on the hydraulic motor of the front sus¬ 
pension anti-roll bar. 

On the pressure relief valves there are air filter elements (black plas¬ 
tic caps) attached. Those black air filter caps with Goretex inserts 
must not be removed. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Oscillating motor 

4 

VDM 

2 

Tandem pump 

5 

Power steering cooler 

3 

ARS valve manifold 

6 

Air filter element 











Rear Suspension Active Anti-roll Bar 

The anti-roll bar is mounted behind the rear suspension subframe. 
The anti-roll bar links are attached to the rear suspension swing 
arms. 

On the hydraulic motor for the rear suspension anti-roll bar, blank¬ 
ing plugs are fitted in place of the pressure relief valves. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear suspension, oscillating motor (hydraulic) 


ARS Hydraulic Valve Manifold 

The hydraulic valve block is located on the floor plate of the vehicle 
behind the front right hand wheel housing level with the front right- 
hand door. 

The hydraulic valve block is connected to a carrier plate bolted to 
the body. The hydraulic valve block houses the following valves 
and sensors: 


• 1 directional control valve 

• 1 failsafe valve 

• 2 pressure sensors; 1 sensor for the front suspension, 
1 sensor for the rear suspension 

• Switch-position detector 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Front axle, pressure valve (PVV) 

5 

Rear axle pressure sensor (DSH) 

2 

Rear axle, pressure valve (PVH) 

6 

Failsafe valve (FS) 

3 

Switch position detector (SSE) 

7 

Directional valve (RV) 

4 

Front axle pressure sensor (DSV) 




• 2 pressure valves; 1 for the front suspension and 1 for the rear 
suspension [these are proportional pressure limiting valves] 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

87 




















F01 


Tandem Pump 

The hydraulic pumps fitted in this model series were based on a 
modular design principle. Depending on the engine and eguip- 
ment specification, a suitably dimensioned hydraulic pump is 
flange-mounted to the engine in the same installation space. 
Decisive eguipment features for these tandem pumps: 

• Basic steering 

• Integrated Active Steering (IAL) 

• C02 reduction measures 

• Dynamic Drive (ARS) 

• Dynamic Drive (ARS) and Integrated Active Steering (IAL) 

• Intake restrictor valve 





- Module 2 


88 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Radial piston pump 

3 

Electronic volumetric 
flow control valve 

2 

Intake restrictor valve 

4 

Vane pump, power steering 


The hydraulic pump driven by the engine's poly-V belt is, on vehi¬ 
cles with Dynamic Drive, invariably a tandem pump, which consists 
of a radial-piston pump section for ARS and a vane pump section 
for the power steering. Radial-piston pump section of the tandem 
pump: 

Radial Piston Pump 

This radial piston pump has 8 pistons in a single row and is 
designed for a maximum pressure of 210 bar. 

When the engine is idling, the pump speed is approximately 750 
rpm. At that speed, the radial piston pump section delivers a 
minimum fluid flow rate of approximately 5.5 liters per minute at a 
pressure of approximately 3 bar. Conseguently an adeguate fluid 
flow rate is guaranteed even at idling speed. 

At a pump speed of 1450 rpm, the maximum fluid flow rate is limit¬ 
ed to approximately 9 liters per minute. 

New Feature 

As a C02 reduction measure when driving in a straight line, the 
fluid flow rate of the radial piston pump is restricted by a restrictor 
valve on the intake side, thereby substantially reducing the circula¬ 
tion pressure and, therefore, the engine power used to drive the 
pump. As a result, active control of the intake restrictor valve makes 
a positive contribution to the C02 eguation. 

The Dynamic Drive and hydraulic power steering share a common 
fluid reservoir and fluid cooler. 












90 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Electronic Ride Height Control (EHC) 


As of the start of production, the EHC system is only available as 
standard equipment on the F02. At the time of vehicle launch, 
EHC is not available as an option on the F01. 



The EHC system operates much the same as previous EHC 
systems. On the F01, EHC is a “single-axle” air spring 
system for the rear axle. 


The control unit for the EHC system is located in the 
right rear luggage compartment area in the control 
module carrier near the rear power distribution 
box. 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

ZGM 

6 

Air supply relay 

2 

Ride height sensor, rear right 

7 

Air Supply Unit (LVA) 

3 

EDC.SHR 

8 

EDC_SHL 

4 

Rear power distribution box 

9 

Ride height sensor, rear left 

5 

EHC control module 






















EHC Circuit Diagram 


□ 


© 


m 

© 


© 


Oil 






®n 


Ip® 


J u 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

ZGM 

7 

Solenoid valve, right side 

2 

Ride height sensor, rear left 

8 

Air exhaust valve 

3 

Ride height sensor, rear right 

9 

Air supply relay 

4 

Air Supply Unit (LVA) 

10 

Rear power distribution box 

5 

Compressor unit 

11 

EHC control module 

6 

Solenoid valve, left side 




F01 Workbook - Module 2 

91 


































































92 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


| Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. What are the primary functions of the VDM module? 6. What is the purpose of the intake restrictor valve? 


2. What is different about the ride height sensors on a vehicle 7. Where is the EHC module located on the F02? 
equipped with EHC? _ 


3. Which portion of the tandem pump is responsible for 
providing pressure for the ARS system? 


4. Why is it necessary for the VDM to receive brake pressure 
information from DSC? 


5 


What is unique about the damping control of the VDC 
system? 





94 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 

DCC and ACC 


Trusted Driver Assistance Systems 

BMW has long since offered a comprehensive range of driver 
assistance systems. These make it easier for the driver to control 
the vehicle, by: 


• providing the driver with information, 

• prompting the driver how to act or 

• actively intervening in the way the vehicle is driven. 



The systems in this section of the training workbook include: 

• Cruise control with braking function (standard F01/F02) 

• Active Cruise Control with Stop & Go function (opt) 

• Adaptive Brake Assistant with warning function (w/ACC) 

In the F01/F02, "Dynamic Cruise Control" (DCC) supersedes the 
cruise control (FGR) function available as standard in the E65. 

The optional extra "Active Cruise Control with Stop & Go 
function" (ACC Stop & Go) provides optimum assistance to the 
driver not only in smoothly flowing traffic but also in traffic jam 
situations. 

Both systems are based on the new architecture of the Integrated 
Chassis Management (ICM). 

As part of the ACC with Stop & Go option, the F01/F02 features 
the Adaptive Brake Assistant function. 

This safety function, has been supplemented by a new warning 
function in the F01/F02. It alerts the driver to a risk of collision 
detected by the long-range radar sensor. This enables the driver 
to intervene even faster and, potentially, to avoid an accident. 










Dynamic Cruise Control 

The cruise control with braking function was introduced with the 
BMW 3 Series (E9x). It is also referred to as "Dynamic Cruise 
Control" (DCC). 

Mostly, DCC is a conventional cruise control system with some 
additional functions. The DCC offers the driver the opportunity to 
adjust the set speed in small or large increments, which is then set 
and maintained by the system by controlling power output and 
braking. 

The brakes are also controlled during steep downhill driving if 
sufficient deceleration is not achieved by engine drag-torgue alone. 

Dynamic Cruise Control in the F01/F02 is not computed in the 
DSC control unit as it is in other vehicles. Instead, it has been inte¬ 
grated into the ICM control unit. 

In the F01/F02, there are differences in how the function is operat¬ 
ed and how information is displayed by comparison with the func¬ 
tion implemented in other vehicles. 

Operation and Display 

In the F01/F02, Dynamic Cruise Control is no longer operated by 
means of an operating lever. Instead, the driver can operate the 
function conveniently using a button pad on the multifunction 
steering wheel. 

To prevent accidental activation, the function remains inoperable 
until the I/O button has been pressed after the vehicle has started, 
the DCC is then in standby. 

This state is acknowledged in the instrument cluster by a green 
indicator light lighting up. With the function in standby, the driver is 
now able to activate cruise control. To do this, the driver can press 
the SET button used to store the vehicle's current road speed as 
the set speed. 


F01 


An active state is indicated by a green indicator light in the circum¬ 
ference of the speedometer dial lighting up. There is an alternative 
way to activate the function if a set speed has already been stored. 

This is indicated by an orange indicator light in the circumference 
of the speedometer dial. If the driver wants to use this speed value 
as the set speed, he simply has to press the RES button. 

The DCC then accelerates or decelerates the vehicle to this speed 
value automatically. While the function is active, the driver is able to 
increase or decrease the set speed at anytime. There are two 
adjustment increments available. 



The rocker switch offers two different incremental settings in either 
direction. First, the set speed is altered in increments of 1 mph 
each time the rocker switch is pressed; second, it is altered in 
increments of 5 mph. 

In the F01/F02, the adjustment range for the set speed is 20 mph 
to 110 mph. If the rocker switch is pressed and held, the system 
will accelerate/decelerate the vehicle until the rocker switch is 
released. This is known as a "comfort dynamics" function as fea¬ 
tured in the E9x and E6x LCI. 

To deactivate the system, the driver can simply operate the brake 
pedal like before. Or, the driver can deactivate the system by 
pressing the I/O button. 


book 

95 


- Module 2 









96 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


The system is then returned to standby and keeps the set speed 
last used stored in its memory. If the driver then presses the I/O 
button once more, the system is completely switched off and the 
green indicator light in the instrument cluster goes out. 

In the event of particular operating states, the displays shown here 
are supplemented by information messages displayed below the 
speedometer. This is the case, for instance, if the driver attempts 
to activate the system even though not all the activation criteria 
have been fulfilled (i.e. speed less than 20 mph). 

In the F01/F02, a difference in the way Dynamic Stability Control 
interacts with Dynamic Cruise Control has been introduced. 

This is explained by the following example: Using the "Driving 
Dynamics Switch", the driver has selected a mode in which DSC is 
inactive (e.g. "Sport+" mode). If the driver now activates cruise 
control, DSC will be activated automatically. 

This is accompanied by an automatic changeover from Sport plus 
mode to "Normal" mode. 

In previous vehicles, the driver was unable to activate cruise control 
without activating DSC manually first. 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

“Standby” indication 

B 

“Active” state 

1 

Orange LED: set speed of 130 km/h (80 mph) stored 

2 

Indicator light for DCC (DCC On) 

3 

Green LED; actively maintaining a set speed of 130 km/h (80 mph) 

4 

Set speed displayed numerically (briefly displayed at time of function 
activation or whenever the set speed is changed 












Active Cruise Control with Stop & Go function 

The ACC Stop & Go function in the F01/F02 is largely identical to 
that in the E6x LCI. ACC Stop & Go extends the operating range of 
the former ACC system to include low speeds down to a standstill. 



In other words, speed and distance from the vehicle in front are 
automatically controlled at those speeds as well. 

ACC Stop & Go will automatically stop the car if necessary and 
then indicate to the driver as soon as it detects that it is possible to 
start moving again. 

To pull away again, the driver has to acknowledge this message. 
The pulling-away process is controlled fully automatically by ACC 
Stop & Go only if the duration of the standstill is very short. 

Thus, ACC Stop & Go provides optimum assistance for the driver 
not only in moving traffic but also in traffic jams such as are more 
and more freguently encountered on highways. Flowever, this 
system (in common with ACC) is not intended for use in urban 
areas for negotiating junctions or traffic lights. 

The functions of ACC Stop & Go in the F01/F02 differ from those 
in the E6x LCI in the following areas: 

• Operation and display 

• Behavior in response to driver's intention to get out. 


Operation and Display 

ACC Stop & Go and DCC are activated/deactivated in a very similar 
way. The driver is able to activate ACC Stop & Go not only while 
the vehicle is in motion, but also when the vehicle is stationary, 
provided the system has detected another vehicle in front. 

To activate ACC Stop & Go at a standstill, the driver has to depress 
the brake pedal and press the SET or RES button at the same 
time. The activation conditions that applied to the E6x LCI similarly 
apply here: 

• Brake pedal must not be depressed 

• Automatic transmission must be in Drive 

• Parking brake must not be activated 

• Radar sensors must be operational and not dirty 

• There must be no system fault present. 

If DSC was inactive before, in the F01/F02 it is activated as soon as 
ACC Stop & Go is activated. At the same time, the "Driving 
Dynamics Control" automatically changes to "Normal" mode 
(same behavior as for DCC). 

Similarly, ACC Stop & Go cannot be deactivated by means of the 
I/O button while the vehicle is stationary unless the brake pedal is 
depressed at the same time. 

In the F01/F02, the adjustment range for the set speed is 20 mph 
to 110 mph as it is in the E6x LCI. 

By comparison with DCC, a vehicle with ACC Stop & Go has an 
MFL button pad that additionally features two buttons for making 
distance adjustments. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

97 


98 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 



Index 


Explanation 


1 SET button to activate 


Button for reducing distance 


Rocker switch to change 
set speed 


Button for increasing distance 


I/O button for ON/OFF 


Resume button 


Each (short) button stroke to change the distance increases the 
desired distance used by ACC Stop & Go for its control process by 
one increment at a time. A total of four increments are available to 
the driver. 

If the vehicle is equipped with the head-up display option, the ACC 
displays also appear there, provided the driver has configured them 
to do so. 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

"Standby" state 

B 

"Active" state 

1 

Orange LED: set speed of 130 km/h stored 

2 

Lines that indicate "standby" mode 

3 

Green LED: set speed of 130 km/h selected by the driver (the speedome¬ 
ter needle is not pointing at the LED here because the vehicle in front is 
travelling slower than the set speed) 

4 

Car symbol: vehicle ahead detected by ACC Stop & Go 

5 

Bars: represent the distance increment selected by the driver 

6 

Set speed displayed numerically: briefly displayed at the time of function 
activation or whenever the set speed is changed 






















Behavior in response to the driver's intention to get out 

ACC Stop & Go uses the DSC hydraulics to reliably slow the vehi¬ 
cle to a halt and keep it stationary. 

Without a supply of electricity, the DSC hydraulics are, however, 
unable to indefinitely maintain the braking force necessary to keep 
the vehicle stationary. 

By contrast with the E6x LCI, the F01/F02 is equipped with an 
electromechanical parking brake (EMF). This is able to assume the 
function of holding the vehicle stationary if 

• DSC is no longer able to maintain the hold function due to a 
fault or overload, 

• the driver gets out or 

• the engine is switched off. 

Thanks to the EMF, ACC Stop & Go also benefits from improve¬ 
ments designed to enhance comfort while the vehicle is stationary. 
Drivers of an E6x LCI had to be issued with a warning if they were 
about to get out with ACC Stop & Go still active. They were 
reminded to secure the vehicle against rolling away. They had to 
apply the parking brake manually. 

In the F01/F02, however, the parking brake function of the EMF is 
activated automatically whenever the driver is about to get out of 
the vehicle with ACC Stop & Go still active. 

The driver's intention to get out of the F01/ F02 is detected by the 
signals of the seat belt buckle contact (driver's) and door contact 
(driver's door). A signal from the seat occupancy detection (driver's 
seat) is not used in the F01/F02. 

While the vehicle is being held stationary by ACC Stop & Go, the 
DSC unit takes overall monitoring and control processes. 

The DSC also controls the system's behavior in response to the 
driver's intention to get out of the vehicle. 


F01 


For ACC Stop & Go, this is absolutely identical to that implemented 
for the DSC-internal Automatic Hold function. 

ACC Stop & Go is deactivated automatically if, from the bus signals 
it receives, it detects that the parking brake function has been acti¬ 
vated. 

Now the vehicle is still held stationary but by the parking brake 
function instead. 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

State of driver's seat belt 
and driver's door 

B 

Displays of ACC Stop & Go and 
parking brake in the instrument 
cluster 

C 

Road traffic situation or perceptible 
response of vehicle with ACC Stop 
& Go 

1 

ACC Stop & Go is active and has 
automatically braked the vehicle to 
a halt behind a vehicle in front. 

2 

The DSC hydraulics hold the vehi¬ 
cle stationary (and are monitored 
by the DSC control unit). 


DOOk 

99 


- Module 2 























100 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


Adaptive Brake Assistant with Warning Function 

The Adaptive Brake Assistant has been carried over from the E6x 
LCI. This function is included automatically if the customer orders 
the ACC Stop & Go option. 



Adaptive Braking Assistance offers the greatest benefit in situa¬ 
tions where the vehicle is following another vehicle. If the vehicle in 
front brakes hard, it is detected by the long range radar sensor. 

The two subfunctions of precharging the brake system (also 
known as the "brake readiness" function) and lowering the thresh¬ 
old for the hydraulic Brake Assistant, assist the driver to perform the 
braking operation to best effect and thus in the best case to avoid a 
rear-end collision with the vehicle in front. 

In the F01/F02, this function is no different from the function imple¬ 
mented in the E6x LCI. The long-range radar sensor gathers data 
on the road users ahead of the vehicle. The data are supplement¬ 
ed by data relating to the driving status of the customer's vehicle, 
and both types of data are used as a basis for calculating a collision 
avoidance rate of deceleration. 

This is the rate of deceleration at which the driver would have to 
brake in order to avoid a collision with the vehicle in front. If the cal¬ 
culated collision avoidance deceleration is above a stored threshold 
value, the brake system begins to precharge and the activation 
threshold for the hydraulic Brake Assistant is reduced. 


All sensor-related and processing functions of Adaptive Braking 
Assistance are computed in the long-range radar sensor. However, 
the computed output variables have to be transmitted to the DSC 
control unit because that is where they are put into action. 

To make this possible, the ICM control unit acts as a gateway 
between the local CAN and the FlexRay. 

In the DSC control unit, there are still more conditions that need to 
be fulfilled before these two subfunctions can be carried out. 

(Example: road speed must be higher than a defined minimum 
speed.) 

However, the Adaptive Braking Assistance technology also has 
limits and cannot react fast enough in situations such as other road 
users cutting in right in front of the vehicle. 

Driving with care and anticipation remains the fundamental impera¬ 
tive even with Adaptive Braking Assistance! 

The Adaptive Brake Assistant and its subfunctions are always 
active and do not have to be switched on separately by the driver. 

New warning function 

In the F01/F02, the Adaptive Brake Assistant is supplemented by a 
warning function. This useful "collision warning" is designed to 
draw the driver's attention to hazardous situations in good time. 
The driver is then assisted by the subfunctions of the Adaptive 
Brake Assistant, which provide optimum deceleration in this kind of 
emergency situation. 

The driver is able to switch the collision warning on and off. 

Its state (on/off) remains stored for the duration of the current 
driving cycle (key-specific). 

The field of application in which the collision warning offers the 
greatest benefit to the customer is as follows: The customer is driv¬ 
ing behind a vehicle that brakes suddenly and hard. 













If the customer has activated the collision warning, he is given noti¬ 
fication in two stages that a hazardous situation has been detected 
and the customer is thereby prompted to intervene: 

• Advance warning 

• Acute warning. 

The time at which the warning has to be issued is, again, calculat¬ 
ed by the long-range radar sensor based on the collision avoidance 
deceleration. Each warning stage has its own threshold values. 

Setting the advance warning 

In the event of an advance warning, powerful braking by the driver 
is sufficient to avoid the situation. If the acute warning is issued, 
the driver must brake immediately and with maximum force to avoid 
a collision. 



The driver has some control over the threshold value for the activa¬ 
tion of the first stage, the advance warning. From an Assistant 
window in the Central Information Display, the driver is able to 
select one of three warning times for the advance warning: 

• Early 

• Late 

• Off (no advance warning given). 

For the collision warning, the ICM control unit is responsible for the 
following control tasks. The switching on and off, the activation 
conditions, the fault monitoring and the adjustment of the warning 
time are all computed by the ICM. 


In addition, the ICM control unit forwards the warning request from 
the long-range radar sensor to the instrument cluster and (if fitted) 
the head-up display, where the warning is issued. 

Issuing of the warning 

The advance warning is represented by the red car symbol in the 
instrument cluster. In the event of an advance warning, it lights up 
constantly. As there is no audible signal, this visual warning signal 
is the only signal for the advance warning. 

In the event of an acute warning, the car symbol in the instrument 
cluster begins to flash. Since an immediate intervention by the 
driver is required, this visual signal is supplemented by an audible 
tone. 

This particular high-frequency tone is used only for the acute 
warning and differs distinctly from other tones that are issued, e.g. 
with Check Control messages. 

If the vehicle is equipped with the head-up display, the visual dis¬ 
plays of the collision warning are seen by the driver even more 
directly and therefore even sooner. 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Stage 1: Advance warning 

B 

Stage 2: Acute warning 




F01 Workbook - Module 2 

101 









102 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


In the head-up display, the advance warning is represented by a 
significantly enlarged red car symbol. As with the instrument cluster 
display, the advance warning is indicated by the symbol lighting up 
constantly. 



_ 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Stage 1: Advance warning 

B 

Stage 2: Acute warning 


In the event of an acute warning, the car symbol in the head-up 
display begins to flash. 

At the same time, the parts of the display that are irrelevant to this 
emergency situation are hidden so as not to distract the driver 
unnecessarily. These displays include those of the navigation sys¬ 
tem, for example. As soon as the acute warning is over, all the 
displays in the head-up display re-appear. 

The same distinctive tone for the acute warning is used in vehicles 
with head-up display. 

The collision warning is active only if the driver has switched it on 
at the driver assistance systems operating unit. 

As the advance warning is the first warning stage, its timing is 
configurable but it can also be switched off. 


If one of these essential system components is limited in its avail¬ 
ability in anyway, these functions may no longer work correctly and 
would need to be deactivated. 

The driver is given notification of this condition. If, for example, a 
fault is present at the time the system is switched on, the function 
illumination of the collision warning will not be activated. 

From this, the driver can infer that the collision warning is not avail¬ 
able. If a fault were to occur some time after the system was 
switched on, the driver could fail to see the function illumination go 
out. For this reason, a Check Control message is issued as an 
additional warning measure. 

There are two different symbols, and each one is supplemented 
by a relevant instruction. Collision warning deactivated (due to 
unfavorable operating conditions, e.g. dirty long-range radar sensor) 
Collision warning failure (due to genuine faults or defective compo¬ 
nents). 



55 





Collision warning deactivated (due to 
unfavorable operating conditions 
e.g. dirty long range radar sensors) 

Collision warning failure (due to genuine 
faults or defective components) 


Fault states 

The functions of the Adaptive Brake Assistant depend on the fault¬ 
less operation of the long range radar sensor in particular, but also 
of the ICM control unit and the DSC unit. 















Components for ACC Stop and Go 
Long-range radar sensor 

In terms of physical design, the long-range radar sensor (LRR) for 
ACC Stop & Go in the F01/F02 is largely identical to the one fitted 
in the E6x LCI. 

Functionally, however, it differs from the sensor in the E6x LCI in 
that it also calculates the new collision warning of the Adaptive 
Brake Assistant. 

In the F01/F02, the long-range radar sensor no longer has a con¬ 
nection to the wake-up line. Instead, it is supplied with power by 
terminal 15N and is thus hard switched. 

Terminal 15N is tapped off at the front fuse carrier. The long-range 
radar sensor contains a terminating resistor (for the local CAN) as it 
does in the E6x LCI. 

The installation location of the long-range radar sensor and the way 
it is mounted have been adapted to the structural conditions 
specific to the F01/F02. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Fixed bearing (mount) 

4 

Housing 

2 

Connector 

5 

Screw for vertical adjustment 

3 

Screw for horizontal adjustment 

6 

Bracket 


Short-range radar sensors 

The short-range radar sensors (SRR) used for ACC Stop & Go in 
the E6x LCI have undergone a hardware revision. New, integrated 
switch circuits have been implemented. 

The principle of operation, however, is much the same. The short- 
range radar sensors on the left and right are identical, as they are in 
the E6x LCI. 

Each of the short-range radar sensors detects its respective instal¬ 
lation position from the pin that is assigned to ground in the wiring 
harness. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Bracket 

3 

Housing (antenna cover) 

2 

Connector 




F01 Workbook - Module 2 

103 

















104 

F01 Workbook - Module 2 


As in the E6x LCI, the short-range radar sensors cannot be pro¬ 
grammed. While they do have a self-diagnostics function, access¬ 
ing the ICM control unit is the only means by which it is possible to 
read their fault code memory entries. 

In the F01/F02, the short-range radar sensors - like the long-range 
radar sensor - are supplied with power by terminal 15N, which is 
supplied in turn by the front fuse carrier. 

There is no connection to the wake-up line. The local CAN is con¬ 
nected to the short range radar sensors by two lines, which begin 
at the long-range radar sensor. 

The short-range radar sensors have no terminating resistor for the 
local CAN. 

In the F01/F02, the short-range radar sensors are fitted on top of 
the bumper carrier (and no longer on its front). For this reason, the 
bracket had to be completely redesigned. It now grips the housing 
of the short-range radar sensor from behind. 

To guarantee the necessary level of stability and reliability, the 
bracket now also has a reinforcement rib. This runs vertically to the 
front of the aerial cover. The rib was positioned here in order to 
minimize its interference with the propagation of radar waves. 

The material for the bracket (and thus for the rib) was also selected 
specifically for this particular application. Emergency repairs that 
use other plastic parts are not permitted. 

Otherwise, there is a risk that the short-range radar sensors may 
not work correctly. 

Note: The short range radar sensors (if replaced) must be 
commissioned via the diagnostic system after instal¬ 
lation. The sensors are accessed through the path¬ 
way provided by the ICM via the Lo-CAN. 



© 


© 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

ZGM 

7 

ICM 

2 

DSC 

8 

FlexRay bus 

3 

Short range radar sensor, left 

9 

FlexRay terminating resistor, 

DSC and DME 

4 

Long range radar sensor 

10 

Lo-CAN bus termination 

5 

Short range radar sensor, right 

11 

Lo-CAN terminating resistor 

6 

DME 



































Driver Assistance Systems Operating Unit 

The driver assistance systems operating unit contains a button for 
switching the collision warning on and off. The operating unit is 
connected to the footwell module (FRM) on the LIN bus. 


A bus signal from the FRM notifies the ICM control unit when the 
button has been pressed. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Function illumination 

2 

Button for warning of 
Adaptive Brake Assistant 


The ICM does not allow the collision warning to switch on unless 
the entire system is working faultlessly. It is only then that a bus 
signal providing positive feedback is sent to the FRM in order to 
have the function illumination in the button light up. 


If, however, a fault is present in any part of the entire system, the 
function illumination remains off even if the button is pressed. 
From this, the driver can infer that the collision warning is not avail¬ 
able. 


The operation and function of the buttons were described in the 
"functions" section. 

The electronics of the multifunction steering wheel evaluate the 
button strokes on both MFL button pads. On the LIN bus, the 
signals are transmitted to the steering column switch cluster (SZL). 

The SZL forwards the button stroke signals to the ICM control unit 
on the FlexRay. This is where the signals for controlling the DCC 
and ACC Stop & Go function are evaluated. 

There is no function illumination on the MFL button pad. For this 
reason, no feedback is sent by the ICM control unit to the MFL 
button pad as it is to the driver assistance systems operating unit. 


SZL 


LIN-Bus 


MFL 


Multifunction steering wheel button pad 

Which version of the MFL button pad on the left-hand spoke of the 
multifunction steering wheel is fitted depends on which option, 
DCC or ACC Stop & Go, is fitted in the vehicle. 

This does not apply to the MFL button pad on the right-hand 
spoke, which is the same regardless of whether the vehicle is 
eguipped with DCC or ACC Stop & Go. 


F01 Workbook - Module 2 

105 










Module 2 




