Table of Contents 

E83 Life Cycle Impulse (LCI) 

Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

Body.5 

Bodyshell.5 

Front .5 

Rear.6 

Vehicle Exterior Lighting.6 

Headlights .6 

Fog Lights .6 

Turn Indicators.6 

Taillights .7 

Interior Design.8 

Cockpit .8 

Door Panels .9 

Rear Seat .9 

Drivetrain.10 

N52 Engine.10 

Intake Air Duct.10 

Digital Engine Electronics (DME).10 

Exhaust System.10 

Gearbox.11 

6-speed Manual Transmission.11 

6-speed Automatic Transmission GM6 (6L45) .11 

Running Gear.12 

Rear Axle Differential (final drive) .12 

Two-stage Disc-type Vibration Absorber .12 

Chassis .13 

Mounts .13 

DXC+ .13 

RDC.13 

Power Steering Cooling.13 


Initial Print Date: 09/06 


Revision Date: 

































Subject Page 

Electrical Systems.14 

EWS4.4 .14 

Lights Module 2.14 

Rear Seat Heating.14 

Oil Level Indicator .14 

Radio, CD .14 

Navigation.14 

Specifications.15 











E83 Life Cycle Impulse 


Model: E83X3 3.0si 
Production: from August 2006 

IBIICHUIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the changes made to the E83 X3 LCI 


3 

E83 LCI 



Introduction 


The BMWX3 has been available on the market as of the 2004 model year and repre¬ 
sents a premium product in the segment of compact luxury SUVs. 

As of August 2006 production, the E83 will undergo a redesign in order to maintain its 
leading position in the market and to fend off the ever increasing number of competitors. 

This model redesign, known as LCI (Life Cycle Impulse), includes a pronounced visual 
upgrade, the introduction of new engines as well as a whole series of improvements in 
details as well as in the range of interior trim and fittings. 

As of September 2006, the E83 X3 3.0i with M54B30 (170 kW/231 bhp) will be 
replaced with theX3 3.0si with N52B30O1 (191 kW/260 bhp). 



4 

E83 LCI 











Body 


Bodyshell 

The only technical change is to the openings for the reversing lights in the inner panel of 
the rear hatch. Due to the higher positioning of these lights, it was also necessary to dis¬ 
place the clearance for their bulbs further upward. 

The carrier, sheet metal components and assembly concept remain unchanged. Only 
the underbody paneling has been adapted to the new engines as part of the model 
redesign. Modifications to the bodyshell components are solely restricted to details such 
as the repositioning of threaded connections, pins or securing elements for the adapted 
wiring harnesses. 

All parts of the bodyshell (hood/tailgate, side panels, doors, sills and weatherstrips) 
remain unchanged. The same also applies to the body connection points. 


Front 

The redesigned E83 can be immediately distinguished from its predecessor by the 
partly painted bumpers and the double kidney grill that extends further downward. 

The newly designed front bumper which was previously two-piece is now three pieces. 
A top section painted in the car color and a bottom cover that is also painted are now 
clipped onto the black-structured, bolted carrier. These painted parts can be individually 
replaced as required by removing the complete bumper. 



Front view - Left: E83 up to 8/06, Right: E83 LCI 

The kidney grills now extend further downward is available only with light titanium bars. 

The grill between the double kidney and bumper as well as the lower grill are black on all 
vehicles. 


5 

E83 LCI 









Rear 

The rear bumper on the E83 LCI is also a new design. It is now made up of four main 
parts (previously one-piece). Two black side panels and one exhaust finisher also in black 
are fitted on a carrier painted in the car color. 

In the same way as the front bumper, the rear bumper can also be dismantled for repairs 
and paint work (after disassembly). 

Two separate reflectors are clipped on to the left and right of the exhaust finisher. 

The PCD sensors of the rear bumper are located in the painted area and are therefore 
painted in the car color (unchanged black at the front). 

The panel at the lower edge of the rear hatch is now also painted in the car color, thus 
making a decisive contribution to the overall higher grade impression of the X3's rear end. 

Vehicle Exterior Lighting 

Headlights 

The front headlights retain their outer contour and connection points. However, vehicles 
with halogen headlights are now eguipped with new open-design segments for high 
beam and low beam reflector. The tube body, cover frame and housing are new. In addi¬ 
tion, vehicles with bi-xenon lights now have lights with four light coronas (previously two). 

The previous headlight washer system with free-standing water jets has now been 
replaced by a system with retractable washer jets. 

Fog Lights 

The new fog lights for the X3 have been modified. 

A new cornering light function has been added. This function is controlled by means of 
signals from the direction indicator and steering angle sensor. When turning, the respec¬ 
tive fog light is switched on thus optimally illuminating the turn-off area. 

Turn Indicators 

The design of the front direction indicator lights has been slightly modified in the same 
way as the side repeater lights which are white. The vehicle is additionally eguipped with 
side markers. 


6 

E83 LCI 



Taillights 

The tail lights have also undergone a facelift. A new chamber arrangement (reversing 
lights now further up) as well as the use of active light guides for the tail light function 
(instead of the previous bulbs) give the rear end of the X3 a modern appearance. 

The lights on the side panels retain their outer contour and connection points while the 
contour of the lights on the rear hatch have been modified. 



Rearview - Left: E83 up to 8/06, Right: E83 LCI 


7 

E83 LCI 

















Interior Design 


Cockpit 

The dashboard has been upgraded by numerous details. The instrument cluster shroud 
(previously attached) provides for a wider color separation groove and a more harmo¬ 
nious general impression. The dashboard, shroud, and airbag cover also have a new 
structure finish. 

The cover of the glove compartment is positioned slightly lower. 

The trim covers for the fresh air grills, the light switch cluster and the cup holder are now 
coated with soft paint (three different colors - depending on interior color). 

Both the basic steering wheel as well as the sports steering wheel now feature a new 
steering wheel rim and a new cover. 

In addition, the sports steering wheel features new spokes and a new backing. Both 
steering wheels have 3 spokes, the previous 4-spoke basic steering wheel is no longer 
available. 


As in other model series, the interior rear-view mirror in the E83 is available with a digital 
compass. 



Cockpit - Left: E83 up to 8/06, Right: E83 LCI 


8 

E83 LCI 












Door Panels 

The door mirrors have also been distinctly upgraded by new surface structuring and 
geometry. The connection to the dashboard has been improved while the trim covers 
for the speakers are now larger due to the installation of new speakers. 

Storage compartment shelves integrated in the door trim panel replace the previous 
netshell combination. The finishers for the power window switches are now smaller. 



Door trim panel - Left: E83 up to 8/06, Right: E83 LCI 


Rear Seat 

Modifications to the foam material in the seat and the seat cover of the rear bench seat 
have raised the front edge by 30 mm thus improving the seating comfort in the rear. A 
seat heating system will be additionally offered for the rear seat. 


9 

E83 LCI 






Drivetrain 


N52 Engine 

The N52 engine first offered in the E90 will 
be reengineered for the September 2006 
launch and will then be known as the N52K. 

The exact engine designation will 
N52B30O1. 

Compared to the M54 6-cylinder engine 
previously fitted in the E83, the N52K is 
characterized by lower fuel consumption 
(12% reduction), reduced weight (10 kg 
less), 35 hp (30 kW) increase in power 
output and an increase of 11 lb ft torgue. 

The exhaust manifold has been slightly adapted to match the geometry of the E83. 

The same also applies to the oil pan with modified underbody area and threaded con¬ 
nection to the front axle. 

The shape of the engine support has been modified to accept the N52. The power 
steering oil reservoir is now mounted on the screw connection for the alternator instead 
of on the frame side member as previously. 

Intake Air Duct 

For the first time at BMW, the intake silencer is a fixed part in the engine. The unfiltered 
air duct is crash-optimized. An unfiltered air resonator and a time chamber filtered air 
resonator are used in order to satisfy acoustics reguirements. 

Digital Engine Electronics (DME) 

The engine management MSV80 is used in connection with the N52K. This system is a 
further development of the MSV70 and has been adapted in terms of several details. 

Exhaust System 

For acoustics reasons, the exhaust system is now mounted at the level of the transfer 
case instead of at the engine support as previously. 

Note: For detailed information on this engine please refer to the 
ST613 “2007 NG6 Engines” technical training manual. 



10 

E83 LCI 




Gearbox 


6-speed Manual Transmission 

The synchromesh of the gearshift mechanism has been newly developed to provide out¬ 
standing gearshift comfort both at low as well as elevated shift forces. 

1st/2nd gearshift now takes place in double cone synchromesh and single-cone synchro¬ 
mesh for 3rd/4th and 5th/6th gear. 

A central selector valve connects the gearshift with a shift gate on the inside for the first 
time. Another new feature is the passive shift lock that guarantees distinctly greater lock¬ 
ing reliability in addition to further optimized smoothness of operation. 

The pressure diecast aluminum transmission casing is of 2-piece design similar to that of 
the 5-speed manual transmission. 

6-speed Automatic Transmission GM6 (6L45) 

The new automatic transmission GM6 replaces the previous transmission GM5 in the E83. 
As indicated by its designation, the transmission has 6 forward drive ranges (GM5: 5). 

The spread and gear ratio are virtually identical to the GM5. 

The power transmission capacity of the transmission weighing 170lbs (76.9 kg), including 
oil, is 258 lb ft (350 Nm). Its main advantages include a 6 % reduction in fuel consump¬ 
tion and improved gearshift dynamics. 

The lower fuel consumption results from the use of the so-called neutral idle control 
(NIC), low converter slip thanks to the use of a turbine-torsion damper as well as reduced 
drag losses in the clutches. 

The structure of the transmission generally corresponds to that of the 6HP19. The main 
difference in the GM6 is a one-way clutch to ensure stable shift guality when shifting from 
1st to 2nd. Thanks to their high drive percentage with the clutch engaged, converters 
with turbine-torsion dampers provide a direct connection to the engine. 

The transmission control unit is accommodated together with the hydraulic control unit in 
the transmission (mechatronics concept). This arrangement provides advantages in terms 
of package space and, due to the smaller number of interfaces, it also ensures increased 
system reliability. 


11 

E83 LCI 



Running Gear 


Rear Axle Differential (final drive) 

A new final drive unit (L-axle drive) has been developed to improve the efficiency of the 
final drive for the X3. The final drive has adopted the new bearing concept from the 
BMW 3 Series together with the new double angular contact ball bearings. This results 
in a considerable reduction in the operating temperature of the final drive, having a posi¬ 
tive effect on operation and service life. 

At the same time, oil flow losses have been substantially reduced while adapting and 
optimizing the efficiency of the gearing in terms of the displacement characteristics. 

The torque capacities of the final drive units HAG168L and HAG188L have been 
increased by 10 % making these final drive units heavier. For acoustics reasons, their 
casings are still made from spheroidal cast iron. 

The table below identifies the differential usage and ratio by vehicle equipment options: 


Model/equipment 

Differential (ratio) 

X3 3.0si manual 

HAG188L (3.73 :1) 

X3 3.0si automatic 

HAG168L (4.44:1) 


Two-stage Disc-type Vibration Absorber 

For effective acoustic decoupling of the drive train, a two-stage disc-type vibration 
absorber is fitted between the propeller shaft and transfer case that becomes harder as 
the applied torque increases. 


12 

E83 LCI 




Chassis 


Various modifications to the chassis of the E83 have been necessary to accommodate 
the higher performance N52K engine. Most of these modifications, however, are restrict¬ 
ed to geometric adaptations (steering system and heat shields). 

Mounts 

The engine and transmission mounts are new. 

DXC+ 

The driving dynamics system DXC+ in the E83 features additional functions. 

In addition to the known features such as ABS, ASC, CBC, DSC and HDC, the following 
will be added: 

• Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) for ensuring maximum traction irrespective of the 
driving surface 

• Hill starting assistance (Hill-holder) 

• Dry brakes in rain 

• Brake standby/brake travel reduction 

• Brake fading assistance 

RDC 

All E83 vehicles will be equipped with the tire pressure monitoring system RDC which 
was introduced in March 2006. 

Power Steering Cooling 

The DSC control unit has an additional program module for the power steering cooling. 
This function increases the fan speed to secure the required cooling capacity under high 
load conditions (e.g. uphill/downhill driving) at low speed. The signals relating to the dri¬ 
ving speed, power output (via HFM) and steering angle lock are used as the control data 
for this purpose. 


13 

E83 LCI 




Electrical Systems 


EWS 4.4 

The E83 will be equipped with the EWS 4.4 already known from other model series. 
Thanks to improved logic of the vehicle immobilizer, this electronic control provides 
increased anti-theft protection, resulting in a more favorable insurance classification of 
the E83. 

Lights Module 2 

The lights module 2 replaces the previous light switch cluster in the E83 LCI; it com¬ 
bines its functionality with that of the AHL control unit. 

Rear Seat Heating 

Rear seat heating will be offered in all X3 models. 

Oil Level Indicator 

The oil level indicator is now integrated in the instrument cluster. 

Radio, CD 

The new radio platform of all E83 features a double tuner and station list expansion. 

An AUX-ln jack is provided on the center console for the connection of external audio 
sources. 

The Random function in the CD changer now only refers to the selected CD and no 
longer to all (up to six) CDs in the magazine of the changer. This reduced number of 
selection options substantially shortens the pauses between the music tracks. 

Navigation 

The computer hardware is now lead-free and therefore recyclable. 


14 

E83 LCI 




Specifications 


X3 3.0si 

Engine 

N52B30O1 

Type/cylinders/valves 

In-line 6/4 

Displacement (ccm) 

2996 

Stroke/bore (mm) 

85 

Power output (kW/bhp) 

260 

At engine speed (rpm) 

6600 

Torgue (Nm) 

305 

At engine speed (rpm) 

2500 

Governed engine speed (rpm) 

6800 

Compression ratio 

10.7: 1 

Engine electronics 

MSV80 

Engine weight (kg) 

165 

Emission stage 

ULEV II 

Rims 

* 

Tires 

* 

Battery (Ah) 

70 

Alternator (AAA/) 

150/2100 

Payload (kg) 

520 

Performance: 0 - 60 mph 

Auto 7.1 sec 

Man 6.9 sec 

* Value not available when going 

to print 


15 

E83 LCI 












