Table of Contents 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 


Subject Page 

Objectives of the Module.2 

Purpose of the System.3 

Transmission Identification.4 

Transmission Comonents.8 

Transmission Features and Principles of Operation.30 

Adaptive Feature.43 

CAN Bus.47 

TCM Coding and Programming.52 

Transmission Fluid.54 

Transmission Service.56 

Transmission Diagnosis and Troubleshooting.58 

Additional Information. 72 

Review Questions.78 


Initial Print Date: 1/03 


Revision Date: 
















Model: All with BMW Automatic Transmission 
Production: All 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Gain practical knowledge of BMW EH Transmissions. 

• Identify Electronic Transmission Control Components 

• Test Electrical components within the transmission 


2 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




Purpose of the System 

Electronically controlled transmissions were introduced on BMW products in 1986 on 5 and 
7 series vehicles. Currently EH (Electro-hydraulic) transmissions are offered on almost every 
production model (Except E46 M3 and E39 M5). EH transmissions offers the following ben¬ 
efits the to driver: 

• Increased driving safety by reducing fatigue. All shifts are automatic as opposed to 
manual transmissions which require more driver interaction. 

• Increased fuel economy through use of lock up torque converter. 

• Increased fuel economy through optimized shift points. 

• Improved shift comfort by use of “Overlap Shift” technology (ZF). 

• More available features through the use of CAN bus technology. 


WHEEL SPEED 
SIGNALS 



3 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 


































































































































































































































































































Transmission Identification 

BMW automatic transmission are manufactured by two suppliers for the US market: 

• Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen: Commonly referred to as ZF. ZF manufactures both 
manual as well as automatic transmissions. 

• GM Powertrain - Hydramatic: Hydramatic is a manufacturing division of General 
Motors located in Strasbourg, France. Hydramatic supplies automatic transmis¬ 
sions to BMW for four and six-cylinder vehicles. 

BMW has developed an internal numbering system for their transmissions for ordering 
parts, information research and identification. Also, each transmission manufacturer uses 
an internal identification system. Here is a breakdown of these identification codes: 


BMW Identification Code Breakdown 


A5S 440Z 

-III II 


Overdrive Ratio 
S = Top Gear Overdrive ““ 

D = Top Gear Direct Drive 

Maximum Input Torque Rating in Nm. 

Manufacturer 

Z = ZF - 

R = Hydramatic 
G = Getrag 


A = Automatic _ 

S= Standard 

Number of Gears 


ZF Identification Code Breakdown 


5HP24 


HP = Hydraulic Planetary 
(automatic) 



Hydramatic Transmissions have internal designations , however they are not used often. 
The internal code for the A4S310/270R is 4L30-E and the A5S360/390R is 5L40-E. 


4 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 






Transmission Identification 


The following is a list of BMW Automatic Transmissions with visual references for identifica¬ 
tion. Also the diagrams below show the drain (1) and fill (2) plug locations. The transmis¬ 
sion used in the current E65/E66 (GA6HP26Z) is not shown on this page, refer to additional 
text found in the pre-course material. 


A5S440Z (5HP24) 


A5S560Z (5HP30) 


A5S310Z (5HP18) 


A5S325Z (5HP19) 


A4S270/310R (4L30-E) 


A5S360/390R (5L40-E) 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 






















Transmission Identification 

In order to identify BMW transmissions there are identification tags located externally on the 
transmission case. The tag contains information such as Manufacturer, Serial number, 
transmission type etc. This information is needed when ordering parts, referencing bulletins 
and calling for technical assistance. 


• ZF - Tag is Located on - 

1. Right hand side (passenger side) 
of transmission case. 

(5HP30 and 5HP18) 

2. Left hand side (drivers side) of 
transmission case. 

(6HP26Z, 5HP24 and all 4HP) 

3. Rear under output shaft. (5HP19) 



ID Tag Location 5HP19 




GETR1EBE -NR. 
SERIAL -NO. 
STUCXL1STEN -NR. i 
MODEL -NO. /—T 


ZF GETRIEBE GMBH 

SAARBRUCKEN 



T 


ID Tag Location 5HP24 


Typical ZF Tag 



• GM - Located on left hand side 
(drivers side) of transmission 
case. 


GM ID Tag (GM 5) 


Hydramatic ID Tag Location (GM5) 



6 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 
















Transmission Identification Worksheet 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. Use ID 
Page and Transmission ID Tag. 

Chassis #: Prod Date: Engine: 

Transmission: Control System: 

TCM Type: (Pins) TCM Part #: 

Software #: Programmed Control Unit #: 

Identification Tag 

Transmission Serial # 

Location of ID Tag: 

Describe the path used to locate the Identification page in the Diagnosis Program: 


Notes: 


7 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Transmission Control Module 

The TCM receives inputs, processes information and actuates the output elements to pro¬ 
vide optimal shift points. The TCM is programmed for maximum shift comfort and fuel 
economy. The TCM on most BMW vehicles is located in the E-Box next to the ECM (DME). 
Always refer to the proper ETM for TCM location. 

There are several types of TCM housings: 

• 35 Pin TCM (TCU) - used on the 4HP transmissions 

• 55 Pin TCM - used on the A4S310R (THM-R1) 

• 88 Pin TCM - used on all others up to 98 

• 134 Pin TCM - used on all BMW transmission from the 99 model year. 

(Note- the 134 pin TCM was introduced on the 98 Models equipped with the 
A5S440Z). 

The 134 Pin TCM is also referred to as SKE (Standard Shell Construction). The SKE hous¬ 
ing uses 5 separate connectors. On transmission applications only three connectors 1, 3 
and 4) are used. Connectors 2 and 5 are blank and are NOT used. The connectors are blue 
in color to avoid confusion with the ECM (DME) connectors which are black. 

134 Pin control modules are supplied by Bosch for ZF transmissions and Siemens for 
Hydramatic transmissions. Bosch and Siemens control modules are NOT interchangeable. 


134 Pin TCM 
with SKE housing 



Connectors 1 2 




55 Pin TCM 88 Pin TCM 


8 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 















Transmission Control Module Worksheet 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. 

Chassis #: Vehicle: _ _ 

Transmission: Control System: 

Where is the TCM located on this vehicle? 

What type of TCM is used? (pins/manufacturer): 

List the information found on the TCM label: 


What special precautions (if any) should be observed when disconnecting the connector on this 
TCM? 


List the special tool numbers of the Breakout Boxes used for this TCM: 


Is this TCM flash programmable? 
Notes: 


9 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Turbine Speed Sensor 

The Turbine Speed Sensor is used to provide input (turbine) shaft speed information to the 
TCM (EGS). The input shaft speed signal is used in conjunction with the output shaft speed 
signal to determine gear range and slip time information for processing in the TCM. Not all 
BMW transmissions use a turbine speed sensor. Some TCM’s use the TD (engine speed) 
signal to determine input shaft speed. All transmissions with the exception of the A5S325Z 
use an inductive type sensor which generates an AC analog signal. The A5S325Z currently 
uses a Hall Effect Turbine Speed Sensor which will send a digital square wave signal to the 
TCM. 

4HP22/24 (EH), A4S310/270R: These transmissions do not use a Turbine Speed Sensor. 
The TD signal is used to determine input shaft speed. The TD signal is an output signal of 
the DME control unit. 

A5S310Z, A5S325Z, A5S440Z, A5S560Z, A5S360/390R: These transmission use a tur¬ 
bine speed sensor. The TD signal is also used with the turbine speed signal to allow the 
TCM to monitor Torque Converter Clutch operation. The TCM can control torque convert¬ 
er clutch slippage and also monitor for faults. 

Output Shaft Speed Sensor 

The Output Shaft Speed Sensor is used to provide output shaft speed information to the 
TCM. The output shaft speed signal is used in conjunction with the turbine speed signal to 
provide the TCM with information on gear ranges and slip times. 

All BMW electronic transmissions have an output shaft speed sensor. The output shaft 
speed sensor is an inductive type which will generate an AC analog signal to the TCM. The 
frequency and amplitude of the signal will increase as output shaft speed increases. The 
exact location of the output shaft speed sensor varies by transmission model. 



Output ^ 
Speed Signal 


Turbine Speed Signal 





Typical Speed Sensor Signal 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




















































































Speed Signal Worksheet 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. Measure speed 
signals as instructed. 

Chassis #: Vehicle: 

Transmission: Control System: 

Look up the Turbine and Output Shaft Speed Sensors in the ETM and record the 
following information: 

Turbine Speed Sensor: 

TCM Connector #: Pins: and 

Output Shaft Speed Sensor: 

TCM Connector #: Pins: and 

Measure the resistance of the Turbine Speed Sensor and record below: 

Actual Reading: Specified Value: 

Measure the resistance of the Output Shaft Speed Sensor and record below: 

Actual Reading: Specified Value: 

Using the Oscilloscope Feature of the DISplus or GT-1, measure the signals from 
the Turbine and Output Shaft Speed Sensors. 

Scope Settings: Voltage Range Volts AC or DC Frequency Hertz 

What type of signal is generated by the Turbine Speed Sensor? 

What type of signal is generated by the Output Shaft Speed Sensor? 

What fault codes are set for Speed Sensor Failures? 

Notes : 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Transmission Oil Temp Sensor 

The TCM is provided with transmission oil temperature information via a temperature sen¬ 
sor. On most BMW transmissions, the sensor is an NTC element which is part of the trans¬ 
mission internal wiring harness. 

4HP22/24 (EH): These transmissions do not use a transmission oil temperature sensor. 
There are no transmission oil temperature influenced features on the 4HP transmissions. 

All Except A5S360/390R, GA6HP26Z: The transmission fluid temp sensor is part of the 
transmission internal wiring harness. On these transmissions, the sensor cannot be 
replaced separately. The harness must be replaced. 

A5S360/390R transmission: the sensor is a separate, replaceable sensor that can be 
unplugged from the harness. 

GA6HP26Z: the sensor is located in the Mechatronics Module, which is located inside of 
the transmission. 

Note: The Mechatronics Module is not currently serviceable at this time. Contact 
the BMW Technical Hotline in the event of a failure. Do not attempt any repair or 
replacement of the Mechatronics Module. 

The transmission oil temperature 
information is used to: 

• Initiate the Warm Up Program 

• To inhibit TOO operation until 
a specified temperature has 
been reached. 

• For determining fluid level 
when used with diagnostic 
equipment. 

The transmission oil temperature 
sensor is connected to the TCM via a 
5 Volt reference and a circuit ground. 

As transmission oil temperature 
increases, the circuit resistance and 
voltage decrease proportionately. 




Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




Kickdown Switch 

The TCM receives a kickdown request via one of two possible methods: 

• The kickdown signal is a direct ground input to the TCM. The kickdown input is 
provided by a kickdown switch located under the accelerator pedal. 

This method is used on most BMW vehicles without electronic throttle control sys¬ 
tems (except M52TU with MDK). 



• The kickdown request is provided by the ECM (DME) via the CAN bus. The kick 
down request originates from the PWG. There is no separate switch in the PWG. 
When the PWG voltage reaches approximately 4.5 volts, the ECM will process a 
kickdown request to the TCM via CAN. The PWG contains a kickdown detent to 
simulate the feel of a kickdown switch. 

This method is used on the M62TU, M54, M73, M73TU, N73 and N62 engines. 



13 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 





Brake Switch 

The brake switch is located on the brake pedal linkage. The brake switch signal is an input 
to the TCM which is used for: 

• De-activation of the shift lock solenoid. When the ignition key is turned to KL15 the 
shift lock is active. The shift lock solenoid is de-activated when the brakes are 
applied. 

• De-activate the Torque Converter. The TCC is deactivated whenever the brake is 
applied, (only on Hydramatic Transmissions ). 

There are two types of brake switches used on BMW vehicles: 

• On early vehicles such as E32, E34, E36, E24, E28 and E31 the brake switch is a 
double-contact mechanical switch. There is a brake light circuit and a brake test 
circuit. The brake test circuit is used for a plausibility check to indicate faults within 
the brake light circuit. 

• On the E38, E39, E46, E65/66, E85 and E53 the brake switch is a hall effect type 
switch. The electronic switch is also monitored for faults and plausibility. 


+ 



ELECTRONIC 
BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 
(Hall Sensor) 


T 


Brake pedal up = Signal Low 
Brake pedal down = Signal High 





Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 

















































Input Signal Worksheet 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. 

Chassis #: Vehicle: 

Transmission: Control System: 

Transmission Temp Sensor 

Where is the transmission oil temp sensor located? 

What is the reference voltage for this circuit? 

Note the current temperature on Status Requests and measure the input voltage at the TCM: 
Transmission Temperature: Input Voltage: 

What does the input voltage do when transmission temperature goes up? 

Kickdown Switch/Circuit 

Describe the Kicdown Switch circuit in this vehicle: 


Brake Switch 

List the pin and connector of the TCM that receives input from the brake switch? 
Connector # Pin # 

What is the brake switch used for in this transmission? 


Notes: 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Transmission Range Selector Switch 

The range selector switch is an input to the TCM. The input is used by the TCM to deter¬ 
mine the position of the manual valve. The range switch uses the familiar “coded input” sig¬ 
nal to determine selector lever position. On all transmissions except the A5S360/390R, the 
range switch uses a 4 wire configuration to determine 7 range selector positions. The 
A5S360/390R uses a five wire arrangement. 

Most range switches are located on the transmission 
case with some exceptions. The E36 with the 
A4S270/310R the range switch is located is the cen¬ 
ter console on the selector lever assembly. The E39 
with A4S270R the range switch is located on the 
transmission case and is adjustable. The range selec¬ 
tor switch on the A5S360/390R is located inside the 
transmission housing. GA6HP26Z is part of the 
Mechatronics Module. 

The range switch can be checked by using “Status Requests” in the DISplus or GT-1. 

A multimeter or an oscilloscope can also be used to check the range switch. If the read¬ 
ing on “Status Requests” does not match the actual selector lever position, there will be 
various transmission malfunctions. 

Always refer to the proper ETM when diagnosing the range selector switch. Use the switch 
logic chart to diagnose faults in the switch. 



Range Switch A5S440Z 


In the example below, the range switch is in neutral. Using the logic chart, switches LI, L2 
and L3 are closed providing B+ voltage to the corresponding pins of the TCM. Switch L4 
is open and no voltage is sent to the TCM. Malfunctions in the range switch or wiring can 
cause various shifting complaints and possible No-Start complaints. 


Switch 
Logic 
Chart — 

EXAMPLE: 




LI 

L2 

L3 

L4 

p 

1 

i 

0 

1 

R 

1 

0 

0 

0 



1 



D 

0 

0 

0 

1 

4 

0 

0 

1 

1 

3 

1 

0 

1 

1 

2 

0 

0 

1 

0 




3 * 


EGS/AGS 






L4^ 

1 





L3 U-*_ 






^L2| ^ 





Llj^ 









Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 






















































































Transmission Range Selector Switch Worksheet 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. Use 
ETM and isert actual voltage readings in chart below. 

Chassis #: Vehicle: 

Transmission: Control System: 

Where is the Range Selector Switch Located on this transmission? 


List any Service Information Bulletins that pertain to Range Selector Switch issues: 


Using the correct ETM for this vehicle, complete the switch logic chart below. 
Connect Breakout Box to TCM and insert the observed voltage readings: 


Notes: 



LI 

L2 

L3 

L4 

L5 

(GM5) 

p 






R 






N 






D 






4 






3 






2 







17 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




Transmission Program Switch 


The transmission program switch is used to switch between various operating modes of 
the transmission. The normal default mode of the TCM is Economy which is indicated in 
the program display as “E”. Economy mode allows the transmission to operate in the most 
efficient mode. Shift priorities are for maximum economy and shift comfort. On some vehi¬ 
cles the program switch is designated “A” for economy mode. Program switches come in 
2 or 3 position configurations. Early vehicles with the 4HP (Early E7) used a rotary program 
switch. 

The TCM can also be switched to “Manual Mode” which on some vehicles is designated 
“Winter Mode”. Manual mode is used to start the vehicle off in a higher gear when encoun¬ 
tering slippery conditions. The program display will indicate “M” (manual) or an asterisk 
symbol for “Winter Mode”. 

Sport Mode is the third operating mode that is available. Sport mode allows for a slightly 
delayed and more aggressive shift. Sport mode is obtained a number of ways. On vehi¬ 
cles with 2 position program switches, moving the selector lever out of drive to 4,3, or 2 
with the program switch in Economy will allow Sport mode. On vehicles with 3 position pro¬ 
gram switches, Sport mode can be obtained by switching to “S”. 



18 

Electronic Transmission Control 


Steptronic Components 

The Steptronic system uses additional components not found on a conventional system. 
These components consist of a manual switch and an Up/Down microswitch. Otherwise, 
the Steptronic system uses the same transmission and TCM. 

The TCM monitors the Steptronic shifter position from P through D via the conventional 
range selector switch located on the transmission. The Range Selector Switch provides 
positions P through D to the TCM because the automatic gate of the shifter only travels 
through these positions. 

When the Steptronic Shifter is moved to the left 15 degrees into the manual gate, the TCM 
receives a ground input from the manual gate switch. The ground signal is provided to the 
TCM through the Transmission Position Indicator. The transmission position indicator also 
provides range position signaling to the range position indicator in the shift console. 

Steptronic was introduced on the E31 850Ci (10/94) and the 840Ci (1/96). Steptronic was 
subsequently introduced into the E38, E39, E46, E36/7 and the E53. 

The Steptronic system can be diagnosed through “Status Requests” with the DISplus or 
GT-1. 


Refer to TRI Bulletin B 24 75 96 for more information on Steptronic. 


Steptronic 
Up/Down 
Shift Switch 



From 2002 model year the Steptronic shifter 
has changed slightly. Downshifts are now 
achieved by moving the selector lever for¬ 
ward and upshifts are now rearward. 


Transmission 
Position 
Indicator 
(up to 2001 MY) 



Manual 

Switch 


TCM 


Manual 
- Mode 


► Upshift 




Down 

Shift 


19 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 





























Transmission Program Switch /Steptronic Worksheet 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. 

Chassis #: Vehicle: 

Transmission: Control System: 

Is this vehicle equipped with a Program Switch or Steptronic? 

Steptronic 

List the inputs to the TCM from the Steptronic Switches: 


What type of signal comes from the Steptronic Switches? 


What is the shift pattern used on this model? 


Notes: 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Mechatronic Module GA6HP26Z 



1 

Position Slide Switch 

9 

EDS 2 

2 

Parking Lock Cylinder Piston 

10 

EDS 1 

3 

Solenoid Valve 3, parking lock Cylinder 

11 

Electronic Plug Connector 

4 

EDS 

12 

Electronic Module 

5 

Solenoid Valve 1 

13 

Hydraulic Module (Valve body) 

6 

EDS 4 

14 

Solenoid Valve 2 

7 

EDS 5 

15 

Position Switch 

8 

EDS 3 





Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




Magnetic Valves 


Magnetic Valves (MV) are used to electronically control hydraulic fluid flow to the various 
shift elements within the transmission. Magnetic valves are located on the valvebody and 
replaceable as separate components. In ZF transmissions, MV valves are designated MV1, 
MV2, MV3 etc. In Hydramatic transmissions, they are designated Shift Valve A, Shift Valve 
B, Shift Valve C etc. 

The magnetic valves are controlled by the TCM. They are supplied power by an internal 
TCM relay and are ground controlled. The TCM switches one or more of the MV’s on or off 
in various combinations to achieve various shifts. Most transmission have 2 or 3 MV’s to 
control shifting. 

In addition to controlling shifts within the transmission, magnetic valves are also used for 
overlap shifting and pressure regulation on some transmission applications. For example 
MV4 and MV5 are used for overlap shifting in the A5S310Z. MV5 is used for pressure reg¬ 
ulation on the 4HP22/24EH transmissions. When used for pressure regulation, the mag¬ 
netic valves are pulse width modulated by the TCM. 



22 

Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 












Pressure Regulating Solenoids 

Pressure Regulating Solenoids are used to modify line pressure for use in the transmission. 
There are numerous terms for these solenoids depending upon transmission type and man¬ 
ufacturer. ZF transmissions use the term EDS, while Hydramatic Transmissions use the 
term DR solenoid, Force Motor Solenoid and Variable Bleed Solenoid (VBS). 

EDS valves are used for main line pressure regulation, TCC application and Overlap Shift 
Pressure Control on the A5S440Z and A5S560Z. All pressure regulating solenoid are con¬ 
trolled by Pulse Width Modulation. 

Using the example in the picture below, this is a section of the A5S440Z/560Z valve body. 
The EDS valves are used for the following: 

• EDS 1 is used for main line pressure regulation 

• EDS 2, 3 and 5 are used Overlap Shift Pressure Control 


• EDS 4 is used for TCC application. (GWK) Gradually applied TCC. 





r* i 


A A 


Hydramatic Pressure Regulator 

The valve body shown at the right 
is from the A5S360/390R. Note 
the location of the main pressure 
regulator. Depending upon the 
reference text, the pressure regu¬ 
lator is also known as the Force 
Motor Solenoid , Variable Bleed 
Solenoid or PC Solenoid. 


TORQUE CONVERTER MANUAL VALVE 




Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 












































































































































































































































Valve Body Worksheet A5S440/560Z 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. Insert 
actual resistance readings in the chart below. 

Chassis #: Vehicle: 

Transmission: Control System: 



Purpose 

Resistance 

Specification 

Actual 

Resistance 

EDS 1 




EDS 2 




EDS 3 




EDS 4 




EDS 5 




MV 1 




MV 2 




MV 3 





What is the proper torque value for the valvebody to transmission case bolts? 


What special tools (Test cable / B.O.B.) is used to measure solenoid resistance from the “cannon” 
connector? 


When does valve body removal become necessary? 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




Valve Body Worksheet A5S440/560Z 


Valve Body A5S440Z/A5S560Z 


PRESSURE REGULATORS (EDS) 

MAGNETIC VALVES (MV) 

L 

j ■ 

■ 

■ 

i ■ 




EDS 1 

_ 

EDS 4 

EDS 3 

J--K 

EDS 2 

EDS 5 

Wf l. 

MV 1 

■ , »~ J 

MV 2 

MV 3 


REAR LOWER 
VALVE BODY 


2 

3 

4 
D 
N 
R 


MANUAL 
VALVE 


FORWARD 
LOWER 
VALVE BODY 



UPPER 
VALVE BODY 


Using repair instructions, circle the bolts on the diagram that are to be removed 
to replace the valve body (shift unit) 


25 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 






































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Valve Body Worksheet A5S360/390R 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. 

Chassis #: Vehicle: 

Transmission: Control System: 


TORQUE CONVERTER 
LOCKUP REGULATOR 
SOLENOID , 


MANUAL VALVE 


SHIFT 

VALVE 

"C" 



MAIN PRESSURE REGULATOR 


ACCUMULATORS 


SHIFT 
VALVE 
A 1 

DO NOT REMOVE THESE 
TWO SCREWS WHEN REMOVING 
VALVE BODY FROM TRANSMISSION 



Purpose 

Resistance 

Specification 

Actual 

Resistance 

Shift Valve A 




Shift Valve B 




Shift Valve C 




TCC Solenoid 




Press Reg. 





What is the torque specification for the valve body to transmission case bolts on 
the A5S360/390R (GM5)? 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




































































































































































































































































































































































Valve Body Worksheet A5S325Z 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. 

Chassis #: _ Vehicle: 


Transmission:_Control System: 



2 - EDS 1 (Pressure Regulator) 



Purpose 

Resistance 

Specification 

Actual 

Resistance 

Solenoid Valve 1 (MV) 




Solenoid Valve 2 (MV) 




Solenoid Valve 3 (MV) 




Pressure Regulator 1 (EDS) 




Pressure Regulator 2 (EDS) 




Pressure Regulator 3 (EDS) 




Pressure Regulator 4 (EDS) 






Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




















Instrument Cluster 


The cluster is used to report information to the driver regarding transmission status. There 
are three items of information needed by the driver: 

• Transmission Range - this indicates the position of the range selector lever. 

The driver needs to know whether the transmission is in P, R, N, D, 4, 3, or 2. 

• Transmission Program - this indicates the mode of operation. There are 3 modes, 
Economy, Manual and Sport . 

• Transmission Fault Information - the driver needs to know of there is a malfunc¬ 
tion in the transmission. Depending upon application, transmission faults can be 
indicated by an icon or by a “Transmission Program” message in the instrument 
cluster display matrix. 



Depending upon vehicle model and transmission, these pieces of information arrive at the 
cluster through different methods. 


• The most current method for this information to arrive at the cluster is through the 
CAN bus. The cluster processes this information from the TCM via CAN. 

• On early E38 and E39 vehicles these is a “One Way Data Signal” from the TCM to 
the cluster. There is a one way serial data line that transfers this information to the 
cluster. On later vehicles, the cluster was introduced to the CAN bus and this 
method was no longer used. This was used on the E38 vehicles to 5/97 and E39 
vehicles to 8/97 production. 

• Early vehicles such as E32, E34, E36 etc. used a various combination of methods 
to transfer this data. Some clusters use the “Coded Input” method for the program 
indicator. Fault indication is done by a ground circuit through the TCM. 
Transmission range indication is achieved by a direct connection between the range 
switch and cluster or by a coded input to cluster. 

There will be a FC6 in the Kombi when the TCM goes into failsafe mode. 

When attempting to diagnose any of these circuits, always refer to the proper ETM. 

28 

Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 







One Way Data Signal 

-Selector Position 
-Program Indication 
-Fault Lamp/Matrix Display 


Cluster E38/E39 


] 

r~ m 

i 

r 

* "M" 

— 

1 

) 




Program Switch 


Instrument Cluster 
E34 



TCM 


9 

• 

9 

! 

i 

. 

[ " a " / 

"M" 

4_ t 

■i _ 



Electronic Transmission Contro Workbookl 













































































































Transmission Features and Principles of Operation 

Adaptive Hydraulic Pressure Control 

Pressure adaptation has been a feature of ZF automatic transmissions since the 4HP22EH. 
The TCM will maximize shift quality by adapting to transmission wear over time. The TCM 
will adjust transmission shift pressures to compensate for wear in the multi-plate clutches. 
This is accomplished by monitoring the input and output speeds of the transmission. When 
the transmission shifts, the TCM monitors the time that it takes to accomplish the shift. The 
time change in gear ratio is monitored and compared to an internal time value in the TCM. 
If the ratio change takes more time than the stored value, the TCM will compensate by 
adjusting the transmission shift pressures via the EDS valve solenoids. The adaptation 
value is stored in the TCM. This adaptation values can only be cleared by the diagnostic 
tester (DIS plus or GT-1). 

Note: DO NOT clear adaptation values unless directed to do so by technical assis¬ 
tance. Clearing pressure adaptations should not be done to resolve a customer 
complaint. The only time that you would need to do so is after a transmission or 
valve body replacement or software change. 

Also it is important not to confuse pressure adaptation with AGS features. AGS 
features will be discussed later in this chapter. AGS features are not stored on a 
long term basis and will not be cleared when the pressure adaptations are 
cleared. Note: Driving style is NOT stored. 




ADAPTATION VALUE 
CONTINUALLY UPDATES 
THE PULSE WIDTH 
MODULATION 
CONTROL OF ALL 
PRESSURE 
REGULATORS 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 














































































































































































Downshift Protection 


Downshift protection is a feature that prevents unwanted or improper downshifting. If the 
range selector were moved to a lower gear at a high road speed, engine damage could 
occur from an unintended over-rev. This feature will prevent engine over-rev by delaying or 
preventing the unwanted downshift until the proper road speed is achieved. The result is 
increased safety by preventing unwanted deceleration slip. 

Reverse Lockout 

The TCM will lockout reverse above 3 MPH to prevent drivetrain damage. The range selec¬ 
tor lever will go into the reverse detent, but reverse will not engage. This is achieved by the 
TCM through hydraulic intervention. The transmission will appear to be in neutral. 

Note: Reverse Lockout is not operative when in failsafe. 

Engine Warm Up Cycle 

The transmission shift points are modified after cold start to raise engine RPM during shift¬ 
ing. This allows for a faster engine warm up and reduction of catalyst warm up time. The 
TCM uses the transmission oil temperature information to determine the implementation of 
this function. 

The warm up phase program will be terminated if any of the following conditions exist: 

• The vehicle exceeds 25 MPH or 

• Transmission oil temperature exceeds 60 Degrees Celsius or 

• A Maximum of three minutes is exceeded. 

ASC/DSC Shift Intervention 

During ASC/DSC regulation upshifts are inhibited to enhance the effectiveness of traction- 
al control. Depending upon vehicle model, this action can take place via the CAN bus or a 
dedicated shift intervention signal wire. On later model vehicles where the ASC/DSC mod¬ 
ule is connected to the CAN bus, the shift intervention signal is sent to the TCM via CAN. 

Torque Reduction 

In order to allow a smoother shift and reduce load on the transmission, engine torque is 
reduced during shifting. This is accomplished by a signal that is sent from the TCM (EGS) 
to the ECM (DME) during shifting. The ECM will retard timing momentarily during the shift 
for a few milliseconds. This timing change is transparent to the driver. Depending upon 
application, the torque reduction signal is sent over a dedicated wire or a signal over the 
CAN bus. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Emergency Program 


When a malfunction occurs within the transmission, the Emergency program (failsafe mode) 
will be initiated. The Emergency Program will prevent unintended gear engagement and 
ensure driver safety. The following will occur during Failsafe Operation: 

• All shift solenoids are de-energized via TCM internal relay. 

• The pressure regulation solenoid is de-energized resulting in maximum line pressure. 

• The Torque Converter Clutch is de-activated. 

• The Reverse Lockout function is cancelled. 

• Shift lock solenoid is de-energized. 

• Fault indicators are active. 

The fault indicator varies depending upon model, year and cluster type etc. High version 
instrument cluster will display a message in the matrix display. Vehicles with low version 
clusters will display a fault symbol in the cluster. 

During failsafe mode the transmission will be shifted into a higher gear to allow the vehicle 
to be driven to a service location. Depending upon application, the transmission will shift 
into 3rd or 4th gear (on a 4spd) and 4th or 5th gear (on a 5 spd). For example the 
A5S360R transmission will go into 5th gear when there is a malfunction and 4th when there 
is a power failure to the TCM. Since pressure regulation ceases, the shift to failsafe mode 
will be abrupt or harsh, unless the transmission is already in the failsafe gear. 

On newer OBD II compliant vehicles, the MIL light will also be illuminated by the ECM 
(DME). 

Note: When diagnosing transmission related complaints, it is possible to have an 
erroneous fault indicator warning. Faults in the cluster can cause a false indica¬ 
tion or “Trans Program” message. One indication of this scenario would be a 
transmission fault message in the cluster with no transmission faults stored in the 
TCM. 



E46 Transmission Fault Indicator 


32 

Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 





















AC Compressor Load Sensing (Hydramatic Transmissions) 

When the AC Compressor is switched on, additional load is placed on the engine. To com¬ 
pensate for the additional load, the TCM modifies line pressure and shift points. On the 
THMR-1, the TCM receives these signals via a direct connection to the AC compressor 
control circuit. 

On vehicles equipped with CAN bus technology, the “AC on” signal is sent to the TCM from 
the DME as a CAN bus message. 

E34 E36 


AUX. FAN RELAY 
EGS DME (3.1) , 



Shift Lock 

The shift lock solenoid is mounted on the 
selector lever assembly and locks the selector 
lever in Park or Neutral when the ignition is ON. 
This prevent the selection of a gear unless the 
brake pedal is depressed. The solenoid is acti¬ 
vated by a switched ground from the TCM. 
Power is supplied by the TCM internal relay. 
During failsafe operation, the shift lock is dis¬ 
abled. On later models, the shift lock will also 
be active when the TD signal is present and the 
shifter will remain locked above an engine 
speed of 2500 RPM regardless of brake appli¬ 
cation. 


A/C COMPRESSOR 
EGS CONTROL RELAY 




33 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 

























































































Torque Converter Clutch 

Since the efficiency of the torque converter at coupling speed is approximately 1.1 to 1, fuel 
economy is compromised. To offset this a torque converter clutch was added on EH con¬ 
trolled transmissions. The torque converter clutch locks the turbine to the converter hous¬ 
ing. This creates a mechanical coupling with a ratio of 1:1. This can only be achieved at 
higher engine speeds, the torque converter clutch must be disengaged at low engine 
speeds to prevent stalling. 

There are two methods for controlling the torque converter clutch on BMW transmissions: 

• A4S310/270R, 4HP22/24 EH, A5S310Z - These transmissions use an on/off 
control method to lock and unlock the torque converter. The Torque Converter 
Clutch is either completely engaged or disengaged. This method of engagement 
provides an abrupt sensation when the TCC is locking and unlocking. This abrupt 
sensation can be undesirable to some drivers. 

• A5S560Z, A5S440Z, A5S325Z, GA6HP26Z,A5S360/390R - These transmissions 
use a gradual approach to TCC control. The TCC is gradually applied and released, 
this method reduces the abrupt feel of the on/off type TCC. The TCC solenoid is 
controlled by pulse width modulation. This allows fluid to be gradually introduced 
and released to the TCC. 

The TCC is spring loaded to the engaged position. Pressurized fluid releases the TCC, 
when the pressurized fluid is released, the TCC is engaged. Depending on transmission 
application, the TCC can be engaged in 3rd, 4th or 5th gear. The TCC must be disengaged 
at low speeds to prevent stalling. 


On On 




Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 












Shift Solenoid Control 


Magnetic valves are used to direct the flow of transmission fluid to control shift elements in 
the transmission. Another Term for “Magnetic Valve” is “Shift Valve”. Magnetic valves (MV) 
are solenoids controlled by the TCM. They can be switched by B+ or B-. 

On ZF transmissions, magnetic valves are designated MV1, MV2, MV3 etc. On GM trans¬ 
missions they are designated Shift Valve A, Shift Valve B, Shift Valve C etc. 

Either valve can be checked for proper resistance using a multi-meter, DISplus or GT-1. 
Also, the “Activate Components” function can be used to check the Magnetic valves. Most 
all magnetic valves are switched on/off instead of Pulse Width Modulation (PWM). 

All magnetic valves (except THM R-1 to 12/95) are supplied power from an internal relay 
located in the TCM. The magnetic valves are switched on and off by final stage transistors 
in the TCM. During failsafe operation, power to all MV’s is switched off by the internal relay. 

Magnetic valves are located on the valve body. They can be replaced individually. Refer to 
proper repair instructions for installation and removal procedures. 



35 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 






























Pressure Regulation 

Pressure regulating solenoids modify line pressure for hydraulic operation. Solenoids for 
pressure regulation are referred to as EDS valves in ZF transmissions. GM transmissions 
have a few terms such as Force Motor Solenoid, Variable Bleed Solenoid, and DR solenoid. 
Regardless of the name used, they are all used to control main line pressure based on throt¬ 
tle position and engine load. 

On ZF transmissions, EDS valves are also used to control “Overlap Shifting”. This allows 
for improved shift comfort by controlling pressures during shifting. 

Depending upon transmission application, pressure regulating solenoids can be controlled 
using Pulse Width Modulation on B+ or B-. 

The TOM will increase line pressure by regulating current flow to the pressure regulator. 
Current flow is controlled by pulse width modulation. When the duty cycle is low, the cur¬ 
rent flow to the solenoid is low. This allows spring pressure to close the valve. Therefore 
maximum line pressure is achieved. As the duty cycle increases, the current flow also 
increases. The valve opening increases, which allows pressure to be released through the 
pressure discharge which in turn decreases line pressure. 

Main line pressure is also increased during failsafe operation and when needed during 
“Adaptive Hydraulic Pressure Control” functions. Mainline pressure will also default to max¬ 
imum pressure when power to the TOM is switched off. 



36 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




Shift Programs 

BMW EH transmissions have selectable shift programs (or modes) to suit driver needs and 
operating conditions. There are 3 basic shift programs available: 

• Economy Program - The economy program is the default program which is adopt¬ 
ed every time the vehicle is started. When in economy mode, the operating priority 
is for maximum economy and shift comfort. Shifts will take place at low engine 
RPM and road speed. The economy mode is indicated by an “A” on the program 
switch. The cluster will display an “E” to indicate economy mode. 

• Manual Mode (Winter Mode) - Manual mode is used to start out the vehicle in a 
higher gear on slippery surfaces when more traction is needed. A higher gear will 
reduce torque to the rear wheels. Manual mode can also be used to select a lower 
gear when needed such as when climbing a hill. Depending upon vehicle applica 
tion an “M” will appear in the cluster when in Manual Mode or an asterisk ( *) sym¬ 
bol will appear in the instrument cluster to indicate Winter Mode. 

• Sport Mode - Sport Mode provides raised shift points and a more aggressive shift 
program for the “Enthusiastic” BMW driver. The cluster will display an “S” when in 
sport mode. 

Regardless of vehicle application, the program switch provides a momentary ground to the 
TCM to switch between modes. There have been numerous designs of the program switch 
since it’s introduction. The program switch configurations are as follows: 

• 2 Position Slide Switch - This switch has the “A” and the “M” selection. Sport 
mode is achieved by moving the selector lever from “D" to 4, 3 or 2 when in the 
Economy Mode. The 2 Position slide switch is used on most models. These vehi¬ 
cles usually have a range and program display located in the instrument cluster. 

• 2 Position Rocker Switch - This switch operates the same as the slide switch, but 
it is used exclusively on the E36. The E36 does not have a program indicator in the 
cluster. The rocker switch will illuminate, indicating the current program. 

• 3 Position Slide Switch - This switch has the added position for sport mode. The 
shifter does not have to be moved out of drive (D) to be in sport mode. This switch 
is used on the E36 M3 and the 4HP22/24 EH (Version Late E-7). 

• 3 Position Rotary Switch - This switch is used only on the Early 4HP22 EH trans 
missions (Version Early E-7). 

• No Program Switch - On some vehicles with AGS features, there is no program 
switch. Shift modes are obtained by moving the shift lever out of “D" range or auto¬ 
matically by adaptive shift functions. (Example E39) 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



3 Position Program Switch 



~T 

> I'A" f'C* 

> ■•M" 


l 



Program Switch 


Instrument Cluster (E34) 



M 


1 


TCM 


> 



i 

i 

) 

) 



38 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 






























Steptronic Shift Modes 

The Steptronic shifting system was introduced to the BMW model line on the 95 E31 850Ci 
(from 10/94). Steptronic was subsequently added to other BMW models and is available 
on all BMW models with automatic transmissions. Other than a few additional components 
in the shifter mechanism, Steptronic equipped vehicles use the same transmission and 
TCM as non-Steptronic equipped vehicles. 

Since the introduction of Steptronic, there have been several variations in Steptronic func¬ 
tion. Regardless of version, the Steptronic system provides the driver with two modes of 
operation: 

• To operate the transmission in fully automatic mode as with a non-Steptronic trans¬ 
mission. 

• To operate the transmission in the manual shift mode by tilting the shift lever forward 
or backward when in the manual gate. 

The Steptronic shift lever console contains and automatic and a manual shift gate. The 
automatic gate contains the gear lever positions P/R/N/D. When the lever is placed in “D” 
all of the shifting takes place based on the shift map programming in the TCM. To enter 
the manual gate the shift lever is moved 15 degrees to the left. Depending upon applica¬ 
tion, there are three possible configurations of the manual gate: 

• On the E31 850Ci, the gate is marked as “M" only. There is a plus and minus sign 
for manual shifting. Upshifts are achieved by momentarily moving the shifter forward. 
Downshifts are achieved by moving the shifter rearward. When placing the shifter 
into the “M" gate, the transmission will adopt the current gear that is engaged. 

The transmission will stay in that gear until an upshift or down shift request is made. 

• On all other vehicles until the 2002 model year, the gate is marked M/S. There is 
also a plus and minus sign for manual shifting. When placing the shifter into the M/S 
gate, the transmission will adopt Sport mode. All shifts will still be automatic. Full 
manual mode is achieved when an upshift or downshift request is made. Upshifts 
are achieved by moving the shifter forward momentarily and downshifts are achieved 
by moving the shifter rearward. 

• On all models with Steptronic from 2002, the only change is to the manual shifting 
modes. In order to be consistent with SMG operation, the positions were reversed. 
Upshifts are now achieved by moving the shifter rearward and downshifts are now 
forward. Otherwise, Steptronic operation is identical to the previous models. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Automatic Functions in Manual Mode 

When in manual mode there are certain functions which occur automatically to prevent dri- 
vetrain damage and improve driveability: 

• Engine Overspeed Prevention: To prevent engine over-rev, the TCM will upshift 
automatically just prior to max engine cutoff. 

• Kickdown: If plausible, the TCM will automatically shift down to the next lower when 
a kickdown request is received. 

• Decelerating: If in 5th gear and coasting to a stop, the TCM will automatically down 

shift to 4th gear at approximately 31 mph and then 3rd gear at approximately 19 

mph. The automatic downshift allows for an acceptable gear when re-accelerating. 
(6 cylinder models will shift to 2nd gear when stopping vehicle) 

• Implausible Gear Requests: Certain shift requests are ignored by the TCM. For 
example, requesting a downshift at a high rate of speed would be ignored. Any shift 
request that would cause the engine to exceed the maximum RPM limit would not 
be allowed. Also starting out in a high gear is also not allowed. Only 1 st, 2nd or third 
gear is allowed when accelerating from a stop. 


E31 850Ci 
Shifter Console 

1995 to 1997 Model Year, 



40 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



























Steptronic Shifter Circuit 

In order to achieve manual shifts with Steptronic, the selector lever is moved 15 degrees to 
the left. A pin on the selector lever engages the “up/down” microswitches which are a 
ground input to the TCM. The selector lever also triggers the “M” gate microswitch which 
is also a ground input to the TCM. 



BOWDEN CABLE IS 
MECHANICALLY DECOUPLED 
WHEN IN THE MANUAL GATE 



UPSHIFT ( M + n ) 
MICROSWITCH 


DOWNSHIFT ("- 
MICROSWITCH 


AGS 


UPSHIFT 

DOWN 
SHIFT ‘ 


MANUAL 
MODE 


PULL SHIFTER 
15° TO LEFT 
TO ACCESS 
THE "M M GATE 


PIN ENGAGES WITH 
MICROSWITCH ACTUATOR 


"M" GATE 
MICROSWITCH 
CLOSED WHEN 
IN M M M GATE 



The example on the right shows a typical 
shift console for an E31. Note the shift 
pattern, upshifts are forward and down¬ 
shifts are rearward. This shift pattern 
was used on vehicles up to the end of 
2001 production. On vehicles from 2002 
production, the shift pattern is reversed. 




Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



































































Steptronic System Comparison 


Detail 

E31 850Ci 

1995 to 1997 

All model except 
E31 850Ci up to 
2001 Model year 
with Steptronic. 

All Models from 
2002 model year 
with Steptronic 

Shift Console Layout 

“M” Gate 

M/S Gate 

M/S Gate 

Selection of Manual 
Mode 

Shift to “M” gate 

Shift to “M/S” gate and 
move lever momentarily 
to “+” or to 

Shift to “M/S” gate and 
move lever momentarily 
to “+” or to “-”. 

Gear Range 
in Manual Mode. 

2nd to 5th gear (1 st gear 
only accepted for 2 min¬ 
utes after cold start. If the 
throttle is pressed 100% a 
2-1 shift will occur 

1 st to 5th gears 

1 st to 5th gears 

Un-allowable gear 
requests. 

4th and 5th gear after 
vehicle standstill. 

Downshifts that can 

cause engine over-rev. 

1st gear after engine 
warm up. 

4th and 5th gear after 
vehicle standstill. 

Downshifts that can 

cause engine over-rev. 

4th and 5th gear after 
vehicle standstill. 

Downshifts that can 

cause engine over-rev. 

Upshifts/Downshifts 

Upshifts - Forward 
Downshifts - Rear 

Upshifts - Forward 
Downshifts - Rear 

Upshifts - Rear 

Downshifts - Forward 


Shift Pattern up to 2001 Shift Pattern from 2002 



42 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 































Adaptive Features (AGS) 

AGS features were introduced in 1994 with the A5S560Z transmission. AGS control con¬ 
sists of adaptive features that will modify transmission operation according to various fac¬ 
tors. AGS operation can be influenced by two major functional groups: 

• Driver influenced features (influenced by throttle and kickdown input) 

• Environmental influences (such as road conditions - icy, traffic etc.) 

- EGS - - AGS - 

CONDITIONS THAT INFLUENCE ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS THAT 

SHIFT PROGRAM INFLUENCE SHIFT PROGRAM 


1. SHIFT 
PROGRAM 
SELECTION 


Evaluation of: 

- Hill Recognition 



Program 

Selection 

Switch 



n Evaluation of: 

- Rate of Throttle 
Movement 



DRIVER TYPE 
EVALUATION 



Kick Down 
Evaluation 


Wheel Speed 
Sensor X4 


WINTER 

RECOGNITION 



CRUISE 

CONTROL 


2. GEAR SELECTION 




1 2 volts 


Recognition of: 

- Stop and Go 

- Downhill 

- Fast Off 


Gear Selector Switch 
Input via range selector 


CAN 



Hall 

Sensor 


Stop and Go 
Recognition 



CURVE 

RECOGNITION 



a 


Wheel Speed 
Sensor X4 


CRUISE 

CONTROL 


EXISTING EGS FUNCTION 



ADDITIONAL AGS FUNCTIONS 


The driving program selection is not adapted on a long term basis - nor is it stored 
in the control module memory when the ignition is switched off. It continually 
changes as the driver of the vehicle changes driving habits. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 








































































Driver influenced features of AGS 

The adaptive drive program is based primarily on throttle input. The throttle information 
comes from the ECM (DME) via the CAN bus. The TCM continuously monitors the throttle 
input for: 

• The current throttle position 

• The rate of change in pedal movement 

• The number of acceleration requests 

• The number of kickdown requests 

Drive away Evaluation 

The AGS system selects the appropriate shift program based on the amount of accelera¬ 
tion that occurs during takeoff. When driving away under full throttle the transmission will 
shift from XE to E. 


Kick Fast Feature 


Based on these inputs, the AGS will select one three different driving programs as follows: 
• Extreme Economy - Shift points are a low speeds for maximum comfort and economy 


• Economy - The shift points are raised for more performance with economy as priority 

• Sport - The shift points are higher to take advantage of full engine performance. 


Under full throttle acceleration at high speed, single gear downshifts are possible. A two 
gear downshift is possible if the accelerator pedal is moved quickly to kick-down. The 
Extreme Sport program was eliminated as part of the kick-fast feature. 



THROTTLE 

POSITION 

SENSOR 


A— 

/ 

/ 


/ 








KICK DOWN 
SWITCH 



CAN BUS 

^ ui_n_n_nj i 

nnFLTLn i inrun i 



KICK DOWN EVALUATION 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 








































Environmentally influenced AGS features 



STOP and GO 

The feature is activated by defined sequence of shifts which are as follows: 

• Upshift from first to second - followed by a downshift from second to first - followed 
by another upshift from first to second. This is then followed by the vehicle coming 
to a complete stop. 

After this sequence occurs, the transmission will stay in second gear. The AGS control has 
recognized stop and go driving and this function will prevent excessive shifting during heavy 
conditions. The second gear start will be cancelled when: 

• The vehicle speed exceeds 40 MPH 

• The throttle pedal is pressed more than 90% 

• The range selector is moved to Park, Neutral, Reverse or Sport (4,3 or 2) 

• The vehicle is in Sport Mode 

Winter Drive Program 

This feature is activated when the TCM detects slippage at the rear wheels by comparing 
front and rear wheel speed signals. When slippage is detected by the TCM, the transmis¬ 
sion will start in second gear and the shift points will be lowered. This will reduce torque to 
the rear wheels allowing improved driveability and traction on slippery roads. 

45 

Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 







Hill Recognition Program 


There are two hill recognition programs, one for Uphill and one for Downhill. The TCM will 
activate this feature when it receives a high engine load signal at slower road speeds. The 
TCM will perceive this information as being consistent with climbing a hill. The shift points 
will be raised to prevent constant up and down shifting. This is referred to as the pendulum 
shift effect. When driving downhill, road speed will increase with minimal throttle input. The 
TCM will detect a downhill situation and hold the current gear to prevent an upshift when 
going downhill. 

Curve Recognition 

This feature will inhibit upshifts when the vehicle is in a curve. This is to improve stability 
when the vehicle is cornering at high speeds. The TCM will initiate this feature when it 
detects a difference between left and right (front) wheel speed signals. The difference in 
these signals will indicate that the vehicle is in a curve. Be aware that improper tire sizes, 
brands and inflation pressures can influence this feature. Always address these issues first 
when diagnosing delayed upshift complaints. 

Cruise Control Drive program 

A special cruise control shift map is selected by the TCM when cruise control is active. The 
TCM will prevent unwanted locking and unlocking of the torque converter clutch. Also, 
upshifting and downshifting will be minimized. Depending upon application, the cruise con¬ 
trol interfaces with TCM via a single wire data link or as on vehicles with electronic throttle 
control, the TCM will interface with the ECM (DME). 

Manually Selected “Extreme Sport” Program 

This feature is activated by moving the shift lever to position 4, 3 or 2. This activates the 
“Extreme Sport Program” where the shift points are raised for maximum rpm and perfor¬ 
mance. On Steptronic equipped vehicles, the sport program is obtained by moving the 
shifter to the manual gate to initiate the “Sport Program”. 

Modifications to AGS features 

Since the introduction of AGS features in 1994, there have been some software changes 
to address customer concerns. Some AGS features have been perceived by the customer 
as malfunctions. To correct this, some of the AGS features were modified with updated 
software. The AGS features previously discussed in this text reflect the updated modifica¬ 
tions. Always refer to the latest Service Information Bulletins for more information on AGS 
features. 

46 

Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



CAN Bus Communication 


The CAN bus is a serial communications bus in which all connected control units can send 
as well as receive information. Data over the CAN bus operates at a rate of up to IMb/s 
(megabits per second). 

The CAN protocol was developed by Intel and Bosch in 1988 for use in the automotive 
industry to provide a standardized, reliable and cost-effective communications bus to com¬ 
bat the increasing size of wiring harnesses. 

The CAN bus was originally introduced on BMW automobiles in the 1993 E32 740i/IL as a 
data link between the TCM (EGS) and the ECM (DME). 




On earlier EGS systems, various signals were transmitted on individual signal wires. This 
reduced reliability and increased the amount of wiring needed. The CAN bus allows faster 
signal transmission and increased versatility. For example, the signals listed in the chart 
below were previously transmitted on individual wires, now these signals are all on the CAN 
bus. This chart represents only some of the signals on the CAN bus, there are many more 
signals transmitted between the TCM and ECM. 


Sender 

Information Item 

Receiver 

Signal Use 

ECM 

Engine Temperature 

TCM 

Shift Point Calculation 

ECM 

Engine Load (tL) 

TCM 

Shift Point Calculation 

ECM 

Engine RPM (TD) 

TCM 

TCC Slippage 

ECM 

Throttle Position (DKV) 

TCM 

Shift Point Calculation 

ECM 

A/C Compressor ON 

TCM 

Fine tune shift points to compensate 
for increased engine load. 

TCM 

Transmission Range 

ECM 

Engine Idle Speed Control 

TCM 

Torque Reduction Signal (ME) 

ECM 

Timing Retard during shifts. 

TCM 

TCC Lockup Status 

ECM 

Engine Timing Map adjustment. 


47 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 
























































CAN Bus Topology 


The CAN bus consists of two twisted copper wires. Each wire contains an opposing sig¬ 
nal with the exact same information (CAN-High, CAN-Low). The opposing signals trans¬ 
mitted through the twisted wire serve to suppress any electrical interference. Early CAN 
bus wiring included a grounded shield around the two wires, later vehicles discarded the 
shield in favor of the unshielded twisted pair wiring. 

Due to the linear structure of the network, the CAN bus is available for other modules in the 
event of a disconnected or failed control unit. This is referred to as a “Tree” structure with 
each control unit occupying a branch. 



As previously mentioned, the CAN bus initially was used as a high speed communication 
link between the DME and AGS control units. 

With the introduction of the E38 750iL (95 M.Y.), the CAN bus was expanded to include the 
EML and DSC control modules. The 750iL made exclusive use of the “star coupler” to link 
the individual CAN bus ends to a common connector. 

The 1998 model year introduced new users of the CAN bus. The instrument cluster and 
the steering angle sensor were linked to expand the signal sharing capabilities of the vehi¬ 
cle. 

The 1999 750iL was the last vehicle to use the shielded cable, after which the entire CAN 
bus went to twisted pair wiring. 

Note: Always refer to the proper ETM to determine the exact wiring configuration 
for a specific model. 

48 

Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 













































































































































GS 20 


INSTRUMENT 
CLUSTER 


L , J 


ULILTU LTLJJIJU L_fl_n_nj LTLJLJIJTJ I 
nnjiji_rinrijiji_j rLnn_nnnnjL 


On most current models the CAN bus pro¬ 
vides data exchange between the following 
control modules: 


ECM (DME) 

EML (750iL E38) 
TCM (EGS) 
IKE/Kombi 
ASC/DSC 
LEW 



MK 60 


On models that use twisted pair, the wire color of the CAN bus is uniform throughout the 
vehicle with: CAN-Low GE/BR and CAN-High GE/SW or GE/RT. Shielded wiring is easily 
identified by the black sheath surrounding the CAN bus. 

Troubleshooting the CAN Bus 

The failure of communication on the CAN bus can be caused by several sources: 

• Failure of the CAN bus cables. 

• Failure of one of the control units attached to the CAN. 

• Failure of the voltage supply or ground to individual modules. 

• Interference in the CAN bus cables. 


Failure of the CAN bus cables 

The following faults can occur to the CAN bus wiring: 

• CAN-H/L interrupted 

• CAN-H/L shorted to battery voltage 

• CAN-H/L shorted to ground 

• CAN-H shorted to CAN-L 

• Defective plug connections (damaged, corroded, or improperly crimped) 


In each instance, the connected control units will store a fault due to the lack of information 
received over the CAN bus. 

49 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 















































The voltage of the CAN bus is divided 
between the two data lines: CAN-High 
and CAN-Low for an average of 2.5 V per 
line. The voltage measurement is taken 
from each data line to ground. Each mod¬ 
ule on the CAN contributes to this voltage. 

The fact that 2.5V are present does not 
mean that the CAN bus is fault free, it just 
means that the voltage level is sufficient to 
support communication. 



BMW Test system Multimeter 



10 

Measurement 

Function 


Measurement 

Connection 

Measurement 

Kind 

Measurement 

Range 


10 


■ Voltage 


Resistance 


Temperature 



|v 


Ohm 


"C 











Current 


Current 


Current 


Diode test 


Pressure 

2A 


50A 


1000A 


-l>l- 

— 


bar 


1 MFK 1 


MFK 2 


Current probe 


Pressure 


Temperature 

1—- 


— 




Sensor 


Sensor 


E 




Effective value 


i 


automatic 


Multimeter 


Counter 


Oscilloscope 

setting 


Stimulators 


Preset 
measurements 


Help 


Freeze image 


Id 


Minimum 

Maximum 


System voltage 
Rotation speed 


2nd 

measurement 


Stimulate 



Terminal Resistors: are used in the CAN bus circuit to establish the correct impedance 
to ensure fault free communication. A 120 Ohm resistor is installed in two control units of 
the CAN between CAN-H and CAN-L. Because the CAN is a parallel circuit, the effective 
resistance of the complete circuit is 60 Ohms. On some vehicles there is a jumper wire that 
connects the two parallel branches together, others have an internal connection at the 
instrument cluster. 

The resistance is measured by connecting the appropriate adapter to any of the modules 
on the CAN and measuring the resistance between CAN-L and CAN-H. The resistance 
should be 60 Ohms. The CAN bus is very stable and can continue to communicate if the 
resistance on the CAN bus is not completely correct; however, sporadic communication 
faults will occur. 


The terminal resistors are located in the ASC/DSC 
control unit and either the instrument cluster or in the 
DME. 

Early 750iL vehicles that used the star connector have 
a separate external resistor which connect CAN-H 
and CAN-L together. 

Modules which do not have the terminal resistor can 
be checked by disconnecting the module and check¬ 
ing the resistance directly between the pins for CAN- 
H and CAN-L. The value at these control units should 
be between 10kOhms and 50kOhms. 


i 

i 

i 

i 

tpodule (IKE) 

I 

I 



XI787 

Terminal resistor CAN 


101000 

CAN star 

contact 

coupler 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 






































































































































































































































































































Can Bus Worksheet 

Chassis #: Vehicle: 

Transmission: Control System: 

How many CAN bus resistors are there on this vehicle? 

Where are they located? 

Measure the resistance of the CAN bus and record here: 

List all of the modules on the CAN bus in this vehicle: 


What are the wire colors of the CAN bus in this vehicle? 


List some information items (signals) that are received by the TCM from the ECM (DME): 


List some information items (signals) that are received by the ECM from the TCM (DME): 


On what BMW vehicle was the CAN bus introduced? 


Notes: 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



TCM Coding and Programming 


As with other control modules used on BMW systems, the TCM must be programmed 
and/or coded for the vehicle. Over the years, these methods have varied from system to 
system. Refer to Service Information Bulletins for the latest coding and programming infor¬ 
mation. 

Coding 

Coding will assign the control unit to a particular application. Information such as differen¬ 
tial ratio, tire size, vehicle series, engine, engine control system, w/wo AC etc.are some of 
the possible variants that have to be considered. Transmission control units are coded 
using various methods. 

• Grounding pins in wiring harness connector - On early models equipped with 
the 4HP22/24 EH transmissions, the TCM was coded to the vehicle by means of 
grounding pins in the wiring harness connector for the TCM. By selectively ground¬ 
ing specific pins in the harness, the TCM was assigned to that vehicle. For Example: 
The TCM could be installed in a 535, 635, or a 735. This only applies to the Early E- 
7 Versions. (E23, E24, E28) 

• TCM ordered for Specific Application - On some later models, the TCM was 

ordered for a specific vehicle application, coding was not necessary. 

• Coding performed during programming - On systems that use a flash program¬ 
mable TCM, the coding process is done during flash programming. 

Programming 

Programming refers to the instructions that the TCM is to follow. The TCM is programmed 
to apply certain shift maps according to operating conditions such as vehicle speed, engine 
speed, engine temperature, engine load and throttle position. This information can be 
entered into the TCM via an updated EPROM or through flash programming. 

Flash programmable control units use a EEPROM which is Electronically Eraseable. The 
EEPROM is also soldered into the TCM and cannot be removed or replaced. Flash pro¬ 
grammable TCM’s can be programmed up to 14 times (with a new TCM). 

Note: Always clear adaptations after programming. 

Note: Do not program a TCM to correct a complaint unless there is a specific SIB 
that covers the issue. Only program when installing a new TCM or when instruct¬ 
ed to do so by BMW Technical Assistance. Always have the ID page available 
when calling for technical assistance. 

52 

Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Control 

System 

Transmission 

Coding 

Programming 

TCM Type 

GS 1.26 

GS 1.27 

GS 1.29 

4HP22 EH (Early E- 
7) 

Grounding pins in 

Harness. (Early E-7 Only) 

TCM ordered for specific 

Replaceable EPROM 

35 Pin 


4HP22/24 EH 
(Late E-7 and E-9) 

application. Coding not 
needed. 

Replaceable EPROM 

35 Pin 

GS 7.3 

GS 7.32 

GS 7.11 

GS 8.32 

A5S310Z (5HP18) 

TCM ordered for specific 
application. Coding not 
needed. 

Replaceable EPROM 

88 Pin 

GS 8.60 

GS 8.60.4 

A5S325Z (5HP19) 

Coding done when 
Programmed 

Flash Programming 
(EEPROM) 

134 Pin SKE 

GS 8.55 

A5S440Z (5HP24) 

Coding done when pro- 

Flash Programming 

88 Pin up to 98 

GS 8.60.2 


grammed 

(EEPROM) 

(E38 M62) 

134 Pin SKE 
from 98 to pre¬ 
sent. 

GS 9.2 

GS 9.22 

GS 9.22.1 

A5S560Z (5HP30) 

TCM ordered for specific 
application. Coding not 
needed. 

Replaceable EPROM 

88 Pin 

GS 8.60.3 

A5S560Z (5HP30) 

(E38 M73TU) 

Coding done when pro¬ 
grammed. 

Flash Programming 
(EEPROM) 

134 Pin 

GS 4.14 

GS 4.16 

A4S310R 

(THMR-1) 

TCM ordered for specific 
application. Coding not 
needed. 

Replaceable EPROM 

55 Pin 

GS 8.34 

A4S270R 

(THMR-1) 

TCM ordered for specific 
application. Coding not 
needed. 

Replaceable EPROM 

88 Pin 

GS 20 

A5S360R 

A5S390R 

Coding done when pro¬ 
grammed 

Flash Programming 
(EEPROM) 

134 Pin SKE 


53 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 

















































Transmission Fluid 

Transmssion Fluid Checking Procedures 

Transmission fluid checking is accomplished using the DISplus or GT-1. The DISplus or GT- 
1 is used to monitor transmission fluid temperature to insure the transmission is not over or 
under-filled. As with most other current ZF transmissions there is no dipstick, the fluid level 
is checked and filled at the fill plug. The location of the fill plug varies between transmis¬ 
sions. 


Transmission fluid should be checked between 30 and 50 degrees Celsius (unless other¬ 
wise specified). Use the DISplus and/or GT-1 to determine transmission temperature. The 
transmission temperature information can be found in the diagnosis section under Service 
Functions. 


Proper procedures for checking 
and filling transmission fluid can 
be found in BMW Service 
Information Bulletin B 24 01 98. 

When checking transmission 
fluid, observe the following 
items: 

• Transmission in Park 

• Parking brake applied 

• Engine Running 

• Vehicle level 

• No engine load 

• Trans Temp 30-50C 

• Observe correct drain 
plug torque 

• Use correct fluid 

When replacing parts on trans¬ 
missions that use lifetime fluid, 
drain fluid into a clean container 
and reuse. 





Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 





Transmission Fluid Application 


There are numerous types of transmission fluid used in BMW transmissions. With the 
exception of the early transmissions (4HP22/24, A4S310/270R and the A5S310Z in the 
E34) all current BMW transmissions use “Lifetime Fill” transmission fluid. There is no main¬ 
tenance required for these transmissions. It is important to use the correct fluid. Incorrect 
use of the transmission fluid can cause non-warrantable transmission damage. 

When performing repairs on transmissions with lifetime fluid, it is important to drain the 
transmission fluid in to a clean container for re-use. New fluid should only be used for 
transmission replacement and for topping off after repairs. 

Also, transmission fluid level is vital to the proper operation of the transmission. Refer to 
BMW Service Bulletin B 24 01 98 for proper fluid level checking procedures. 

When servicing or repairing BMW automatic transmissions, refer to TIS for fluid capacities. 
For fluid types refer to the “Operating Fluids Manual”. 


Transmission 

Fluid Type 

BMW Part # 

Container 

SIB Ref. 

4HP22 

4HP24 

Dexron III 

Mercon 

Available 
Commercially 
(Castrol or Texaco) 

N/A 


A5S310Z 

530i/iT (E34) 

Dexron III 

Available 
Commercially 
(Castrol or Texaco) 

N/A 


M3 (E36) 

ESSO LT 71141 

83 22 9 407 807 

20 liter container 

B 24 03 95 

A5S325Z 

ESSO LT 71141 

83 22 9 407 807 

20 liter container 


A5S440Z 

ESSO LT 71141 

83 22 9 407 807 

20 liter container 


A5S560Z 

740 (E32), 540 (E34) 

840Ci (E31- 6/93-12/94) 
740i/iL-750iL (E38) 

Shell LA2634 

83 22 9 407 765 

5 liter container 

B 24 11 92 

540i (3/96-12/96) 

850Ci (10/94-6/97) 

ESSO LT 71141 

83 22 9 407 807 

20 liter container 

B 24 02 94 

A4S31OR 

A4S270R 

(THM-R1) 

Dexron III 

Mercon 

Available 
Commercially 
(Castrol or Texaco) 

N/A 


A5S360R 

Texaco 

ETL 7045E 

83 22 0 026 922 

25 liter container 


A5S390R 

Texaco 

ETL 8072 B 

83 22 0 024 359 

25 liter container 


GA6HP26Z 

Shell 

M-1375.4 

83 22 0 142 516 

20 liter container 




Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




















































Transmission Fluid Checking Worksheet 

Task: Completely fill in the worksheet using instructor designated vehicle. 
Chassis #: Vehicle: 

Transmission: Control System: 

What transmission fluid does this transmission use? 

What tool(s) are needed to remove/install the fluid fill plug? 

What is the tightnening torque of the fluid fill plug? 

What SIB refers to “Transmission Fluid Checking Procedures”? 

Decribe the path used to find the “ATF Level Check” in the DISplus or GT-1: 


What is the fluid capacity of this transmission? 

Where can information on transmission fluid capacities be found? 
Notes: 



title 



Transmission Service 


Overview of Allowable Repairs 

Currently, service of transmissions covered under warranty is limited to level I. Level I ser¬ 
vice includes electrical, minor mechanical and hydraulic repairs as well as repair manual 
provided service adjustments. 

Part availability is limited to include the repair of the following: 


• Oil Leaks - Radial Seals and 
gaskets. 

• Mechanical/Hydraulic Faults - 

Torque Converter, Valve Body, 
parking pawl, oil pan, output 
shaft bearing. 

• Electrical Faults - Solenoid 
Valves, pressure regulator 
valves, wiring harness. 

• Signal Sensing - Turbine and 
Output Speed Sensors, CAN 
bus, Temp Sensor. 


O RINGS AND SEALS 


MISCELLANEOUS 
MECHANICAL 
PARTS 



TORQUE 
CONVERTER VALVE 

BODY 

FILTER 


MVs & EDSs 

WIRING 

HARNESS 


SPEED 
SENSORS 


GASKETS 


BMW Technical Hotline 


Before performing any majors repairs or transmission replacement, always contact the 
BMW Technical Hotline at 1-800-472-7222. When prompted to do so, select option 1 for 
the Drivetrain Group. Refer to BMW SIB B 00 04 02 for more information regarding the 
BMW Technical Hotline. Be prepared will all necessary information such as transmission 
serial number, ID page, fault codes etc. Failure to contact the technical hotline could result 
in the non payment of warranty claims. 


BMW Value Line Program 


The Value-Line replacement transmission program provides the availability of factory certi¬ 
fied rebuilt units at a very competitive cost. Refer to Part Bulletins in Group 24 for more 
information. 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 









Diagnosis and Troubleshooting 


Due to the cost and complexity of today's electronic transmissions, BMW recommends 

that the technical hotline be contacted before any repairs are performed. It is important that 

the technician perform some basic diagnostic procedures before contacting technical 

assistance. The following procedures should be followed: 

• Always Verify customer complaint, make sure the complaint is not related to normal 
operation, (i.e. Warm Up Phase, AGS operation etc.) 

• Survey Fault Memory - Perform complete quick test. There may be other systems that 
interface with EGS that could cause faults, (i.e DME, ASC/DSC, IKE/Kombi etc.) 

• Print out all fault code with fault conditions. Also print out copy of Identification page and 
diagnostic report. 

• CHECK TO SEE IF THERE ARE ANY SERVICE BULLETINS THAT APPLY TO YOUR 
SPECIFIC COMPLAINT. THIS INCLUDES THE SERVICE ROUNDTABLE. 

• Ensure that battery voltage is sufficient. Battery voltage must be greater than 12.5 with 
ignition switched off. Check battery connections for tightness and condition. 

• Check ground connections, (chassis to engine, grounds to bulkhead and shock tower.) 

• Check over vehicle to look for transmission leaks, physical damage, loose connections 
etc. 

• If necessary, check fluid level and condition using DISplus or GT-1. 

• Check to see if any aftermarket or performance components have been installed that 
could effect transmission operation. (DME or EGS software as well as any engine mod¬ 
ifications). 

• Check repair history to see if there were any recent repairs that could effect the proper 
operation of the transmission (i.e. Engine replacement with damaged dowel pin etc.). 

• Check DCS for any open campaigns or recalls pertaining to drivetrain. 

• Check and record chassis number, production date and transmission serial # before 
contacting technical assistance. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




Establishing a Diagnostic Plan 

Once all of the pre-diagnostic criteria has been satisfied, a logical diagnostic plan should be 
followed. A logical, well organized diagnostic plan will help avoid improper diagnosis, 
unnecessary parts replacement and lost diagnostic time. A technician’s goal should be to 
satisfy the customer by “Fixing it the first time, on time, every time”. The productivity of the 
technician can also be improved by following a logical, common-sense approach to prob¬ 
lem solving. The following steps are recommended to form a diagnostic plan: 

• Verify the Customer Complaint - This step is the most important, but also the 
most overlooked. The focus should always be on the exact customer concern. 
Make sure that the customer complaint is not a misunderstanding of proper vehicle 
operation. This step can avoid unnecessary diagnosis and lost time. If the customer 
concern is not exactly identified, any subsequent repairs can not be verified as being 
effective. This is the most common cause of “comeback” repairs. Communication 
between the customer to advisor and the advisor to technician must be clear. Vague 
or misunderstood customer complaints are often improperly diagnosed. Also make 
sure that the conditions under which the concern has occurred are duplicated. 

For example: If the customer is customer is complaining about a shifting concern 
after a cold start, then the vehicle should be road tested under those conditions. 

• Analyze the Problem - Once the complaint has been verified, then all available 
resources should be used to find the “root cause” of the complaint. Start out by 
checking Service Information Bulletins, DCS messages, and Service Roundtable 
information. Use the DISplus or GT-1 to access the diagnostic program and per 
form Diagnostic Test Modules where applicable. Electrical Troubleshooting Manuals 
(ETM’s) should also be used when needed. 

• Isolate the Problem - Now, the problem can be narrowed down into the final steps 
of diagnosis. Using proper tools and procedures, the technician can “Isolate” by 
using the process of elimination and common sense. Having a working knowledge 
of BMW systems is helpful in this area. When applicable, use all available BMW spe¬ 
cial tools and equipment. Perform all necessary electrical checks such as Voltage 
Drop, resistance measurements etc. 

• Repair the Problem - Once the concern has been correctly identified, perform all 
necessary repairs as per BMW guidelines. Make sure all repairs are properly docu¬ 
mented to comply with warranty policies and procedures. 

• Verify the Repair - Make sure the customer concern has been rectified. Road test 
the vehicle under the same conditions whenever possible. Failure to complete this 
step properly is almost a guaranteed comeback. Repeat repair attempts are costly 
to the BMW Center and the BMW Service Technician. 

REMEMBER - Fix it the first time, On Time, Everytime. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Fault Codes 

When diagnosing transmission fault codes, always print out the fault code(s) and the fault 
conditions. When referring to the fault code itself, be aware that there are actually 3 for¬ 
mats for the fault code. The fault code breakdown is as follows: 


Fault Code Example: 


Fault Code (050) 32 Gear Monitoring 1 (P0731) 


Fault Description 


Hexadecimal (Hex Code) 
Engineering use only 


Decimal Fault 
This is used for all 
diagnostic reference 


OBD Fault 

Used for Aftermarket 
Scan Tools 

Not used Internally at BMW 


When referring to the “Fault Code” during diagnosis always use the fault that is in Decimal 
Format. The Decimal fault is referred to in all reference material such as Service Information 
Bulletins, Test Modules and DCS messages etc. In the example above, FC 050 would be 
the correct choice. 

Fault Conditions 

When a fault code is set, it is stored with a set of environmental conditions. The environ¬ 
mental conditions are used to aid in pinpointing the root cause of the fault. Some of the 
information found in the fault conditions contain information on transmission temperature, 
engine speed and road speed etc. This information is also helpful when trying to duplicate 
the customer complaint. For example, if a customer complains about a shifting complaint 
when cold, check the fault conditions to verify this complaint. Remember to always print 
out the fault codes with the fault conditions. This information is helpful to the technician as 
well as technical assistance. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Identification Page 

The ID page is helpful to determine the Transmission and control system used as well as 
the chassis number and current software version. Always print out a copy of the ID page 
when performing any diagnosis or programming procedures. 


Control System 
Trans Type — 





Electronic gearbox control (EGS) 

EGS 8.60,2 m2 / J457 

5-speed automatic transmission A5S 440Z 
(5HP-24) 



Chassis # 


Chassis Number; ^BaDR 63452GN9227Q 
Part number, master control module: 7512653 
Programmed control unit: 7516981 


TCM Part # 


Programmed Control Unit #. 


Hardware number: 2B 
Diagnosis index: 11 


Bus index: 60 
Date: 04.04. 2 


Software number; 


2425 



ZF Software # 


Type Approval Number: 1DODOOO 
Supplier: BOSCH 

Manufacturer 

TCM 





Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 




Diagnosis Program 

There are two diagnostic formats (programs) used on current model BMW vehicles. The 
earlier diagnostic program was used on the E38 and E39. The latter diagnostic program 
was introduced as the “E46 Diagnostic Concept”. This is used on the E46, E65 and the 
E52 (Z8). The E53 X5 uses a mixture of both diagnostic programs depending upon 
engine/transmission options. Below is an example of the earlier diagnostic program. 



The diagnostic program contains the following features: 

• Fault Symptoms - This is a symptom driven program that will lead the technician 
into guided diagnostics. It contains several possible fault scenarios that are common 
to electronic transmissions. This path is helpful when the technician is not sure 
where to start in his diagnostic plan. 

• Function Test - There are no function tests for electronic transmissions. 

• Service Functions - This is where you will find the ATF level check function. Also 
Test Codes can be obtained and printed out for warranty purposes. The Adaptation 
values can be cleared as well as printed out. 

• Expert Mode - Expert Mode should be used when the technician has a thorough 
working knowledge of the system. You will find several items in expert mode: 
Read/Clear fault memory, Diagnosis (Status) requests, Component Activation and 
Test Modules. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 

















Test Modules 

Test modules are found in the diagnosis program of the DISplus and GT-1. These allow the 
technician to take advantage of a guided diagnostic plan. The program will direct the tech¬ 
nician through the various steps using a “trouble tree” format. When using test modules it 
is important to follow the instructions exactly. Due to the complex nature of some faults, 
the test modules are not always conclusive. The test module is only as effective as the 
information provided by the technician. The technician also needs to rely on his experience 
and some common sense. The test modules should be used to assist the technician, not 
as a replacement for good diagnostic skills. 




1 

j Kickdown switch 

-Ill 

i 

i 

| Selector-lever switch 


1 

| Program-selector switch 



!j Sensor, output speed 


1 

^ Sensor, ATF temperature 


1 

| Sensor, turbocharger speed 


i 

| Power supply, control unit 


p 

3 Pressure actuators 


p 

3 Solenoid valves 


n 

l Solenoid, shift lock 


si 

| CAN bus signals 


p 

| Instrument-cluster interface 


E 

3 Selector-lever switch with 
stepper shift system 


il| All test modules executed, continue 
test sequence and clear fault memory. 

M 


§ 


Test modules come in two formats. The one shown above is used on E38/E39 vehicles 
and the E53 with 4.4 and 4.6 engines. The E46, E65 and E53 (with 3.0 M54) uses the new 
“E46 Diagnostic Concept” which was introduced with the E46 in the 1999 model year. 
Regardless of the format used, the technician is still guided through a step by step proce¬ 
dure. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 










Diagnostic Tips 

The following consists of some helpful hints to assist the BMW diagnostic technician. It is 
designed to assist the technician to form a logical path of diagnosis. These suggestions 
should be used in conjunction with other approved diagnostic routines. This does not 
exclude the technician from the responsibility to contact technical assistance. All major 
repairs and transmission replacement must be pre-approved by the BMW Technical 
Hotline. Transmission concerns can be broken down into several categories: 

• Shift Quality Complaints - Shift Quality complaints consist of harsh up or down 
shifts, improper shift points and erratic shifting. These complaints could be related 
to electronic/software issues or hydraulic/mechanical problems. Perform quick test 
and check SIB’s before proceeding. As with most concerns, check the transmission 
fluid level and condition as well. 

Do not clear adaptation values unless instructed to do so by BMW Technical 
Hotline. 

• Delayed/No Upshifts - Before proceeding on delayed upshift complaints, make 
sure you are aware of the conditions that this occurs. This could be normal opera 
tion, such as the “Warm-up Phase” program. Always check front tires for proper 
inflation pressures, correct size and type. Also check for uneven tire wear. 
Variations in front tire size from left to right can activate the AGS “Curve Recognition” 
feature. The TCM will interpret the difference in wheel speed signals as being a turn 
and suppress (or delay) upshifts. 

• Slipping - This type of issue is usually associated with a fault code. Be sure to 
check the transmission fluid level and condition. 

• Noise, Vibration - Noises and vibrations should be checked over by a good visual 
inspection. Look for loose transmission or engine mounts. Check the driveshaft, 
center bearing and flexible couplings (or constant velocity joints). Also check the 
lateral alignment of the driveshaft. There are several SIB’s pertaining to noise and 
vibration. 

• No Forward or Reverse Gear - Start by checking transmission fluid level and note 
the fluid condition. Inspect for leaks and external transmission damage. 

• Leaks - When investigation transmission leaks, be sure to verify that the suspected 
leak is actually transmission fluid. Engine oil, hydraulic and brake fluid can be mis¬ 
taken for a transmission leak. Check the transmission cooler lines, transmission 
cooler and transmission pan gasket. Try to locate the source of the leak. Do not 
make any major repairs until the technical hotline is contacted. 

• Fault Codes - Perform COMPLETE short test (Quick test) on all vehicle systems. It 
is important to survey all systems in the event that a related system is causing the 
transmission fault. Always print out the ID Page, Fault codes and fault conditions. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Information Resources 


When diagnosing transmission related concerns it is important to use all information 
resources available. The following information sources should be utilized at all times: 


• Service Information Bulletins 

• Technical Data 

• ETM Electrical Troubleshooting Manual 

• DCS (Dealer Communication System) 


• Repair Instructions 

• Tightening Torques 

• Technical Training Manuals 

• Special Tool Information 


Technical Information System (TIS) 


Most of the above information can be accessed by using the BMW TIS CD or by logging 
on the the BMW TIS website through www.bmwcenternet.com. The BMW TIS website 
contains a wealth of helpful information for the technician. The information is updated on 
a regular basis. 

Service Roundtable 


In addition to the above sources of information, the technician should be up to date on the 
latest edition of the BMW Service Roundtable. The roundtable will cover the most recent 
topics and offer some hints that will assist the technician. The Service Roundtable is broad¬ 
cast live on a monthly basis via the BMW Visionwerke Network. In addition to live broad¬ 
casts, the roundtable is rebroadcast on a regular schedule during the month. 

Training Manuals 

Training Manuals are available for the various training classes that are offered by BMW. 
These manuals are issued when attending the training courses and can also be obtained 
on the BMW TIS website. This is a good source of information to help understand system 
operation, this can aid in a timely diagnosis. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Diagnostic Checklist 


The BMW Technical Hotline is available to authorized BMW Centers. The Hotline was 
established to assist the BMW Technician with difficult repairs. In order to ensure the best 
possible quality, it is necessary to be properly prepared when calling. Make sure that all of 
the necessary BASIC diagnostic procedures have been followed before calling for Technical 
Assistance. This will reduce unnnecessary phone calls which reduce the response time 
and increase the effectiveness of the Technical Hotline. Please follow all of these steps 
before calling for help. (Refer to Service Information Bulletin B000402 for more information). 


1. Verified Complaint 

2. Perfomed Complete Quick Test with DISplus or GT-1 

3. Printed out all relevant fault codes with environmental conditions 

4. Checked for all applicable Service Bulletins 

5. Checked DCS for all open issues (Campaigns etc.)_ 

6. Accessed all other information resources (Training Manual/ SRT etc) 

7. Checked Vehicle Repair History 

8. Performed all basic electrical checks including grounds and B+ Voltage 

9. Perform all relevant test modules as per the Diagnosis Program 

10. Checked for aftermarket installations that could hinder proper operation 

11. Inspect for physical damage, loose connections 

12. Consulted with Shop Foreman or Lead Technician 

13. Check and record chassis # and production date 

14. Check and record any necessary serial numbers/ID tags etc. 

15. Call only if the vehicle is currently at your BMW Center 


□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 


□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 


Once the above checklist is complete and your complaint is still not rectified, contact the 
BMW Technical Hotline. Call 1-800-472-7222, select Option 1 for Drivetrain related issues. 
Option 2 is for Body Electrical concerns and Option 3 is for Body and Chassis. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Diagnostic Worksheet 

Vehicle: Chassis #: Prod Date: 

Engine: Transmission: Control System: 

Complaint: 

Was the Complaint verified? 

Cause/Diagnostic Procedure: 


Correction: 


List the Special Tools that were needed to perform above diagnosis? 


Notes: 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Diagnostic Worksheet 

Vehicle: Chassis #: Prod Date: 

Engine: Transmission: Control System: 

Complaint: 

Was the Complaint verified? 

Cause/Diagnostic Procedure: 


Correction: 


List the Special Tools that were needed to perform above diagnosis? 


Notes: 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Diagnostic Worksheet 

Vehicle: Chassis #: Prod Date: 

Engine: Transmission: Control System: 

Complaint: 

Was the Complaint verified? 

Cause/Diagnostic Procedure: 


Correction: 


List the Special Tools that were needed to perform above diagnosis? 


Notes: 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Diagnostic Worksheet 

Vehicle: Chassis #: Prod Date: 

Engine: Transmission: Control System: 

Complaint: 

Was the Complaint verified? 

Cause/Diagnostic Procedure: 


Correction: 


List the Special Tools that were needed to perform above diagnosis? 


Notes: 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Diagnostic Worksheet 

Vehicle: Chassis #: Prod Date: 

Engine: Transmission: Control System: 

Complaint: 

Was the Complaint verified? 

Cause/Diagnostic Procedure: 


Correction: 


List the Special Tools that were needed to perform above diagnosis? 


Notes: 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



Additional Information 


Speed Sensor Resistance Values 


Transmission 

Turbine Speed Sensor 
Resistance in Ohms 

Output Shaft Speed Sensor 
Resistance in Ohms 

4HP22/24 

No Turbine Speed Sensor 

325 +/- 40 @ 20° C 

A5S310Z 

(5HP18) 

325 +/- 40 @ 20° C 

325 +/- 40 @ 20° C 

A5S325Z 

Hall Effect Sensor 

No Resistance 

Measurement 

325 +/- 40 @ 20° C 

A5S440Z 

(5HP24) 

325 +/- 40 @ 20° C 

325 +/- 40 @ 20° C 

A5S560Z 

(5HP30) 

325 +/- 40 @ 20° C 

325 +/- 40 @ 20° C 

A5S360R 

A5S390R 

(GM5) 

Nominal 405 Ohms 

Minimum 324 Ohms 

Maximum 486 Ohms 

Checked @ 20° C 

Nominal 405 Ohms 

Minimum 324 Ohms 

Maximum 486 Ohms 

Checked @ 20° C 

GA6HP26Z 

Not Checked in Field, Part of 
Mechatronics Module. 

Call Technical Hotline is the 
event of a fault. 

Not Checked in Field, Part of 
Mechatronics Module. 

Call Technical Hotline is the event of 
a fault. 

A4S270R 

A4S310R 

(THMR-1) 

(4L30-E) 

No Turbine Speed Sensor 

3000 Ohms @ 20° C 


72 


Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 
































A4S310/270R Component Identification and Ohmic Values 



A4S270/310R (4L30-E) (THMR-1) 



MV1/MV2 Pressure Regulator Brake Band Solenoid TCC Solenoid 

(DR Solenoid) (MV-B) (MV-WK) 

17-20 Ohms @ 20°C 3.5 - 6.0 Ohms @ 20°C 9.0-12.0 Ohms @ 20OC 

21.5-24.5 Ohms @ 80°C 4.0 - 7.0 Ohms @ 80°C 11.5 - 14.5 Ohms @ 80°C 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 












A5S440/560Z Component Identification and Ohmic Values 

































A5S440/560Z Component Identification and Ohmic Values 



MANUAL 
VALVE 


FORWARD 
LOWER 
VALVE BODY 


PRESSURE REGULATORS (EDS) 

ZL 


MAGNETIC VALVES (MV) 


MV 1 


MV 2 


MV 3 


EDS 1 


REAR LOWER 
VALVE BODY 


EDS 4 


EDS 3 


EDS 2 


EDS 5 



UPPER 
VALVE BODY 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 






























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































A5S360/390R Component Identification and Ohmic Values 









A5S360R 

(5L40-E) 


, •>_*# < if ll vvB \ >T K) 

(Cfl II \ Jy 

Sr/ <f/ 




y / I - ---(5^ 


1- Drain Plug 

2- Fill PLug 


(v 


Transmission Oil Temperature Sensor Resistance Values (NTC) 


Temperature 
Degrees °C 

Minimum 

(Ohms) 

Nominal 

(Ohms) 

Maximum 

(Ohms) 

Reference 

Accuracy 

(+/-°C) 

-30 

50264 

52594 

54924 

0.7 

-20 

27439 

28582 

29725 

0.7 

-10 

15540 

16120 

16700 

0.7 

0 

9097 

9399 

9701 

0.6 

10 

5493 

5658 

5823 

0.6 

20 

3418 

3511 

3604 

0.6 

30 

2185 

2240 

2295 

0.6 

40 

1430 

1465 

1500 

0.6 

50 

958 

980 

1002 

0.6 

60 

656 

671 

686 

0.6 

70 

459 

469 

479 

0.6 

80 

327 

334 

341 

0.6 

90 

237 

242 

247 

0.7 

100 

174 

178 

182 

0.6 


Shift Solenoid (A-B-C) Resistance Values 


Temperature 
Degrees °C 

Minimum 

(Ohms) 

Nominal 

(Ohms) 

Maximum 

(Ohms) 

20 

15 

16 

17 

30 

15.6 

16.6 

17.7 

40 

16.2 

17.2 

18.3 

50 

16.8 

17.9 

19.0 

60 

17.3 

18.5 

19.7 

70 

17.9 

19.1 

20.3 




















































































































TORQUE CONVERTER MANUAL VALVE 



Pressure Regulator Resistance Values 


Temperature 
Degrees °C 

Minimum 

(Ohms) 

Nominal 

(Ohms) 

Maximum 

(Ohms) 

20 

3.5 

4.05 

4.6 

30 

3.6 

4.2 

4.8 

40 

3.8 

4.4 

5.0 

50 

3.9 

4.5 

5.1 

60 

4.0 

4.7 

5.3 

70 

4.2 

4.8 

5.5 

80 

4.3 

5.0 

5.7 

90 

4.5 

5.2 

5.9 


TCC Solenoid Resistance 


Temperature 
Degrees °C 

Minimum 

(Ohms) 

Nominal 

(Ohms) 

Maximum 

(Ohms) 

20 

9 

10 

11 

30 

9.4 

10.4 

11.4 

40 

9.7 

10.8 

11.9 

50 

10.1 

11.2 

12.3 

60 

10.4 

11.6 

12.7 

70 

10.8 

12.0 

13.1 

80 

11.1 

12.3 

13.6 

90 

11.5 

12.7 

14.0 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 








































































































































































































































































Review Questions 

1. The identification tag on the A5S440Z is located on 

2. The 5HP19 transmission uses a turbine speed sensor. 

3. The transmission fluid temperature sensor is part of the on the 

GA6HP26Z transmission. 

4. On the GM5 transmission, the transmission range selector switch is located 

5. EDS 1 is used for on the 5HP24 transmission. 

6. The “Warm up Phase Program” will be terminated if: 

7. List the fluid types for the following transmissions: 

A5S440Z A5S560Z (late) 

A5S360R_ A5S325Z 

GA6HP26Z A5S310Z _ 

8. Line pressure will be at when there is no power to the pressure 

regulating solenoid. 

9. What is the difference in Steptronic operation between a 2001 model year vehicle and 
a 2002 model year vehicle? 


10. The “Curve Recognition” feature compares the 
to inhibit in a turn. 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



11. List 5 inputs to the TCM from the ECM over the CAN bus. 


12. What SIB refers to “Transmission Fluid Checking Procedures”? 

13. The Transmission will always default to the Program when started. 

14. List the transmissions which use a gradually applied TCC: 

15. List 6 items that will occur during failsafe operation: 



Electronic Transmission Control Workbook 



