Table of Contents 


Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 

Subject Page 

Heating Ventilation Refrigeration (HVAC).3 

Comfort in the Vehicle.4 

Heat is a Strain .5 

"The Comfort Zone”.6 

Principals of Heating and Refrigeration.7 

Heat and Cold Explained .7 

Condensation and Evaporation.8 

Evaporation of Water .8 

Heat Transfer.9 

Sensible and Latent Heat .10 

Types of Latent Heat.10 

Change of State.11 

First Natural Law.11 

Heat and Temperature .12 

BTUs and Calories.12 

Effects of Pressure .16 

Pressure and Boiling Points.18 

Boiling Point of Various Substances .19 


Initial Print Date: 10/07 


Revision Date: 





















Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 


Model: All 
Production: All 

iijf 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the difference between a HVAC system and a 
Climate Control System. 

• Describe the meaning of the "Comfort Zone”. 

• Identify the principles of Heating and Refrigeration. 


2 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 



Heating Ventilation Refrigeration (HVAC) 


The purpose of the heating, ventilation and air conditioning system is to treat the air 
entering the passenger compartment in orderto achieve and maintain a constantly 
comfortable environment for the occupants. 

This is achieved by: 

• Heating or cooling the area depending on the requirements or demands 
of the driver/passenger and dictated by outside temperatures. 

• Circulating airthrough out the vehicle. 

• Removing moisture, to assist in defogging of the windows 
and enhancing occupant comfort level. 

• Filtering the air to remove dust, allergens. 

The modern automotive system that cools, heats, dehumidifies, ventilates and filters the 
air entering the passenger compartment is referred to as Climate Control. Climate 
Control describes a more complete and precise management of the basic HVAC sys¬ 
tem, where the vehicles internal climate is constantly varied and adjusted depending on 
the occupants desired and requested settings.. 

Climate Control Sub-Systems: 

• AirConditioning 

• Heater 

• Air M anagement (blower, filters, vents) 

• Computer Controls 


Note: Scientific investigations conducted by the World Health Organization 
shows that concentration and reaction diminish considerably under the 
effects of stress and strain. 


3 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 




C omfort in the Vehicle 


Humans feel comfortable at a certain ambient temperature and atmospheric humidity. 
The feeling of well-being plays a significant part in ensuring the driver's comfort while 
driving. The "climate in the vehicle" has a direct influence on the driverfatigue and over¬ 
all safety. 

A comfortable interior temperature is determined by the prevailing outside temperature, 
solar radiation and adequate air output rate and circulation. 

• A low outside temperature of-20°C, requires a higher interior temperature of 
28°C and an air output rate of approx. 5-6 kg/min. 

• A high outside temperature of 40°C, requires a low interior temperature of 
23°C and an air output rate of approx. 10 kg/min. 

• A moderate outside temperature of 10°C, requires a low interior temperature of 
21.5°C and an air output rate of approx. 4 kg/min. 

Even modern heating and ventilation systems have difficulty achieving total comfort in 
the vehicle interior at high outside temperatures. 

• Particularly under conditions of high solar radiation (strong sunshine), the heated air 
in the vehicle interior can be replaced only by air at ambient temperature. 

• Opening a window or sunroof or increasing the fan speed to achieve the feeling of 
comfort often involves draughts and other annoyances such as noise, exhaust 
fumes and pollen. 

C omfort C urve 

®C kg/min 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Interiortemperature 

B 

Air delivery (vent output) 

C 

Outside temperature 

1 

Comfort curve - air output 

2 

Comfort curve - interiortemperature 


Physical strain increases by a multiple at high 
humidity levels. 


4 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 
















Effects of unfavorable vehicle interiortemperatures on people 


Area 

With air conditioning 

Without air conditioning 

Head 

23°C (73°F) 

42°C (107°F) 

Chest 

24°C (75°F) 

40°C (104°F) 

Feet 

28°C (82°F) 

35°C (95°F) 


Temperatures in a medium-class passenger car at: Driving time Ih, outside temperature 
30°C (86°F) and sun shining (solar radiation) on the car. 


Heat is a Strain 

The ideal temperature forthe driver is 20°C (69°F) to 22°C (72°F).This corresponds to 
the comfort zone A with low climatic strain: 


• Intensive solar radiation (sunshine) on 
the vehicle can raise the interior temper¬ 
ature by 20°C (69°F)To25°C (77°F) 
above the outside temperature, particu¬ 
larly in the head area where the heat is 
perceived as most unpleasant. 

• The body temperature rises and the 
heart rate increases.This situation is also 
characterized by increase perspiration. 

• The brain receives too little oxygen. Zone 
B is characterized by moderate climatic 
strain. 

• Zone C poses an overload situation for 
the body, often referred to as "climatic 
stress". 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stress 

2 

Climatic Stress 

3 

Perspiration 

4 

Fleart rate 

5 

Body temperature 

A,B,C 

Comfort zone 


Note: Research shows that sensory perception and powers of deduction 

decrease by 20% at a temperature increase from 25 to 35°C (77 to 95°F) 


5 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 






















"The Comfort Zone" 


With the aim on reducing or even eliminating climatic stress situations, air conditioning 
systems adjust the air in the vehicle to a pleasant temperature while also cleaning and 
dehumidifying. 

Modern climate control systems are capable of producing temperatures at the air outlets 
that are considerably lowerthanthe higher outside temperatures, both when the vehicle 
is stationary as well as while driving. 

We must keep in mind that equally important as reducing the temperature in the passen¬ 
ger compartment is air dehumidification. This is most effective in winter, while driving in 
inclement weather by controlling window condensation orfogging due to the great differ¬ 
ence in climate between the inside and out side of the vehicle, as well in adding to pas¬ 
senger comfort in hotsticky weather by controlling ambient humidity. The reason forthis 
is that the human body cools itself by allowing moisture on the skin to evaporate.The rel¬ 
ative humidity governs how quickly evaporation occurs. 

• High relative humidity = low evaporation rate. 

• Low relative humidity = high evaporation rate. 

When the A/C system removes moisture from the air, the relative humidity in the passen¬ 
ger compartment decreases. By reducing the relative humidity, the A/C system increases 
the rate at which the moisture on passengers' skin will evaporate. 

• Temperature in the range of 70°F to 80°F (21°C to 27°C). 

• Relative Humidity of about 45% to 50%. 

Air pollution is another valid concern that automotive engineers must address in their 
effort to control the climate of our passenger compartments. In order to effectively limit 
the presence of undesirable allergens like dust, pollen, smoke, chemical fumes and other 
impurities, high performance micro filters have been developed and are currently used. 

• Abundant air circulation (the more airthe coolerthe sensation). 

• Adequate air filtration. 


6 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 



Principals of Heating and Refrigeration 


Heat and Cold Explained 

From a physics point of view there is no cold but rather only heat at different temperature 
levels. There is no more heatat-273°C (-459.4°F), or absolute zero. 

Fora person to experience the feeling of cold, heat 
must be removed from his/her environment. 

When you place your hand on a block of ice, the heat 
is transmitted from the hand to the block of ice. This 
continues until a heat balance orthermal equilibrium 
takes place between the hand and block of ice. Seen 
from a human point of view, both objects are then 
equally cold. 


Note: Heat always travels from the higherto the lowertemperature level and 
never the other way round. 

A simple example of taking heat from the surroundings is the use of volatile liquids. 
These are substances that readily change from the liquid to the gaseous state, orthey 
evaporate. When such a liquid (Cologne) is applied on the skin at room temperature, it 
evaporates and becomes a gas, as a result a cool sensation is experienced. Obviously, 
heat is taken away from the skin during the transition from a liquid to the gaseous state. 



Note: To generate cold it is therefore necessary to allow a liquid that readily 
evaporates to boil and then evaporate away and thus take heat with it. 


Steam behaves in precisely the opposite way as the procedure described above when it 
cools or is cooled: 


• While boiling, the water vapor collects on the 
lid of the pot (see illustration), where it cools 
down and becomes liquid again (condensation 
droplets). 

• Warm moist air in the vehicle interior collects 
on the cold windows where it cools down and 
settles in the form of moisture on the windows 
or (condensation mist). 



7 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 






Condensation and Evaporation 

A gaseous substance that cools down becomes liquid again as from a certain tempera¬ 
ture. All liquids can evaporate by the application of heat. On reaching boiling point, the 
further application of heat leads to evaporation of the liquids. 

To reach boiling point, water is heated to a temperature of 100°C at standard air pressure. 
The further application of heat does not change the temperature of the water but rather it 
causes the water to evaporate. 

Evaporation of Water 

The evaporation of water at different pressures and temperatures is represented simply 
by the following steam-pressure curve. A simple orientation aid is the known boiling point 
of water. At standard ambient pressure 14.5psi (1 bar) water evaporates at a temperature 
of 100°C (212°F). 


100°C 



Note: 1 bar = 14.5psi = lOOKpa 


1 Atmosphere = 1.01325 bar = 14.7psi 


8 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 






Index 

Explanation 

1 

Standard atmospheric pressure approx. 1 bar 

2 

Liquid (water) 

3 

Gaseous (water) 


The curve shows that water evaporates at room temperature of approx. 20°C at an ambi¬ 
ent pressure of 0.023 bar (23 mbar), i.e. under partial vacuum. 1 bar = 1000 mbar. The 
pressure gauges used in technical applications are mostly calibrated to 0 bar at ambient 
pressure and do not show the physically correct pressure of 1 bar. 

• All pressure/temperature ratios above the curve signify water in a liquid state. 

• All pressure/temperature ratios below the curve signify water in a gaseous state. 


9 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 


























Heat Transfer 


Everything is made up of atoms combined to form molecules and these live in very close 
proximity. There is interaction between them in the form of vibrations. These vibrations 
can't be felt but can always be measured in the form of heat as it flows from a warm 
object to a cold object. 



We put a glass of hot water in a bowl of warm water and: 

• T he water in the glass got colder 

• T he water in the bowl got hotter 

• Eventually the water in the bowl will equal the water in the glass 

From this experiment we can conclude that: 

• Cooling is the dissipation of heat energy 

• Cooling occurs by way of heat exchange 

• Heat always passes from a higherto a lower temperature level 


10 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 



Heat transfers from molecule to molecule in three methods: convection, conduction and 
radiation. 

• Convection is the transfer of heat via a medium, either gas or liquid. Hot objects 
warm up the medium surrounding them and thus any cooler object in their proximity 
like food in an oven or a spoon in hot coffee. 

• Conduction is the transfer of heat by direct physical contact between objects like a 
pot on a stove top or an iron on an ironing board. 

• Radiation takes place when an object is warmed by the exposure to infrared rays, 
like the rays of the Sun, warm everything in their path even though it is millions of 
miles away. 


Note: Radiation is one of the major factors affecting the performance of auto¬ 
motive AC systems as sunlight penetrates the vehicle's glass windows. 

Sensible and Latent Heat 

Liquids and gases contain two types of heat: Sensible and Latent heat. Sensible heat can 
be felt or sensed. Latent heat is called hidden heat. Liquids and gases contain Latent 
heat because it is absorbed to produce a change of state. 


Types of Latent Heat 

• Latent heat of fusion orfreezing (to change from a liquid to a solid by giving up heat). 

• Latent heat of vaporization (to change from liquid to a gas by absorbing heat). 

• Latent heat of condensation (to change from a gas to a liquid by giving up heat). 

• Latent heat of melting (to change from a solid to a liquid by absorbing heat). 


11 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 



Change of State 

Many substances are known in three states of aggregation. Example: water, solid, liquid 
and gaseous.The cooling process is based on this natural law. Efforts to achieve cooling 
go back a long way. One of the first food cooling processes was to store food in the "ice 
box". Heat is taken from the food by the ice = (water in solid state of aggregation). 
Consequently, the food cools down. The ice melts and assumes a different state of 
aggregation, (it becomes liquid). If further heat were applied to the water it would boil 
and evaporate. The gaseous state of aggregation is then reached. The gaseous 
substance can turn to liquid again by cooling and revert to a solid state by further cooling. 
This principle can be applied to almost all substances. 

First Natural Law 

Note: “Energy can neither be created nor destroyed, but can be converted 
from one type to another" 

• A substance takes up or absorbs heat during the transition from the liquid 
to the gaseous state. 

• A substance gives off heat during the transition from the gaseous to the 
liquid or solid state. 

• Heat always flows from the warmerto the colder substance. 

The effects of the heat exchange where a material changes its state under certain 
preconditions are utilized and technically implemented in air conditioning technology. 

Atthe Solidification point: e.g. water becomes ice. 

Atthe Boiling point: e.g. water becomes steam. 






Ice absorbs heat and 
becomes liquid. 



Water absorbs heat and 
becomes vapor (gaseous) 


12 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 











Heat and Temperature 

Heat is the energy that describes the state of a body. The temperature depends on the 
intensity of the movement of its atoms or molecules. 

Heat is no longer present at -273.15°C =0° Kelvin. This value is known as absolute zero 
where molecules and atoms cease to move and the body no longer has heat orthermal 
energy. 

Depending on the thermal conductivity, temperature is perceived differently on contact 
with a body so that temperature must therefore be measured with a thermometer. 

When two objects at different temperatures move, the heat always flows from the warmer 
to the colder object. The warmer object cools down, the colder object heats up until both 
objects reach the same temperature. Here, heat is transported until a state of thermal 
equilibrium is reached. 

Generating cold therefore means removing heat. From a thermodynamics point of view, 
the term cold is not used as long as the temperature of the room, material or body is 
above absolute zero. 

There are various methods of generating cold (low temperature): 

• Adiabatic cooling (cooling effect by the movement of air over a moist surface). 

• Absorption method (giving off energy to a liquid to change the state of aggregation). 


• Peltier cooling (electric cooling method). 


BTUs and Calories 

Heat is measured in British Thermal Units (BTUs) and calories. 

• BTU - amount of heat energy required to raise one pound of water 
one degree Fahrenheit. 

• Calorie - amount of heat energy required to raise one gram of water 
one degree Celsius. 


13 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 



It is in the interest of the userto apply the least possible amountof energy to achieve high 
refrigerating capacities. In motor vehicle air conditioning systems, this is achieved by the 
cold vapor compression method known as a compression-type refrigerating system. 

The quantity of heat corresponds to the thermal energy contained in a body without ther¬ 
mal reaction. It is measured in J oules (formerly Calories). 

The quantity of heat required to heat 1 kg of water: 

Waterfrom 0°C - 100°C 420 kj 

Evaporation at 100°C 2257 kJ 

Watervapor (steam) from 100°C - 200°C 188 kJ 


The specific heat is the quantity of heat required to heat a kilogram of a certain sub¬ 
stance by 1°C without a change in phase or state occurring. 

The evaporation or vaporization heat is the quantity of heat required to change 1 kg 
of a substance from a liquid to a vapor state. 


•c 



14 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Liquid 

A-B 

The liquid is heated from 0°C tolOO°C. 

T he first vapor (steam) bubbles occur at 
point B. 420 kj of heat are required up to 
this point. 

2 

Two Phase 
liquid/Gas bubbles 

B-C 

The liquid changes into saturated vapor 
(steam).The liquid is completely evaporated 
at point C. The temperature is constant dur¬ 
ing this phase change and an energy supply 
of 2250 kJ is required. 

3 

Gas 

C-D 

T he vapor is heated further. 188 kJ of heat 
must be added to increase the temperature 
ofthe vapor by 100°C. 1.88 kJ of heat are 
required to heat up 1 kg of water by 1°C. 
Specific heat of steam. 

A 

Point A the sub-cooling of a liquid = 
cooling below the point of condensation 
or Dew Point. 

D 

At point D, the superheated vapor (steam) as 
a total thermal (heat) energy of 2858 kJ 
(enthalpy) = heat content of a substance. 


As we analyze the chart we can see: 

• Water boils at a temperature of 100°C at 1 bar ambient pressure 

• Despite applying more heat, a further increase in temperature is not 
possible until the entire quantity of water is evaporated. 

• This thermal energy enables the phase transition. 

• At point A sub-cooling of a liquid = cooling below the point of 
condensation or Dew Point. 

• At point D superheated vapor (steam) by heating above the 
temperature of boiling (Water). 

At a temperature of 100°C, water is in a liquid and gaseous state, known as the two- 
phase zone. Once all the water has been evaporated, the further application of energy 
results in heating the steam above 100°C.The specific heat of the steam is the charac¬ 
teristic value for this further heating process. 


15 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 





MPa 



Graphical Explication ofthe Refrigerant Cycle 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Liquid 

2 

Two Phase Zone (Liquid/gas) 

3 

Gas 

A-B 

Compression in the compressor, gaseous, high pressure, high temperature 

B-C 

Compression in the compressor, gaseous, high pressure, high temperature 

C-D 

Expansion = abrupt pressure reiief causes evaporation 

D-A 

Evaporation process in the evaporator. Transition from iiquid to gaseous 
state, iow pressure. 


16 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 







































Effects of Pressure 


The boiling point of a liquid rises as altitude increases and vise versa. 



Water boils at sea level at 100°C (212°F) 
and as atmospheric pressure drops so does 
the boiling point. 

Atmospheric pressure is 14.7psi (absolute) 
at sea level and gradually lower at higher 
attitudes. 

Imagine the pressure in the atmosphere rep¬ 
resented as a one inch square, 600 mile high 
column of air; the higheron this column we 
go, the lighterthe air becomes and the lower 
the pressure. 


Note: Absolute pressure takes into 

accountthatthere is 14.7psia of 
atmospheric pressure at sea level 
and this is calibrated as 0 pres¬ 
sure on all gauges, so any pres¬ 
sure below the ZERO is vacuum 
and above is absolute pressure. 



17 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 









Of course, you don't notice the 14.7 psi pressing in on everything, and air pressure 
gauges are calibrated to read 0 psi at atmospheric pressure. 

But this atmospheric pressure exists, and you can feel its effects, particularly at higher 
elevations; for example, if you exercise vigorously, at a high elevation, you become winded 
more quickly. Humans as well as machines feel the effects of the thinner air at altitudes. 

A soccer playerthat is accustomed to playing at sea level will feel fatigued and run down 
in a very short time at high altitudes like in Quito, Ecuador at 9,200 feet or La Paz, Bolivia 
at 11,811 feet. 

Vehicles also sufferthe dramatic effects of altitude which robs them of power. The devel¬ 
opment of electronic fuel injection and forced induction made it possible to compensate 
for these adverse conditions. 

In an air conditioning system, the pressure in the evaporator is low, so that all the refriger¬ 
ant vaporizes. The pressure in the condenser is high, so that all the refrigerant readily 
changes state to a liquid. 

Raising the pressure of a vapor raises its temperature; lowering the pressure decreases 
its temperature. 

In an air conditioning system, a compressor is used to increase the pressure of the refrig¬ 
erant; this raises its temperature. The refrigerant vapor entering the condenser is hot. 

In BMW air conditioning systems, an expansion valve is used to lower the pressure of the 
refrigerant; the refrigerant in the evaporator is cold. 

Automotive A/C systems are designed to operate at pressures that keep the refrigerant at 
the optimum temperature for taking heat out of the passenger compartment. 


18 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 



Pressure and Boiling Points 


The boiling point of a liquid changes if the pressure above it changes. All liquids behave 
in the same way. 

• Boiling point of H20/water = 100°C (212°F) 

• Boiling point of machine oil =380 to 400°C (716 to 752°F) 


We know that water boils (becomes steam) at lower temperatures, the lower the pressure. 
Airconditioning systems in motorvehicles also make use ofthe evaporation process. 

A substance with a low boiling point is used for this purpose. It is known as refrigerant. 

• Boiling point of refrigerant R12 =-29.8°C (-21.6°F) 

• Boiling point of refrigerant R134a =-26.5°C (-15.7°F) 

(The boiling point of liquids specified in tables always refers to an atmospheric pressure 
of 0.1 MPa = 1 bar) 


The following points can be established based on the vapor-pressure curves forthe two 
refrigerants R134a and R12 (R12 is no longer used). 


At a constant pressure, the gas 
becomes liquid by reducing tempera¬ 
ture (in the refrigerant circuit ofthe air 
conditioning system, this takes place 
in the condenser) or by reducing 
pressure the refrigerant changes 
from the liquid to the gaseous state 
(in the circuit ofthe air conditioning 
system, this takes place in the evapo¬ 
rator). 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Pressure 

B 

Temperature 

1 

R134 a 

2 

R12 

3 

Liquid 

4 

Gaseous 




19 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 

























Boiling PointofVarious Substances 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Machine oil 

2 

Water 

3 

Spirits 

4 

R134a 

5 

R12 

6 

Absolute 0 


20 

Principles of Heating and Refrigeration 











