Table of Contents 


Engine Cooling/Heating System 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

Heat Management.5 

Intelligent Heat Management .6 

Engine Cooling/Heating System Components .7 

The Radiator.7 

Engine Coolant.9 

Coolant RecoveryTank.9 

Coolant Level Check.9 

Cooling Fans.10 

Coolant Pump (Mechanical) .12 

Third Generation Design.13 

Coolant Pump (Electric).14 

Electric Pump System Bleeding Procedure .16 

Conventional Thermostat.17 

Data-map Thermostat .17 

Control Principle of DatamapThermostat.18 

Water Valves .19 

Air Cleaner/Microfilters.19 

Heater Core .20 

Blower Fan .21 

BlowerControl .23 


Initial Print Date: 10/07 


Revision Date: 
























Engine Cooling/Heating System 


Model: All 
Production: All 

lUr 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the operation of the engine cooling system. 

• Identify the components that integrate the engine cooling system. 


2 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 



Introduction 



The internal combustion engine transforms chemical energy into mechanical energy. 
Heat is generated as a by-product of combustion and by internal component friction. 

M aintaining operating temperature is crucial forthe operation and efficiency of any 
engine. Temperatures in excess of the operating temperature may lower efficiency, raise 
emissions levels and eventually lead to engine failure. 

The job of the cooling system is to circulate a coolant mixture of antifreeze and water 
through the engine with the purpose of extracting excess heat but at the same time 
allowing the engine to achieve and maintain operating temperature.This ensures maxi¬ 
mum efficiency, lowers tailpipe emissions and contributes to engine durability by mini¬ 
mizing wear. 

The coolant is circulated through the engine block and cylinder head with the use of a 
belt driven or electric water pump. This pump pushes the coolant through a thermostat 
to the radiatorwhere a cooling fan forces ambient airthrough the outside fins of the radi- 
atorto extract heat from the circulating coolant. The thermostat is held closed fora suffi¬ 
cient amount of time to allow for adequate heat transfer to take place on both sides (hot 
orcold) of the system. The coolant in the cooled section of the radiator may also be 
used for other cooling needs like transmission oil cooler or engine oil cooler before it is 
re-circulated back into the engine and the process is repeated. 


3 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 














The cooling system is pressurized with the use of a metered radiator cap. This pressur¬ 
ization of the coolant raises the coolant boiling point and allows the system to operate at 
much higher temperatures with out boiling over. It is designed to maintain the pressure 
inside of the system. Sending the excess coolant to an expansion tank as the heated 
coolant expands and letting it re-enterthe system when the engine cools down and the 
coolant contracts. In this mannerthe cooling system remains sealed and full. 


PRESSURE 

SPRING 



Hot coolant from the engine/cylinder head is sent into the passenger compartment to be 
circulated through a heat exchanger (heater core). This heat supply warms the passenger 
compartment as a blowerfan flows airthrough the outside fins of the heater core, 
extracting heat from the circulating coolant. The desired temperature is generally con¬ 
trolled through the use of a heater control valve. 

To optimize system efficiency a computer monitors the engine coolant temperature to 
operate the cooling fan, thermostat opening and electric water pump.T he computer alters 
its modes of operation depending on the feed back from the coolant temperature sensor. 
Limiting the engine capability until operating temperature is reached and stepping in to 
safeguard the engine if operating temperature is dangerously exceeded. 

At BMW, there have been three types of water cooling systems used to date: 

• Simple water cooling system 

• Partially-cooled-engine water cooling system 

• Crossflow water cooling system 

Note: Fordetailed information on cooling systems refertothe Engine 
Reference Material undercooling Section. 


4 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 
























Heat Management 

The engine management ECU controls the coolant pump as demanded by the situation 
as follows: 

• Low output when cooling requirement is small and outside temperatures are low. 

• High output when high cooling requirement is large and outside temperatures are high. 

The coolant pump may also be completely switched off under certain circumstances, e.g. 
to allow the coolant to heat up rapidly during the warm-up phase. However, this only 
occurs when no heating is required and the outside temperature is within the permitted 
range. 

The coolant pump also operates differently than conventional pumps when controlling 
the engine temperature. Previously, only the currently present temperature could be con¬ 
trolled by the thermostat. The software in the engine control unit now features a calcula¬ 
tion model that can take into account the progression of the cylinder head temperature 
based on load. In addition to data-map control of the thermostat, the heat management 
system makes it possible to use various data maps for the purpose of controlling the 
coolant pump. 

For instance, the engine management ECU can adapt the engine temperature to match 
the current driving situation. This means that four different temperature ranges can be 
implemented: 

• 111°C (231°F)ECO mode 

• 105°C (221°F) Normal mode 

• 95°C (203°F) High mode 

• 80°C (176°F) High-F Data-map thermostat mode 

If the engine management ECU selects ECO mode based on the current operating con¬ 
ditions, the system aims to bring about a higher cylinder head temperature 
(111°C/231°F). The engine is operated with relatively low fuel consumption in this tem¬ 
perature range as the internal friction is reduced. An increase in temperature therefore 
favors lowerfuel consumption in the low load range. In High and 

Data-map thermostat mode, the driver wishes to utilize the optimum power development 
of the engine. The cylinder head temperature is therefore reduced to 80°C (176°F).This 
results in improved volumetric efficiency, thus increasing the engine torque.The engine 
management ECU can then set an operating mode adapted to the particular driving situ¬ 
ation. Consequently, it is possible to influence fuel consumption and power output by 
means of the cooling system. 


5 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 



Intelligent Heat Management 

The previous section explained the operating modes in which heat management was 
implemented. However, an electrically driven coolant pump makes even more options 
possible. For instance, it is now possible to warm up the engine without the coolant circu¬ 
lating, orto allow the pump to continue running afterthe engine is switched of in orderto 
facilitate heat dissipation. 

The advantages offered by this type of pump are listed below: 

Fuel consumption 

• Faster warm-up as coolant is not circulated (stationary). 

• Increased compression ratio through greater cooling capacity at full load compared 
to the predecessor engine. 

Exhaust emissions 

• Faster engine warm-up due to drastically reduced pump speed (n => 0) 
and the resulting minimal volumetric flow of coolant. 

• Reduced friction. 

• Reduced fuel consumption. 

• Reduced exhaust emissions. 

Power output 

• Component cooling independentof engine speed. 

• Demand-based coolant pump output. 

• Avoidance of energy loss. 

Comfort 

• Optimum volumetric flow. 

• Greater heater output when demanded. 

• Residual heat when engine is not running. 

Component protection 

• Electric pump overrun achieves more effective heat 
dissipation after switching off engine when hot. 


6 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 



Engine Cooling/Heating System Components 


The Radiator 

The radiator is the main heat exchanger responsible for dissipating the heat gathered by 
the coolant as it circulates through the engine and cylinder head. The hot coolant is 
pushed into the radiator with the use of a water pump and a cooling fan blows outside 
airthrough it to cool itoff.Today radiators are built out of Aluminum and plastic. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Radiator 

2 

Thermostat 

3 

Coolant Pump 

4 

Coolant Passages in block 

5 

Coolant Passages in head 


7 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 




















































The radiator on the E65, is all aluminunn and is divided into two sections: a high-tempera¬ 
ture section, which is mainly responsible for engine cooling, and a low temperature sec¬ 
tion, which takes care of automatic-transmission oil cooling. This is achieved by a diverter 
integrated in the radiator tank which diverts part of the coolant flow adjacent to the high 
temperature section. 



In comparison with the plastic/aluminum radiator used on the previous models, it is 400 g 
lighter when full and 21mm slimmer. The total weight reduction is around 5 percent. 

The all aluminum radiator is not only slimmer, it is also more reliable and lasts longerthan 
conventional radiators. The all-aluminum design also for the first time incorporates VDA 
connections for quick-fit joints. 

Note: Manual Transmission vehicles utilize the entire radiator surface for 
engine cooling. 


8 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 














































Engine Coolant 

The cooling system contains a special liquid called coolant, or "antifreeze,” which circu¬ 
lates through the engine and the radiator. The coolant picks up heat from the engine and 
transports it to the radiator, where it is dissipated to outside air. Some of the hot coolant 
can also be circulated through the heater core, where it can warm the air being blown into 
the passenger compartment. 

The antifreeze concentration should be 50%, throughout the year. In addition, the coolant 
should be drained and refilled according to the recommendations in the BMW Operating 
Fluids Specifications, Group 17. 

The cooling system does not need any additives besides a reputable brand of ethylene 
glycol antifreeze with corrosion inhibitors that are nitrite- and amino-acid free and com¬ 
patible with aluminum radiators. Antifreeze other than the type specified by BMW for alu¬ 
minum radiators may cause corrosion of the cooling system, which can lead to engine 
overheating and damage. 

Coolant RecoveryTank 

As coolant is heated it expands and gains volume, this fluid expansion is contained in the 
coolant recovery tank or expansion tank. Generally constructed out of plastic, this reser¬ 
voir caches and holds the coolant as the engine warms, stores it until the engine cools 
and the suction generated by the contraction of the coolant pulls it back into the system. 

C oolant Level C heck 

Coolant level can be checked by observing that the fill line is between a minimum and a 
maximum (Hot) marker and filling according to specifications. A measuring device or sen¬ 
sor is generally provided to indicate coolant level depending on the model. 


Illustration shows E 60/E 61/E 63/E 64: 

• Perform filling operation slowly. Pour 
coolant into expansion tank up to 
MAX mark. 

• Start engine and run at idle speed 
for approx, one minute (cap open). 
Then adjust coolant level to MAX. 

• Close cap and run engine up to 
operating temperature until main 
thermostat opens. C heck cooling 
circuit and drain plug for leaks 



9 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 





The engine must be cooled down before the coolant level is checked. Coolant tempera¬ 
ture must not exceed 30°C. If ambient temperature is above 30°C, allow engine to cool 
down to ambient temperature at least. 

Check coolant level and adjust to MAX. 

Before filling: 

• Turn on ignition. 

• Set blowerto low level. 

• Set heating controllerto maximum temperature. 

This ensures that the heater valves are fully opened and the auxiliary water pump starts. 


WARNING!!! 


Note: Do notfill coolant expansion tank over MAX level as overfilling will cause 
the coolant to overflow and the auxiliary water pump must deliver coolant 
in orderto ensure fully venting! 

Cooling Fans 

The heat is carried away from the engine by the coolant and then it is transferred on to 
the radiator fins. The cooling fans job is to force airthrough these fins and extract the col¬ 
lected heat from the radiator. In early vehicles this fan was driven by the engine, current 
fans are all electric in efforts to enhance fuel economy and power savings and overall 
efficiency. 

The initial constantly driven and engine-speed dependent fans were followed by fans with 
a viscous coupling. This involves an engine-driven primary side which imparts drive by 
hydraulic friction with a transmission ratio determined by engine speed to a secondary 
side connected to the fan. By means of the controllable oil pressure inside the coupling, 
the fan speed can be varied from an idling speed to a maximum speed virtually equivalent 
to the primary-side drive speed. 

Control is effected by virtue of a purely temperature-dependent self regulating coupling 
which infinitely varies its speed of rotation by controlling the volume of silicon oil in the 
chamber using a bi-metallic strip, a switch pin and a valve lever. The control variable is the 
post-radiator airtemperature and, therefore, indirectly the temperature of the coolant. 

The viscous fan coupling was subsequently replaced by the electric fan, which initially 
was only used as an auxiliary fan on vehicles with air conditioning (which at that time was 
an option).Those electric fans could initially be operated at multiple speeds and different 
power ratings were used according to country of destination (hot or cold climate). 

With the arrival of the electric fan, compact radiator modules were developed and are now 
found on all modern vehicles. 


10 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 



E90 Radiator Module 


^ ^ 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

Power steering cooler 

2 

Air conditioning condenser 

3 

Radiator 

4 

Electric fan with fan cowl 

5 

Transmission oil cooler (Auto only) 


Radiator modules are assembly units that consist of a number of cooling-system 
and air conditioning components. 


Auxiliary Fan C ircuit (Early Models) 

The condenser on BMW A/C systems is equipped with an auxiliary fan the provides addi¬ 
tional airflow through the radiator and condenser, when needed. 

The auxiliary fan is used to cool the outersurface ofthe condenser and consequently the 
hot gaseous refrigerant that flows through it. As the refrigerant cools, it condenses into 
liquid state as the heat from the passenger compartment is removed. 

The engine management computer communicates with the fan control module which 
governs the auxiliary fan operation. 

The fan is activated based on the following conditions: 

• The radiator outlet temperature exceeds a preset temperature. 

• The refrigerant pressures reach a predetermined crucial point. 

• Vehicle speed. 

• Battery voltage level. 


11 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 














Coolant Pump (Mechanical) 

Mechanical coolant pumps have undergone a continual process of improvement and 
refinement as a result of which the 3rd generation is now in use. 

The design of the third-generation mechanical coolant pumps has largely overcome their 
leakage and lubrication difficulties as well as enhanced their housing rigidity. 

This coolant pump has a "leakage retention system” Under normal conditions the coolant 
that escapes past the pump shaft collects in it and evaporates through a hole in the leak¬ 
age chamber. If the shaft seal fails, the leakage chamberfills up completely with coolant. 

Coolant escaping from the leakage chamber vent is thus an indication of shaft seal failure. 

In the past, perfectly functioning coolant pumps were often replaced because the shaft- 
seal leakage necessary for proper operation of the coolant pump left evaporation residues 
on the outside ofthe pump housing. 

The "leakage retention system" now ensures undetectable evaporation ofthe intended 
leakage so that visual inspection of the pump in the course of a service does not result in 
incorrect diagnosis of coolant pump failure. At the same time, the introduction ofthe leak¬ 
age chamber also significantly increased the rigidity ofthe coolant pump housing. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hub, for belt pulley 

2 

Pump shaft seal 

3 

Pump Impeller 



12 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 





























Third Generation Design 





\ ^ 





- 

-^ 

-Sil 

r 

a 







/r~u 



K- 











Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hub, for belt pulley 

4 

Impeller 

2 

Leakage/evaporation chamber 

5 

Shaft seal 

3 

Drain port for leakage/evap chamber 




13 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 



































































Coolant Pump (Electric) 


The implementation of thermal management system on the N52 engine required that the 
active components of the cooling system such as pump, thermostat and fan would be 
electrically controllable. Electrically controllable data-map thermostats and electric fans 
were already established components of engine cooling systems. Thus an electric 
coolant pump was also developed which would reliably ensure the coolant flow 
demanded by the thermal management system independently of engine speed. 


The electric coolant pump had to meet demanding requirements in terms of: 


• Exceptional reliability 

• Small dimensions 

• Low power consumption 
(approx. 200 W) 

• Controlled leakage 

• Deliveryof minimal volumetric 
flow rates 

• Compatibility with high ambient 
temperatures 

The electric coolant pump used is a wet- 
rotor design with an electronic motor with 
integrated electronics mounted on the rear 
of the pump. 

The pump's integrated electronic circuitry 
has two fundamental tasks: 

• To condition and connect the electric 
current for the motor to operate, and 
with it the pump. 

• To regulate the coolant flow as 
demanded by the engine manage¬ 
ment by modulating the pump speed 
and to feed back information to the 
engine management. 



14 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 










Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Pump impeller section 

3 

Electronic module 

2 

Sealed motor 




The modular design of the electric 
coolant pump (see illustration) makes 
it an exceptionally compact and light¬ 
weight unit which is substantially more 
efficient than conventional mechanical 
pumps. 



Note: The pump should only be stored full of coolant and upright on its base. 


15 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 
























































































Electric Pump System Bleeding Procedure 

Due to this coolant pump, a special filling and bleeding procedure must be implemented 

for servicing (see current repair instructions): 

Fill coolant expansion vessel to bottom of filler neck with specified coolant. 

Replace cap on coolant expansion vessel. 

Do not remove cap from coolant expansion vessel during the bleeding sequence. 

1. Connect battery charger. 

2. Switch on ignition. 

3. Setheaterto maximum temperature (set to "Automatic"), turn fan to lowest setting. 

4. Depress acceleratorto maximum for 10 seconds. The engine must not be started. 

5. The bleeding sequence has been started by depressing the accelerator and takes 
about 12 minutes. (The electric coolant pump has been activated and switches off 
automatically after about 12 minutes.) 

6. Afterwards, fill coolant expansion tank to 250 ml above "M ax". 

(Observe service instructions specific to vehicle.) 

7. Check cooling system for leaks. 

8. If the bleeding sequence has to be repeated (e.g. if there are leaks in the cooling sys¬ 
tem), allow DME to reset completely (remove key from ignition for about 3 minutes), 
then repeat procedure from step 3. 


16 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 



C onventional Thermostat 


The control of engine tennperature by the conventional thermostat is performed purely on 
the basis of coolant temperature. That method of control can be divided into the following 
three operating phases: 

• Thermostat closed: the coolant circulates only inside the engine and the cooling 
part of the system is closed off. 

• Thermostat fully open: the total volume of coolant flows through the radiatorthus 
utilizing the maximum cooling capacity. 

• Thermostat partially open: a thermostat in which the wax element responds to the 
temperature of the coolant flowing over it divides the coolant flow between the radi¬ 
ator and a "radiator bypass". In that way, cooling can be largely prevented at very 
low coolant temperatures. 

Data-map Thermostat 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Heating resistor 

7 

Eiement housing 

2 

M ain vaive 

8 

Main spring 

3 

Eiastomer insert 

9 

Operating piston 

4 

Bypass vaive 

10 

Cross brace 

5 

Housing 

11 

Bypass spring 

6 

Connector 




17 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 























































Control Principle of Datamap Thermostat 

In view of the fact that an intelligent heat management system has an influence on fuel 
consumption, exhaust emissions, performance and comfort according to engine temper¬ 
ature, this data-map thermostat was developed for use with such a system. The data¬ 
map thermostat successfully integrates modern engine management electronics. That 
combination is achieved by placing an electrically heated resistor in the expanding ele¬ 
ment of the thermostat. 

This means that the expanding element is no longer heated simply by the coolant pass¬ 
ing over it but can also be "artificially" heated and, therefore, brought into operation at 
temperatures at which it would otherwise not respond. 

The heating element is controlled by the engine management on the basis of a stored 
data map and according to the particular driving situation. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Air-temperature data map 

5 

Chip 

2 

Load data map 

6 

Electric fan 

3 

Road-speed data map 

7 

Data-map thermostat 

4 

Coolant-temperature data map 




18 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 


















































That data map was determined on the M62 engine, for example, 
by the following parameters: 

• Engine load 

• Engine speed 

• Vehicle speed 

• Intake-air temperature 

• Coolant temperature 

With such an "intelligent" control system, it is possible to use a higher coolant tempera¬ 
ture at medium engine loads. Using higher operating temperatures at medium engine 
loads achieves improved combustion (assuming the engine management system is 
appropriately configured) which ultimately results in lowerfuel consumption and exhaust 
emissions. At maximum engine load, on the other hand, higher operating temperatures 
would have disadvantages (e.g. retarding of ignition due to pinking tendency).!herefore, 
the data-map thermostat is used to deliberately reduce coolant temperatures at maximum 
engine load. Such data-map driven control is also dependent on an electric fan that can 
be operated by the engine management. 

Water Valves 

The heating system utilizes hot coolant from the engine cooling system to warm air for 
heating the passenger compartment. The amount of coolant that flows into the heating 
system is controlled by an electric watervalve(s). 

The water valve is electrically actuated. It is located beside the brake booster. It controls 
coolantflow through the heater core. The valve is powered closed by an electric switch; 
when not powered, it springs open. The valve, when powered closed, prevents hot 
coolant from entering the heater core, 
so the air entering the passenger 
compartment is not heated. When 
power is removed, the valve springs 
open, so that hot coolant flows 
through the heater core and can warm 
the air entering the passenger com¬ 
partment. 

Water regulated Climate Control cars 
use pulsed water valves to control the 
heater core temperature. Air regulated 
Climate Control vehicles may still use 
a water valve to adjust the temperature 
of the heater core. 


E60 Water Valve 



19 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 


Heater Core 



When the thernnostat opens, hot coolant is flowed through the heater core. The heater 
core consecutively heats the airthat passes through it; the hot air can then be used to 
warm the passenger compartment. The heater core (like the radiator) is also a "heat 
exchanger."The heatercore can be single core ordual core were left and righttempera- 
ture outputs can be achieved individuallyforthe use in a dual zone Climate Control sys¬ 
tem. 

There are two types of temperature controls used in BMW vehicles: 

• Coolant/water Regulated Temperature Control 

• Air Regulated Temperature Control 

In water regulated temperature control system, when the water valve is open, hot engine 
coolant circulates through the heatercore. The temperature is controlled by varying the 
Duty Cycle of the water valve/valves. 

In air regulated temperature control systems hot water constantly flows through the 
heatercore and do not need to use water valve because they vary the temperature by 
constantly mixing in cold airfrom the evaporator. 

In both instances the airthat passes through the heatercore first passes through the 
evaporator (if so equipped) with the intent on removing the moisture from the incoming 
air charge and avoiding condensation. 


20 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 


Blower Fan 

The blowerfan is in charge of delivering the airflow to the heating/A/C System. 

Although a dual squirrel-cage type blower is commonly used on most BMW (E53, E60, 
E63, E65 and E70 FKA), a single squirrel cage blowerfan design is also installed in some 
othervehicles like E9X, E85, E70. Both blowerdesigns are used to push air across the 
evaporator and the heater core through the plenum and out the vents. 

The dual fan design is mounted in the center of the dash inside the air box.The single fan 
design is usually mounted on the side of the air box nearthe passenger seat. 

Regardless of the fan design used, 
blower speed is controlled by resistors 
(in the older vehicles) or transistors that 
vary the amount of voltage applied to 
the blower, depending on the air volume 
control knob setting (current vehicles). 

In current heating and A/C systems, the 
blower speed is controlled electronically 
through the use of an output stage con¬ 
troller as are the engine/auxiliary cooling 
fans. Wheneverthe A/C is switched on, 
the fan runs at speed "1" or higher. 

Without the fan working, the evaporator 
could ice up, as humid air comes in 
contact with the fins. 




21 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 






















E85 Blower/final Stage Location 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Left/right rear ventilation airduct 

4 

Center left/right rear ventilation outlet air ducts 

2 

FKA rear air conditioning blower 

5 

Left/right B-pillarventilation airduct 

3 

FKA blower final stage 




22 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 





















Blower Control 

The blower motor is actuated by the blower output stage depending on this variable con¬ 
trol signal. The line connections from the IHKA to the final stage are monitored by the 
IHKA. 

The blower and the output stage can be replaced separately. See appropriate workshop 
systems documentation. The motor voltage is limited to 12.5V by the software. If an over¬ 
load is detected at the output stage output or temperature protection is activated, the 
engine output is reduced. 



E70 Output Stage 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

IHKA blower housing 

2 

blower output stage 


23 

Engine Cooling/Heating System 






