Table of Contents 


C limate C ontrol C omponents 

Subject Page 

Control Modules . .4 

Climate Control Panel/Module .4 

Climate Control Panel/Module (E90 IHKA) .5 

Digital Motor Electronics (DME)Control Module .5 

J unction Box(J B).6 

Roof Control Panel (FZD).7 

Car Access System (CAS).7 

CarCommunication Computer (CCC) .7 

Central Information Display .7 

Center Console Switch C luster (SZM).8 

Input Sensors ... 9 

InteriorTemperature Sensor .9 

AUC Sensor.10 

AUC Sensor Location .10 

E70 AUC Sensor.12 

Solar Sensor.13 

Condensation Sensor.14 

Rain/Driving Light Solar Sensor .16 

Mist Sensor via FZD (E70).17 

OutletTemperature Sensor.18 

Front Center Ventilation Temperature Sensor(s) .19 

Refrigerant Pressure Sensor.20 

Pressure Sensor via J unction Box(E70) .21 

EvaporatorTemperature Sensor.22 

Heater Core Temperature Sensors .24 

AmbientTemperature Sensor.25 

Output Devices .26 

Compressor Control Methods .27 

SIGNAL KO: .28 

SIGNAL KO-REL:.29 

Compressor Control Valves .30 

Electronic Control Valve at Low Loads .31 

Electronic Control Valve at High Loads.31 

Control Range of the Compressor.34 


Initial Print Date: 10/07 


Revision Date: 





































Subject Page 

Blower Motor/Final Stage.35 

Water Valve .36 

WaterValve (AirTemperature Control) .37 

Auxiliary Water Pumps.37 

Electric Water Pumps .38 

Map Thermostat.39 

Auxiliary Fan Control (from 99 MY).40 

Stepper Motors for Air Flap Operation .41 

Conventional Stepper Motors .42 

"Smart" Stepper Motors .42 

E65 Stepper Motors .44 

E60 Stepper Motors .45 

E9X Stepper Motors .46 

E70 Stepper Motors .50 

Replacement of a F lap M otor.52 

PTC Heating Elements .55 

FKA Control Unit.55 

E70 Third Row Heating and Ventilation PCT Heater.57 





















C limate C ontrol C omponents 

Model: All 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 


• Identify and locate all the different inputs and outputs of BMW climate control 
systems. 

• Understand the operation of the inputs and outputs of BMW climate control 
systems. 

• Describe the difference between IHKA, IHKS and IHKR systems. 

• Understand how the temperature is regulated in all BMW climate Control 
Systems. 


3 

Climate Control Components 




Control Modules 


Climate Control Panel/Module 

The control module forthe climate control system comes in numerous configurations. 

Starting with the E38, the climate control module was integrated with the control panel. 

The control panel/module is responsible for receiving and processing input information 

and controlling or signalling various outputs for climate control functions. 

The control panel/module receives the following input information: 

• Power supply and ground 

- KL31, KL30 and KL15. KL50 is used forthe unloader input to shutoff 
consumers such as the blower motor. 

• Command input from driver 

- This includes desired temperatures, front and rear defrost, air distribution 
requests, blower speed, "snowflake button”, recirculation and auto operation. Also 
there in the "stratified” air input for air blending at the center face vent. 

•Temperature inputs 

- The system needs environmental information from various temperature sensors 
including heater core , ambient temp, fact vent and also receives feedback infor¬ 
mation from the interior temperature sensor to determine the temperature regula¬ 
tion needed. 

• Road speed input 

- This is for fresh air flap operation for "Ram Air” pressure compensation. 

• Pressure sensor input 

- For compressor operation and auxiliary fan control. 

• Engine speed 

- The RPM information is used for auxiliary water pump/water valve operation on 
some models. 



E39 IHKA control panel/module 


4 

Climate Control Components 




























































Climate Control Panel/Module (E90 IHKA) 


The control and operating module is the control center of the heating and air conditioning 
system. It is the point where all the necessary sensor data is processed and the required 
settings can be entered. 

Since the E90 a new feature of the control module is that it no longer directly controls all 
functions and components like in other models but rather makes use of other control 
modules for this purpose (distributed functions). 

The E90 IHKA panel is directly responsible for the following: 

• SZM switch input 

• Solar sensor input 

• Receives the rear stratification knob (rheostat) signal. 

• Receives ventilation, footwell, and evaporator temperature sensor signals. 

• Condensation sensor signal via the K-CAN. 

The signal path is: Condensation sensor =>FZD => K-CAN =>IHKA 



E90 IHKA control panel/module 


Digital Motor Electronics (DME) Control Module 

The DM E control unit performs the following functions: 

• Actuates the Engine cooling fan for cooling of the condenser. 

• Interfaces with the IHKA control unit via the bus network for the compressor 
release signal. 

• Interfaces with the IHKA control unit for operation of the engine's electric water 
pump for the residual heat feature. 


5 

Climate Control Components 




J unction Box (J B) 


The junction box is extremely important to the IHKA system. It is responsible for the fol¬ 
lowing functions: 

• Output signal for seat heating. 

The signal path is:SZM =>ribbon cable =>IHKA =>K-CAN=>J BE =>SHM/SMFA 

• Rear window defogger. 

The signal path is: IHKA =>K-CAN =>J BE (relay) => Rear window defogger 
filters/grid 

• B lower motor operating voltage. 

• Refrigerant control valve (in compressor). 

The signal path is: IHKA =>K-CAN =>J BE => Operating voltage for valve 

• Gateway to the PT-CAN for bi-directional communication between the IHKA and DME. 
The signal path is: IHKA <=>K-CAN <=>J BE <=> PT-CAN <=>DME 

• Receives the rear stratification knob (rheostat) signal. 

• Receives refrigerant pressure sensor signal. 

The signal path is: Pressure sensor =>J BE =>K-CAN =>IHKA 

• Receives AUC sensor signal. 

The signal path is: AUC sensor =>J BE => K-CAN => IHKA 

• Splice point for the ambient air temperature sensor. 

The signal path is: Ambient air temperature sensor => hardwire =>throughJ B => IKE 


6 

Climate Control Components 



Roof Control Panel (FZD) 

The roof control panel is used to relay the condensation sensor signal to the IHKA. It 
takes the signal from the condensation sensor and places it on the K-C AN. 

Car Access System (CAS) 

The CAS assigns a personal identification code to every remote control. The CAS trans¬ 
fers the personal identification code to the IHKA control unit via the K-C AN. 

The ID code "Key-based settings" (Key Memory) are stored in the IHKA control unit. 

When the vehicle is unlocked, the remote control unit used is recognized. The settings 
stored forthis unit are called up and executed. While entering the sleep mode (run-down 
period), the current settings are stored for the remote control unit in use at that time. 

CarCommunication Computer(CCC) 

If the vehicle is equipped with a navigation system, the signals from the controller for 
selecting the menus and sub-menu are processed in the CCC. 

To actuate the CID (Central Information Display), the red-green-blue signals from the 
graphics processor are converted into Low Voltage Differential Signalling (LVDS) digital 
signals. 

Central Information Display 

The following control and display functions are selected and activated with the controller 
in the CID (Central Information Display): 

• Air distribution setting - The defrost flaps, ventilation flaps and footwell flaps can be 
individually set in the air distribution submenu. 

• Automatic mode - T he intensity of the IH KA can be set in the automatic mode sub¬ 
menu. In other words, the automatic influence of the climate conditions outside the 
vehicle on the airvolume and the opening angle ofthe flaps can be set to one of 
three different settings (low, medium, high). 


7 

Climate Control Components 



Center Console Switch Cluster (SZM) 

The center console switch cluster (SZM) is connected by means of a 14-wire ribbon 
cable directly to the IHKA control module. The commands from the SZM are then trans¬ 
mitted via K-CAN to the corresponding systems. 

The A/C control and operating unit is also responsible for activation of the LEDs forfunc- 
tion and backlighting. 



E90 IHKA Center Console Switch Cluster 


8 

Climate Control Components 





Input Sensors 


IHKA system performance relies on a network of sensors that input information to the 
controller in order to compensate and adjust all the variables that are involved in the con¬ 
trol of the climate in the vehicles passenger compartment. These sensors vary depend¬ 
ing on equipment options but are generally the following: 

• Interior temperature sensor 

• AUC sensor 

• Solar sensor 

• Condensation sensor 

• Outlet temperature sensor 

• Refrigerant high/low pressure sensor 

• Evaporator temperature sensor 

• Heater core temperature sensors left/ right 

• Ambient outside temperature 

InteriorTemperature Sensor 

The interior temperature sensor is a NTC type thermistor, typically mounted in the IHKA 
panel. To promote adequate airflow across the sensing element a small puller type fan is 
used. Fan and sensor work together provide an interior cabin temperature input to the 
IHKA control module. 



9 

Climate Control Components 













AUC Sensor 

The AUC sensor, originally located in the lower right corner of the fan shroud, samples 
ambient airthat has entered the engine compartment. The sensor contains a gas sensor, 
which measures the level of oxidizable gases in air.These include hydrocarbons, NOx, 
SOxand CO. The AUC sensor sends a voltage signal to the control panel/module 
according to the concentration of these pollutants. If a high level of pollutants is detected, 
the control panel/module activates the recirculating air mode as follows: 

• In heating mode, recirculating air is used fora maximum of 3 minutes. 

• In cooling mode, recirculating air is used for a maximum of 10 minutes. 

If the level of oxidizable gases drops to an acceptable point before the time limit is 
reached, the IHKA system switches back to fresh air intake. If air quality has not improved 
at the end of the time limit, the system switches to fresh air briefly and then back to recir¬ 
culating mode for another 3 or 10 minute period. 

Note: Operating strategies of the AUC sensor vary from model to model. 


AUC Sensor Location 



E92AUC Sensor Location 

Note: On recent vehicles the AUC sensor has been relocated 
closer to the fresh air intake drills of the IHKA system. 


10 

Climate Control Components 


The IHKA control module monitors the change in the voltage signal as these gasses 
influence the sensor. The second circuit shown is a heating circuit which enhances the 
sensor's reaction time. When starting the vehicle, fresh air is always supplied due to the 
AUC sensor heat-up time. 

Pressing the button again activates the recirculating air mode. 

Pressing the button once again returns to fresh air mode. 

Recirculating air mode and AUC mode are indicated by green function lights (LEDs) on 
the control panel. 



The AUC/recirculating airfunction also features "forced ventilation with fresh air," the acti¬ 
vation and duration of which depends on whether the system is in A/C mode (compres¬ 
sor active). The fresh air is already dehumidified if the A/C compressor is ON, therefore, 
the duration of recirculating air mode is longer. 

The IHKA measures airquality by analyzing the AUC sensorsignal.The AUC-2 sensor 
provides a PWM signal corresponding to the noxious-gas content. The sensor is provided 
5V to activate the heating circuit (approx. 500 - 800 mW). 

Relative humidity inside the car can increase during a recirculated air phase, because the 
proportion of fresh air is low. This can cause the windows to fog, therefore recirculation in 
the AUC function is limited. 


11 

Climate Control Components 







E70 AUC Sensor 

The AUC sensor is an air quality sensor and is used to control the ventilation in the vehi¬ 
cle interior (fresh air, recirculated air) in combination with the IHKA control unit, depending 
on how much traffic-specific pollutant the fresh air contains. This increases the well-being 
of the occupants and reduces the amount of pollutant to which the occupants are sub¬ 
jected. 

The AUC sensor is a fully integrated system consisting of the sensor element, the signal 
processing system and a digital interface. 

A metal oxide sensor is used, which is extremely sensitive to different odors and exhaust 
emissions that typically occur in traffic. 

The signal processing unit calculates the air quality level by continuously monitoring the 
quality of the fresh air. The IHKA control unit is notified of this via the junction box inter¬ 
face. 

Depending on other parameters (ambient temperature, humidity, road speed etc.), the 
IHKA control unit decides whetherto allow the recirculated air request from the AUC sen¬ 
sor (including determination of the duration thereof) or suppress it. 

The AUC sensor is installed at the airfilter housing in the E70. 

An important task that is performed by the electronics is accurate control of the sensor 
operating temperature. The sensor element needs an operating temperature of approxi¬ 
mately 300°C. The sensor detects gases that can be reduced and oxidized. The main 
ones are carbon monoxide CO (gasoline) and nitrous oxide NO as an indicator of soot 
particles from diesel vehicles. 



AUC Sensor atE70 Filter Housing 


12 

Climate Control Components 


SolarSensor 

The solar sensor records the light intensity of the insolation to which the vehicle interior is 
being subjected separately for the right and left-hand sides. The influence of insolation on 
the temperature in the vehicle interior is compensated for in automatic mode by means of 
temperature specified value control intervention. 

Typically located in the center of the dashboard or integrated to the rain light sensor 
assembly on E70.The solar sensor consists of a light sensitive diode that provides the 
IHKA module with inputs of sunlight intensity. The input is used as a measure ofthe solar 
heating effect on vehicle occupants.The sensor signals will influence blower output, air 
stratification and ventilation flap operation. 


SolarSensor Location E60 



13 

Climate Control Components 






















Condensation Sensor 


The condensation sensor is relatively new to BMW climate control systems. Introduced 
with the E60 model, this sensorvaries its frequency out put in response to the presence 
of humidity and temperature in the windshield area. This information is sent to the IHKA 
control module via a digital signal with a varying frequency. The information is evaluated 
by the IHKA control module, which then implements a series of countermeasures to pre¬ 
vent windshield fogging. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rain-light sensor 

2 

Condensation sensor 


On the current E60 the condensation sensor is mounted underthe rain light sensor 
(RLS) on the mirror base. Other names forthe condensation sensor are Mist, Fogging, 
and Humidity sensor. 

When moisture is detected by the Condensation Sensor, the following occurs: 

• Defroster Flaps open further 

• Fresh Air Flaps open 100% 

• Blower speed is increased 

• Footwell Flaps are closed 

• Temperature increases 

• Evap Temperature threshold goes to minimum 


14 

Climate Control Components 























These measures are implemented one after another until windscreen fogging is eliminat¬ 
ed. Further steps are initiated if one measure proves to be ineffective. After successfully 
eliminating windshield fogging, the measures are gradually cancelled in steps. 

The sensor is located beneath the RLS on the windshield below the coverforthe base of 
the rearview mirror. 

A special locating tool is used to install the new sensor, this tool is supplied with the 
replacement sensor. 

The sensor is affixed to the windscreen with an adhesive. If the sensor needs to be 
removed from the windshield it must be replaced. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Sensor Electronics 

2 

Pin Connection 

3 

Moisture measuring cell 

4 

Well for laser adjusted resistors 


u -u 





The sensor varies its frequency out put in response to the presence of humidity. On the 
current E90 the condensation sensor is controlled and powered by the roof module 
(FZD). 

The sensor data are transferred via the K-CAN to the control and operating unit where 
they are evaluated. The IHKA control module receives all information sent from the FZD 
control module via the K-CAN spliced through the junction box. 

Note: Similar to previous systems, the condensation sensor value is ignored 
unless the IHKA panel is running in the automatic mode. 


15 

Climate Control Components 


















Rain/Driving Light Solar Sensor 



E70 RLSS Rain/Driving LightSolarSensor 

The new rain/driving light solar sensor RLSS of the E70 is clipped into a retaining ring 
beneath the windshield mirror base cover. 

The rain/driving light solar sensor separately records the insolation acting upon the vehi¬ 
cle occupants for the left and right halves of the vehicle. It generates two signals that are 
proportional to the insolation acting upon the vehicle occupants. 

The temperature rise due to heat from sun radiation in the vehicle interior is compensat¬ 
ed for in automatic mode by means of temperature specified value control intervention. 
The sensor signal is read in by the FZD via the LIN bus and relayed to the IHKA via the 
K-CAN. 

The signals are used by the IHKA to regulate the left and right air volume and ventilation 
temperature 


16 

Climate Control Components 





MistSensorvia FZD (E70) 

The mist sensor BSS is directly clipped to a bracket on the rain/driving light solar sensor 
beneath the mirror base cover. 

The sensor provides early window mist detection, even before the driver can see any. 
Countermeasures are taken automatically at an early stage, without the need for driver 
intervention. Good ventilation is needed for the sensor to operate efficiently. Suitable 
ventilation slots have therefore been provided in the mirror base cover that provide the 
sensor with an adequate amount of airflow. 

The sensor has to be within the range of the windshield wipers so that temperature 
changes caused by snow or ice on the other side of the windshield can be compensated 
for. 

The "glass conditions" that are present in the driver's field of view must also exist at the 
sensor. This is the only way for conclusions to be drawn about the window mist in the 
driver's field of view from the mist at the sensor. 

A capacitive sensor element is used for early detection of possible dew formation on the 
windshield orfor removing mistthat is present on the windshield. 

The sensor is supplied with 5V by the FZD. There is a frequency signal at the sensor out¬ 
put. The signal, which is evaluated by a regulator, is read in by the FZD and relayed to the 
IHKA via the K-CAN. 

System hardware: 

• Windshield 

• Condensation sensor 

• FZD 

• IHKA 
Peripherals: 

• Blower 

• Ventilation flaps 

• Compressor 

• Water valve 


17 

Climate Control Components 




Outlet Temperature Sensor 

Negative Temperature Sensors are installed in the air outlet vents in order to monitor air 
vent temperature. This is a crucial parameter in the calculation of the ideal outlet tempera¬ 
ture with regard to the requested temperature value. Depending if the system is single, 
dual zone orfourzone like E70, these sensors operate in the same manner and in all 
cases are located in the middle of the air delivery. 

In the case of a four zone system the driver, front passenger and rear seat passengers 
may have their own individual temperature settings. This is in part possible because of 
the use of these individual outlet vent temperature sensors. 

E70 Rear Air Stratification Sensors and Potentiometer 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

E70 FKA rear center ventilation outlet 

2 

Left/right rear ventilation temperature sensors 

3 

Left/right rear air stratification potentiometer 

4 

Left/right rear ventilation manual shut-off flap 


18 

Climate Control Components 























Front Center Ventilation Temperature Sensor(s) 

Depending on the equipment variant, the signal values from one ortwo sensors in the 
ventilation outlets are still used to control the temperature in the vehicle interior. 

The IHKA records the separately adjustable right/left temperatures with two sensors. 

The ventilation temperature sensor default value is 20°C. 


E70 Center Front Ventilation AirVent Outlet 



Index 


Front left/right ventilation temperature sensors 


M anual shut-off flap, front left/ right ventilation 


Center front ventilation outlet IHKA 


19 

Climate Control Components 

























Refrigerant Pressure Sensor 

The pressure sensor is mounted on the liquid reservoir and sends out a voltage signal 
depending on the high pressure in the air conditioning system. 

This signal is transferred in the form of a telegram to the digital motor electronics (DME). 
In turn, the DME outputs the control voltage for the output stage of the auxiliary fan, thus 
activating the corresponding fan stage (speed). 

Activation of the auxiliary fan is also influenced by an excessively high coolant tempera¬ 
ture. 

On vehicles equipped with a condenser module (filter dryer integrated in the condenser), 
the pressure sensor is installed in the high pressure line between the condenser and 
expansion valve. 

On various automatic transmission vehicles such as the E65 and E60, the auxiliary fan is 
also activated by excessively high transmission fluid temperature. The higherfan stage is 
then generated in this case. 

The sensor sends the IHKA control module an analog signal between 0.4V and 4.6V as a 
representation of system pressure. 

The 5V supply is provided by the IHKA control module and the sensor current consump¬ 
tion is <20mA. (E60) 

The refrigerant pressure sensor is located in the pressure line between the condenser 
and the evaporator. The output of the A/C compressor is reduced by a request from the 
the IHKA control unit to the J BE in the event of excessively high or low refrigerant pres¬ 
sure. (E90) 

The junction box provides power to the refrigerant pressure sensor. The data are evaluat¬ 
ed in the junction box electronics. The evaluated data are transmitted to the IHKA control 
unitviathe body CAN (K-CAN). 

The signal path is: 

Pressure sensor =>J BE => K-CAN =>IHKA 



20 

Climate Control Components 




Refrigerant Pressure Sensor 



Pressure SensorviaJ unction Box (E70) 

The refrigerant pressure input signal is a direct junction box input signal and is relayed to 
the IHKA via the K-CAN.The IHKA requests actuation of the auxiliary blower by the DME/ 
depending on the refrigerant pressure. 

The IHKA determines the relevant A/C compressor load torque on the basis of the input 
signals from the pressure sensor and the compressor speed. 

The DME control units are notified of the load torques by the IHKA and used by the DME 
as input variables for actuating the electric fan. 


21 

Climate Control Components 




Evaporator Temperature Sensor 

The sensor is installed between the evaporator fins or arranged behind the evaporator in 
the flow of cold air. Depending on the type of system in the vehicle,the temperature at the 
evaporator is monitored as the regulator switches the electromagnetic clutch of the com¬ 
pressor on and off or signals the compressor control valve (clutchless compressor) as 
required. This prevents the evaporator fins from icing up due to frozen condensed water. 

Controlled via the IHKA control unit, the sensor generally switches off the compressor at 
a temperature of approx. 1°C (33°F)and on again at approx. 3°C (37°F). 

In connection with the output-controlled compressors with magnetic clutch, the sensor 
only serves as a protection function in the event that the temperature at the evaporator 
drops below 3°C. Consequently, the compressor remains switched on almost perma¬ 
nently. With the interior temperature set at comfortable levels, the compressor is generally 
switched off by the electromagnetic clutch only at outside temperatures below approx. 
6°C (42.8°F). 

In the case of output-controlled compressors without an electromagnetic clutch, if there 
is a threat of the evaporator icing up, the IHKA will correspondingly change the pulse- 
width-modulated control signal via the electric control valve in the compressor. 
Consequently, the compressor output is reduced in the direction of zero. Icing of the 
evaporator can be recognized by decreasing air volume at the air outlet vents. 


22 

Climate Control Components 






















































































The evaporator temperature sensor has the characteristics of an NTC resistor 
(negative temperature coefficient). 

Resistance as a function of temperature: 


Temp. 

Resistance 

-5°C 

11.4-11.9 KQ 

0°C 

8.8-9.2 KQ 

5°C 

6.8-7.2 KQ 

10°C 

5.3-5.6 KQ 

15°C 

4.2-4.5 KQ 

20°C 

3.3-3.6 KQ 

25°C 

2.6-29 KQ 

30°C 

2.1-2.3 KQ 

35°C 

1.7-1.9 KQ 


The default or substitute value of the sensor in the event of a break or short-circuit is 
<0°C.This setting ensures that the air conditioning system remains switched off and 
icing is prevented. 

New vehicles as from the E60 feature variable evaporator temperature control. Depending 
on the outside temperature, the evaporator temperature is set between 1°C and 8°C.The 
colderthe outside temperature, the higherthe evaporator temperature is set. 



E60 Evaporator Temperature Sensor 


23 

Climate Control Components 













Heater Core Temperature Sensors 

Heater core temperature is monitored to insure the correct desired temperature at the 
vents. Heater core temperature along with ambient, vent and evaporator temperatures are 
the main parameters utilized to calculate Y Factor. Thus we control the coolantflow 
though the heater core by varying the heater valve opening on a water based system. 

The Air regulated System has no need fora water valve because it controls temperature 
by adjusting the air mixing flap. 

As an added benefit we also monitor heater core temperature in other to maintain a safe 
range of operation and in case of over heating the heater valves can be shutoff. 

In IHKA the individual temperature readings are of crucial importance and necessary in 
other to be able to separately adjust the outlet temperature for the driver and the passen¬ 
ger. This calls for the installation of two heater core temperature sensors. 


E60 Heater Core Temperature Sensor 



24 

Climate Control Components 



Ambient Temperature Sensor 

The ambient temperature sensor is similar to interior, evaporator, heater core and outlet 
vent sensors in their operation. An NTC negative temperature coefficient sensor as tem¬ 
perature goes up resistance goes down. 

The temperature sensor is located at the front end of the vehicle in front of the condenser 
and it is responsible for reporting ambient temperatures to all systems that require the 
reading. 


E60 AmbientTemperature Sensor 



25 

Climate Control Components 


Output Devices 

Based on the feedback from the IHKA inputs, the system calculates the Y factor and 
reacts to the desired requested temperature and/or conditions detected to operate 
the following output devices to deliver optimum performance: 

• Compressor clutch/Compressorcontrol valve 

• B lower motor/F inal stage 

• Water valves 

• Auxiliary water pumps 

• Electric water pump 

• Auxiliary fan 

• Stepper motors 

E85 IHKA IPO 



26 

Climate Control Components 





















Compressor Control Methods 

The compressor control circuit varies between systems. There are three basic methods 
for compressor control: 

• The compressor clutch coil receives powerfrom the KL 87 terminal of a relay which 
is ground controlled byECM (DME). 

• The compressor clutch is powered directly by the climate control module. A final 
stage in the control module sends power directly to the compressor clutch. The relay 
and additional wiring are eliminated. 

• Constantly engaged compressors are usually variable displacement units. The com¬ 
pressor has a swash plate that can vary the amount of compression on the refriger¬ 
ant with the use of control valve. 


The engine control module (ECM) and the IHKA control panel/module communicate via 
three direct circuits; there are no relays.The IHKA control panel/module powers the A/C 
compressor clutch coil directly; again, there is no relay. 


E36 IHKA Compressor Control Circuit 


3 


EVAPCRATOR 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 




COMPRESSOR 

RELAY 




AC = IHKA 'ON" (snowflake 
button depressed) 

KO = COMPRESSOR 
ON REQUEST 


27 

Climate Control Components 




Activation of the compressor clutch is an output control function of the IHKA module. 

As with the E38 IHKA, activation is carried out directly through a final stage in the module 
(no relay required). 


Typical IHKA Control 

IHKA CONTROL PANEL /MODULE 


I .• . - 

V'T 


72.0T 


63.0 B F 


H-' 


I J- L 


jULTTtl 


V I I- 




4- ■ ■* 

iA* ? 



ENGINE 
ICCNTROL 
MODULE 


A/C SYSTEM STATUS {Signal KO) LrOTOJ 


SWITCHED GROUND SIGNAL TROM DME DOR 
OMPRESSOR ON/OFF CYCLING {Signal KO REL 


i 


COMPRESSOR 
ON POWER 




_*"**1 

4 

4 



COMPRESSOR 

CLUTCH 

SOLENOID 


PRESSURE 
SWITCH ES 




The signals KO and AC have been combined into one signal providing multiple data 
through a stepped increase in signal duty cycle. 


SIGNAL KO: 

•15% Duty Cycle: IHKA is OFF. 

• 30% Duty Cycle: IHKA is switched ON (Standby). 

• 45% Duty Cycle: Snowflake button is pressed, the IHKA signals the engine control 

module to raise the idle speed in preparation of the compressor being switched on. 
This takes place before the IHKA energizes the compressor. 


28 

Climate Control Components 
















SIGNAL KO-REL: 

The engine control module signals the IHKA (Signal KO-REL) when the idle increase has 
taken place and the IHKA will then activate the compressor clutch, as long as all other 
compressor requirements are satisfied. Compressor cut off conditions include: 

• Evaporator temperature below 20 C. 

• Coolant temperature > 1170C - causes the compressorto run in a pulsed opera¬ 
tion. 

• Coolant temperature > 120OC - the compressor clutch is deactivated until the tem¬ 
perature drops below 1170C. 

• Full acceleration at low speeds - below 10 M PH with a full throttle input will cause 
the compressorto shut off for 10 seconds. 





Evaporator 

temperature 

sensor 



R ef rige rant pres sure sen sor y 




For'99 Model Year, E39 IHKA now receives a variable input from the refrigerant pressure 
"sensor”. The sensor is mounted in the receiver/dryer. 

Based on the refrigerant pressure, the pressure sensor input allows the IHKA module to 
determine the "start up" torque of the A/C compressor. If the pressure is too low or high 
the compressor will be deactivated. The IHKA also anticipates the necessary auxiliary fan 
speed and passes this information on to the ECM via the K-bus. 


29 

Climate Control Components 































































C ompressor C ontrol Valves 

Depending on application, the compressor may or may not use a magnetic clutch. In 
vehicles that use clutchless compressors they are always engaged when the engine is 
running. This results in constant drag on the engine which affects emissions and fuel 
economy. The compressor output is always variable and is controlled internally by either a 
mechanical control valve that operates solely on A/C pressure differential and does not 
need electronic signals or an electronic control valve, operated directly by signals from the 
IHKA control module depending on the system demand. 



Mechanical (Left) Electronic (Right) Electronic Control Valve Location 


Delivery rate and pressure is produced by 5 to 7 pistons in the compressor. The piston 
stroke is influenced by a swash plate. The position of the swash plate is varied by the 
internal pressure which is controlled by the valve mounted in the rear of the compressor. 

The control valve influences the force at the swash plate by changing the crankcase 
chamber pressure. When de-energized the electronic control valve opens and the swash 
plate is almost vertical and not deflected. The compressor output is approximately 0 - 2% 
which is required to maintain internal lubrication. 

The electronic valve is controlled and powered by the junction box in most resent models 
but the command comes from the IHKA module. 

The IHKA control module sends a pulse width modulated signal (12V, 0.85A at 400 Hz) 
to close the control valve. This causes the pressure in the crankcase chamber to diminish. 
The swash plate is deflected (angled) and the compressor output increases (variable 
between 2 - 100%). See Externally Controlled A/C Compressors under A/C System 
Components for more information. 

Note: Some BMW vehicles have been switched from clutchless pulleys to mag¬ 
netic clutch (E70). Magnetic Clutch compressors have been proven to 
increase fuel economy and lowertailpipe emissions. 


30 

Climate Control Components 









E lectronic C ontrol Valve at Low Loads 

When the thermal load is low, the intake pressure (Ps) decreases, the bellow-type gaiter 
of the control valve expands and the control valve opens. As a result, the high pressure 
(Pd) acting on the swash plate chamber causes the internal pressure (Pc) in the swash 
plate chamber to rise. 

The sum of the pressure in the swash plate chamber (Pc) x 7 cylinders + force of spring 
A (to the left of the swash plate) +counterforce of the drive plate that acts on the left 
side of the pistons in the seven cylinders is higher than the pressure PI - P7 that acts on 
the right side of the seven pistons. 

Consequently, the lower piston moves to the right and therefore reduces the inclination 
angle of the swash plate. As a result, the piston stroke decreases and the compressor. 

operates at minimum displacement. The spring 1 (to the left of the swash plate) moves 
the seven pistons to the right and thus reduces the angle of the swash plate. This spring 
therefore has the function of a starter spring, starting at minimum displacement volume of 
approx. 5% as the current from the IHKA control unit to the solenoid valve is switched off 
and the valve is open. 

Electronic Control Valve at High Loads 

When the thermal load is high, the IHKA control unit detects a higher temperature via the 
evaporator temperature sensor and activates the solenoid valve accordingly. 

The valve body is shifted to the left and the valve closes. The intake pressure (Ps) is high, 
the bellow-type gaiter of the control valve is compressed, also causing the valve body to 
be shifted to the left, closing the valve. 

As a result, the high pressure (Pd) is reduced and the pressure (Pc) in the swash plate 
chamber drops to the level of the intake pressure (Ps).The balance is achieved through 
an orifice (gas flow). 

Consequently, the sum of the pressure in the swash plate chamber (Pc) x 7 cylinders + 
force of spring 1 (to the left of the swash plate) +counterforce of the drive plate that acts 
on the left side of the pistons in the seven cylinders is lower than the pressure PI - P7 
that acts on the right side of the seven pistons. 

Consequently, the lower piston moves to the left and therefore increases the inclination 
angle of the swash plate. As a result, the piston stroke is increased and the compressor 
runs at up to 100% output capacity. 

The system detects a drop in the evaporator temperature via the evaporator temperature 
sensor. 

The IHKA control unit now activates the solenoid valve accordingly and opens it slightly in 
order to reduce the pressure and therefore the angle of the swash plate. 


31 

Climate Control Components 



Compressor at LowThermal Load 
and Low AmbientTemperature 



^ ^ ^ vil ^ 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Orifice Between Pc and Ps 

6 

Valve Push Rod 

2 

Crank Chamber Pressure Pc 

7 

High Pressure Pd 

3 

Gas Flow 

8 

Intake Pressure Ps 

4 

Spring 2 

9 

Gaiter With Springl 

5 

Coil (Solenoid Valve) 




32 

Climate Control Components 






























































































































































































Compressor at High Thermal Load 
and High AmbientTemperature 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Orifice Between Pc and Ps 

6 

Valve Push Rod 

2 

Gas flow 

7 

High Pressure Pd 

3 

Crank chamber pressure Pc 

8 

Intake Pressure Ps 

4 

Spring 2 

9 

Gaiter With Springl 

5 

Coil (Solenoid Valve) 




33 

Climate Control Components 

















































































































































































Control Range ofthe Compressor 

All control positions between the upper stop (100% maximum output) and lower stop 
(approx. 5% minimum output) are adapted by the varying chamber pressure to the 
required delivery capacity. 

In the case of compressors with constant displacement, adaptation to the required refrig¬ 
erating capacity is achieved by periodical cut-in and cut-out ofthe compressor with the 
aid ofthe magnetic clutch. 

Output-controlled compressors without electric control valves are also cut out using a 
magnetic clutch. However, this only occurs at very low refrigerating capacity requirement 
(swash plate position <5%). 

Consequently, the compressor is switched on almost permanently. 

The IHKA receives the following inputs: 

• Pressure sensor 

• Evaporator temperature sensor 

• Air conditioning ON/OFF 

• Target interior temperature 

• Actual interior temperature 

• Outside temperature 

• Ventilation temperature 

Based on these parameters, the IHKA calculates the adequate signal forthe compressor 
control valve to vary the Swash Plate angle and piston displacement in response to ther¬ 
mal load, ambient temperature and climate control settings. 

The solenoid valve signal is PWM (Pulse Modulated Signal) with activation at400Hz and 
800 mA 


34 

Climate Control Components 




Blower Motor/Final Stage 

The fresh air/recirculated air blower is flange mounted to the right side of the IHKA hous¬ 
ing.The specified voltage forthe blower is provided by the IHKA (Master) as a defined 
control signal (PWM signal) via a single-wire interface of the blower output stage (Slave). 

The blower motor is actuated by the blower output stage depending on this variable con¬ 
trol signal. The line connections from the IHKA to the final stage are monitored by the 
IHKA. 

The blower and the output stage can be replaced separately. See appropriate workshop 
systems documentation. The motor voltage is limited to 12.5 V by the software. If an over¬ 
load is detected at the output stage output or temperature protection is activated, the 
engine output is reduced. 


E70 IHKA Blower and Final Stage 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

IHKA blower housing 

2 

Blower output stage 


35 

Climate Control Components 




















Water Valve 

The water valves used on the water temperature systems have one inlet and two outlets. 
The valves are normally sprung open and are pulse width modulated by the IHKA control 
unit. The IHKA control unit controls the valves via the B +circuit, both valves are grounded 
at a common location. The valves are powered closed by the IHKA module when full 
cooling is needed. 

Temperature regulation on IHKA systems is 
accomplished by solenoid actuated water 
valve(s).The valve(s) are normally held open 
by spring pressure (fail safe), and are electri¬ 
cally closed by pulses from the IH KA control 
module to regulate the flow of hot coolant to 
the heater core(s). 

The watervalve(s) are pulsed according to 
the Y-factor, which is calculated from the 
following inputs: 

• Desired temperature request (left and 
right if equipped) 

• Interior temperature 



• Heater core temperature(s) 


E65 Water Valve 


• Ambient air temperature 

• Blower speed request 

When the desired temperature calls for maxi¬ 
mum heat, the water valve(s) do not receive 
pulses and are mechanically sprung open. 
Similarly, when maximum cooling is request¬ 
ed, the IHKA control module powers the 
watervalve(s) completely closed. 



2 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Left heater core circuit 

2 

Hot coolant inlet 

3 

Right heater core circuit 


36 

Climate Control Components 











Water Valve (AirTemperature Control) 

A water valve that controls the waterflow rate through the downstream heater core is not 
used for setting the temperature in an air-based temperature control system but rather a 
temperature mixerflap is integrated in the heater/air conditioner. 

A single water valve is typically used to control the amount of heat sent to the heater core 
on an AirTemperature Controlled Systems, although most current vehicles (E85, E9X) 
don't use one. To control the temperature desired by the dual zone climate control sys¬ 
tem, air mixing flaps are used. 

Auxiliary Water Pumps 

Typically used on Water Regulated Systems. Electrically powered auxiliary coolant pump 
ensure that an adequate supply of hot coolant is always available to the heater core(s). 
The IHKA control module operates the pump directly orthrough a relay by supplying the 
ground circuit. 

Some current vehicles use electric water pumps and don't need to use an auxiliary pump 
to maintain adequate coolant flow through the heater core. 



E60 Auxiliary Water Pump 


37 

Climate Control Components 


Typical Water Based System w/Auxiliary Water Valve 


IHKA 


K-BUS 


OUTSIDE 

TEMPERATURE 

SIGNAL 



HEATER 

CORE 

TEMP 

SENSOR 


HEATER 

CORE 

TEMP 

SENSOR 


Electric Water Pumps 

The current N52 and N54 engines are equipped with electronically controlled water 
pumps. Electric water pumps decreased warm uptime while enhancing power output 
and fuel economy. 






38 

Climate Control Components 



































































































When the residual heat (REST) function is activated, the IHKA control unit interfaces with 
the DME control module to activate the electric water pump. The water pump allows 
hot/warm coolant to flow through the heater core and warm the passenger compartment. 

The coolant pump of the N54 engine is an electrically driven centrifugal pump with a 
power output of 400W and a maximum flow rate of 9000 l/h.This represents a significant 
increase in power ofthe electric coolant pump used in the N52 engine, which has a 
power output of 200 W and a maximum flow rate of 7000 l/h. 

The DME (ECM) uses the engine load, the operating mode and the data from the tem¬ 
perature sensors to calculate the required cooling output. Based on this data, the DME 
issues the corresponding command to the electric coolant pump. 

The electric coolant pump regulates its speed in accordance with this command. The 
system coolant flows through the motor ofthe coolant pump, thus cooling both the motor 
as well as the electronic module.The coolant lubricates the bearings ofthe electric 
coolant pump. 


Note: The pump must be filled with coolant when removed for service to pre¬ 
vent any corrosion. Also, the pump impeller must be turned by hand 
before installation to ensure the pump is not seized. 

Map Thermostat 

In view ofthe fact that an intelligent heat management system has an influence on fuel 
consumption, exhaust emissions, performance and comfort according to engine temper¬ 
ature, this data-map thermostat was developed for use with such a system. 

The data-map thermostat successfully integrates modern engine management electron¬ 
ics. That combination is achieved by placing an electrically heated resistor in the expand¬ 
ing element ofthe thermostat. 

That data map is determined, for example, by the following parameters: 

• Engine load 

• Engine speed 

• Vehicle speed 

• Intake-air temperature 

• Coolant temperature 


39 

Climate Control Components 




Auxiliary Fan Control (from 99 MY) 

The auxiliary fan motor incorporates an output final stage that activates the fan motor at 
various speeds. 

The auxiliary fan is controlled by the E CM. The motor output stage receives power and 
ground and activates the motor based on a PWM signal (10-100Hz) received from the 
ECM (DM E). The fan is activated based on the following factors: 

• Radiator outlet temperature input exceeds a preset temperature. 

• IHKA signaled via K and CAN bus based on calculated refrigerant pressures. 

• Vehicle Speed 

• Battery Voltage Level 

When the over-temperature light in the instrument cluster is on (120°C), the fan is run in 
the overrun function. This signal is provided to the ECM (DM E) via the CAN bus. When 
this occurs, the fan is run at a frequency of 10Hz. 


Typical Auxiliary Fan Control System 



RADIATOR 

OUTLET 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 


AUX FAN 
OUTPUT 
STAGE/MOTOR 


IHKA SIGNALING VIA CAN BUS: 
-Variable Speed Auxiliary Fan Control 

- IHKA on 

- Compressor Activation Status 


40 

Climate Control Components 

















































































Stepper Motors for Air Flap Operation 

BMW IHKR and IHKA Climate Control Systems use 12 volt DC electric stepper motors to 
operate many of the air inlet, air distribution and temperature mixing flaps. While different 
types of stepper motors are used on different vehicles, they all share many desirable 
characteristics: 

• Lower power consumption 

• Operate in both directions 

• Can be started and stopped in any position 

• Provide quick movement 

• Move in precise increments 

• Do not require feedback potentiometers to determine position 

• Remain in position when shutoff 

• Have long service life 

Unlike a "normal” 12 volt DC motor (for example, a blower motor) in which the rotor spins 
through many revolutions per second when the motor receives power a stepper motor 
rotor rotates through only a small angle when it receives power and then it stops. 

A total of four different stepper motor versions are (were) installed in connection with the 
various heating/air conditioning systems (IHKA, IHKR, IHKS) in all model series. 

Each of the early stepper motors, mounted on the various airflaps of the respective sys¬ 
tems had different part numbers. 

The M-bus stepper motors all feature a fixed programmed address and must therefore be 
installed in no other position than on the corresponding airflap, they cannot be inter¬ 
changed. 




U nipolar stepper motor 

5 connection lines 


B ipolar stepper motor 

4 connection lines 


M-bus stepper motor or 
LIN-bus stepper motor 
(bipolar) 

3 connection lines 


41 

Climate Control Components 











































Conventional Stepper Motors 

Until the E38 was introduced, the stepper motors used in IHKR and IHKA climate control 
systems did not contain electronic components, and only 3 part numbers were needed to 
service all the motor assemblies. These motors consisted of copper wire coils wrapped 
around iron cores (pole pieces), and permanent magnet rotors, all attached to a high- 
reduction mechanical gearbox. The system electronic control components were located 
inside the climate control module assembly. 

There up to 4 sets of windings in these motors. This circuit arrangement requires from 5- 
6 wires between the control module and the stepper motor. These motors were used on 
early climate control systems and are still used on some vehicles forfresh airflap opera¬ 
tion. 

"Smart" Stepper Motors 

Starting with the E38 climate control system, some of the control module electronics 
were moved into the stepper motors, making the E38 motors (except the fresh air flaps 
motor) substantially different from the "conventional” stepper motors we've already dis¬ 
cussed. 

These "Smart” stepper motors use only three wires for operation. There is a power, a 
ground and the third wire for the "M" bus signal. The "M" bus is used to send messages 
to the stepper motors. The commands or "messages” are sent by the climate control 
module. The stepper motors contain processors which will "interpret” the bus messages 
and actuate the stepper motors to the correct position. 

The M-bus stepper motors are different and have a different part number. They all feature 
a fixed programmed address and must therefore be installed in no other position than on 
the corresponding airflap, they cannot be interchanged and must be replaced with the 
same part number as was originally equipped. 



- MIXING 

■ REAR OUTLET - DEFROST 

- FACE VEf\fF 

- MIXING 


- RECIRCULATING 
■ -OCTWELL 


42 

Climate Control Components 



The 9 smart stepper motors used on the E38 system share the same set of power, 
ground, and signal circuits. The left and right branches are connected inside the control 
module. The fresh airflaps "conventional" stepper motor has its own separate circuits. 

These stepper motors have the same type gearbox, permanent magnet rotor, and 4 field 
coils as a "conventional" stepper motor. Plus, it still receives operating signals from the 
system control module.The stepper motors used on E38/E39/E46 constantly receive 
power and ground on two of the terminals, and operating instructions on the third. 


"SMART" STEPPER MOTOR 



The operating instructions are digital signals which "tell" the stepper motor whether to 
open or close a flap. The microprocessor inside the stepper motor receives the instruc¬ 
tions and converts them into pulses to operate the permanent magnet rotor. 

Notice that this 3-wire arrangement (referred to as the M-Bus) allows the control module 
to operate the motor using only 1 signal circuit instead of the 4 control circuits used pre¬ 
viously. 

Because the 9 smart stepper motors are connected to the same signal circuit, a total of 
35 separate circuits between the control module and the motors can be eliminated.The 
system operates with just one signal circuit for all 9 motors. 

• Each of the 9 stepper motors is different (and has its own part number). 

• The control module identifies which motor it wants to operate before it issues 
the commands. 

The part number is clearly marked on every stepper motor, and every stepper motor must 
be installed in the correct location on the climate control housing. 


43 

Climate Control Components 





The operating instructions issued to the smart stepper motors by the control module are 
much more sophisticated than with conventional stepper motors. The sequence of 
events appears below: 

• The control module determines that a flap position must change. 

• It issues a "wake-up call” to alert the stepper motors that a command is coming. 

• It "names” the motorthat is to respond to the command. 

• It issues the command signal, e.g. "move 15 steps clockwise". 

• All the stepper motors "hear” the command. 

• Only the stepper motorthat "hears its name” follows the command. 

• The "named” stepper motor then informs the control module that it has carried out 
the command. 

E65 Stepper Motors 

The E65 IHKA has a total of 11 stepper motors, 1 Rapid action motorfor the fresh airflap 
and 10 Stepper motors for all otherflaps Each of these motors contain an integrated cir¬ 
cuit (M UX- 4 chip) in the plug connection housing. 

This 1C controls the windings of the motor and is linked by a motor bus with diagnosis 
capabilities. 

All stepper motor drives are controlled by the IHKA control module over the motor bus. 

Each drive has a permanent address (stored on the chip) which is a unique identifierfor 
the individual motor (for bus communication). The stepper motors are all different and are 
not interchangeable. 

Faults (blockages) reported by the drives are stored in the IHKA control module, which 
responds by discontinuing control signals to the motor in question. 



44 

Climate Control Components 


E65 Stepper Motors 




E60 Stepper Motors 

The E60 IHKA system uses 9, MUX5 motors (multiplex motor type 5). These stepper 
motors have different part numbers, are connected to the LIN Bus in parallel and are not 
interchangeable. 

The LIN Bus replaced the M-Bus.This bus circuit consists ofthree wires, power (B+), 
ground and the LIN bus signal wire. 

The stepper motors forthe fresh air/recirculation airflaps are designed as high speed 
motors. This system does not use any bowden cables forflap actuation. 



E60 Stepper Motors and Sensors 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Heater Core Temperature Sensor (RH) 

7 

Stepper M otor, left side ventilation 

2 

Stepper Motor, rightfootwell 

8 

Stepper Motor, fresh air/recirculated air(LH) 

3 

Stepper Motor, fresh air/recirculated air(RH) 

9 

EvaporatorTemperature Sensor 

4 

Stepper M otor, right side ventilation 

10 

Stepper Motor, defrost 

5 

Stepper M otor, air stratification 

11 

Stepper Motor, left footwell 

6 

Stepper M otor, rear compartment (center) 

12 

Heater Core Temperature Sensor (LH) 


45 


Climate Control Components 






























E9X Stepper Motors 

The current E9X IHKA systems utilizes eight stepper motors that are wired in series for 
climate control operation. The IHKA control module also operates the stepper motors via 
the LIN-bus. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stepper Motor, Ventilation Flap 

5 

Stepper Motor, Air Blending, Rear 

2 

Stepper Motor, Defroster Flap 

6 

Stepper Motor, Footwell 

3 

Stepper Motor Air Mixing Flap, Right 

7 

Stepper Motor, Air Mixing Flap, Left 

4 

Stepper Motor, Fresh / Recirculating Air 

8 

Stepper Motor, Air Blending, Front 


• All eight stepper motors can be replaced without removing the dashboard 
or A/C housing. 

• Seven of the eight stepper motors used are identical (same part number). 

• A different stepper motor is used only for the fresh air/recirculation motor. 
"See the Service Information section”. 

• Flap motors are wired in series. 

• Each flap motor has a measuring resistance of approx. 1 ohm. 


46 

Climate Control Components 


















Each flap motor is connected to its predecessor via this measuring resistance. Forthis 
reason, troubleshooting must be performed in the order stipulated in the schematic cir¬ 
cuit diagram. A new generation of stepper motors is used in the E90/E91/E92/E93 sys¬ 
tems as well as in the current E70. 

These stepper motors feature two LIN bus connection lines (input/output). A motor has 
only one LIN-bus input on the wiring harness (foot-well motor). The motors are connect¬ 
ed in series (the foot-well motor is the last motor in the series connection). 

Also in this case there are two different versions. The motor with the designation EFB is 
used for all air flaps except the fresh air flap as well as in IHR and IHKR for the central 
(mechanism) kinematics with IQ resistor. 

The motor with the designation EAB is used forthe fresh airflap and the central kinemat¬ 
ics (Air Distribution Mechanisms). The EAB motor varies its speed corresponding to the 
force applied at the flap. Faster at a low load force and slower at a high load force (with no 
IQ resistor). 

C ircuit Diagram - EAB Stepper Motor 



EAB Stepper Motor 



47 

Climate Control Components 













































The EFB motor has a constant displacement speed and a defined moment. The EFB 
motors are all identical and must therefore be programmed. The airflap motors are con¬ 
nected in series. A IQ measuring resistor is installed in each airflap motor. The following 
airflap motor is connected to the one before it via this measuring resistor or shunt. The 
motors must be connected only in the sequence as shown in the schematic circuit dia¬ 
gram. 

Circuit Diagram - EFB StepperMotor 



EFB StepperMotor 



48 

Climate Control Components 














































E70 Stepper Motors 



49 

Climate Control Components 
























E70 Stepper Motors 

The IHKA actuator stepper motors used on the E70 are the same as in the E9X.They are 
all designed as identical components and are actuated by the IHKA via the LIN bus. 

When an actuator motor is being replaced it must be ensured that the correct plug is 
connected to the relevant motorfrom the wiring harness end. The plug order can be 
found in the wiring diagram. 

Then an addressing run must be started using the BMW diagnostics system. The IHKA 
detects the actuators that are connected in series and assigns an address to the new 
motor if necessary. 

The actuation of the addressing run is integrated in the diagnostics system in the service 
function (re-address body, heating/air conditioning functions, flap motors). A function test 
(reference run) is also integrated in the diagnostics system, with which the operational 
capability and the adjusting path of the motors can be tested. 



Actuator motors 

IHKA 

IHKA w/FKA 

1 

Fresh air/recirculated air, actuator motor 

V 

V 

2 

Dynamic pressure compensation, actuator motor 

V 

V 

3 

Defrost, actuator motor 

V 

V 

4 

Left/right front ventilation, actuator motor 

V 

V 

5 

Right/left front footwell, actuator motor 

V 

V 

6 

Right/left front air stratification, actuator motor 

V 

V 

7 

Right front ventilation, actuator motor 

V 

V 

8 

Left front footwell, actuator motor 

V 

V 

9 

Right front air stratification, actuator motor 

V 

V 

10 

Left/right rear air stratification, actuator motor 

V 

V 

11 

Left rear footwell, actuator motor 

Not used 

V 

12 

Right rearfootwell, actuator motor 

Not used 

V 

13 

Right rear air stratification/shut-off, actuator motor 

Not used 

V 


50 

Climate Control Components 

























































IHKA 4-zone,Overview of Air Distribution Flaps 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Actuator motor, fresh air/recirculating air 

2 

Actuator motor,dynamic pressure compensation 

3 

Actuator motor, defrost 

4 

Actuator motor, front left ventilation 

5 

Actuator motor, front right footwell 

6 

Actuator motor, front left air stratification 

7 

Actuator motor, right front ventilation 

8 

Actuator motor, left front footwell 

9 

Actuator motor, right front air stratification 

10 

Actuator motor, left rear air stratification 

11 

Actuator motor, left rear footwell 

12 

Actuator motor, right rearfootwell 

13 

Actuator motor, right rear air stratification/shut-off 

14 

Housing internal non-return flaps 


51 

Climate Control Components 











































Replacement of a Flap Motor 

After replacement, the flap motor must be addressed. The addressing procedure is initiat¬ 
ed with the BMW diagnostic Equipment. 

The IHKR orlHKA control unit automatically assigns the address to the flap motor. The 
motor recognizes its assignment (address e.g.footwell motor) based on an addressing 
current. 

This arrangement makes it possible to use a standard motor for all air distribution flaps. 
The motor must not be turned by hand as this would pose the risk of irreparably damag¬ 
ing the electronics or the gear mechanism. 

The new address will be triggered by the diagnosis software via: 

Service Functions => Body => Heating and Air Conditioning => re-address motors 


The flap motor will automatically receive the address from the IHKA control unit. The con¬ 
trol unitwill recognize the correct address from the order of flap motors. 

Because of this, care should be taken during the exchange the each flap motor is con¬ 
nected in the correct order to the correct connector. 

The correct order for the stepper motors is: 

1. Defroster flap 

2. Fresh/Recirculating airflap 

3. Ventilation flap 

4. Rear blending/stratification flap 

5. Right air mixing flap 

6. Front blending/stratification flap 

7. Left air mixing flap 

8. Footwellflap 

Note: Flap motors are wired in series. Each flap motor has a measuring resis¬ 
tance of approximately 1 ohm. Each flap motor is connected to its pre¬ 
decessor via this measuring resistance. Forthis reason, troubleshooting 
must be performed in the order stipulated in the schematic circuit dia¬ 
gram. 


52 

Climate Control Components 



E90 IHKA System Diagram 



53 

Climate Control Components 

































































































































































































































































































































































E90 IHKA System Diagram Legend 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear blend/stratification motor 

22 

Pressure sensor 

2 

Alternator 

23 

Center console switch cluster (SZM) 

3 

Digital motor electronics (DME) 

24 

Water valve 

4 

Electric water pump 

25 

Outside temperature sensor 

5 

Engine cooling fan 

26 

Auxiliary water pump (not for US) 

6 

Ventilation motor 

27 

Evaporator temperature sensor 

7 

Front blend/stratification motor 

28 

Footwell temperature sensor 

8 

Car communication computer (CCC) 

29 

Blocking circuit (filter) 

9 

Condensation sensor 

30 

Rear window defogger 

10 

AUC II sensor 

31 

Blocking circuit (filter) 

11 

Fresh air/recirculation motor 

32 

Ventilation temperature sensor 

12 

Mix air flap motor, left 

33 

Solar sensor (1-channel) 

13 

Defrost flap 

34 

Seat heating element, left 

14 

Footwell flap motor 

35 

Seat heating element, right 

15 

Central information display (CID) 

36 

B lower motor and final stage 

16 

Roof function center (FZD) 

37 

Instrument Cluster 

17 

J unction Box Electronics Control Module 0 BE) 

38 

Outside temperature sensor 

18 

Seat heater button, left 

39 

Driver's seat module 

19 

A/C compressor valve 

40 

Seat heating module (passenger) 

20 

Seat heater button, right 

41 

Mixairflap motor, right 

21 

Controller 




54 

Climate Control Components 
























































































PTC Heating Elements 

On the E70 in order to provide 4 temperature zones BMW uses PTC heating elements. 
Installed at the left and right side rearfootwell air channels for the second row of seats 
FKA,The heating elements act as auxiliary comfort heaters and provide the occupants 
with a way of offsetting the rear temperature compared to the front temperature, regard¬ 
less of the heating situation in the front. 

The heating elements are operated by the FKA via a PWM signal depending on the rear 
footwell outlet temperature and any output capability limitations. 

The nominal rating of the PTC heating element is 300W with a voltage of 13V and air 
flow rate of 1 kg/m in. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

PTC heater element 

2 

Outlet temperature Sensor 



FKA Control Unit 

The FKA is incorporated in the vehicle system via the K-CAN.The FKA operating unit 
and control unit have a 12-volt and a 5-volt power supply area. 

The footwell and ventilation temperature sensors and the air stratification potentiometer 
are supplied with 5 volts by the FKA. 



(l)FKA Control Unit RearView, (2 )Plug Connector 


55 

Climate Control Components 



























E70 IHKA w/FKA PTC Heaters 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

IHKA with FKA 

7 

Defrost air outlet 

2 

IHKA, dual front temperature controls 

8 

Center Ventilation air outlet, front left/right 

3 

FKA, dual rear temperature controls 

9 

Ventilation air outlet, front left/right 

4 

Two inlet pipes to HWT, two water valves 

10 

Footwell air outlet, front left/right 

5 

PTC heating element in footwell 
air ducts rear left/right 

11 

Rear ventilation air outlet, center, 
left/right 

6 

Rear blower (FKA) 

12 

Ventilation air outlet, B-pillar left/right 


56 

Climate Control Components 

































































E70Third Row Heating and Ventilation PCT Heater 

The 3rd row of seats HB3SR has its own optional heating and ventilation system. A PTC 
heating element is activated via the limit position switch operated by the knurled adjust¬ 
ing wheel. 

Warm air is blown out via the lower ventilation air vents. The heating can only be activated 
if the blower is switched on. 

The control unit for heating and ventilating the 3rd row of seats is connected to the IHKA 
via the LIN bus and controls the heating element (output 300W) for heating the air in the 
footwell of the 3rd row of seats. 

The output of the heating element is controlled depending on the interior temperature in 
three stages from 0 - 100% (<20°C =100%,>20°C =50%,>30°C =0% PTC output). 

The DME (ECM) (by means of a CAN signal to the IHKA and to the HB3SR control unit 
via the LIN bus) can reduce the power of the heating element (power reduction of 50% or 
cut off) within the scope of power management. 





HB3SR System showing the PTC Heating Element 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

System unit for heating and ventilating 
the 3rd row of seats 

4 

Auxiliary heating temperature sensor. 

2 

Ventilation blower and heating for 3rd row 
of seats, recirculated air intake 

5 

HB3SR control unit 

3 

PTC heating element 




57 

Climate Control Components 




















E70 IHKA w/FKA Ventilation Component Identification 



58 

Climate Control Components 

























































































































E70 IHKA w/FKA Ventilation Component Identification Legend 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Fresh air cabin filter 

17 

Left and right FKA rearfootwell vent 
temperature sensors 

2 

Recirculating air cabin filter 

18 

Left and right FKA rear center vent 
temperature sensors 

3 

Fresh airflap 

19 

Left and right front corner dash vents 

4 

Front blower motor 

20 

Left and right front center dash vents 

5 

Evaporator 

21 

Left and right front footwell vents 

6 

Expansion Valve 

22 

Left and right front footwell vents 

7 

Heater control valve passenger 

23 

Left and right rearfootwell vents 

8 

Heater control valve driver 

24 

Left and right B pillar vents 

9 

Auxiliary water pump (N62 only) 

25 

Left and right rear center vents 

10 

Heater core 

26 

Left and right front dash vents 
air stratification flaps 

11 

Auxiliary PTC heater (not for US vehicles) 

27 

Left and right front dash vent control flaps 

12 

Evaporator temperature sensor 

28 

Left and right front footwell vent control flaps 

13 

Left and right heater core temperature sensors 

29 

Left and right front footwell vent airflow control 

flaps 

14 

Left and right front center dash vent 
temperature sensors 

30 

Left and right FKA rearfootwell 
airflow control flaps 

15 

Left and right FKA rearfootwell PTC 
heater elements 

31 

Left and right rear center and 

B pillar air stratification flaps 

16 

FKA rear blower motor 




59 

Climate Control Components 



































































