Table of Contents 


Climate Control Systems and Functions 

Subject Page 

Heating and Air Conditioning Systems.4 

INKS .4 

IHKR .4 

IHKA.4 

FKA(E66) .5 

FKA (E70) .5 

E70 Dual Zone IHKA.5 

E70 FourZone IHKA with FKA.7 

Adjustment and Operation of Rear Air-conditioning .7 

FKA Sensors .9 

RearInteriorTemperature Sensor (FKA) .9 

Rear Center Ventilation Temperature Sensors (FKA).9 

Rear FootwellTemperature Sensors (FKA).9 

RearInteriorTemperature Control (FKA) .9 

E66 RearAirConditioning FKA .12 

System Components.14 

Calibration of Left/Right Control Panels.14 

E70 Third Row HeatingA/entilation .16 

IHKA Temperature Control Methods.19 

Coolant Temperature Controlled IHKA .19 

Outside Temperature.20 

InteriorTemperature.20 

The Y Factor .21 

Heater Core Temperature.23 

AirTemperature Controlled IHKA .25 

Vent Temperature Stratification.28 

Operation and Adjustment/Air Distribution .30 

E 70 Air Stratification (Ventilation Temperature) .30 

Automatic Programs.31 


Initial Print Date: 10/07 


Revision Date: 
































Subject Page 

IHKA Functions and Features.32 

Washer] et Heating and Windshield Base Heating .33 

Wiper Parked Zone Heating .34 

"Rest” Feature (residual heat).34 

"Service Station” Feature .34 

Parked-car Ventilation.35 

E65 Parked-car Ventilation .36 

Cold Start Arrest .38 

Dynamic Air Pressure Compensation .38 

E9X IHKA Functions .40 

Temperature Control.40 

Front Stratification AdjustmentThumbwheel .41 

Rear Stratification AdjustmentThumbwheel .41 

Evaporator Control.42 

Air Distribution Setting .42 

Airflow Control .42 

Sunlight Adaptation (solar sensor) .43 

MAX Cooling .43 

Residual Heat (REST).43 

Defrost Function .44 

AUTO Function .44 

Heated RearWindow .45 

Defrosting Phase (1st heating period) .45 

Pulsing .45 

2nd Heating Period .45 

OFF .45 

Air-recirculation Mode.45 

Automatic Air-recirculation Control .46 

Condensation Sensor Program.46 

Convertible Mode .47 

Convertible Mode Control.47 

Condition Based Service (Cabin Filters).49 

Fresh Air/Recirculating AirFilter.49 

Fresh Air Filtering .49 

Recirculated Air Filtering .51 






































Climate Control Systems and Functions 


Model: All 
Production: All 

ib: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the difference between the climate control systems used by BMW. 

• Describe how temperature control is achieved in BMW climate control systems. 

• Understand the features and functions of BMW IHKA Systems. 


3 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Heating and AirConditioning Systems 


There are afew different types of BMW climate control systems. Mostofthe currentUS 
vehicles are equipped with fully automatic climate control systems (IHKA). Each climate 
control system has different features and functions depending upon the vehicle applica¬ 
tion. These systems are: 


IHKS 

Translated from German, the acronym means "Integrated Heating and AirConditioning 
Control. This system does not regulate the interior temperature of the passenger com¬ 
partment automatically. IHKS is single Zone system, controlled directly by the driver to 
achieve the desired level of comfort and was installed on the E36/5(318ti), E36/7(Z3) 
and the E52 Z8 as standard equipment. 


IHKR 

The IHKR system is a "semi-automatic” climate control system. Interior air temperature 
is controlled automatically, but air distribution and blower speed are controlled from the 
control panel by the driver. IHKR was used on the some early vehicles such as the E34 
and E36 (up to 95). The most recent use of the IHKR system was on the E39 525, E53 
X5 3.0, E46 325 and the E85 Z4 as standard equipment (IHKA was available as an 
option). IHKR is also a single zone system, with only one temperature control forthe 
entire passenger cabin. 


IHKA 

This is a fully automatic climate control system. Air distribution, blower speed and tem¬ 
perature regulation are controlled automatically. The system is designed to maintain the 
driver desired temperature setting automatically by monitoring interior temperature. The 
IHKA system is a dual zone system, with 2 temperature controls with some exceptions 
(the E46 and E83 X3 with basic single zone IHKA). The IHKA system was first installed 
on 7 and 8 series vehicles.The system was added to the 3 series (E36, E46), then to 
the 5 series E39, E53 and it is currently available on all US models. 


4 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 




FKA (E66) 

This is a Rear Compartment Air Conditioning system (FKA), available as an option on the 
E66.The rear compartment air conditioner is located in the front area of the luggage 
compartment. The control and integration of the rear compartment air conditioning sys¬ 
tem in the IHKA refrigerant circuit is designed so that independent operation is possible 
for either the front or rear unit. 


FKA (E70) 

This is a rearclimate control system that is available currently on the E70 X5. By combin¬ 
ing IHKA with FKA the system is considered to be a true 4 zone system. Every passen¬ 
ger has the option to change the temperature of his sitting area independently with 
respect to the other occupants. 


Note: BMW Climate Control Systems may be coolant (water) temperature 
regulated or air temperature regulated depending on the model. 


E70 Dual Zone IHKA 

Due to its dual section heater core, the IHKA allows separate and individual 2- zone, 
right/left temperature control. This is achieved in part, through the use of left and right 
temperature sensors. The desired temperature is fine tuned via two water control valves 
(left/right). The waterflow through the heater core is aided with the use of an auxiliary 
water pump in the case of vehicles with the N62 engine (the N52 engine has an electric 
water pump thus no auxiliary pump is needed) 

Fresh air or recirculated air can be routed directly to the air ducts via the evaporator and 
appropriate bypass, without being routed through the system's heater core. The airflow 
(fresh air or recirculated air) is first routed via the evaporator in the heating/ air-conditioning 
housing, provided that the A/C compressor has been activated, it is cooled and then 
heated to the required temperature via the heating system. 


5 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



E70 Dual Zone IHKA 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

IHKA, 2-zone 

6 

Ventiiation airoutiet, front center, ieft/right 

2 

IHKA operating unit with right & left 
temp, controls. 

7 

Ventiiation airoutiet, front ieft/right 

3 

Two inlet pipes to HWT, two water 
valves 

8 

Footweii airoutiet, front ieft/right 

4 

Fresh air intake 

9 

Footweii air ducts, rear ieft/right 

5 

Defrost airoutiet 

10 

Ventiiation airoutiet, rear ieft/right 


6 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 
































E70 Four Zone IHKA with FKA 

The 4-zone air conditioning system consists ofthe standard 2-zone IHKA plus: 

• Its own FKA controls 

• Four additional outlet temperature sensors 

• A separate rear blower 

• Air ducts and outlets in the B-pillars 

• Two separate PTC heating elements in the rearfootwell air ducts 

• An additional actuator motors for air flap control ofthe system 
(IHKA with FKA, total of thirteen actuator motors) 


This system makes it possible to make separate left/right temperature settings for the 
first and second row seat area, and also provides separate front/rear blower control. 

The rear blower enhances the airto flow to the rear center console and the B-pillar 
ventilation air outlets. 

Thefootwell ducts that deliver airto the second row area can be switched off completely 
or provided with additional heating by energizing the electric PTC heating elements. 

Adjustment and Operation of Rear Air-conditioning 

The Climate Control Menu allows us to activate orde-activate the (FKA) rear climate con¬ 
trol via the controller. A checked box next to "Rear Climate Control” function will show the 
system activated. The FKA control module settings can betaken over by selecting the 
"Driver Settings” function and synchronized with the settings from the driver-side IHKA 
controls, but as soon as the F KA controls are operated by the rear occupants the rear 
controls become active once again. 


i sc Rear Climate Control ► 


1 CV Activate rear climate control 

Main Street 


□ Use driver’s settings 



tF 100m 

BAYERN3 TMC a 'r;iill 8:52 

10:10 52 km 


7 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 




E70 FourZone IHKA with FKA 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

IHKA with rear automatic 

A/C system, 4-zone. 

7 

Defrost air outlet 

2 

IHKA, dual front temperature controls 

8 

Ventilation air outlet, front left/right 

3 

FKA, dual reartemperature controls 

9 

Ventilation air outlet, front left/right 

4 

Two inlet pipes to HWT, two watervalves 

10 

Footwell air outlet, front left/right 

5 

PTC heating element in footwell air ducts 
rear left/right 

11 

Rear ventilation air outlet, 
center, left/right 

6 

Rear blower (FKA) 

12 

Ventilation airoutlet, B-pillar left/right 


8 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 





























FKA Sensors 


■ Rear InteriorTemperature Sensor (FKA) 

Same as in IHKA, the FKA control unit has an interior 
temperature sensor with forced ventilation located under 
the left temperature adjuster. 


■ Rear Center Ventilation Temperature Sensors (FKA) 

The delivery temperature in the FKA rear center ventila¬ 
tion is measured by two temperature sensors in the 
center ventilation outlet. See FKA Air Stratification. 



E70 FKA Rear Sensor 

(below "AUTO" button) 


■ Rear FootwellTemperature Sensors (FKA) 

The delivery temperature at the rear footwell air 
ducts is measured by temperature sensors in 
each the footwell airducts. The footwell temper¬ 
ature sensor default value is 55°C. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

PTC Heater 

2 

Temperature Sensor 



■ Rear InteriorTemperature Control (FKA) 

The FKA reads the signals from the interior temperature, rearfootwell channel and rear 
ventilation temperature sensors in orderto control the temperature in the rear. The sensor 
signal values are transmitted to the IHKA by the FKA and centrally evaluated by a con¬ 
troller in the IHKA. 

The values of the calculated front and rear nominal temperatures are both used to calcu¬ 
late blower settings. 

The FKA receives input from the IHKA that is used for blower control and controlling the 
rearfootwell temperature. 


Note: Ifthe actual reartemperature is greaterthan the specified reartempera- 
ture, the airflow from the footwell air outlets is restricted. Ifthe rear 
footwell temperatures are less than the specified values, the PTC heat¬ 
ing element in the rearfootwell channels are activated by the FKA. 


9 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 









E70 IHKA with FKA Blower 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Left/right rear ventilation air duct 

4 

Center left/right rearventilation outlet air ducts 

2 

FKA automatic rear air conditioning blower 

5 

Left/right B-pillarventilation airduct 

3 

FKA blowerfinal stage 




10 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 














E70 IHKA with FKA Rear Air Stratification 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

E70 FKA rear center ventilation outlet 

3 

Left/right rear air stratification potentiometer 

2 

Left/right rear ventilation 
temperature sensors 

4 

Left/right rearventilation manual shut-off flap 


Note: In orderto stratify the air and therefore adjustthe ventilation temperature 
in the rear, the FKA has two potentiometers (left/right) in the rear center 
ventilation outlet. 


11 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 














E66 RearAirConditioning FKA 

From E66 series launch, a Rear Compartment AirConditioning system (FKA) may be 
installed as an option. The rear compartment air conditioner is located in the front area of 
the luggage compartment and consequently reduces the volume of the luggage com¬ 
partment by about 20 percent (incl. trim panels). 

The control and integration of the rear compartment air conditioning system in the IFIKA 
refrigerant circuit is designed so that independent operation is possible foreitherthe front 
or rear unit. 

The air required for rear compartment air conditioning is drawn in via a particle filter 
(recirculated air filter) from the luggage compartment with the use of a rear blower fan. 

The rear system shares some of the Main (front) A/C system's components like com¬ 
pressor, condenser and dryer and the operate independently from each other separated 
by two refrigerant shut off valves. 

Operation of the rear air conditioning system from two separate control panels and takes 
place by means of push-buttons and rotary knobs, of which only those on the right are 
"intelligent." These two control panels must be matched with respect to each other; i.e. 
the right-hand control panel must be calibrated with the exact end stop values of the 
potentiometers of the left-hand control panel. (Referto the relevant service information 
onTIS.) 

The rear compartment air conditioning system additionally supplies cold airto an integrat¬ 
ed refrigerator box. This refrigerator box should not be confused with the electrically oper¬ 
ated refrigerator box that is optionally available also for the E65. 

The rear air conditioning system performs the following functions: 

• Regulates air volume distributed through rear ducts 

• Temperature and air volume control for left and right rear occupants 

• Airconditioning (cooling) 

• Electronic control of rear evaporator temperature 

• Operation of integrated rear compartment refrigerator box 


Note: Filling mode can be activated via the diagnosis interface for the rear 
compartment air conditioning system. In this mode, both refrigerant 
shut-off valves (front/rear) are opened, allowing complete recovery of 
the refrigerant charge. 


12 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



E66 RearAirConditioning FKA 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Pressure and Suction Refrigerant Line. 

2 

Biowerand recircuiated airfiiter. 

3 

Rear Compartment Refrigerator Box 

4 

Left/Right ducts to roof outiets. 

5 

Left/Right outiets in controi units. 


13 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 


















System Components 

The rear air conditioning system consists of the following components: 

• Evaporator Housing with Actuators and Flaps 

• Refrigerant Circuit 

- Evaporator and Expansion Valve 

- Refrigerant Cut-Off Valve 

- Connection point for refrigerant lines 

• Refrigerator Box 

• Blower and Blower Control Module 

• Recirculating Air Filter 

• EvaporatorTemperature Sensor 

• Control Panel with Electronics 

• RearAirConditioning Ductwork 

• Wiring Harness with Connector 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Evaporator Housing with 
Actuators and Fiaps 

2 

Connection Point for 
Refrigerant Lines. 

3 

Refrigerator Box 

4 

Biower, Biower Output 

Finai Stage and Recircuiating 
Air F liter. 



Calibration of Left/Right Control Panels 

Manual operation of the rear compartment air conditioning system from two separate 
control panels takes place by means of push-buttons and rotary knobs, of which only 
those on the right are "intelligent." These two control panels must be matched with 
respect to each other; i.e. the right-hand control panel must be calibrated with the exact 
end stop values of the potentiometers of the left-hand control panel. 


14 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 













start of calibration: 

Start calibration by pressing all four push-buttons on both control panels simultaneously 
for at least 3 seconds. Be sure the ignition is in the terminal R position. 



Leftside Control Panel Right side Control Panel 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stratification Knob 

4 

L/S OFF Button 

2 

Max AC cooiing button 

5 

Lever for air flow directionai controi 

3 

AC Biowercontroi Knob 




Afterstarting the calibration procedure, the LEDs of the OFF button and MAX AC button 
on the left control panel flash. 

• Turn both rotary knobs on the left-hand control panel to the left end stop (minimum 
values). 

• Press the MAX AC button on the left-hand control panel.The MAX AC LED stops 
flashing as an indication for storage of the left end stops. 

• Turn both rotary knobs on the left-hand control panel to the right end stop (maxi¬ 
mum values). 

• Press the OFF button on the left-hand control panel.The OFF LED stops flashing 
as an indication for storage of the right end stops. 

The above procedure calibrates the leftside potentiometers to the right side pots and 
control unit. 

The FKA control unit is "smart” and will only accept values (end stop positions)that are 
within specified limits. If the LED's continue to flash when the button is pushed, confirm 
that the dial is turned completely to the end stop. 

Note: For more information please referto the "Rear Air Conditioning" E66 
training material available in TIS. 


15 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 





E70 Third Row Heating/Ventilation 

The E70 with 3rd row seats uses a heating and ventilation system referred to as HB3SR. 
The blower is switched on and off using the button nearthe center air outlet. The air dis¬ 
tribution at the ventilation air vents in the third row seats is controlled using a knurled 
adjusting wheel with control flap. A PTC heating element is activated via the limit position 
switch operated by the knurled adjusting wheel. 

The warm air is blown out via the lower ventilation air vents. 

The heating can only be activated if the blower is switched on. 

The control unit for heating and ventilating the 3rd row of seats is connected to the IHKA 
via the LIN bus and controls the heating element (output 300W) for heating the air in the 
footwell of the 3rd row of seats. 

The DME (ECM) (by means of a CAN signal to the IHKA and to the HB3SR control unit 
via the LIN bus) can reduce the power of the heating element (power reduction of 50% 
or cut off) within the scope of power management. 


E70Third Row Heating/Ventilation Location 



Note: This is note rear A/C system and it is not linked with the IHKA system 
in the vehicle. It is linked to the vehicle electronics with efforts of power 
management. 


16 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 








E70Third Row Heating/Ventilation 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Heating and ventilating system 


the 3rd row of seats 


Blower and heating forBrd row 


seats, recirculated air intake 

3 

PTC heating element 

4 

Auxiliary heating temperature sensor 

5 

HB3SR control unit 


17 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 














E70Third Row Heating/Ventilation Control 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Heating and ventilating the 3rd row unit 

2 

Blower ON/OFF button 

3 

knurled wheel contact switch for PTC heating element ON/OFF (ON is in the full HOT position) 

4 

Air distribution flap knurled adjusting wheel 

5 

Airduct 

6 

Lower warm air routing flap 


18 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 




















IHKA Temperature Control Methods 


Coolant Temperature Controlled IHKA 

The cold air that flows from the evaporator can be heated and blown into the passenger 
compartment at comfortable levels based on two temperature control methods; water- 
based and air-based temperature control. In a water-based temperature control system 
with one water valve or in a separate control forthe driver and front passenger with two 
water valves, the IHKA control unit generates a pulse-width-modulated signal forthe pur¬ 
pose of operating the water valve(s). 

The control is achieved with the aid of a master controller, based on digital microproces¬ 
sor-controlled electronics. The temperature controls on the control panel are set accord¬ 
ingly for temperature selection. The adjustment range extends from 162C to 322C 
(60-70F). 

Water- based Temperature C ontrol 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Cold air 

B 

Warm air 


19 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 








































The electronics makes use of the following temperature sensors for control purposes: 

• Interior temperature 

• Heater core temperature (left, right) 

• Outside temperature 

• Evaporatortemperature 

• Coolant temperature 

The vehicle speed and the engine speed are also evaluated. The temperature setting 
(display) shows the set values in ^c/F. 

These temperatures are defined as psychological comfort settings that may deviate 
considerably from the set values that are processed by the controller. 


Outside Temperature 

There is no separate sensor for the outside temperature. The temperature sensor located 
at the front end of the vehicle is responsible for all the systems that require the outside 
temperature. The temperature value is transferred via the bus system. The temperature 
set-point is corrected at low outside temperatures in that the interior temperature is raised 
so that comfort levels in the vehicle are maintained even at temperatures below zero; 
even though the temperature setting is not changed. The outside temperature sensor 
therefore has the task of increasing the set target temperature in the passenger compart¬ 
ment at low outside temperatures. 


InteriorTemperature 

A forced-ventilated air sensor is arranged in the control panel for the purpose of measur¬ 
ing the interior temperature. The airflow through the sensor is provided by an integrated 
blowerfan. 

Since this is the most important value for the stability of the control circuit, the interior 
sensor value must be read and processed with very high resolution. Changes in tempera¬ 
ture are realized only very subtle. 

Default: 205C (in the case of short-circuit or break [open circuit]) 


20 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



TheY Factor 

Two sensors for left and right are integrated in the heaterforthe purpose of acquiring the 
heater core temperature. These sensors measure the outlet temperature directly at the 
heater core. 

Default: SS^C (in the case of short-circuit or break [open circuit]) 

The master controller is the core of the temperature control system; this control circuit 
compares the actual interior temperature value with the driver's choice (target value). 

The reference variable Y (in %) is derived from the comparison of the actual interior tem¬ 
perature value with the corrected target value = driver's requested -i-outside temperature 
application. 


MAXIMUM MAXIMUM 

COOLING HEATING 


1 

1 

1 

1 1 

1 1 

Radical Correction [ 

Moderate 

1 

1 

1 

Radical Correction 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Zone-Cooling ' 

1 1 

1 1 

Correction 

Zone 

1 

1 

1 

Zone - Heating 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Compressor 

1 1 

1 1 

1 Adequate i 


1 

1 

1 


1 

1 

1 


Operation 

Cooling 





1 

Required for 

1 Power 1 


1 


1 

1 

Adequate 

1 without 1 


1 


1 

1 

Cooling 

|Compressor| 


1 


1 

1 

1 1 

Power 

1 1 

1 Operation | 

1 1 1 

1 1 1 

1 

1 

1 1 1 

1 

1 

-30 

-20 -10 

0 10 20 

30 40 50 

60 

70 80 90 

100 


Y-FACTOR 

Typical Y Factor Chart 


Y FactorO %=watervalves closed =no heating output 


Y Factor 100 % = watervalves open =full heating output 


21 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 







The master controller sends the signal to the two lower-ranking auxiliary controllers on 
the left and right (referto IPO below).The auxiliary controller relieves the burden on the 
master controller in that it corrects interference such as air volume and waterflow fluctua¬ 
tions or coolant and fresh air temperature variations that would otherwise be noticeable 
as variations in the temperature in the passenger compartment. 

The opening time of the watervalves is calculated from the difference of the auxiliary con¬ 
troller set-point and the actual heater core temperature. The watervalves are activated 
pulse-width modulated with a period duration of 3600 ms. 

This control variable y represents the basis forfurtherfundamental functions of the IHKA 
such as: 

• Automatic blower output control in the automatic program 

• Air distribution flap adjustment in the automatic program 

• Auxiliary water pump operation ON/OFF 

• Cold start interlock 

• Compensation of solar sensor influence 



Note: It is not possible to view the Y-Factor parameter in all vehicles and the 
typical Y-range of OtolOO% temperature control has been extended from 
-200% to +300% to comply with current IHKA system functions. 


22 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 




































Typical CoolantTemperature Systems 


IHKA 



K-BUS 


OUTSIDE 

TEMPERATURE 

SIGNAL 


HEATER 

CORE 

TEMP 

SENSOR 


HEATER 

CORE 

TEMP 

SENSOR 


Heater Core Temperature 

Due to the split design of a dual section heater core, the dual zone IH KA allows for sepa¬ 
rate 2-zone right/left temperature control by varying the water temperature on either side 
of the system. The heater core uses two temperature sensors and the temperature is 
controlled via two water valves (left/right) that regulate waterflow through the system 
based on the requested Driver/Passengertemperature settings. As previously mentioned 
these water valves are electrically pulsed and are typically sprung open when deactivated. 

The water valves are pulsed to regulate temperature based on the following inputs: 

• Left/Right temperature settings 

• Left/Right heater core temperatures 

• Outside temperature 

• Interior temperature 

• "Y" factor 


23 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 




















































An auxiliary water pump is used to ensure the adequate volume of coolant through both 
sides of the heater core to comply with the system's requirements. This pump is typically 
powered directly from the IHKA control module through a final stage output. 


The auxiliary pump is used to supply coolant 
for the REST feature of the IHKA, although 
not all models use one. Some current vehi¬ 
cles use electric main water pumps and no 
longer need auxiliary water pumps. 

The air-mass flow (fresh air or re-circulated 
air) is first routed via the evaporator in the 
heating/air-conditioning housing (provided 
that the compressor has been activated) to 
be dried and then heated to the required 
temperature via the heating system heater 
core. The air is dried as it flows through the 
evaporator; at the same time the condensa¬ 
tion is led away via the drains of the heater- 
A/C air box housing. 


E70 A/C Housing Section 



E 6X Air Distribution Vents 

f 



Note: Fresh airorre-circulated aircan be routed directly to the airducts via the 
evaporator and appropriate bypass, without being routed through the 
heating system heater core. 


24 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 




AirTemperatureControlled IHKA 

The temperature forthe best possible interior climate in an air controlled system is regu¬ 
lated with a mixerflap in this type of system. A water valve that controls the waterflow 
rate through the heater core (as in the water base system) is not used in an air-based 
temperature control system. A temperature mixerflap is integrated in the heater/air box 
housing and is used for adjusting the requested temperature. 

When the temperature mixerflap routes the fresh air or recycled airthrough the heater 
core completely, maximum heating capacity is realized. When it is not necessary to heat 
the air, the heater is covered off by the temperature mixerflap and the air is deflected 
away. 

A corresponding proportion of cold air to warm air is mixed with the flap in the intermedi¬ 
ate positions, thus achieving and controlling the out let temperature in the vehicle based 
on the requested customer settings and calculated values. The temperature mixerflap is 
operated by a stepper motor which is controlled by the IHKA/IHKR control unit. 

This type of temperature control is used on the E85 as a single zone and on E9X vehicles 
as a dual zone. A disadvantage of this control system is the large package space it 
requires. In the case of complaints ("poor heating output" or residual heating in "cold" 
setting) particular care must be taken to ensure that the mixerflap rests snugly on the 
stops in the corresponding end positions. 


A B 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Heating off 

1 

Heat exchanger 

B 

Heating on 

2 

Temperature mixerfiap 


As in the water-based temperature control system (clock signal for water valves), the con¬ 
trol variable Y is formed from the temperature set-point and the various temperature sen¬ 
sor input values. The respective position of the temperature mixerflap is derived from this 
Y value signal. It also determines the position of the air distribution flaps as well as the 
automatic blower output control when the automatic button is pressed. 


25 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 







































E85 IHKS Temperature Control Flap 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Evaporator 

2 

M ixed air flap 

3 

Heatercore 

4 

Stepper motor, mixed airflap 


Coolantflow is constant in the heatercore as the mass airflow is fed through the evapo¬ 
rator. As this happens, the air is cooled and dried (providing the air-conditioning system is 
switched on). The mixerflap then feeds the air completely or in partoverthe heating sys¬ 
tem heatercore, depending on the desired temperature value set at the IHKA control 
panel the airflow is subsequently mixed again. The air-mass is then fed through the venti¬ 
lation flaps and into the vehicle interior. 

The temperature inside the vehicle is controlled by means of a master controller. Control 
is based on the nominal values set and the calculated actual value (the nominal values are 
the requested temperature settings). The actual value is calculated from the temperatures 
measured by the interior temperature sensor and the footwell temperature sensor). 


26 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 













E90 AirTemperature Control 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stepper Motor, Air Mixing Fiap, Left 

2 

Stepper Motor, Air Biending, Front 

3 

Stepper Motor, Air Mixing Fiap, Right 


The lead parameter is calculated from the comparison between the actual value forthe 
interior temperature and the corrected nominal value (calculated from temperature 
request, interior temperature and ambient temperature). 

Compared to the set specification, the interior temperature is raised in the cold so that a 
comfortable level is achieved even at negative temperatures, despite the temperature 
setting being unchanged. A separate temperature setting forthe driver's side and the 
front-passenger side makes 2 mixerflaps necessary for a dual zone system. 


27 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 














Vent Temperature Stratification 

stratification in the climate control system refers to the mixing of the air temperature at 
the outlet vents. Hot, warm or cold air can be adjusted as it comes out of the front or rear 
outlet vents no matter what main temperature setting was selected on the IHKA.This is 
realized by mixing hot and cold air with the use of blend airflap. 

Front stratification refers to the components necessary to adjust the dash outlet vent 
temperature to the occupant's preference. Rear stratification refers to the rear passenger 
compartment air delivery vents. 



STRATIFIED AIR OUT OF 
FACE VENT OUTLETS 



Typical Stratification Process 


The stratification mixing flaps may be operated mechanically through the use of a 
Bowden cable connected to a thumbwheel adjuster mounted on or nearthe vent. 

Most current BMW vehicles adjust the stratification electronically, by means of a system 
of air mixing flaps connected to stepper motors, which react to commands depending on 
the vent outlet temperature sensor readings and the settings that the occupant dialed in 
with the potentiometerthumbwheel adjuster at or nearthe out let to be adjusted. 


28 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 


























stratification is realized mechanically and electronically: 

• M echanical stratification is through the use of a Bowden cable connected from the 
air mixing flap to a thumbwheel adjuster mounted on or near the vent. 

• Electronic stratification adjusts the air mixing flaps with the use of step per motors. 

The adjustment is done by manipulating the air mixing flap depending on: 

• Thumbwheel and Bowden cable position (mechanical). 

• Vent outlet temperature sensor readings . 

• Occupant requested settings (Potentiometer position at the thumbwheel adjusters). 

• Occupant selected settings on the I Drive CID screen under climate control menu. 


◄ Vent Settings ► 
Driver 



E70 CID Vent Stratification Settings 


Note: In vehicles with CID (E6X or E 70) the air stratification can be adjusted 
through the I Drive and CID screen at the climate control settings menu 
orthe shortcut buttons. 


29 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 




Operation and Adjustment/Air Distribution 

All control modules of the IHKA equipped E70 provide a facility for manually adjusting the 
air distribution using "rocker button air distribution" via the controller. 

The menu has four default settings and one individually configurable setting at the dri¬ 
ver's side, and three default settings and one individually configurable setting at the front 
passenger side. When the rocker button is operated, an "Air distribution" pop-up menu 
appears on the control display. 

The air stratification (ventilation temperature) can also be adjusted via the controller in this 
menu at the same time as the air distribution is being adjusted Air DistributionA/entilation. 


E70 Air Stratification (Ventilation Temperature) 

Adjusting the air stratification via the air blending flap adjusts the proportion of cold and 
warm air at the ventilation vents. This setting adjusts the ventilation temperature. Only 
cold airorwarm airflows out of the ventilation vents at the maximum/minimum air blend¬ 
ing flap positions. 

The passenger can achieve individual cold/warm air distribution and stratification in the 
vehicle at a constant temperature setting using this stratification facility. 

The air stratification at the front ofthe vehicle can only be adjusted via the controller and 
is displayed in the CID control menu. 

The air stratification at the front can be adjusted separately for the left and right sides with 
the IHKA. 

The air stratification in the rear can be adjusted using a potentiometer in the rear ventila¬ 
tion outlet. 

The airblending flaps ofthe IHKA with FKA equipment variant can be controlled sepa¬ 
rately using two potentiometers, one in the left rear ventilation outlet, one in the right rear 
ventilation outlet. This means that the IHKA with FKA can provide individual 4- zone air 
stratification. 

Note: Attention must be paid to the air blending flap settings when 
troubleshooting a heating and cooling performance complaint. 


30 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Automatic Programs 

With the IHKA and IHKA with FKA equipnnent variants, two additional automatic pro¬ 
grams can be selected via the automatic programs selection menu in addition to the 
standard automatic programs. 

The IHKA control unit can be used to select and adjust the automatic program using 
the AUTO button/short cut button or via the controller or with the IDrive and CID. 

The three different automatic programs: 

• Soft 

• Medium 

• Intensive 



< Automatic programs ► 



Driver 

□ 

soft 

• 

□ 

medium 

= # = 


intensive 



E70 CID Automatic Program Settings 


Each have their own characteristic curves for blower control, air distribution and air flap 
control. The individual selecting facility within these three automatic programs allows 
more customers to satisfactorily operate the heating/air conditioning system in their vehi¬ 
cles in automatic mode without having to switch to manual mode. 

Operation and adjustment of the air conditioning system, automatic programs All control 
modules of the IHKA equipment variant have a facility for switching between the three 
gentle, medium and intensive automatic programs using the "AUTO Toggle button". 

The display is in the form of a pull-up menu in the CID when selecting and adjusting the 
automatic program using the AUTO button as a rocker button . However, the selection 
and the current setting also appear on the display of the IHKA control module. 

The automatic programs can also be selected and adjusted via the controller, with CID 
display. The air stratification adjusting facility appears in the air conditioning, automatic 
program selection menu first. 


31 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



IHKA Functions and Features 


BMW vehicles are equipped with various versions of clinnate control systems. Regardless 
of the version used, the objectives are basically the same. The climate control system is 
designed to perform the following functions: 

• Remove heat from the passenger compartment when ambient temperatures are 
above the drivers comfort zone. 

• Add heat from the passenger compartment when ambient temperatures are below 
the drivers comfort zone. 

• Dehumidify the air entering the passenger compartment. 

• Defrost front and rear windows for optimum vision and safety. 

• Remove contaminants from incoming air (with microfilter-if equipped). 

In addition to the above functions there are additional sub systems and additional fea¬ 
tures. These systems and features are not available on all models or package options. 

These features include, but are not limited to: 

• Washer jet heating 

• Windshield base heating 

• "Rest” feature (residual heat) 

• "Service Station” feature 

• Parked car ventilation 

• Automatic air recirculation (AUC) 

• Cold start arrest 

• Air pressure compensation 


Note: These features are used on most BMW vehicles and their operating 
strategy varies from model to model. 

Please referto the specific Service Information / Latest ETM as well as 
Training material of the vehicle and orsystem you are working on. 


32 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 





WasherJ et Heating and Windshield Base Heating 

Although not all vehicles use heated washer jets most current vehicles use similar sys¬ 
tems to achieve the same results. E38 vehicles are equipped with a windshield 
base/washer spray jet heater system similarto the one found on 1988 and 1989 E32 
vehicles. On E38 vehicles, however, both heater systems are powered at the same time 
by the same relay: 

• The lower portion of the windshield contains electrical resistance heating elements 
(similarto those on a heated rear window) which, when powered, prevent the wiper 
blades from freezing to the glass. 

• The washer spray jet heaters are located on the underside of the hood and are 
designed to prevent ice from forming on and obstructing the washer nozzles.The 
control panel/module monitors the signal from the ambient temperature sensor (K- 
Bus) and automatically activates the windshield base/washer spray jet heater relay 
when: 

- Ambient temperature is lowerthan 382F (32C), and 

- The ignition is "on” and 

- Battery voltage is greaterthan 12.2 volts. 


When ambient temperature exceeds 432F (62C), the windshield base/washer spray jet 
heaters are switched off. 




E 38 WasherJ et Heaters 


33 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 
















































Wiper Parked Zone Heating 

In order to prevent the wiper blades freezing to the glass at low outside temperatures, the 
E65 use a wiper parked zone heating is activated depending on the outside temperature. 

• < 32 c Wiper parked zone heating ON 

• >62C Wiper parked zone heating OFF 

Low voltage cutout of the wiper parked zone heating by the power module is possible. 
Switching conditions for shutdown are applied as of priority level 5 (K-CAN message). 


''Rest" Feature (residual heat) 

The "Rest” feature is a new feature, providing passenger compartment heating fora short 
time afterthe ignition is switched "Off” The feature is activated by pressing the "Rest” 
button on the control panel/module, if the following conditions are met: 

• Ignition switch is "Off” and 

•The ambient temperature is less than 592F (IS^C) and 

•The left heater core temperature is greaterthan ISS^F (702C)and 

• Battery voltage is greaterthen 11.4 volts and 

•The time elapsed since the ignition was turned "Off” is less than 15 minutes. 

When the REST feature is activated in KL R, all ofthe IFIKA functions are operable. 

This includes the blower speed, air distribution control and temperature settings. 

With the ignition switched OFF, the REST feature is in a preset operating mode. The 
blower fan runs at medium speed and the temperature is set to allow maximum heat. 


"Service Station" Feature 

The control panel/module continues to power both coolant valves closed automatically for 
about 3 minutes afterthe ignition is switched "Off."This feature prevents the heater cores 
from being flooded with hot coolant when the engine is shut off for brief periods (e.g. dur¬ 
ing refueling). 


Note: If the coolant temperature is above IS^C, the water valves are 
powered closed for 3 minutes when the vehicle is switched OFF. 


34 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Parked-car Ventilation 

The Parked-car Ventilation blows ambient air into the passenger compartment to lower 
the interior temperatures. The air enters the passenger compartment through the vent 
outlets in the instrument panel, which can be adjusted for both direction and flow (must 
be open for the system to operate). The system remains on for 30 minutes. The system 
can be switched on and off manually. 

The Parked-car Ventilation feature of the E38 IHKA system is retained on the E39 IHKA 
system.The feature is only available with the High BC.The signal to activate the venting 
function is generated by the BC function ofthe IKE.The signal is passed overthe K-Bus 
to the IHKA forfan and flap activation. 

The signal prompts the IHKA to open the face vent flaps to 100%. The blower relay is 
energized and the blower output stage is sent a 4 volt signal. The blower is run at 7 volts 
operating powerto provide adequate venting. 

If battery voltage drops below 11.5 volts the function is cancelled. 


E39 Parked-carVentilation 


K-BUS 



i@ 

FACE VENTS (100%) 


BLOWER RUNS AT 
7 VOLT OUTPUT 


BLOWER MOTOR 
OUTPUT STAGE 


35 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 
















































E65 Parked-carVentilation 

The outside temperature must be > SO^C to activate this function. Using the Control 
Display, the Parked-carVentilation function has 2 control options: Direct (manual) opera¬ 
tion and Timer programming. 

Activating and Deactivating Manually: 

• Ignition in position "KLR” 

• Select "Indep. vent.” on the second page of the "Climate” menu and confirm to activate 

• Select "Indep. ventil.” a second time and confirm to deactivate 
Timer Programming (two available times): 

• Ignition in position "KLR” 

• Select "Indep. vent.” on the second page of the "Climate” menu and confirm 

• Select "Settimel” / "Settime 2” and confirm 

• Enter the desired time by turning the Controller and press to confirm 
To Activate Timer: 

• Select "Switch time 1” / "Switch time 2” and confirm 

The Parked-carVentilation is only available for activation within the subsequent 24 hours. 
Afterthis the time will have to be reconfirmed.Terminal R "ON” (Control Panel is Active): 

• Temperature control OFF (watervalves closed) 

• Flap program manually selectable 

• B lower manually adjustable 

• Function lighting ON 

• Function buttons not active Terminal 15 "OFF” (Control Panel is Inactive): 

• Temperature control: OFF (watervalves closed) 

• Flap program (0% =flap closed /100% =flap open) 

- Warm air left and right 100% 

- Recirculating air0% 

- Defrosting 0% 

- Footwell left and right 0% 

- Cold air left and right 100% 

- Rear seating area left and right 0% 

- Fresh air 100% 

- Blower set to 50% 

• Function lighting OFF 


36 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 




The stationary functions are registered with the power module and are subject to deacti¬ 
vation by the power module (priority lever consumer shutdown >6). The power module 
continuously monitors the battery state of charge while the Parked-car Ventilation func¬ 
tion is active. When the power module issues the shutdown signal forthe independent 
consumers, the IHKA will shutdown the Parked-car Ventilation and it will not be 
reactivated. 

The IHKA will send a CAN message "status air conditioner Parked-car Ventilation" with 
the "INDEPENDENT VENTILATION not active" information to the Control Display. 

The Control Display responds by updating the on screen display. 


Note: On the E70 Parked-carstationary ventilation can be activated directly via 
the controllerundertimercontrol orvia a remote start. When operated 
via the controller, the setting is displayed in the relevant control menu. 


Note: These systems are used on most BMW vehicles and theiroperating 
strategy varies from model to model. 

Please refer to the specific Service Information / Latest ETM as well as 
Training material ofthe vehicle and orsystem you are working on. 


37 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Cold Start Arrest 


The cold start interlock function intervenes activation of the air distribution flaps and 
blower control. The cold start interlock is active at low outside temperatures and low 
coolant temperatures (engine cold) to prevent cold air distribution until warm air is avail¬ 
able. 

In the E85, the cold start interlock is not deactivated by a terminal change from KL15 
"ON” to "OFF”. When the switch on conditions are fulfilled, the defrost air distribution flap 
is fully opened and the ventilation and footwell air distribution flaps are completely closed. 
As a result, no cold air is blown directly at the driver/passenger. The automatic blower 
function must be selected for intervention in blower control. 

Cold start interlock is active in the AUTO program with a driver's side heater core temper¬ 
ature below 20^C. In this program, the defrost flaps are 100% open, the footwell and face 
vents are closed. The blowerfan will run at the set speed. 


Dynamic Air Pressure Compensation 

The E38 system prevents the flap position from being changed continuously in response 
to minor changes in road speed (overcompensation), buffering is included in the calcula¬ 
tion forthe desired flap position. In the 80 tol80 km/h speed range, the fresh airflap 
angle is reduced from 100% to 30%. 

The air volume entering the IFIKA system is compensated for at higher vehicle speeds. 
This is carried out through the road speed dependent fresh airflap operation. 

In the fresh air mode, the flaps are open 100% up to a road speed of approximately 
37 MPFI at which point they are closed to 40%. 

When the vehicle speed reaches approximately 55 MPFI the flaps close to 30%. 

There is a overlap built into the flap closing so that the flaps will not oscillate open/closed 
atone set speed. 

On an E65 , as vehicle speed increases, the increase in "ram air” is controlled by 
Dynamic Pressure Compensation to maintain consistent airflow volume. 

The ram air is compensated by closing down the fresh airflap to restrict the air intake 
duct in response to the road speed signal (over K-CAN). 

To prevent the flap position from being changed continuously in response to minor 
changes in road speed (overcompensation), buffering is included in the calculation forthe 
desired flap position. 

In the 80 to 180 km/h speed range, the fresh airflap angle is reduced from 100% to 
30%. 


38 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



On an E85, to prevent uneven airvolume as driving speeds vary, dynamic pressure is 
compensated by the fresh air flap reducing the fresh air inlet opening as the vehicle 
speed increases. The vehicle speed is made available via the K-bus from the instrument 
cluster. 

The fresh airflap reduces the opening angle within a certain speed range according to a 
characteristic curve. T he calculation of the flap position is dampened to avoid continual 
flap activation as a result of variations in vehicle speed. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Fresh airflap opening angle 

2 

Vehicle speed 


Note: This system is used on most all models with changes to the operating 
strategy. 


39 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 






















E9XIHKA Functions 


E9X IHKA Functions are in most of the BMW vehicles and 
only vary depending on models and option packages: 

• Temperature control 

• Evaporator control 

• Air distribution setting 

• Airflow control 

• Sunlight adaptation (solarsensor) 

• MAX cooling 

• Residual heat 

• Defrost function 

• AUTO function 

• Heated rear window 

• OFF 

• Air recirculation mode 

• Automatic air-recirculation control 

• Condensation sensor program 

• Convertible mode 

Temperature Control 

The temperature forthe best possible interior climate is regulated with a mixerflap in this 
air controlled heater/air conditioning system. 

The air-mass flow is fed through the evaporator. As this happens, the air-mass flow is 
cooled and dried (providing the air-conditioning system is switched on). The mixerflap 
then feeds the air-mass flow completely or in part overthe heating system heater core 
(depending on the desired temperature value set at the IHKA control panel). The airflow 
is subsequently mixed again. The air-mass flow is then fed through the ventilation flaps 
and into the vehicle interior. 

The temperature inside the vehicle is controlled by means of a master controller. 
Temperature Control is based on the nominal values set and the calculated actual value 
(the nominal values are set with 2 temperature selector knobs). 


40 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 





The actual value is calculated from the temperatures measured by the interior tempera¬ 
ture sensor and the footwell temperature sensor. 

The lead parameter is calculated from the comparison between the actual value for the 
interior temperature and the corrected nominal value (calculated from temperature 
request, interior temperature and ambient temperature). Compared to the set specifica¬ 
tion, the interior temperature is raised in the cold so that a comfortable level is achieved 
even at negative temperatures, despite the temperature setting being unchanged. 

The ambient temperature is transmitted to the IHKA control unit via the K-CAN.The sep¬ 
arate temperature setting forthe driver's side and the front-passenger side makes 2 mixer 
flaps necessary. 

Front Stratification AdjustmentThumbwheel 

The front adjustment thumbwheel is part of the DSC/DTC/Hazard switch cluster. 

The thumbwheel signal is wired directly to the IHKA control unit as an analog/varying volt¬ 
age signal. The IHKA panel sends the specific position signal to the front mixing flap 
motorvia the LIN bus. 

Rear Stratification AdjustmentThumbwheel 

The rear adjustment thumbwheels is located to the right ofthe rear center vent. 

The thumbwheel potentiometer signal is wired directly to the j BE control unit as 
an analog/varying voltage signal. 

The] BE converts this signal into a digital signal overthe K-CAN to the IHKA control unit 
which then sends the specific position signal to the rear mixing flap motorvia the LIN bus. 


E90 CID Vent Stratification Settings 



41 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 


Evaporator C ontrol 

The evaporator temperature is regulated by means of the evaporator temperature sensor 
and the expansion valve. The evaporator temperature is set to the predefined specifica¬ 
tion of 2°C. Lower temperatures are not possible due to the risk of icing. 

If the function gradual evaporator control is encoded, the nominal value forthe evaporator 
temperature will be calculated between 2°C and 7°C.The specification depends on the 
ambient temperature, the ventilation temperature and the refrigerant pressure. A variable 
evaporator control reduces dehumidification. This reduces the risk of mucous mem¬ 
branes drying out. 


Air Distribution Setting 

Forthe best possible operation of the air distribution, it is important forthe manually 
adjustable air vents to be open.Occupants have the possibility of allowing the air distribu¬ 
tion to be decided by the automatic program (AUTO button). Alternatively, individual, per¬ 
sonal settings are possible through manual selection (defrost, ventilation, footwell).lf the 
vehicle is equipped with navigation/CCC, it is also possible to make a fine adjustment via 
the CID (Central Information Display) in the submenu Air distribution. Compared to manu¬ 
al selection, fine adjustment offers the additional possibility of further individualization of 
the air distribution. 


Airflow Control 

The airflow control is dependent on the following settings and control actions: 

• Manual blower setting 

• Automatic blower and flap setting - The automatic blower and flap functions are acti¬ 
vated when the AUTO button is pressed. 

• Dynamic pressure compensation - The airvolume at the air inlet grills increases dis¬ 
proportionately with increasing road speed. This effect is compensated for by the 
opening angle of the fresh-airflap being reduced as speed increases (dynamic pres¬ 
sure compensation). The opening angle is regulated according to the programming. 

• B lower control - If necessary, the power management system will assign priority 
levels to reduce the blower output (via K-CAN). 

• Effect of terminal 50 - When the engine is being started (terminal 50 ON), the elec¬ 
tric auxiliary heater (not US) and blower are switched OFF to reduce the load on the 
vehicle battery. 


42 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Sunlight Adaptation (solarsensor) 

How the solar sensor affects the IHKA regulation on the driver's side and on the front 
passenger side is not programmed separately. The following functions are modified when 
automatic mode is activated (depending on the intensity of sunlight): 

• Blower output is increased or reduced 

• Desired temperature value is increased or reduced 

MAX Cooling 

The MAX button makes it possible forthe userto select maximum cooling with just one 
press of a button at the IHKA controls. When the MAX button is pressed, all functions, 
including the defrost function, are deactivated. The air conditioning function is activated 
(if it was not already activated) and defined settings are selected, (example: temperature 
control is deactivated, ventilation flaps are fully opened) 

Residual Heat (REST) 

The residual-heat function allows the heat from the engine to be used to heat up the 
vehicle interior when the engine is not running (e.g. during a stop at a level crossing). 

The residual-heat function is only possible fora certain run-down period (15 minutes 
from terminal 15 OFF).The DME is signaled to activate the electric waterpump via the 
bus system to circulate the coolant. 

Switch-on conditions: 

• Terminal 15 OFF 
And 

• Run-down period active (up to 15 minutes afterterminal 15 OFF) 

And 

• REST button in IHKA controls ON 
And 

• Ambient temperature below 25°C 
And 

• Engine temperature at some point above 60°C 
And 

• On-board supply voltage over 11.4 volts 


43 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Conditions for switching off: 

• Terminal 15 ON 
Or 

• Residual heatON (15 minutes) expired 
Or 

• REST button in IHKA control panel OFF 
Or 

• OFF condition activated with residual heat active (terminal R) 

Or 

• Promptfrom power management to switch off auxiliary consumers 
Or 

• On-board supply voltage less than 11 volts 


Defrost Function 

When the defrost function is activated, the defroster flap (on the inside in front of the 
windshield) is opened fully. The fresh-air/air-re-circulation flaps move to the fresh 
air position. 

All otherflaps are closed. The blower is run up to maximum output. 


AUTO Function 

When this button is pressed, all IFIKA functions are set to automatic mode. If one or more 
automatically controlled functions are manually set, automatic control forthe functions 
concerned will be cancelled. 

All otherfunctions remain automatically controlled. 


44 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Heated RearWindow 

The heated rearwindow is switched on when the button in the IHKA control panel is 
pressed. The function indicator lamp in the button lights up. 

The heated rearwindow is switched off by pressing the button again or automatically 
after the heating time has expired. 

Defrosting Phase (1st heating period) 

When terminal 15 is switched ON, the first time the system is switched on, 
the time span for the heated rearwindow is defined as follows: 

• Ambient temperature down to -15°C: Heating period: 10 minutes 

• Ambient temperature below 15°C: Heating period: 17 minutes 

Pulsing 

Afterthe defrosting phase, the heating phase is (25 minutes with pulsed 
heat output on-off cycle: 40 seconds ON, 80 seconds OFF). 

The function indicator lamp in the button is off during pulsing. 


2nd Heating Period 

Afterthe 1st heating period has expired, each subsequent time the button is pressed 
will cause the heated rear window to be switched on for a further 30 minutes 
(defrosting phase). 

Afterthe 2nd heating period has expired, output is again pulsed. 


OFF 

The IHKA control panel is switched off when the blowerspeed is set to 0 
(The control panel/control unit continues to run in the background). 


Air-recirculation Mode 

In air-recirculation mode, the flow of outside air can be stopped to prevent pollution from 
entering the vehicle, e.g. in traffic congestion. Air inside the vehicle is continually re-circu- 
lated. 

To make sure that there is a sufficient supply of fresh air, air-recirculation mode is only 
available fora limited time. (30 minutes air recirculation ->30 seconds partial fresh air-> 
30 minutes air recirculation ->etc.) 


45 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Automatic Air-recirculation Control 


If the AUC II sensor detects an increased level of pollutants in the environment from 
spark-ignition and diesel engines, the IH KA control unit will automatically switch to air 
recirculation mode. 

To make sure there is still an adequate supply of fresh air, air recirculation is only available 
fora limited time: 

• At ambient temperatures less than 0°C: 2 minute re-circulated air mode ->20 sec¬ 
onds fresh air mode ->2 minute re-circulated air mode ->etc. 

• At ambient temperatures from 0°C to 6°C: 3 minute re-circulated air mode ->20 
seconds fresh air mode ->3 minute re-circulated air mode ->etc. 

• Operation without a/c function at ambient temperatures greater than 6°C:4 minute 
re-circulated air mode-> 20 seconds fresh air mode-> 4 minute re-circulated air 
mode ->etc. 

• Operation with a/c function at ambient temperatures greater than 6°C: 12 minute re¬ 
circulated air mode -> 20 seconds fresh air mode -> 12 minute re-circulated air 
mode ->etc. 

When the engine is started and the AUC function activated, fresh-air mode is always 
selected for approximately 40 seconds due to the warming phase of the AUC sensor. 

Condensation Sensor Program 

The following conditions must be satisfied forthe condensation sensorto operate: 

• The engine must be running 

• The IHKA must be in automatic mode 

The IHKA control unit evaluates the condensation sensorsignal (humidity). If condensa¬ 
tion on the windscreen is imminent, the following measures are initiated in sequence to 
prevent condensation from forming: 

• Open defrost flaps further. 

• Switch from air-recirculation/AUC/automatic air-recirculation 
mode to partial fresh-air mode. 

• Switch from partially fresh air in air-recirculation/AUC/automatic 
air-recirculation mode to fresh air. 

• Increase blower air volume. 

• Reduce airvolume forthe footwell. 

• Increase desired temperature value. 

If one measure proves to be ineffective, the next measure is initiated. Once successful, 
the measures previously performed are reversed step-by-step in reverse order. 


46 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Convertible Mode 


The E93 Convertible with its retractable hardtop combines two vehicles in one. It is a 
Coupe when closed and a Convertible when open, a fact taken into account by the auto¬ 
matic climate control to create pleasant and comfortable heating/ventilation conditions. 

This characteristic makes it possible for an individual climate control program for both 
states. The software automatically initiates the automatic climate control program when it 
detects that the hardtop is down. 

Trials and customer surveys have shown that the previous air conditioning systems set up 
for Sedans or Coupes were not ideal fora Convertible with the top down. 

The temperature and blower output stage had to be constantly readjusted for the 
purpose of ensuring pleasant interior conditions. 

All control parameters are adapted to the requirements of driving with the top down when 
the hardtop is lowered. 

Convertible mode requires no additional sensors. The IHKA control unit was 
programmed with corresponding software that takes these specific parameters into 
account. 

Convertible mode is activated by opening the retractable hardtop. The IHKA receives the 
corresponding information on the status of the hardtop from the Convertible top module 
(CTM). 

Convertible mode is always active on vehicles with no central information display (CID). 

On vehicles with central information display, the Convertible Mode box in the "Automatic 
Program" menu must first be activated. This activation is possibly only with the hardtop 
open and is set to active as part of initial programming. 

Note: If Convertible mode is not activated, the selected automatic program 
(soft, medium, intensive) is activated when the hardtop is opened. 

Convertible Mode Control 

The aim of Convertible mode is to create an automatic climate control program that 
makes it unnecessary to continually make manual adjustments while driving. 

When driving with the top down, the occupants consciously expose themselves to the 
solar radiation and outside temperature at changing driving speeds. These parameters 
have a decisive influence on the climate in the vehicle interior and must therefore be 
taken into consideration in the control concept. 

The spatial separation of the interior is cancelled when the hardtop is opened thus 
drastically reducing the influence of the interior temperature sensor. The temperature 
control forthe vent outlet temperature is strongly orientated on the outside temperature. 


47 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



The sun's intensity has a great influence on the climate in the vehicle interior when 
driving with the top down. Therefore, changes in conditions such as cloudless, cloudy or 
daytime/night-time are included via the solar sensorto a greater extent in the temperature 
control than when the hardtop is up. 

Unlike when the vehicle is closed, the ventilation outlets become the dominant air 
distribution level when the hardtop is down and are therefore always fully opened while, 
to achieve a comfort balance, the footwell outlets must always be restricted as soon as 
the operating temperature of the engine necessary for heating is reached. 

Measures for keeping the windscreen/windows clear are not necessary when driving with 
the top down, therefore the defrost outlets always remain closed. 

The driver sets the required temperature at the temperature control. Depending on the 
outside temperature, sun's intensity and vehicle speed, the required interior climate is 
maintained by the supply of correspondingly temperature-controlled air. The most 
comfortable conditions are achieved with the side windows closed and a wind deflector 
additionally installed. 

The ram pressure compensation that serves the purpose of keeping the airthroughput 
constant when the vehicle is closed is cancelled in Convertible mode. The blower output 
Is additionally increased based on the vehicle speed in orderto maintain a constant air 
flow about the occupants. 

The increasing air volume essentially shields the occupants from increasing turbulence at 
highervehicle speeds. The occupants subjectively notice no difference in temperature 
conditions. 

The AUC function is also active in Convertible mode up to a speed of 45 MPH. It is 
deactivated at higher speeds. This is intended to ensure that no pollutants are blown into 
the interior of the vehicle via the air conditioning outlets when driving at low speeds, e.g. 
in urban orstop-and-go traffic. The best effect is achieved with the side windows closed. 


Note: Convertible Mode was first introduced in the E64, this system 
served as the basis to the E93 Convertible Mode. 


48 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



Condition Based Service (Cabin Filters) 

Fresh Air/Recirculating Air Filter 

The E9X is equipped with a carbon activated microfilter which is accessible fronn the 
engine compartment. 



E90 Microfilter 


In the E 70 Fresh air is drawn in via two filter elements in the intake area in front of the 
bulkhead. The recirculated air is drawn in at the side by the blower via separate recircu¬ 
lating air filters. 

Fresh Air Filtering 

A particulate filter or a micro/activated charcoal "combination filter" is also used on the 
E70 fresh air intake. The particulate filter (also referred to as a microfilter) removes dust, 
pollen, soot and otherdirtfrom the fresh airthat is needed to control the climate of the 
vehicle. The adsorption filter (activated charcoal filter) has the job of removing the pollu¬ 
tants (hydrocarbons, acidic gasses) that mainly occur in high concentrations under smog 
conditions from the fresh airthat is needed to control the climate in the vehicle. 


49 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 





E70 Fresh Air/Recirculating Air Filter 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

IHKA fresh air intake 

3 

IHKA recirculated air intake 

2 

IHKA fresh airfiiter 

4 

IHKA recirculated airfiiter 


50 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 













Recirculated Air Filtering 

A new type of honeycomb filter is used in the recirculated air intake. The versions for fresh 
air particulate filters can also be used for filtering recirculated air, but are used for cleaning 
the air in the passenger compartment. 

Filtertypes and equipment in the E70 All filters are electrostatically charged during manu¬ 
facture and have the characteristic of attracting particles and holding them in, therefore 
cleaning the air. 

The performance figures of an adsorption filter are initial pressure loss, particle separa¬ 
tion, dust storage capacity, gas adsorption (such as n-butanes, sulphur dioxide, toluene) 
and are independent of the filter surface and the air- mass flow. 

In orderto be able to cope with customer specific filter usage and associated change 
interval increases and reductions, the filter change intervals of the E70 have not been 
stored in the CBS (Condition Based Service) system. 

Note: The filter change intervals can be found in the relevant service literature. 

Once the cover has been removed from the bulkhead, the filter can be easily replaced or 
cleaned.The filterchange is indicated via the CBS. 

The wear level of the microfilter is monitored by the IHKA control unit. 

To do this, the control unit uses a calculation model (algorithm) to simulate the condition 
of the microfilter from the following factors: 

• Outside temperature 

• Signal from rain/light sensor (IHKA only, otherwise default value) 

• Signal from solar sensor (IHKA only) 

• Blower voltage 

• Air conditions (recognized from frequent or infrequent use of air recirculation) 

• Vehicle road speed 

• Service interval display (SIA) timer 

The IHKA control unit forwards the following data to the clustervia the K-CAN: 

• Odometer reading 

• M icrofilter availability in percent 

• Time remaining until next service 


51 

Climate Control Systems and Functions 



