Table of Contents 


Future Technology 

Subject Page 

FutureTechnology- CO 2 Refrigerant.3 

Air Conditioning System with CO 2 (R744) as the Refrigerant .3 

The CO 2 Refrigerant Circuit .3 

Switch-on Pressure 

Refrigerant . 

Legal Situation_ 


Initial Print Date: 10/07 


Revision Date: 


LT) LT) LD 









Future Technology 


Model: All 
Production: All 

iijf 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Familiarize yourself with the new CO 2 technology proposed to replace R134a. 

• Understand the need forthe change to CO 2 systems. 

• Describe the difference in both systems. 


2 

Future Technology 




Future Technology - CO2 Refrigerant 


Air Conditioning System with CO 2 (R744)as the Refrigerant 

The greenhouse potential of carbon dioxide is lower by a factor of 1300 than that of 
R134a, or one kilogram of R134a escaping into the atmosphere has the same green¬ 
house effect as 1300 kg ofC02. Since CO 2 for motor vehicle airconditioning systems 
will with certainty be produced from natural sources or as a waste product from industrial 
processes, it even has a neutral environmental effect when used as a refrigerant. The 
CO 2 (R744) air conditioning system also has a higher degree of efficiency than today's 
R134a system. It therefore requires less fuel to achieve the same refrigerating capacity 
(outside temperatures up to <35 °C)thus reducing exhaust emissions. On an annual 
European average, this means higher efficiency is achieved in combination with lower 
fuel consumption. 

Note: An important advantage ofthe CO2 air conditioning system is that in 
reverse operating mode it works as a heat pump and is used very effec¬ 
tively as a heater. 

The CO 2 Refrigerant Circuit 

The CO 2 refrigerant circuit is made up ofthe evaporator, expansion element, collector/ 
separator, internal heat exchanger, compressor and gas cooler. 

In the compressor, the gaseous CO 2 is compressed from 35 bar intake pressure to up to 
133 bar. and it is heated to a max. 165°C. 

T he gas cooler gives off a part of the absorbed heat to the outside air. T he refrigerant 
can become liquid only if its temperature can drop below 31°C (the critical temperature 
forC02). However, due to its technical efficiency of < 1 (an "ideal" gas cooler would 
have an efficiency of 1) this occurs in the gas cooler only at outside temperatures below 
27°C (therefore the term gas cooler is used instead of condenser). 

In the heat exchanger, the CO 2 coming from the gas cooler is cooled further by the CO 2 
coming from the evaporator at a temperature of about 0°C. It is then injected through an 
expansion element into the evaporator where the pressure is relieved from 120 bar to 35 
bar allowing it to evaporate. 

The refrigerant takes the heat required for evaporation from the supplied air or with the 
air conditioning system in circulating mode from the air in the passenger compartment 
that is routed through the fins ofthe evaporator and cooled. The lowerthe temperature 
ofthe liquid refrigerant after the gas cooler, the more heat it can take from the ambient 
air in the evaporator. 

Following evaporation, the refrigerant initially passes through a collector where the liquid 
CO 2 components are separated and then the inner heat exchanger. The now pure 
gaseous CO 2 is fed to the compressor and the process starts again from the beginning. 


3 

Future Technology 




Due to the higher density of CO 2 compared to R134a, lower volumetric flow rates can be 
used to achieve the same refrigerating capacity as with today's R134a air conditioning 
systems. 

System description: 

• The CO 2 refrigerant has the designation R744. 

• The refrigerant filling capacity is about 10- 15% lowerthan in today's systems filled 
with R134a. 

• With only a few exceptions, the components in the air conditioning system are simi- 
larto the components used for R134a. 

• Depending on the ambient temperature, the pressure level is considerably higher at 
up to 95 bar when stationary (high-pressure and low-pressure) and up to 133 baron 
the high-pressure side during operation. 

New A/C components: 

• An accumulator with integrated inner heat exchanger. It has 4 connections. 

• The condenser in the CO 2 system is referred to as the gas cooler. 

• In addition to the pressure, the sensor at the inlet to the gas cooler 
also measures the hot gas refrigerant temperature. 

• A rupture disc between the evaporator and expansion valve 
(low-pressure side) trips at a pressure of 120 -H/-10 bar. 

• A rupture disc at the compressor outlet (high-pressure side) 
trips at 160 -H/-10 bar. 

The temperatures and pressures in the R744 refrigerant circuit are considerably higher 
than those in an R134a system. The air conditioning system uses a combined pressure- 
temperature sensor on the refrigerant side for control purposes. This sensor is posi¬ 
tioned in the high-pressure section before the inlet to the gas cooler. 

The system controls operation such that a maximum pressure of 133 bar is reached in 
the high-pressure section. If this pressure level cannot be maintained by corresponding 
control interventions, the compressor is set to zero stroke as of a pressure of 140 bar. 

Besides the control, the air conditioning system can respond by mechanical means to 
high pressures. If control intervention is not possible the system pressure is relieved via 
the discharge elements called rupture discs. The rupture or bursting disc in the low 
pressure section (combined accumulator and internal heat exchanger) responds at a 
pressure of 130 bar at the latest. The rupture disc in the high-pressure section (at the 
outlet of the compressor) responds at a pressure of 170 bar at the latest. 


4 

Future Technology 



Switch-on Pressure 

The air conditioning system is switched on only if the system pressure is within the range 
from 25barto 95bar.There is a distinct undercharge in the system at pressures less than 
25bar- At more than 95barthe system is overfilled orthe ambient temperature is distinct¬ 
ly higherthan 54°C. 

A different refrigerant oil is used. Instead of PAG oilforthe R134a system, POE oil is used 
forR744. 

Under no circumstances must PAG oil be used in the system. The aim is to use a stan¬ 
dardized PAG oil by the time the system is introduced in series production. 

New service devices with filler adapters as well as new leak detectors will be necessary. 
The system cannot be filled with the R134a service devices. 

Refrigerant 

The refrigerant is carbon dioxide (R744) and can be disposed of directly into the ambient 
air in well ventilated rooms. 

Legal Situation 

The current legal situation in Europe stipulates changeoverto the R744 as from 2011 for 
new vehicle types and as from 2017 for all new vehicles. The introduction at BMW will 
therefore take place slowly and in stages. 


5 

Future Technology 



R744 Refrigerant Circuit 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Expansion Element 

7 

Internal Heat Exchanger 

2 

Evaporator 

8 

Service Port, High Pressure 

3 

Service Port, Low Pressure 

9 

Gas Cooler 

4 

Combined Component 

10 

Sensor 

5 

Rupture Plate, Low Pressure 

11 

Compressor with High Pressure Rupture Plate 

6 

Accumulator 




The refrigerant circuit is subdivided into three areas corresponding to temperature: 

• The low-pressure area (ND) is blue. 

• The high-pressure area (HD) is red and orange. 

• The red area is the hot gas zone of the system with refrigerant 
temperatures up to 165°C (short-term max. 180°C). 


6 

Future Technology 




























