Outline of Important Points 


Fundamentals of air conditioning systems 

• A comfortable interior temperature is determined by the prevailing outside tempera¬ 
ture and adequate airflow. 

• When the temperature increases from 25 to 35°C, a person's sensory perception 
and the powers of deduction diminish by approx. 20%. 

• In addition to reducing the temperature, the air conditioning system also dehumidi- 
fies and cleans the air. 

• Heat always travels from the higher to the lower temperature level and never the 
other way round. 

• Refrigerant R 134a is utilized in current vehicle air conditioning systems. R12 must 
no longer be used due to its high ozone depletion potential. 

• PAG refrigerate roil is used. 

• The refrigerant circuit is divided into a high-pressure section and a low-pressure 
section. The separating points are the expansion valve and the compressor. 

• There are two main types of compressor: Internally controlled with electromagnetic 
clutch and externally controlled with electric control valve and without defeatable 
magnetic clutch. 

• Condenser and condenser module - in connection with the condenser module, the 
dryer is mounted on the outside and the dryer element can be replaced. 

• The liquid reservoir can absorb only a limited amount of moisture and cannot 
regenerate. 

• The expansion valve has a fixed setting. 

• The evaporator must not become dirty. This would otherwise produce odor produc¬ 
ing bacteria. 

• The evaporator blower must run permanently during operation of the air condition¬ 
ing system. 

• The refrigerant circuit essentially consists of the compressor, condenser, liquid 
reservoir, expansion valve, evaporator, hoses and pipes as well as regulation and 
control devices. 

• There are two variants of air temperature control in the passenger compartment: 
Air-based and Water-based temperature control. 


1 

Glossary 





Glossary 


Boiling Point 

The temperature at which a substance changes from liquid to a gaseous state with out 
further increasing the liquids temperature. The Boiling Point is pressure dependent; as 
pressure increases so does the boiling point. 

BTU 

British Thermal Unit is the amount of heat that will raise or lower the temperature of one 
pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit. 

Condensation 

The procedure in which a material changes from a gaseous state to a liquid. 

Cold 

A condition of low temperature defined as the lack of heat. 

Cooling by pressure relief 

A gas underpressure cools down when it is allowed to suddenly expand. The pressure 
relief leads to the evaporation of the material which causes heat to be absorbed by it. 

Critical Point 

The exact instant as a material is changing from liquid to vapor state when condensation 
is no longer possible. A substance above its Critical Point is always in vapor state. 

Dew Point 

The temperature at which vapor begins to condense. 

Evaporation 

The procedure in which a material changes from a liquid state to a gas. 

Heat 

The form energy that causes substances to rise in temperature, fuse, evaporate, expand, 
or undergo any of various other related changes, that flows to a body by contact with or 
radiation from bodies at higher temperatures, and that can be produced in a body (as by 
compression) orthe friction between molecules. 

HVAC 

Heating, ventilation and airconditioning. 

Refrigerant 

The chemical medium used in the heat exchange process. Refrigerant can be found in an 
air conditioning system in liquid or gaseous form depending on the pressure and temper¬ 
ature conditions. 


2 

Glossary 



Latent Heat 

Hidden heat, that when added or removed, causes a change of state - but not a change 
in temperature, thus it can't be measured with a thermometer. 

Lin Bus 

Local Interconnected network 

Saturation Temperature 

Referred to as the boiling point or the condensing temperature. This is the temperature 
at which a refrigerant will change state from a liquid to a vapor and visa versa. 

Sensible Heat 

Heat, that when added or removed, causes a change in temperature but not in state, 
it can be felt and measured with a thermometer. 

Specific Heat 

The amount of heat that is required to cause a rise in temperature of a specific material. 

Sub Cooled Liquid 

A liquid refrigerant which is cooled below its saturation temperature. 

Superheated Vapor 

When refrigerant vapor which is heated above its saturation temperature. 

If a refrigerant is superheated, there is no liquid present. 


3 

Glossary 



