Technical training. 

Product information. 

5 Series LCI 




BMW Service 


Edited for the U.S. market by: 

BMW Group University 

Technical Training 

ST1309 8/1/2013 







General information 


Symbols used 

The following symbol is used in this document to facilitate better comprehension or to draw attention 
to very important information: 

A 

Contains important safety information and information that needs to be observed strictly in order to 
guarantee the smooth operation of the system. 


Information status and national-market versions 

BMW Group vehicles meet the requirements of the highest safety and quality standards. Changes 
in requirements for environmental protection, customer benefits and design render necessary 
continuous development of systems and components. Consequently, there may be discrepancies 
between the contents of this document and the vehicles available in the training course. 

This document basically relates to the European version of left-hand drive vehicles. Some operating 
elements or components are arranged differently in right-hand drive vehicles than shown in the 
graphics in this document. Further differences may arise as the result of the equipment specification in 
specific markets or countries. 

Additional sources of information 

Further information on the individual topics can be found in the following: 

• Owner's Handbook 

• Integrated Service Technical Application. 

Contact: conceptinfo@bmw.de 
©2013 BMW AG, Munich 

Reprints of this publication or its parts require the written approval of BMW AG, Munich 

The information contained in this document forms an integral part of the technical training of the 
BMW Group and is intended for the trainer and participants in the seminar. Refer to the latest relevant 
information systems of the BMW Group for any changes/additions to the technical data. 

Information status: April 2013 
BV-72/Technical Training 




5 Series LCI 

Contents. 

1. Introduction.1 

1.1. Models.1 

1.1.1. Gasoline engines.1 

1.1.2. Diesel engines.1 

1.2. Further information.1 

2. Body.2 

2.1. Acoustic measures.2 

2.2. Design changes.3 

2.2.1. Identification of all-wheel drive vehicles.5 

2.3. Exterior mirrors.6 

2.3.1. System wiring diagram.7 

2.4. Line package content.10 

2.5. Luggage compartment.11 

3. Powertrain.12 

3.1. Overview of engines.12 

3.2. N57TU engine.13 

3.3. N63TU engine.14 

3.3.1. Measures for C02 reduction.14 

3.4. Automatic engine start/stop function.16 

3.4.1. Longitudinal jolt.16 

3.4.2. Stop delay.17 

3.4.3. Start strategy.18 

3.4.4. Starter motor.19 

3.5. C02 measures.20 

3.6. Automatic transmission.20 

3.6.1. Sports automatic transmission.20 

3.6.2. ConnectedShift.20 

3.6.3. Coasting in idle.22 

4. Chassis and Suspension.23 

4.1. Electromechanical parking brake.23 

5. General Vehicle Electronics.24 

5.1. Voltage supply.24 

5.1.1. Deletion of DC/DC converter.24 

5.1.2. Battery.24 

5.2. Bus systems.25 

5.2.1. Bus overview.25 

5.2.2. MOST.28 







































5 Series LCI 

Contents. 

5.3. Exterior lights.28 

5.3.1. Bi-xenon headlights.28 

5.3.2. Bi-xenon headlight with Adaptive Headlight.29 

5.3.3. Adaptive LED headlight.29 

5.3.4. Fog light.34 

5.3.5. Rear exterior lights.34 

5.4. Ambiance lighting.35 

5.5. Contactless tailgate activation.36 

6. Driver Assistance Systems.37 

6.1. Overview of optional equipment.37 

6.2. Overview of sensors.38 

6.3. BMW Night Vision.38 

6.3.1. BMW Night Vision with pedestrian and animal recognition.39 

6.4. Lane departure warning.43 

6.4.1. Functional limitations.44 

6.5. Camera-based collision warning (option 5AS).44 

6.5.1. Functional principle.45 

6.5.2. Operation.47 

6.5.3. Warning and braking function.48 

6.5.4. Timescale of collision warning with city braking function.51 

6.5.5. System limits.52 

6.5.6. Functional limitations.53 

6.5.7. Check Control messages.54 

6.6. Collision warning with braking function (option 5AT).55 

6.6.1. Functional principle.56 

6.6.2. Operation.56 

6.6.3. Warning and braking function.57 

6.6.4. History.61 

6.6.5. Comparison to the camera-based collision warning.62 

6.7. Speed Limit Info.62 

6.7.1. System limits.63 

6.8. High-beam assistant.65 

6.9. ACC Stop & Go.65 

6.9.1. Introduction.66 

6.9.2. System components.69 

7. Entertainment and Communication.73 

7.1. Headunits.73 

7.1.1. New features of Headunit High.73 








































5 Series LCI 

Contents. 

7.1.2. Deletion of internal yaw sensor, Headunit High.77 

7.2. Speaker systems.77 

7.3. Rear seat entertainment system.77 

7.4. ConnectedDrive realignment.78 

7.4.1. BMW Assist eCall.79 

7.4.2. BMW TeleServices from 03/2013.81 

7.4.3. ConnectedDrive services.81 

7.4.4. Additional ConnectedDrive functions.82 

7.4.5. Internet.84 

7.5. BMW Apps.87 

7.6. Audio playback with Android.87 

7.7. Snap-in adapter.88 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls.90 

8.1. ID transmitter.90 

8.1.1. Programming third and fourth button.90 

8.1.2. Changeover of symbol for fourth button.92 

8.2. Touchpad Controller.92 

8.2.1. Controller with touchpad.92 

8.3. Instrument cluster.95 

8.4. CID power display in SPORT mode.96 

8.5. Driver assistance system operating facility.97 

8.6. IHKA operating facility.98 

























5 Series LCI 
1. Introduction 


In July 2013 the model revision or the Life Cycle Impulse (LCI) of the BMW 5 Series enters the market. 

For clearer representation, the revised BMW 5 Series is mentioned with the individual development 
series "BMW 5 Series LCI" or "F07 LCI", "F10 LCI" in this document. 


1.1. Models 

As before, the following body variants are offered: 

• Sedan (FI 0 LCI) 

• Gran Turismo (F07 LCI) 

The model range of the BMW 5 Series LCI includes the following gasoline and diesel variants: 

1.1.1. Gasoline engines 

F07 LCI FI0 LCI 

BMW 535i BMW 528i 

BMW 535i xDrive BMW 528i xDrive 

BMW 550i BMW 535i 

BMW 550i xDrive BMW 535i xDrive 

BMW ActiveHybrid 5 
BMW 550i 
BMW 550i xDrive 


1.1.2. Diesel engines 

FI0 LCI 

BMW 535d 
BMW 535d xDrive 


1.2. Further information 

Only the new features and adaptations of the BMW 5 Series LCI are described in this document. 

For additional information on other components and systems, please refer to the appropriate 
documents for the vehicles and engines listed above. 


1 










5 Series LCI 

2. Body 

2.1. Acoustic measures 

In the FI 0 LCI, the noise generation in the vehicle was reduced by various measures. 



BMW FI 0 LCI measures for noise reduction 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Foam part 

2 

Foam insert 

3 

Foam insert (F11 5 series Sport wagon, not for US) 

4 

Mirror base (new, with modified sealing of the mirror triangle) 


2 







5 Series LCI 

2. Body 


2.2. Design changes 

F07 F07 LCI 



BMW 5 Series LCI Design changes to front 


The following design changes were made to the front of the BMW 5 Series LCI: 

• New bumper panel 

• New air inlet grille at bottom with different variants (with/without ACC, with/without fog light) 

New design (horizontal rod look instead of diamond pattern) 

New side gills with different variants for Basic, Luxury and Modern lines 


3 






5 Series LCI 

2. Body 



F07 design changes at rear 


The following design changes were made to the rear of the F07 LCI: 

• Tailgate with redesigned outer skin. 

• New handle strip with integrated number plate lights, which were integrated in the tailgate 
without an additional cover/chrome strip. 

• New plastic cover under the handle strip. 

• Trim strip at the tailgate at the bottom for Luxury line (chrome surface) or Modern line 
(pearl shine, matt chrome surface). 

• New rear lights. 

• New bumper panel in three different versions depending on the exhaust system 
(the bumper support was also adapted based on the modified bumper panel). 



FI 0 design changes at rear 


4 














5 Series LCI 

2. Body 

The following design changes were made to the rear of the F10 LCI and F18 LCI: 

• New rear lights. 

• New bumper panel in three different versions depending on the exhaust system. 

• New, three-piece trim strip at the bumper (only for Luxury and Modern lines), which runs 
across the entire vehicle width and includes the rear reflectors at the side. 

2.2.1. Identification of all-wheel drive vehicles 



BMW 5 Series LCI xDrive identification 


A redesigned xDrive model inscription is located at the rear of the vehicle to identify the all-wheel drive 
vehicles. 

• F07 LCI: The xDrive model inscription is located at the rear on the bottom left 

• FI 0 LCI : The xDrive model inscription is located at the rear on the top left 


5 






5 Series LCI 

2. Body 

2.3. Exterior mirrors 



F10 LCI exterior mirror 


As was first introduced with the F30, the side mounted turn signals are now integrated in the exterior 
mirrors in the BMW 5 Series LCI. The side turn signals in the front fenders are no longer used. An 
exception here is the BMW M5, in which the side turn signals are still installed in the fenders. 

In addition, the power of the mirror heating is now reduced in ECO PRO mode depending on the 
temperature. However, it is not possible to completely switch off the mirror heating at low ambient 
temperatures. 


6 




5 Series LCI 

2. Body 

2.3.1. System wiring diagram 


©I 


® 

G3 




® 


C« 








BMW 5 Series LCI System wiring diagram, exterior mirror 













































5 Series LCI 

2. Body 

Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Outside temperature sensor 

2 

Junction box electronics (JBE) with front power distribution box 

I 3 

Right exterior mirror 

4 

Switch block, driver's door 

I 5 

Left exterior mirror 

6 

Footwell module (FRM) 

|7 

Instrument panel (KOMBI) 

8 

Central gateway module (ZGM) 

| 9 

Car access system (CAS) 


8 








5 Series LCI 

2. Body 



BMW 5 Series LCI System wiring diagram, electrochromic outside mirror (optional equipment) 


9 




























5 Series LCI 

2. Body 


Index 

Explanation 


I 1 

Outside temperature sensor 


2 

Junction box electronics (JBE) with front power distribution box 

I 3 

Right electrochromic outside mirror 

4 

Switch block, driver's door 


I 5 

Left electrochromic outside mirror 

6 

Footwell module (FRM) 


|7 

Instrument panel (KOMBI) 


8 

Central gateway module (ZGM) 

| 9 

Car access system (CAS) 


2.4. Line package content 

Modern Line (ZML) 

Luxury line (ZLL) 

LED fog light 


LED fog light 

Elements of the ornamental grille, the air inlets, 
the rear bumper, the tailgate and the exhaust 
tailpipe in aluminium matt 

Elements of the air inlets, the tailgate and the 
rear bumper in high-gloss chrome 

Cover of B-pillar, window guide rail and mirror 
base in high-gloss black 

Cover of B-pillar, window guide rail and mirror 
base in high-gloss black 

Weather strip and cover of window border in 
aluminium with satin finish 

Weather strip and cover of window border in 
chrome 

Door handles illuminated with chrome wedge 

Door handles illuminated with chrome wedge 

Cover of entrance illuminates with specific 
insert and model inscription 

Cover of entrance illuminates with specific 
insert and model inscription 

Remote key/ID transmitter in dark oyster with 
clasp in high-gloss chrome 

Remote key/ID transmitter in black with clasp in 
high-gloss chrome 

Sporty leather steering wheel in dark oyster or 
black 

Sporty leather steering wheel in black 

Upholstery in fabric, Dakota leather or nappa 
leather with line-specific seam pattern 

Upholstery in Dakota leather or nappa leather 
with line-specific seam pattern 


The package contents may vary depending on the development series and vehicle equipment. 


10 














5 Series LCI 

2. Body 

2.5. Luggage compartment 



F07 LCI luggage compartment 


The rear seats of the BMW 5 Series Gran Turismo were moved forward by 27 mm with the model 
revision. This design measure, as well as other changes to the luggage compartment trim panels, the 
storage shelf and the partition wall, the luggage compartment capacity was able to be enlarged by 
60 liters to 500 liters. 


11 



5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 

3.1. Overview of engines 

The engines which are used from the model revision in the BMW 5 Series are listed below. 

Gasoline engines 


Engine 

Model 

Development 

series 

Power output 
[kW] (hp) 

Torque 
[Nm] (Ib-ft) 

N20B2000 

BMW 528i 

BMW 528i xDrive 

F10 

180 (240) 

350 (260) 

N55B30M0 

BMW 535i 

BMW 535i xDrive 
BMW ActiveHybrid 5 

F07, F10 

225 (300) 

400 (300) 

N63B4401 

BMW 550i 

BMW 550i xDrive 

F07, F10 

330 (445) 

650 (480) 

Diesel engines 

Engine 

Model 

Development 

series 

Power output 
[kW] (hp) 

Torque 
[Nm] (Ib-ft) 

N57D30O1 

BMW 535d 

BMW 535d xDrive 

F10 

190 (255) 

560 (413) 


All models of the BMW 5 Series LCI satisfy the exhaust emissions standard ULEVII. Diesel particulate 
filters are installed in all diesel-engine cars. In addition to SCR II exhaust emission system (Selective 
Catalytic Reduction II). 


Further information on the SCR II exhaust emission system can be found in the Training Reference 
Manual “ST1307 Second Generation Diesel Emissions 


12 







5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 

3.2. N57TU engine 



0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 [11m in] 


N57D3001 


Full load diagram F10 LCI, 535d with N57D30O1 engine 


Further information on the N57TU engine can be found in the Training Reference Manual “ST 1306 
N57TU Diesel Engine”. 


13 









5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 

3.3. N63TU engine 



N63B4401 

Full load diagram FI 0 LCI, 550i with N63B4401 engine 


In the FI 0 LCI and F07, the N63TU, is used in the variant N63B4401. 


3.3.1. Measures for CO 2 reduction 

Even before the model revision of the BMW 5 Series, the N63TU engine was revised to reduce 
emissions. 

Wider piston rings with an optimized coefficient of friction, made from a softer material, were installed. 
As these piston rings require lower piston ring grooves, the pistons were also modified accordingly. 

Connecting rods without wrist pin bushings are used, the wrist pins also have a special carbon coating 
(DLC - Diamond-like carbon). The designation DLC refers to the diamond-like properties of this 
coating, which further optimized the coefficient of friction. 


14 








5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 



Connecting rod (B) without bushing in the N63TU engine 

Index 

Explanation 

|a 

Connecting rod with bushing 

B 

Friction optimized connecting rod without bushing 



Vacuum pump, N63TU engine 


A friction-optimized vacuum pump reduces fuel consumption by approximately 0.5%. 
The standard automatic engine start-stop function also helps reduce emissions. 


15 





5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 

3.4. Automatic engine start/stop function 

In the BMW 5 Series LCI the automatic engine start-stop function (MSA) is used for all engine 
versions. 

The operating logic is known from the current BMW models. 

In this chapter only the changes to the automatic engine start-stop function introduced with the BMW 
5 Series LCI are described. A description of the entire system can be found in the Training Reference 
Manual "F31 Complete Vehicle" ST1301. 

3.4.1. Longitudinal jolt 



BMW 5 Series LCI drive train 


In vehicles with an automatic transmission the drive train is preloaded by the engine torque and the 
stationary wheels, as soon as a drive position (R, D, S or M) is switched, when an engine is running and 
the brake pedal is pressed. If the engine is stopped by the automatic engine start-stop function in this 
state, the mechanical transmission oil pump is also no longer powered. As not enough transmission oil 
pressure can build up below a certain engine speed, a multidisc clutch in the automatic transmission 
is opened very quickly. This in turn means that the torque at the drive train drops suddenly, whereby a 
longitudinal jolt or shudder of the vehicle is felt. 

To avoid this longitudinal jolt, a multidisc clutch is slowly opened in the automatic transmission 
immediately before the automatic engine shutdown which improves the comfort significantly. 

This additional function was introduced in all vehicles with an automatic engine start-stop function and 
automatic transmission shortly before the model revision of the BMW 5 Series. 

Other changes to the automatic engine start-stop function are introduced parallel to the model 
revision. In general, the time delay between vehicle standstill and an automatic engine shutdown 
is deleted, among other things (see next chapter). In this case the multidisc clutch in the automatic 
transmission is not opened before the automatic engine shutdown. 


16 


5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 

3.4.2. Stop delay 





t 




Automatic engine start-stop function without stop delay 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Vehicle speed 

2 

Vehicle excitation (automatic engine start-stop function with stop delay) 

I 3 

Vehicle excitation (automatic engine start-stop function without stop delay) 

a 

Roadway excitation 

|b 

Stopping jolt of the vehicle 

c 

Stopping the engine 

|d 

Stopping jolt of the vehicle and engine (masked) 


Similar to vehicles with manual gearbox, the time delay of approximately one second until the 
automatic engine shutdown (light blue area in the graphic) is now also deleted in vehicles with an 
automatic transmission. The engine is shut down immediately upon vehicle standstill (v = 0 mph). The 
shutdown of the engine is hardly noticeable as it is masked by the stopping jolt of the vehicle. 


17 













5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 


In special cases, the automatic engine shutdown can still be done shortly after the vehicle standstill, 
for example: 

• by the driver such as steering wheel movement (for maintaining the power steering support) 

• upon heavy braking (from 5 m/s 2 ) 

• on inclines or downhill gradients (from about 3.5%) 


3.4.3. Start strategy 




Index 

Explanation 

A 

System start 

B 

Convenient starting 

C 

Dynamic start 

1 

Engine speed 

2 

Position of multidisc clutch 

a 

Idle speed 

b 

Multidisc clutch closed 

c 

Multidisc clutch open 


18 

























5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 


Up to now, upon an automatic engine start by the automatic engine start-stop function, the engine 
speed was increased in every situation as quickly as possible to reach idle speed. 

However, in order to guarantee quick drive off on the one hand, and to start the engine with fewer 
vibrations and without a noticeable longitudinal jolt of the vehicle on the other, the automatic engine 
start for the BMW 5 Series LCI with automatic transmission was optimized depending on the situation: 


System start 

Convenient starting 

Dynamic start 

The automatic engine start 
is executed by a system 
switch-on request (e.g. by air- 
conditioning), the brake pedal 
remains pressed. 

The automatic engine start 
is executed by releasing the 
brake, the accelerator pedal is 
not pressed. 

The automatic engine start 
is executed by releasing the 
brake, the accelerator pedal is 
pressed for drive off. 

The engine speed is slowly 
increased until it reaches the 
idle speed. 

The engine speed is slowly 
increased until it reaches the 
idle speed. 

The engine speed is increased 
quickly. 

The multidisc clutch in the 
automatic transmission closes 
very slowly. 

The multidisc clutch in the 
automatic transmission closes 
slowly. 

The multidisc clutch in the 
automatic transmission closes 
quickly. 

A longitudinal jolt noticeable to 
the driver is avoided. 

Smooth and comfortable 
drive-off is made possible. 

Quick drive off is therefore 
made possible. 


For an engine start with fewer vibrations, with the system start and convenient starting the engine 
speed is initially increased quickly and then slower until it reaches the idle speed. The ignition timing is 
retarded for this. 


3.4.4. Starter motor 

A new, more robust starter motor is used for the following engine versions: 

• N57 engine 

• N20 engine 

While previously the starter motor was only actuated at engine standstill, the new starter motor can be 
actuated before the engine standstill, at an engine speed of 0 to approximately 150 rpm. 

This is primarily used with a recognized switch-on prompt during an automatic engine shutdown by 
the automatic engine start-stop function. The customer therefore does not have to wait if he wants to 
continue driving straight away after an automatic engine shutdown, e.g. at a stop sign. 


19 






5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 

3.5. CO 2 measures 

In the FI 0 LCI 550i with rear-wheel drive the CO 2 emissions were reduced. 

• N63TU engine: 

Piston rings with optimized coefficient of friction 
Connecting rod without bushing and carbon-coated wrist pin 
Friction-optimized vacuum pump 

Deletion of the stop delay during an automatic engine shutdown of the automatic engine 
start-stop function in vehicles with an automatic transmission 

• Automatic transmission 8HP70: 

Changes when adjusting the converter lockup clutch in 1 st gear (in comparison to its 
predecessor, in the F10 LCI 550i the converter lockup clutch can be closed in 1st gear in 
the lower and medium load range) 

Longer overrun fuel cutoff (in comparison to its predecessor the fuel injection and ignition 
only start at a lower engine speed in the FI 0 LCI 550i) 

• Ratio of the rear axle differential changed from 3.08 to 2.81 

• Aerodynamic measures at vehicle underbody and wheel arch: 

Enlargement of the underbody panelling at the fuel tank 


3.6. Automatic transmission 

3.6.1. Sports automatic transmission 

The Sports automatic transmission (option 2TB) is only offered only in the F10 LCI. 

Additional functions are available for the Sports automatic transmission with the model change: 

• Three different shift speeds, depending on the driving dynamics setting. 

• Suppression of automatic gear shifts in manual mode. 

• Launch Control enables optimal acceleration when driving off on a smooth roadway. The 
system calculates an engine torque, at which a controlled slip of about 10 to 15% is allowed 
on a smooth roadway depending on conditions. 


3.6.2. ConnectedShift 

ConnectedShift uses navigation data for a forward-thinking shift strategy of the automatic 
transmission. If, for example, a sharp bend is detected, the automatic transmission shifts down early 
and the gear is retained in the bend. 

The route guidance of the navigation system does not need to be activated for the function. However, 
the identification of a turn-off request, for example by the active route guidance or operating the turn 
indicator, helps to control the system more accurately. Up-to-date navigation map data also influences 
the control accuracy. 


20 


5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 


Advantages 

ConnectedShift offers various advantages depending on the route: 


Traffic guidance 

Advantages 

Bend/Subsequent bend 

• Higher engine braking effect before the bend 

• Driving force reserve for accelerating from the bend 

• Optimized shift characteristics in the bend. 

Crossroads 

Upon recognized turn-off request by active route guidance or 
operation of the turn indicator: 


• Higher engine braking effect before crossroads 

• Optimized shift characteristics in the crossroads. 

Highway entrance/exit ramp 

• Higher engine braking effect before ramp 

• Driving force reserve when merging. 

Roundabout 

• Higher engine braking effect before the roundabout 


Driving force reserve before entry 

Optimized shift characteristics in the roundabout and in 
the exit. 


Shift example for a vehicle with and without ConnectedShift 



ConnectedShift shift example 


21 







5 Series LCI 

3. Powertrain 


Index 

Explanation 

|a 

Shift points without ConnectedShift 

B 

Shift points with ConnectedShift 

a 

Taking the foot off the gas (coasting (overrun) mode) 

b 

Slight brake control 

c 

Accelerator pedal is operated 


ConnectedShift can choose downshifts before bends and avoid up and down shifts between 
consecutive bends. A higher engine braking effect before bends is thus achieved, as well as a 
reduction of the shift frequency in bends and optimal passage from the bends. 

Characteristics and availability 

In SPORT and COMFORT modes the characteristics of ConnectedShift are adapted to the respective 
driving program, in ECO PRO mode ConnectedShift is not available. ConnectedShift is also not 
available during control operation of cruise control. 

With the exception of the BMW ActiveHybrid 5, ConnectedShift is used in the BMW 5 Series LCI for 
vehicles with automatic transmission and navigation system. 

A prerequisite is that the navigation map data and the required additional information for the country 
are available. This is dependent on the navigation map provider and is not available worldwide for all 
countries. 


3.6.3. Coasting in idle 

With the exception of hybrid cars, the function "Coasting in idle" is available for all BMW 5 Series LCI 
with automatic transmission. Linder certain prerequisites the engine is automatically disconnected 
from the transmission in gear selector switch position D. The engine runs here at idle speed. 

Further information on "Coasting" is available in the “Training Reference Manual” ST1212 F01/F02 
LCI, chapter Displays and Controls". 


22 






5 Series LCI 

4. Chassis and Suspension 

4.1. Electromechanical parking brake 



Indicator light, parking brake 

A functional enhancement of the electromechanical parking brake EMF enables an automatic 
release of the parking brake as soon as the drive-off request by the driver is recognized. Smooth and 
comfortable drive-off is made possible. 

In the BMW 5 Series with automatic transmission this function has already been used since 2011 
in the FI 0, this feature is now available in other BMW models with the EMF parking brake. With the 
model revision this function is now integrated in vehicles with manual gearbox. 

The parking brake is automatically released as soon as there is a corresponding drive torque. In 
vehicles with an automatic transmission the accelerator pedal must also be pressed. In vehicles with 
manual gearbox the clutch must be released and at the same time the accelerator pedal pressed. 

The following conditions must also be satisfied: 

• Driver presence is identified, door closed and seat belt fastened 

• Engine is running or driving readiness is displayed (BMW ActiveHybrid 5). 

• Drive position/Gear engaged 

In vehicles with manual gearbox the engaged gear is detected with help of the reverse gear switch and 
the zero-gear sensor. An engaged forward gear is identified if neither the reverse gear nor the neutral 
are shifted. 

The driver's absence is detected via the seat belt buckle switch and by the door contact. 


23 



5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 

5.1. Voltage supply 

5.1.1. Deletion of DC/DC converter 

In vehicles equipped with the automatic engine start-stop function (MSA), voltage dips in the vehicles 
electrical system occur more frequently due to the starter operations. Up to now a DC/DC converter 
was used to protect specific voltage-sensitive electrical components. 

The last voltage-sensitive control units were replaced with the use of the Headunit High. With the use 
of the Headunit High, the DC/DC converter could be deleted in F10. 

For F07 the interior light is supplied with voltage via the DC/DC converter. In the case of a voltage dip 
upon an engine start, it does not result in a change to the light intensity of the interior light. As this is 
still also desired, a DC/DC converter is still used in F07 . 

5.1.2. Battery 

An AGM battery with a capacity of 105 Ah has been installed in the following vehicles since July 2012: 

• All vehicles in the F07 series 

• All F10N63TU engine 


24 


5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 

5.2. Bus systems 


5.2.1. Bus overview 



BMW 5 Series LCI Bus overview, includes hybrid and diesel 

















































































5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Control units with wake-up line 

2 

Control units with wake-up authorization 

3 

Start-up node control units for starting and 
synchronizing the FlexRay bus system 

ACSM 

Advanced Crash Safety Module 

AL 

Active Steering 

AMPT 

Top HiFi Amplifier 

ASD 

Active Sound Design 

CA 

Comfort Access 

CAS 

Car Access System 

COM BOX 

Combox 

CON 

Controller 

DDE 

Digital Diesel Electronics 

DME 

Digital Engine Electronics 

DME2 

Digital Engine Electronics 2 (only N63TU engine) 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

DVDC 

DVD Changer 

EDC 

Electronic Damper Control 

EDCSHL 

Electronic Damper Control Satellite, rear left 

EDCSHR 

Electronic Damper Control Satellite, rear right 

EDCSVL 

Electronic Damper Control Satellite, front left 

EDCSVR 

Electronic Damper Control Satellite, front right 

EGS 

Electronic Transmission Control 

EHC 

Electronic Ride Height Control 

EKPS 

Electronic Fuel Pump Control 

EME 

Electrical Machine Electronics (only for hybrid cars) 

EMF 

Electromechanical Parking Brake 

EPS 

Electromechanical Power Steering 

FKA 

Rear Climate Control 

FLA 

High-beam Assistant (integrated in the camera-based driver support systems 
control unit for vehicles with Driving Assistant 5AS, Driving Assistant Plus 5AT 
or Road Sign Recognition 8TH) 

FRM 

Footwell Module 

FZD 

Roof Function Center 

GWS 

Gear Selector 

HEADUNIT 

Headunit (Headunit High) 


26 




















5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 


Index 

Explanation 

HKL 

Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuation 
(F07 LCI, FI 0 LCI, at the K-CAN) 

HSR 

Rear Axle Slip Angle Control 

HUD 

Head-Up Display 

ICM 

Integrated Chassis Management 

IHKA 

Integrated Automatic Heating / Air Conditioning 

JBE 

Junction Box Electronics 

KAFAS 

Camera-Based Driver Support Systems 

KOMBI 

Instrument Panel 

LHML 

LED Main Light Module, left 

LHMR 

LED Main Light Module, right 

NVE 

Night Vision Electronics 

PDC 

Park Distance Control (integrated in the Junction Box Electronics) 

PMA 

Parking Maneuvering Assistant 

TPMS 

Tire Pressure Monitoring System 

RSE 

Rear Seat Entertainment System 

SCR 

Selective Catalytic Reduction (DCU, Dosing Control Module) 

SMBF 

Seat Module, Passenger 

SMBFH 

Seat Module, Passenger, Rear 

SME 

Battery Management Electronics (only hybrid cars) 

SMFA 

Seat Module, Driver 

SMFAH 

Seat Module, Driver, Rear 

STML 

Left-hand Headlight Driver Module 

STMR 

Right Headlight Driver Module 

SVT 

Servotronic 

SWW 

Lane Change Warning 

SZL 

Steering Column Switch Cluster 

TBX 

Touchbox 

TCB 

Telematic Communication Box 

TRSVC 

Control Unit for Reversing Camera and SideView 

VDM 

Vertical Dynamics Management 

VSW 

Video Switch 

VTG 

Transfer Box (xDrive only) 

ZGM 

Central Gateway Module 


27 





















5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 


In vehicles with an Adaptive LED headlight (option 552) with Adaptive Headlight (option 524) the 
vehicle electrical system of the BMW 5 Series LCI was extended with a further data bus, the K-CAN3. 
This data bus controls the headlights for illumination, the two headlight driver modules or LED main 
light module. The K-CAN3, which can be easily accessed from the outside, was implemented and 
secured separately from the other bus systems in order to prevent manipulations at the vehicle. 


5.2.2. MOST 

With the introduction of the Headunit High in July 2012, the MOST connection to the central gateway 
module (ZGM) is no longer used. It is still possible to update the map data via the Ethernet interface of 
the headunit or via USB. 


5.3. Exterior lights 

With the model revision the BMW 5 Series is equipped as standard with bi-xenon headlights. The 
halogen headlights are no longer used. In addition, headlights and fog lights with LED technology 
are now available for vehicles of the BMW 5 Series. The following table provides an overview of the 
equipment specifications: 


Designation 

Standard/Optional Equipment 

Bi-xenon headlights with Adaptive Headlights 

Standard 

Full LED headlights 

Option 552 

LED fog lights 

Option 5A1 


5.3.1. Bi-xenon headlights 



F10 LCI bi-xenon headlight 


28 








5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 


The technical features of the bi-xenon headlight previously available as option 522 is now used as 
standard in the BMW 5 Series. 

The lighting rings and the positioning lights with exposed optical fibre are still implemented in LED 
technology. 

The appearance of the turn indicator was changed. They were also converted to bulbs in the F10 LCI, 
as the previous LEDS were too strong. The LEDs are still used in the F07 LCI. 

5.3.2. Bi-xenon headlight with Adaptive Headlight 

This chapter describes the bi-xenon headlight with Adaptive Headlight in the FI 0 LCI. In the F07 LCI 
the bi-xenon headlights with Adaptive Headlight were adopted from the predecessor. No changes 
were made to the technical features. They are therefore not mentioned here. 

5.3.3. Adaptive LED headlight 

Optional adaptive LED headlights (option 552) are available for the BMW 5 Series LCI. The similar 
to daylight color temperature allows the LED light to appear even brighter and therefore ensures 
even greater comfort and safety. Particularly traffic signs and other reflective objects appear higher in 
contrast and can be subjectively better perceived. The technology used is known from the FI 2 and 
F13. 

The LED full headlight has a low-beam headlight which is made from numerous LEDs and an 
additional reflector. Unlike the Xenon, the cornering light has the same light color as the low-beam 
headlight. It is convincing with its very bright and clear illumination of the entire area of the road being 
turned onto. 

Both the outer and inner reflectors of the headlight are used for the high-beam headlight. 

Automatic High-beam Assistant is available as an option (option 5AC). 


29 


5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 


i> 



F10 LCI LED headlight, left 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Cornering light LED module 

2 

Left-hand headlight driver module, STML 

3 

LED main light module on the left, LHML 


30 















5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 


LED main light module 

The LED main light module is fitted to the underside of the LED headlight and controls the following 
lighting functions: 

• Low-beam headlight 

• High-beam headlight 

• Headlight flasher 

• Cornering lights 

The LED main light module additionally controls the temperature control in the LED headlights. After 
switching off the lighting functions an after-run of the fans of up to 60 s is possible. 

In the case of a failure of a temperature sensor the fans are switched on at full power to protect the 
components in the LED headlight. The data from the LED main light module is transferred to the 
footwell module FRM for the diagnosis of the fans and temperature sensors. 

Headlight driver module 

The headlight driver module is installed as a printed circuit board in the LED headlight. The following 
lighting functions are controlled: 

• Sidelights 

• Daytime lights 

• Side marker light 

• Turn indicator 

• Positioning light 

The control of the stepper motors for the headlight beam throw adjustment and the Adaptive 
Headlight is also assumed from the headlight driver module. 

Cornering light LED module 

The cornering light LED module is installed as an additional light source in the LED headlight. Through 
corresponding encoding country-specific settings are possible. For example, in the Korea national- 
market version the cornering light is not available. 

The modular design allows the interchangeability of the cornering light LED module in the existing 
LED headlight. 

Emergency operation 

If there is a fault in the footwell module (FRM) that could lead to the failure of an LED headlight, then 
an emergency operation is activated via the LED main light module. In the case of a fault in the LED 
main light module the emergency operation is activated via the footwell module FRM. The driving 
light remains switched on until the vehicle is stopped. The driver is warned of the malfunction in the 
instrument cluster (KOMBI) as a Check Control message. 


31 



5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 

System wiring diagram 



BMW 5 Series LCI System wiring diagram for adaptive LED headlight 


32 











































































5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

LED Fog Light, left (option 5A1) 

2 

Headlight, left 1 

3 

2 

Headlight, right 

4 

LED Fog Light, right (option 5A1) 

5 

Junction Box Electronics (JBE) 

6 

Junction Box for the Power Distribution Box 

|7 

Additional Turn Indicator in Exterior Mirror, right 

8 

Power Distribution Box, luggage compartment 

9 

Ride Height Sensor, rear 

10 

Integrated Chassis Management (ICM) 

111 

Additional Turn Indicator in Exterior Mirror, left 

12 

Steering Column Switch Cluster (SZL) 

13 

Operating Facility, Light Switch 

14 

Central Locking Button/Hazard Warning Switch 

15 

Footwell Module (FRM) 

16 

Central Gateway Module (ZGM) 

17 

Car Access System (CAS) 

18 

Ride Height Sensor, front 


-i 

Including the LED main light module on the left LHML with fan and LEDs for cornering light, low- 
beam headlight and high-beam headlight, as well as the left-hand headlight driver module (STML) 
with stepper motors for headlight beam throw adjustment and Adaptive Headlight and LEDs for side 
marker light, positioning light, side lights/daytime driving lights and turn indicator. 

2 Including the LED main light module on the right LHMR with fan and LEDs for cornering light, low- 
beam headlight and high-beam headlight, as well as the right-hand headlight driver module (STMR) 
with stepper motors for headlight beam throw adjustment and Adaptive Headlight and LEDs for side 
marker light, positioning light, side lights/daytime driving lights and turn indicator. 


33 













5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 

5.3.4. Fog light 



F10 LCI LED fog light 

LED fog lights (option 5A1) can also be ordered for the BMW 5 Series LCI as optional equipment. 
Covers are installed in the bumper in place of the fog lights in the basic equipment. 

5.3.5. Rear exterior lights 



In the F07 LCI, rear lights with modified geometry are installed. Technical changes were not made. 


34 


5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 



F10 LCI rear light 


The rear lights of the F10 LCI are now characterized by turn indicators illuminated indirectly with LEDs 
and narrower tail lights. The shape of the rear lights is the same. 


5.4. Ambiance lighting 

The ambiance lighting in the BMW LCI can now be adjusted via the controller in the central information 
display CID. Firstly, the two light colors orange or white can be selected, then the brightness can be 
adjusted. The brightness setting takes precedence over the adjustment to the instrument lighting. 


\ 16:37 _@ 

Interior lighting \ 



Amb ient lighting 
Brightness: 

. « Exterior lighting 


Classic 




Home lights: 


40 » 


Headlights 

c One-touch triple turn signal 


Adjustment of ambient lighting in the BMW 5 Series LCI 


35 








5 Series LCI 

5. General Vehicle Electronics 

5.5. Contactless tailgate activation 

All BMW 5 Series LCI with CA (option 322) have the contactless rear lid actuation known from the F30. 
In vehicles with automatic luggage compartment lid actuation (option 316), the foot movement in the 
BMW 5 Series LCI can now also activate the closing action of the tailgate. An acoustic warning device 
is integrated in the tailgate, which is activated upon closing. 



The acoustic warning device is only installed in the F07 LCI and is located under a cover in the upper 
area of the tailgate. 


36 




5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

The comprehensive package of assist systems for the BMW 5 Series LCI has been modified and 
supplemented. The changes are based on those of the F01/F02 LCI. 

The assist systems facilitate driving of the vehicle by: 

• providing the driver with information, 

• giving the driver suggestions or 

• automatically intervening in the driving process. 

In this chapter you obtain an overview of the following assist systems: 

• BMW Night Vision with person recognition 

• Lane departure warning 

• Camera-based collision warning (including pedestrian warning with city 
braking function and collision warning with city braking function) 

• Radar-based collision warning with braking function 

• Speed limit information 

• Active cruise control with Stop & Go function ACC Stop & Go 

Further information on the assist systems can be found in the product information bulletin of the F01: 

• "BMW Night Vision 2" 

• KAFAS F01/F02 

• "DCC, ACC F01/F02" 

• "F01 Driving Stability Control" 

6.1. Overview of optional equipment 

With the introduction of the optional equipment Active Driving Assistant (option 5AS) and ACC Stop 

6 Go + Active Driving Assistant (option 5AT) some of the assist systems are available individually and 
some as part of the two new options. The following table provides an overview. 


Optional 

equipment 

Function 

5AS Active Driving 
Assistant 

Lane departure warning 

Camera-based collision warning 

Forward collision warning with city braking function 

Pedestrian warning with city braking function 

5AT ACC Stop & 

Go + Active Driving 
Assistant 

Lane departure warning 

Forward collision warning with braking function 

Pedestrian warning with city braking function 

ACC Stop & Go 

Distance information (only in conjunction with Head up display (option 610) 

5AG 

Active Blind Spot Detection 

8TH 

Speed Limit Info 


37 






5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Optional 

equipment 

Function 

610 

BMW Head-Up Display 

Distance information (only in conjunction with option 5AT) 

5DP 

Parking Assistant 

508 

Park Distance Control (PDC) 

5AC 

Automatic High-Beams (with option 552) 

6UK 

BMW Night Vision with Pedestrian Detection 

3AG 

Rearview Camera 

5DL 

Side and Top View Cameras 


6.2. Overview of sensors 


The following table provides an overview of which assist systems are implemented with radar sensor, 
KAFAS camera and Night Vision camera. The same system can be used with different sensors 
depending on the equipment. Observe the information in the descriptions of the individual systems. 

Function/Sensor system 

KAFAS camera 

Radar sensor Night Vision 

camera 

Lane departure warning 

X 


Active blind spot detection 


X 

Speed limit info 

X 


ACC Stop & Go 

X 

X 

Collision warning with braking function 

X 

X 

Camera-based collision warning 

X 


Collision warning with city braking 
function 

X 


Pedestrian warning with city braking 
function 

X 


Automatic high-beams 

X 


BMW Night Vision with pedestrian 
detection. 


X 


6.3. BMW Night Vision 

At night BMW Night Vision detects, in optimum conditions, persons and animals up to 100 m / 320 
feet away. 


38 














5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 



BMW 5 Series LCI Night Vision camera 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Night Vision camera 


For further information on BMW Night Vision, please refer to the product information bulletin "BMW 
Night Vision 2". 

6.3.1. BMW Night Vision with pedestrian and animal recognition 

The operation and the warning function of the optional equipment BMW Night Vision with person 
recognition (option 6UK) have been modified. Details of the new features are provided in the following. 

Operation 

System person recognition, or the pedestrian warning front protective function, is automatically 
activated after each engine start via the START/STOP button. 

When the Night Vision button is pressed in the driver assistance system operating facility, the image 
from the Night Vision camera is shown in the central information display (CID). The driver can adjust 
the brightness and the contrast here. 



BMW 5 Series LCI display Night Vision with detected people 


39 














5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

The pedestrian warning is switched on and off via the Intelligent Safety button. 



Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Intelligent Safety 


Using the Intelligent Safety button the following front protection functions of the collision warning, 
collision warning with braking function and BMW Night Vision can be activated and deactivated 
depending on the equipment in the vehicle. 

• Collision warning (camera-based collision warning and collision warning with braking function) 

• Pedestrian warning (pedestrian warning with city braking function and BMW Night Vision) 

If only one function is available in the vehicle, the function is switched on or off each time the button is 
pressed and the LED above the button is turned on or off respectively. If both functions are installed 
in the vehicle, a menu appears in the CID when the button is pressed in which the functions can be 
individually switched on or off. The LED above the button illuminates as soon as at least one of the 
functions is switched on. The front protection functions are automatically switched on each time the 
engine is started via the START-STOP button. 

Warning function 

The system issues a warning when BMW Night Vision detects a person (pedestrian) or an animal 
within the warning range. The warning range is dependent on the driving speed and the steering angle. 
The warning threshold values are also dependent on whether the pedestrian or the animal is moving or 
standing still. This is demonstrated in the following graphic. 


40 





5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 






BMW 5 Series LCI Night Vision warning ranges 




Index Explanation 



6 Warning range early warning (animal is beside or on the roadway) 


41 



















5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


The pedestrian or animal warning appears in the instrument cluster or in the head-up display. 





BMW 5 Series LCI Pedestrian or animal warning in the display of the instrument cluster and in the Head-Up Display 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Stage 1: Early warning, pedestrian or animal is on the roadway or crosses the 
roadway. The symbol shows in which side the pedestrian or animal is located. 

B 

Stage 2: Acute warning, flashing person in red and acoustic warning signal. 

The brake system is prepared and the brake assistant is adapted. There is no 
acute warning for animals. 


The early warning is executed when a pedestrian or animal is identified within the warning range. The 
early warning shows - depending on where the person or animal is situated - a person or animal lit 
yellow who is located within the lane or is moving on it. Animals from a certain size can be identified, 
e.g. deer. 

The acute warning is only displayed in the case of an immediate risk of collision. The point at which the 
acute warning is issued is calculated in such a way that a collision can only be avoided by immediate 
emergency braking or by an evasive maneuver. With the acute warning the brakes of the vehicle are 
prepared for emergency braking. 

The acute warning in the instrument cluster and in the Head-Up Display shows a flashing person in the 
roadway in red. In addition, an acoustic warning signal is sounded. 

There is no acute warning for animals. 

A 

The acute warning does not relieve the driver of their responsibility to adapt their driving speed and 
driving style to the road and traffic conditions. 


42 










5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

The pedestrian or animal warning is executed irrespective of the representation of the Night Vision 
camera image in the central information display CID. 

The warning is no longer shown in the CID, but instead appears exclusively in the instrument cluster 
or in the head-up display. If the Night Vision camera image is active both identified pedestrians and 
animals are shown in yellow. 



BMW 5 Series LCI Night Vision camera image for identified animals on the central information display 


6.4. Lane departure warning 

The lane departure warning is an element of the optional equipment Active Driving Assistant (option 
5AS) and the optional equipment ACC Stop and Go + Active Driving Assistant (option 5AT) and is 
unchanged. The lane departure warning warns the driver by vibrations in the steering wheel of the 
inadvertent departure from a given lane. The prerequisite for this is the presence of suitable roadway 
or lane markings, which can be recognized with the KAFAS camera of the control unit. 


43 








5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 



BMW 5 Series LCI Lane departure warning 


A 

The system cannot replace a personal assessment of the roads and traffic situation. The lane 
departure warning merely supports the driver. 

Observe the information in the section "Functional limitations". 


6.4.1. Functional limitations 

The function of the KAFAS camera and thus also the function of the corresponding assist systems 
may be impaired for example in the following situations: 

• Heavy fog, rain, or snow 

• Strong light in the camera lens 

• If the field of view of the KAFAS camera or the windscreen is dirty or concealed 

• On sharp bends 

• Up to 10 seconds after an engine start via the START-STOP button 

• During the calibration process of the KAFAS camera immediately 
after vehicle delivery or a camera change 


A 

System and functional limitations mean that warnings and bans may under certain circumstances not 
be issued or are issued too late or without authorization. The driver must therefore always remain alert 
and observant so that they can actively intervene at any time so as to avoid the risk of an accident. 


6.5. Camera-based collision warning (option 5AS) 

The camera-based collision warning is part of the optional equipment, Active Driving Assistant (option 
5AS). The collision warning alerts the driver of a possible collision danger using the input from the 
KAFAS camera system. The camera-based collision warning was extended in the BMW 5 Series 


44 








5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

LCI (compare to the 7 Series LCI) with the functions collision warning with city braking function 
and pedestrian warning with city braking function. The system is available as part of the ZDB Driver 
Assistance Plus package. 

The ZDB Driver Assistance Plus package includes: 

• Active Blind Spot Detection (5AG) 

• Active Driving Assistant (5AS) 

• Or the ACC stop and Go + Active Driving Assistant (option 5AT) 

Active Driving Assistant (5AS) 

• KAFAS camera based 

• Collision warning Pedestrian warning (daytime) 

• Brake application 

ACC Stop & Go + Active Driving Assistant (5AT) 

• KAFAS camera 

• Radar sensor 

You can find a comparison of the camera-based collision warning and collision warning with braking 
function in the chapter "Collision warning with braking function". 

6.5.1. Functional principle 

The KAFAS camera records the scenery ahead of the vehicle and uses image processing to detect the 
complete rear views of moving and stationary vehicles in the field of view. 



BMW 5 Series LCI KAFAS camera 


45 



5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

KAFAS camera 

2 

Rain-light-solar-condensation sensor 

3 

Photosensor for brightness in front for the automatic-dim 
feature of the electrochromic inside mirror 



Example of vehicle identification by KAFAS camera 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Vehicle in same lane 

2 

Vehicle in different lane 


The corresponding warning stages, early warning and acute warning are output in critical situations on 
the basis of the calculated positions, distances and relative speeds of the other vehicles. For the early 
warning, the brakes of the vehicle are prepared for emergency braking and the activation thresholds of 
the brake assistants are reduced. 

In the event of a deliberate forward collision with a vehicle, the system sensitivity is reduced in order to 
avoid unwarranted and thus annoying warnings. 

Collision warning with city braking function 

The collision warning with city braking function extends the camera-based collision warning with a 
braking function from a speed of roughly 5 km/h / 5 mph up to a maximum speed of 60 km/h / 37 mph. 
If there is still no driver response in this speed range after an acute warning, the vehicle is decelerated 
at an acceleration of maximum 4 m/s 2 . 

The brake intervention is restricted to roughly 1.5 seconds. This avoids additional dangers for the 
following traffic. 

At speeds over 60 km/h / 37 mph a warning without brake intervention is executed as before. 


46 








5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

Pedestrian warning with city braking function 

The pedestrian warning with city braking function is designed to prevent possible collisions with 
pedestrians in urban areas or lessen the results of an accident. In sufficient daylight the system 
identifies a possible collision with a pedestrian, warns the driver early and introduces emergency 
braking in the event of an unavoidable collision by the driver in order to reduce the vehicle kinetic 
energy. 

The system provides a warning against a collision with pedestrians from a speed of roughly 10 km/h 16 
mph up to a maximum speed of 60 km/h / 37 mph. 

The KAFAS camera records the scenery ahead of the vehicle and uses image processing to detect 
pedestrians in the field of view. An acute warning is output in critical situations on the basis of the 
calculated positions, distances and the movement of the identified pedestrians. An early warning is 
not output for the pedestrian warning with city braking function. With an acute warning the vehicle is 
decelerated at an acceleration of maximum 4 m/s 2 . 

At night the pedestrian warning with city braking function in vehicles with BMW Night Vision is 
automatically switched off and replaced with the pedestrian warning of the BMW Night Vision. At night 
only a warning function for pedestrians is available in vehicles with BMW Night Vision. There is no 
braking function. The change of the systems is not pointed out to the driver. 

In vehicles without BMW Night Vision the pedestrian warning with city braking function also remains 
activated at night. However, the identification of pedestrians using the KAFAS camera is severely 
restricted at night due to the lighting conditions. 

6.5.2. Operation 

The collision warning and pedestrian warning are switched on and off via the Intelligent Safety button. 



BMW 5 Series LCI Intelligent Safety button 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Intelligent Safety 


The new Intelligent Safety button replaces the previous button for the collision warning. Using the 
Intelligent Safety button the following front protection functions of the collision warning and BMW 
Night Vision systems can be activated and deactivated depending on the equipment in the vehicle. 

• Collision warning 

• Pedestrian warning (pedestrian warning with city braking function and BMW Night Vision) 


47 





5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

A menu appears in the CID when the button is pressed in which the functions can be individually 
switched on or off. The LED above the button illuminates as soon as at least one of the functions is 
switched on. The front protection functions are automatically switched on each time the engine is 
started via the START-STOP button. 

From the information pages on Intelligent Safety you can also get to the menus for adjusting the 
warning time of the collision warning. 


rm. It let 



V 1MB 



\ iioe 





Frontal Collision Warning 


i Warning point 



V frt 


Q 

System: ON 


L v [lrfv 



* 


Q 

\ Warning and brake J 

\ intervention before 


lnttrm#diat« 

. *•** 


\ ♦ 1 




UMtsrble collision 






BMW 5 Series LCI Displays on the central information display 


When the collision warning is activated the driver can set the time of the early warning in three stages. 
The setting of the time of the early warning is saved for the current driver profile. The warning time for 
the pedestrian warning cannot be adjusted. 

6.5.3. Warning and braking function 

This function is a camera-based assist system which can avoid accidents with pedestrians or vehicles 
or can lessen the results of an accident in the event of a collision. The operating principle is based on 
an identification and warning algorithm. The image processing identifies pedestrians and vehicles in 
the detection range of the camera. Using a motion prediction a risk of a collision is calculated taking 
into consideration the vehicle movement. If a situation is evaluated as critical by the warning algorithm, 
a warning is output and braking executed based on a multistage warning concept. The warnings and 
brake interventions are different for pedestrians and vehicles. 


48 





5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Displays 

The warning function appears in the instrument cluster or in the head-up display. 


a; b 



BMW 5 Series LCI Collision warning in the instrument cluster 



BMW 5 Series LCI Collision warning in the Head-Up Display 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Stage 1: Early warning, vehicle in red 

B 

Stage 2: Acute warning, flashing vehicle or pedestrian in red and acoustic 
warning signal 


49 







5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Early warning 

The early warning is only executed for vehicles and not for pedestrians. The early warning is issued, for 
example, in the event of an imminent danger of collision on account of a high differential speed to the 
vehicle driving ahead or in the event of a very small distance to the vehicle driving ahead. 

The early warning is indicated by a vehicle permanently illuminated in red in the instrument cluster or 
in the head-up display. 

The time of the early warning can be configured in the CID. 

A 

The collision warning is dependent on the vehicle's inherent driving speed. The distance 
calculated for the collision warning is much lower than the minimum distance required by law. 
It is therefore still the driver's responsibility to maintain the legal minimum distance. 


Acute warning 

The acute warning can be displayed for vehicles and pedestrians. The acute warning alerts the 
driver to a potential situation of danger both visually and audibly. The acute warning is issued by the 
system as late as possible and only if there is an immediate danger of a collision when the vehicle is 
approaching the vehicle driving ahead at relatively high differential speed or if there is an immediate 
danger of a collision with a pedestrian. The point at which the acute warning is issued is calculated 
in such a way that a collision can only be avoided by immediate emergency braking or by an evasive 
maneuver. The acute warning therefore cannot be deliberately brought about or monitored. 

If the vehicle is for example approaching at very low speed the vehicle driving ahead, no acute warning 
is issued either when the distance to the vehicle ahead is very small. This deliberately brought- 
about driving situation merely triggers off the early warning. In this way, less sensible and thus more 
annoying acute warnings are avoided by the system. 

The acute warning for vehicles cannot be deactivated separately. Nor can the time of the acute 
warning be set. If the acute warning is not to be issued, the collision warning front protective function 
must be deactivated. 

An acute warning is indicated to the driver by a red flashing vehicle or person in the instrument cluster. 
In addition, an acoustic warning signal is sounded. 

The acute warning is executed for pedestrians only at speeds between 10 and 60 km/h / 6 and 37 
mph. For vehicles the acute warning is executed at speeds above 5 km/h / 5 mph. 

Parallel to the warning, the brake system is also prepared to decelerate quicker and heavier. With these 
measures the driver receives specific support at the same time as the warning to be able to respond 
effectively. 

A 

The acute warning does not relieve the driver of their responsibility to adapt their driving 
speed and driving style to the road and traffic conditions. 


50 






5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


A 

System limitations mean that warnings may under certain circumstances not be issued or are 
issued too late or without authorization. The driver must therefore always remain alert and 
observant so that they can actively intervene at any time so as to avoid the risk of an accident. 


In towing or tow-starting situations the collision warning system must be deactivated in order to avoid 
malfunctions. 

Brake intervention 

If the driver can no longer avoid the accident with his own reactions, an automatic brake intervention is 
introduced as a final step. The brake intervention is applied initially at a brake force of 4 m/s 2 and can 
avoid collisions up to a differential speed of roughly 18 km/h /II mph. At higher differential speeds 
the impact speed is reduced by a smaller amount. As well as the driver being able to support the effect 
of the system, he also has the option at any time to oversteer the automatic emergency braking by a 
steering wheel movement or by accelerating, thus cancelling it. 

The brake intervention of the collision warning can be overridden by the following actions: 

• Sharp acceleration of the vehicle by the driver 

• Introduction of an avoidance maneuver by the driver 

• Strong brake intervention by the driver 

The brake intervention is executed for pedestrians in the speed range between 10 and 60 km/h / 6 and 
37 mph and for vehicles in the speed range between 5 and 60 km/h / 3 and 37 mph. 

6.5.4. Timescale of collision warning with city braking function 

The timescale of the warnings and the braking is shown in the following graphic. There is no brake 
intervention if an avoidance by the driver is recognized. 


51 




5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 



Timescale of camera-based collision warning 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Collision warning (early) 

2 

Collision warning (late) 

3 

Acute warning (acoustic warning signal, brake system is prepared and brake 
assistants adapted) 

4 

Braking at 4 m/s 2 is introduced (city braking function only in the range between 

5 and 60 km/h / 3 and 37 mph) 

5 

Detection range of KAFAS camera 


6.5.5. System limits 

A 

System limitations mean that warnings may, under certain circumstances, not be issued or are issued 
too late or without authorization. The driver must therefore always remain alert and observant so that 
they can actively intervene at any time so as to avoid the risk of an accident. 


52 


















5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


A 

Range of detection 

The collision warning has a limited capacity for detection. 

This means that warnings sometime may not be issued or may be issued late. 
The following vehicles may possibly not be detected: 

• A vehicle travelling at slow speed when approaching at high speed 

• Vehicles that cut in suddenly or are heavily decelerating 

• Vehicles with an unusual rear view or with poorly visible rear lights 

• Partially concealed vehicles 

• Two-wheeled vehicles travelling ahead 


6.5.6. Functional limitations 

The function of the KAFAS camera and thus also the function of the corresponding assist systems 
may be impaired for example in the following situations: 

• Heavy fog, rain or snow 

• Strong light in the camera lens 

• If the field of view of the KAFAS camera or the windscreen is dirty or concealed 

• On sharp bends 

• Up to 10 seconds after an engine start via the START-STOP button 

• During the calibration process of the KAFAS camera immediately 
after vehicle delivery or a camera change 



Example of functional limitation by back-light 


53 






5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

The pedestrian warning with city braking function is available to the driver only under the following 
conditions: 

• Speed between 6 and 37 mph (10 and 60 km/h) 

• Adequate daylight 

• For pedestrians taller than 31.5 inches (80 cm) standing upright 

A 

System and functional limitations mean that warnings and bans may under certain 
circumstances not be issued or are issued too late or without authorization. The driver must 
therefore always remain alert and observant so that they can actively intervene at any time so 
as to avoid the risk of an accident. 


6.5.7. Check Control messages 

If the system fails, the corresponding Check Control messages are output. 


Check Control Symbol Supplementary Cause 

message information 


Pedestrian warning 
failed. 


Pedestrian warning 
failed. 

Have vehicle checked 
by your BMW Service 
authorised workshop. 


KAFAS camera or 
control unit defective 
or failed. 


Pedestrian warning 
restricted. 



Pedestrian warning 
restricted during the 
day. 

No brake intervention 
is executed upon 
acute pedestrian 
warning. 

Warnings are still 
executed visually and 
audibly. 

Have vehicle checked 
by your BMW Service 
authorised workshop. 


Brake function has 
failed. 

Full extent of function 
is no longer available. 


Pedestrian warning. 
Check field of view. 



Pedestrian warning 
during the day. 

Check field of view of 
the front camera. 
Restricted 
functionality of 
pedestrian warning. 
See Owner's 
Handbook. 


Field of view of 
camera restricted, e.g 
by dirt contamination, 
back-light or weather 
conditions. 


54 









5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Check Control Symbol Supplementary Cause 

message information 


Collision warning 
deactivated! 



Collision warning Collision warning was 

deactivated. deactivated by driver. 

You have deactivated 
the collision warning. 

No warning is output 
when driving too 
close. 


Collision warning 

JH 

Collision warning 

KAFAS camera or 

failed. 


failed. 

control unit defective 

IQ 


No warning is output 

or failed. 

3 ! 

M 

when driving too 
close. 

Have vehicle checked 
by your BMW Service 
authorised workshop. 



Collision warning 
deactivated. 



Collision warning 
deactivated. 

No warning is output 
when driving too 
close. 

Person recognition 
restricted. Check 
sensor field of 
view and clean 
sensor if required, 
see operating 
instructions. 


Field of view of 
camera restricted, e.g. 
by dirt contamination, 
back-light or weather 
conditions. 


6.6. Collision warning with braking function (option 5AT) 

The collision warning with braking function is a supplement to Active Cruise Control with Stop & Go 
(ACC Stop & Go) and uses its sensor system and system components. It is an integral part of the 
optional equipment ACC Stop and Go + Active Driving Assistant (option 5AT). 

The collision warning with braking function warns the driver of a possible danger of collision and 
provides assistance in an emergency in the form of an automatic brake intervention. 

In the BMW 5 Series LCI the generation of the collision warning with braking function introduced with 
the F01/F02 LCI is used, which permits higher braking deceleration thanks to the fusion of radar and 
image data. 

Similar to the camera-based collision warning, in the BMW 5 Series LCI the collision warning with 
braking function is extended with the function pedestrian warning with city braking function. The 
collision warning with city braking function is already covered by the main functions of the collision 
warning with braking function. The identification of pedestrians (for the collision warning with 
braking function) is also achieved here by using only the image data of the KAFAS camera. 


55 








5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


6.6.1. Functional principle 

The system warns of a possible collision from a speed of around 5 km/h / 3 mph initially with an early 
warning and then if the danger persists, with an acute warning. 

The collision warning is also available when cruise control is deactivated. 

Stationary and moving vehicles are taken into consideration here. 

In addition to the warnings, the vehicle's brakes are prepared for emergency braking and the activation 
thresholds of the brake assistant is decreased. In an emergency an automatic brake intervention is 
performed by the system. 

In the event of a deliberate forward collision with a vehicle, the system sensitivity is reduced in order to 
avoid unwarranted and thus annoying warnings. 

Pedestrian warning with city braking function 

The pedestrian warning with city braking function is designed to prevent possible collisions with 
pedestrians in urban areas or lessen the results of an accident. In sufficient daylight the system 
identifies a possible collision with a pedestrian, warns the driver early and introduces emergency 
braking in the event of an unavoidable collision by the driver in order to reduce the vehicle kinetic 
energy. 

The system provides a warning against a collision with pedestrians from a speed of roughly 10 km/h / 
6 mph up to a maximum speed of 60 km/h / 37 mph. 

The KAFAS camera records the scenery ahead of the vehicle and uses image processing to detect 
pedestrians in the field of view. An acute warning is output in critical situations on the basis of the 
calculated positions, distances and the movement of the identified pedestrians. An early warning is 
not available for the pedestrian warning with city braking function. With an acute warning the vehicle is 
decelerated at a maximum rate of 4 m/s 2 . 

At night the pedestrian warning with city braking function in vehicles with BMW Night Vision is 
automatically switched off and replaced with the pedestrian warning of the BMW Night Vision. At night 
only a warning function for pedestrians is available in vehicles with BMW Night Vision. There is no 
braking function. The change of the systems is not pointed out to the driver. 

In vehicles without BMW Night Vision the pedestrian warning with city braking function also remains 
activated at night. However, the identification of pedestrians using the KAFAS camera is severely 
restricted at night due to the lighting conditions. 

6.6.2. Operation 

The collision warning and pedestrian warning are switched on and off via the Intelligent Safety button. 


56 


5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 



BMW 5 Series LCI Intelligent Safety button 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Intelligent Safety 


The new Intelligent Safety button replaces the previous button for the collision warning with braking 
function. Using the Intelligent Safety button the following front protection functions of the collision 
warning, with braking function and BMW Night Vision systems, can be activated and deactivated 
depending on the equipment in the vehicle. 

• Collision warning 

• Pedestrian warning (pedestrian warning with city braking function and BMW Night Vision) 

A menu appears in the CID when the button is pressed in which the functions can be individually 
switched on or off. The LED above the button illuminates as soon as at least one of the functions is 
switched on. The front protection functions are automatically switched on each time the engine is 
started via the START-STOP button. 

From the information pages on Intelligent Safety you can also get to the menus for adjusting the 
warning time of the collision warning with braking function. 




V * 


\ 13« 



Q 

Frontal Collision Warning 
System: ON 

^ Warning point 

V ' tarty 

Q 



- 

\ Wimlng ind brjkt J 

lnt»rm#au»« 

(£*Pl Ljt * 

Q ' 

, 



\possibl* collision 





BMW 5 Series LCI Displays on the central information display 


When the collision warning is activated the driver can set the time of the early warning in three stages. 
The setting of the time of the early warning is saved for the current driver profile. 

6.6.3. Warning and braking function 

The function is a camera- and radar-based assist system and can avoid accidents with pedestrians, 
vehicles or can reduce the results of an accident in the event of a collision. The operating principle is 
based on an identification and warning algorithm. The image processing identifies pedestrians and 
vehicles in the detection range of the camera. Detection of vehicles is also performed via the radar 
sensor. Using a motion prediction a risk of a collision is calculated taking into consideration the vehicle 
movement. If a situation is evaluated as critical by the warning algorithm, a warning is output and 
braking executed based on a multistage warning concept. The warnings and brake interventions are 
different for pedestrians and vehicles. 


57 








5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

Displays 

The warning function appears in the instrument cluster or in the head-up display. 


a; b 



BMW 5 Series LCI Collision warning in the instrument cluster 



BMW 5 Series LCI Collision warning in the Head-Up Display 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Stage 1: Early warning, vehicle in red 

B 

Stage 2: Acute warning, flashing vehicle or pedestrian in red and acoustic 
warning signal 


58 







5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Early warning 

The early warning is only executed for vehicles and not for pedestrians. The early warning is issued, for 
example, in the event of an imminent danger of collision on account of a high differential speed to the 
vehicle driving ahead and in the event of a very small distance to the vehicle driving ahead or stationary 
vehicle. 

The early warning is indicated by a vehicle permanently illuminated in red in the instrument cluster or 
in the head-up display. 

The time of the early warning can be configured in the CID. 

Acute warning 

The acute warning is executed for vehicles and pedestrians. The acute warning alerts the driver to a 
potential situation of danger both visually and audibly. The acute warning is issued by the system as 
late as possible and only if there is an immediate danger of a collision when the vehicle is approaching 
the vehicle driving ahead at relatively high differential speed or if there is an immediate danger of a 
collision with a pedestrian. The point at which the acute warning is issued, is calculated in such a way 
that a collision can only be avoided by immediate emergency braking or by an evasive maneuver. 

The acute warning; therefore, cannot be deliberately brought about or monitored. 

If the vehicle is for example approaching at very low speed the vehicle driving ahead or a person, 
no acute warning is issued when the distance is very small. This deliberately brought-about driving 
situation merely triggers off the early warning. In this way, less sensible and thus more annoying acute 
warnings are avoided by the system. 

The acute warning cannot be deactivated. Nor can the time of the acute warning be set. If the acute 
warning is not to be issued, the collision warning front protective function must be deactivated. 

An acute warning is indicated to the driver by a red flashing vehicle or person in the instrument cluster. 
In addition, an acoustic warning signal is sounded. 

The acute warning is executed for pedestrians only at speeds between 10 and 60 km/h / 6 and 37 
mph. For vehicles, the acute warning is displayed at speeds above 5 km/h / 3 mph. 

Parallel to the warning, the brake system is also prepared to decelerate quicker and heavier. With these 
measures the driver receives specific support at the same time as the warning to be able to respond 
effectively. 

A 

The acute warning does not relieve the driver of their responsibility to adapt their driving speed and 
driving style to the road and traffic conditions and to maintain the prescribed safety distance. 


A 

System limitations mean that warnings may under certain circumstances not be issued or are issued 
too late or without authorization. The driver must therefore always remain alert and observant so that 
they can actively intervene at any time so as to avoid the risk of an accident. 


59 






5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Brake intervention 

If the driver can no longer avoid the accident with his own reactions, an automatic brake intervention 
is introduced as a final step. Brake intervention is restricted to approx. 3 seconds and must end when 
the vehicle has been decelerated by around 50 km/h / 31 mph. This avoids additional dangers for the 
following traffic. 

In the lower speed range to approx. 50 km/h / 31 mph brake intervention for vehicles is applied 
initially at a brake force of roughly 5 m/s 2 . When the target object is verified by the camera data, brake 
intervention is applied after around 0.5 seconds at max. 8 m/s 2 . The vehicle can therefore be braked in 
the lower speed range to a standstill. 

At a driving speed in excess of 50 km/h / 31 mph brake intervention for vehicles is applied initially at a 
brake force of roughly 4 m/s 2 . When the target object is verified by the camera data, brake intervention 
is applied after around 0.5 second at max. 6 m/s 2 . 

At a driving speed in excess of 210 km/h /130 mph the speed reduction is limited to 10 km/h / 6 mph. 

In the speed range from 10 km/h to 60 km/h / 6 mph to 37 mph brake intervention for pedestrians is 
applied at a brake force of roughly 4 m/s 2 . 

Brake intervention is also applied when the driver fails to press the brake pedal sufficiently. 

Brake intervention is applied only when Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) is switched on. 

The brake intervention of the collision warning can be oversteered by the following actions: 

• Sharp acceleration of the vehicle by the driver 

• Introduction of an avoidance maneuver by the driver 

• Strong brake intervention by the driver 

In towing or tow-starting situations the collision warning with braking function must be deactivated in 
order to avoid malfunctions. 

The braking function is deactivated when Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) or Dynamic Traction Control 
(DTC) is deactivated. 

If the KAFAS camera fails, brake intervention for vehicles is applied only at a brake force of max. 4 ml 
s 2 and solely in response to detected moving or stopped vehicles. In the case of vehicles which were 
already stationary when they entered the radar sensor's detection range, there is no braking. If the 
radar sensor fails, the collision warning with braking function is deactivated. In both cases the driver is 
informed of the failure by means of a display in the instrument cluster and a Check Control message. 


60 


5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

6.6.4. History 

The collision warning with braking function, formerly the adaptive brake assistant, was introduced for 
the first time in 2007 with the E60 LCI. The table below sets out the various development stages, their 
features and their initial implementation in BMW models. 


Features 

Adaptive 

brake 

assistant 

Adaptive 
brake 
assistant 
with warning 
function 

Collision 
warning 
with braking 
function 

Collision 
warning 
with braking 
function 
Latest 
generation 

Initial 

implementation 

03/2007 

E60 LCI 

08/2009 

F01 

01/2010 

F10 

07/2012 
F01/F02 LCI 

Preparation of 
brake system 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Adaptation of 
brake assistant 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Early and acute 
warnings 

in resp. to moving/ 
stopped targets 


X 

X 

X 

in resp. to 
stationary targets 



X 

X 

Braking 

in resp. to moving/ 
stopped targets 



X 

X 

in resp. to 
stationary targets 




X 

at max. 3 m/s 2 



X 


at v< 50 km/h, 31 
mph 

at max. 8 m/s 2 
two-stage 
to a standstill 




X 

at v> 50 km/h, 31 
mph 

at max. 6 m/s 2 
two-stage 




X 


61 










5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


6.6.5. Comparison to the camera-based collision warning 

The following table provides an overview of the differences between the two systems: 



Camera-based collision 
warning 

Collision warning with 
braking function 

Collision warning (vehicles) 

Sensors 

KAFAS camera 

Radar sensor and KAFAS 

camera 

Speed range for braking 
function 

3-37 mph (5-60 km/h) 

from 3 mph (5 km/h) 

Maximum braking deceleration 

4 m/s 2 

8 m/s 2 

Pedestrian warning 

Sensors 

KAFAS camera 

KAFAS camera 

Speed range for braking 
function 

6-37 mph (10-60 km/h) 

6-37 mph (10-60 km/h) 

Maximum braking deceleration 

4 m/s 2 

4 m/s 2 


6.7. Speed Limit Info 

The optional equipment Speed Limit Info (8TH) is referred to in the following section as Road 
Sign Recognition for short. Current speed limits and bans on passing/overtaking are shown in the 
instrument cluster or in the head-up display. In this way, Road Sign Recognition helps the driver to 
adhere to and not to exceed the maximum speed limit. 

8TH Speed Limit Information is only available in conjunction with the navigation system (standard) and 
it is part of the optional ZDB Driver Assistance Package. 

A 

The responsibility for the vehicle and for the speed that is adopted rests exclusively with the 
driver. 


The control unit for the Road Sign Recognition function is the KAFAS control unit. 

The display of the speed limit signs is based on the evaluation of data from the navigation system and 
the evaluation of image data recorded by the KAFAS video camera. 

The maximum allowable speed of the road currently driven is displayed in the instrument cluster and in 
the head-up display. 

The KAFAS uses the video camera to monitor the road signs at the side of the road and takes into 
account the information from the navigation system (609). Thus, for example in some areas, the 
applicable maximum speed is displayed without there being actual recognizable road signs stipulating 
the speed. 


62 










5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 



Speed limit information displayed on the HUD (F30 graphic shown) 



Speed limit information displayed on the instrument cluster (F30 graphic shown) 


6.7.1. System limits 

The system has a detection rate of around 90 to 95%. 

Road signs for speed limits which do not conform to the legal standards, especially those which do 
not have square borders, are not always recognized. The same applies to road signs which are fully or 
partially concealed by stickers, dirt or vegetation. 

Long distances to the road sign, high driving speeds and poor weather conditions, particularly at night, 
make it more difficult for the system to recognize road signs reliably. 

The data in the navigation map must be up to date in order for the current speed limit to be correctly 
displayed. If the current place has not yet been incorporated for navigation purposes, for example 
when driving in development areas, on new roads or on roads where the routing has been changed, 
a recognized road sign for speed limits can only be displayed for the next 500 m (547 yds). 


63 




5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Supplementary sign recognition 

The system can only recognize signs that are included in its database. Text references to 
supplementary signs cannot be read or interpreted. Before speed limits with limiting validity are 
displayed, the system scans further information from the vehicle electrical system. 

The system can’t read text, it can only recognize a sign that is included in the “sign database” 
- therefore the system was programed extensively in 48 US states + western/eastern Canada 
therefore all speed limit signs (10-80 mph + signs as e.g. “Trucks”, “Trailers”, “School”, 
“Construction area”) are normally (when conditions allow) recognized by the camera. 

The trailer signal for vehicles in towing mode is not evaluated for the display of speed limits, as the 
speed limits for vehicles with trailers differ from country to country and are dependent on the trailer 
type. 

Supplementary signs are not recognized. The speed limit is then displayed as currently valid without 
the supplementary sign being interpreted. 

Road signs on parallel, branching-off or merging roads and on exits 

Parallel roads are not recognized neither with the KAFAS video camera nor with the aid of the 
navigation map. Signs posted there can be recognized and displayed as speed limits for the road 
currently being driven. 

Speed limits for branching-off or merging roads are usually also adopted and displayed for the road 
currently being driven. 

Speed limits on highway exits with or without an arrow as a supplementary sign are usually correctly 
evaluated and suppressed in the displayed when the exit is driven past. This is only the case if the data 
in the navigation map is up to date. 

In the case of overhead highway signs with different, lane-specific speed limits, the speed limit nearest 
to the lane the vehicle is driving in is displayed. The display is not modified after a later lane change. 

Information signs in the road sign surroundings 

Information signs with speed limits at border crossings with references to the different legal maximum 
speeds for ordinary roads and highways, can be mistakenly recognized as currently valid and 
displayed. The same applies to information signs set out only in different colors, e.g. for minimum or 
recommended speeds. 

Stickers on vehicles 

Stickers showing a speed limit on vehicles driving ahead or on overtaken vehicles, e.g. on trucks, 
buses, trailers and construction machinery, can be mistakenly recognized as the currently valid speed 
limit and displayed. 

Town/city limits 

If the town/city limits sign is not clearly recognized and the data in the navigation map are not up to 
date, the speed limit at town/city limits may be incorrectly displayed. 


64 


5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Legal changes 

If maximum speeds prescribed by law are changed, these are only available after a navigation software 
update. The original, but no longer valid speed limits are displayed until the update is issued. 

A 

The system can only currently detect speed limit signs and no other traffic signs. 

This system cannot replace the driver's personal assessment of the road and traffic situation. Speed 
Limit Information supports the driver but does not is not intended to replace the human eye. 


6.8. High-beam assistant 

In vehicles without Adaptive LED headlight (option 552) the function of the high-beam assistant 
(option 5AC) remains unchanged at two stages. The high-beam headlight is automatic switched on 
and off. 

For further information on the high-beam assistant in this case, please refer to the Training Reference 
Manual "ST811 F01 Complete vehicle. 

A 

The high-beam assistant cannot replace a personal decision on the use of the high-beam headlight. In 
some situations, manual dipping is required as otherwise there is a safety risk. 


6.9. ACC Stop & Go 

Active Cruise Control with Stop & Go function (ACC Stop & Go) is an integral part of the optional 
equipment ACC Stop & Go + Active Driving Assistant (option 5AT) and has improved functionality. 

ACC Stop & Go + Active Driving Assistant adjusts a driver-specified set speed and, if required by the 
traffic situation, also the preselected following distance automatically to the vehicle driving ahead. 
Passenger cars, trucks and motorcycles are detected as vehicles. The scope of application ranges 
from high speeds down to a stop. Depending on the stationary time, driving off from a standstill is 
performed automatically or in response to a prompt by the driver. 

ACC Stop & Go + Active Driving Assistant in the BMW 5 Series LCI detects not only slowly stopping, 
but also stationary vehicles, and can react to these. The detection of stationary vehicles is a unique 
feature. 

The reaction to transverse movements has also been improved. This enables the system to react more 
swiftly to vehicles that are veering in and out and turning. 

The extended application range is achieved by connecting the KAFAS camera installed in the vehicle 
to the system. As well as the radar data, the image data from the camera is now evaluated in ACC 
Stop & Go. This fusion of image and radar data facilitates the clear identification of lane markings and 
distinction between stationary vehicles and other immobile objects. 


In addition, the adjustment range for the set speed has been increased from 180 km/h to 210 km/h / 
110 mph to 130 mph. 


65 






5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

The acceleration behavior of ACC Stop & Go is adapted for ECO PRO mode. ACC Stop & Go 
accelerates the vehicle in ECO PRO mode more smoothly for optimized consumption. The ECO 
PRO instructions regarding the accelerator pedal position are suppressed when ACC Stop & Go is 
activated. 


6.9.1. Introduction 

ACC Stop & Go + Active Driving Assistant offers the driver optimum support not only in flowing traffic, 
but also in traffic jam situations. 

The scope of application of ACC Stop & Go ranges from high speeds down to a stop. The distance and 
the speed are automatically adjusted in this range. 



BMW 5 Series LCI Active cruise control 


ACC Stop & Go controls the speed if there is no vehicle driving directly ahead and automatically 
switches to distance control if the radar sensor detects a slower vehicle in its lane. 

A 77 GHz radar sensor in the system can identify vehicles up to 200 m ahead; this sensor can operate 
independently of weather conditions. Thanks to the radar sensor's improved detection capability and 
the adjustment with the image data from the KAFAS camera, even vehicles in the neighboring lanes 
are detected. If these vehicles drive into the subject vehicle's own lane, ACC Stop & Go adapts the 
speed to vehicles veering in or driving ahead. Consequently a time interval selected by the driver is 
maintained constant. 


66 







5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 



® 


BMW 5 Series LCI Schematic diagram of monitoring ranges 

Index 

Explanation 

a 

Close range 

b 

Long-distance range 

1 

Detection range of KAFAS camera 

2 

Detection range of radar sensor 


The vision cone of the radar sensor is up to 60 m wider in the close range than the vision cone in 
the long-distance range. This provides for wider lane coverage. Within this range the radar data or 
detected objects are verified with the image data from the KAFAS camera. 

The KAFAS control unit can detect transverse movements better, assign lanes and clearly identify 
vehicles. In this way, vehicles veering in and out at close range can be detected earlier and more 
quickly. The fusion of radar and video data also facilitates the clear identification of stationary vehicles. 

The system's Stop & Go function brings the vehicle to a complete standstill if necessary. If the vehicle 
ahead starts a journey again after a standstill, information is output to the driver. To drive off again, the 
driver must acknowledge this information. Only if the duration of the standstill is very short does the 
starting process take place fully automatically by ACC Stop & Go. 

In this way, ACC Stop & Go supports the driver not only in flowing traffic, but also in traffic jam 
situations, both on multiple-lane highways and ordinary roads and on urban arterial and ring roads. 


67 











5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 

Further consideration should be given here to the following areas of the assist system ACC Stop & Go: 

• System components 

• Information from the vehicle environment 

• Control functions 

• Operation and display 

• Behavior when driver intends to exit 

• Monitoring functions 


68 



5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


6.9.2. System components 
System wiring diagram 



System wiring diagram for ACC Stop & Go 


69 

































































5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


Index Explanation 



22 Camera-Based Driver Support Systems (KAFAS) 


Radar sensor 

The radar sensor sends out bundled electromagnetic waves. The echoes reflected by objects are 
received and evaluated by the radar sensor. Information on objects located in front of the radar sensor 
can be achieved in this way. This information includes size, distance and the speed derived therefrom. 

Similar to the F01/F02 LCI, the radar sensor receives additional information from the KAFAS control 
unit via its own sensor bus. This information is lane information, information on transverse movements 
and information on vehicle identification. The information supports the radar sensor in detecting and 
evaluating objects and facilitates clear vehicle identification. This video data is required for the reaction 
to stationary vehicles. 


70 















5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 



BMW 5 Series LCI Radar sensor for ACC Stop & Go 

The radar sensor is located behind a removable grille on the front bumper. 



BMW 5 Series LCI Installation location of radar sensor 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Removable grille 

2 

Radar sensor for ACC Stop & Go 


71 






5 Series LCI 

6. Driver Assistance Systems 


KAFAS camera and control unit 

The KAFAS control unit clearly detects vehicles when their rear ends are recorded by the camera. The 
KAFAS control unit also supplies lane information and thus helps the radar sensor to determine vehicle 
position and movement more quickly. The data is transmitted via the sensor bus to the radar sensor. 

Integrated Chassis Management ICM control unit 

For a detailed description of Integrated Chassis Management (ICM), please refer to the Training 
Reference Manual "ST811 F01 Complete Vehicle". The following text provides a brief overview and 
addresses the particulars connected with the topics presented here. 

The ICM in the BMW 5 Series LCI calculates the control functions, sensor data and vehicle values 
used to influence longitudinal and transverse dynamics. Also integrated in ICM are micro-mechanical 
sensors which supply driving dynamics signals. 

Two different ICM versions are used in the BMW 5 Series LCI. A basic version for vehicles without 
ACC Stop & Go + Active Driving Assistant and a high version for vehicles with ACC Stop & Go + Active 
Driving Assistant. 


72 


5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 

7.1. Headunits 

The following headunit is available for the BMW 5 Series LCI: 


Standard 

equipment 

Headunit 

CID 

Controller 

Navigation 

Professional 

navigation 

Headunit High 

10.2" 

7-button with touchpad 

Yes 


More information on the Headunit High can be found in the Training Reference Manual "ST1211 
Headunit High". 

7.1.1. New features of Headunit High 

A further developed version of the Headunit High is used in the BMW 5 Series LCI. The following new 
functions are available: 

• With the BMW 5 Series LCI it is possible to import and export a Personal Profile using the 
BMW Connected app. This gives the user a simple option of transporting and updating his 
Personal Profile in several BMW vehicles without having to use a USB stick. 

• With the audio playback via Bluetooth one can navigate through the directory structure the 
same way as for the audio playback via USB. The Bluetooth profile AVRCP in version 1.4 is 
used here. 

• With the volume control the current volume is displayed as a bar in the central information 
display. The labelling of the volume bars clarifies which source is changed in the volume 
(for example entertainment, call or announcement of navigation system). 

• SDARS radio was extended with a timeshift function. The current playback is recorded for up 
to 45 minutes. For example, the user can rewind to play a news broadcast again. 



*4^ K«pU] 

ilaMihin 


\ A" 

•g 001 Slrtus Hits 1 


JU " 

\V : 

A ThtFrty 

fl 0My Head (Caw* 

Car) 



^- 

Th* friy 


New features of Headunit High 


73 






5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Volume bars with labelling "Entertainment" 

2 

DAB journal function (not US) 

3 

SDARS timeshift function 


The following new features in the navigation area are introduced for the BMW 5 Series LCI: 

In the navigation system areas can be marked which are avoided during the route planning. 

For example, an area blocked for an extended period due to construction work can be excluded from 
the route planning. 



Route planning 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Define areas to be avoided 

2 

Rectangle of area to be avoided 

I 3 

Storage process of area to be avoided 

The destination input can now also be input using GPS coordinates. 


74 


















5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 



Destination input using GPS coordinates 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Destination input using GPS coordinates 

2 

Input screen for GPS coordinates 


The Special destinations area was also improved. For instance, it is now possible to select historical 
monuments as special destinations. Highway rest stops are now also offered as a possible destination 
directly with the message of the alertness assistant. 



Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Message of alertness assistant with link to special destinations 

2 

Special destinations: Highway rest stops 

I 3 

Special destinations: Historical monuments 


75 




















5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


The constant further development of the Headunit High meant it was necessary to divide the hard 
disk. Take a look at the following graphic to see the division of the hard disk with the introduction of the 
BMW 5 Series LCI vehicles. 


System 
1 GB 



Division of the hard disk of Headunit High 


76 


5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


7.1.2. Deletion of internal yaw sensor, Headunit High 

With the BMW 5 Series LCI the yaw sensor integrated in the Headunit High is deleted. The information 
on the vehicle yaw is made available to the headunit by the ICM control unit. 


7.2. Speaker systems 

The speaker systems in the BMW 5 Series LCI are available in four specification levels: 


Name 

Optional equipment 

System 

Speaker 

HiFi Loudspeaker 
System 

Standard 

HiFi system 

12 

Harman Kardon 
Surround Sound 
System 

Option 688 

Top HiFi system 

16 

Bang & Olufsen High- 
End Surround Sound 

Option 6F2 

Top HiFi system 

16 

System 





7.3. Rear seat entertainment system 



Rear passenger compartment entertainment 


77 





5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


There is only one version of the rear seat entertainment system available in the BMW 5 Series LCI. 
The rear seat entertainment system (option 6FH) in the BMW 5 Series LCI is operated using a remote 
control. The activation of the freestanding rear displays adopted from the F01 LCI is done via APIX 
(Automotive Pixel Link). 

More information on the rear seat entertainment system is available in the Training Reference Manual 
"ST1211 HeadunitHigh". 


7.4. ConnectedDrive realignment 

As with all 2014 MY BMW vehicles, the 5 Series LCI standard equipment structure of the telephone 
functions and the telematics services of ConnectedDrive have been updated. 


A 


The following information applies to all 2014 MY BMW vehicles. 

The option codes for the individual services have been changed and the features reorganized as 
follows. 

Name of optional equipment (previous) 

Optional equipment code 
(up to 03/2013) 

Hands-free Bluetooth with USB audio interface 

Option 6NH 

BMW Assist with enhanced Bluetooth and USB 

Option 6NL 

BMW Apps 

Option 6NR 

Real Time Traffic Information 

Option 6UH 

Smartphones Integration (music interface) 

Option 6NF 

The list of the new optional equipment is below: 

Name of optional equipment (new) 

Optional equipment code 
(new) 

Enhanced USB and Bluetooth plus Smartphone Integration 

Option 6NS 

BMW Assist eCall (intelligent emergency call) 

Option 6AC 

BMW Online (ConnectedDrive services) 

Option 6AK 

BMWTeleServices (only in connection with option 6AC and/or 
option 6AK) 

Option 6AE 

Advanced Real Time Traffic Information (ARTTI) 

Option 6AM 

Remote Services 

Option 6AP 

Concierge Service (previously BMW Information Service) 

Option 6AN 

Internet (new optional equipment number) 

Option 6AR 


The following adaptations have been made to the standard equipment for telephone functions: 


• Enhanced USB and Bluetooth plus Smartphone Integration (6NS). 


78 














5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


The following standard equipment was introduced for the control of telematics services: 

• BMW Assist eCall (6AC): 10 years 

• BMW TeleServices (6AE): 10 years 

• Remote Services (6AP): 10 years 

• BMW Online (6AK): 3 years 

• Advanced Real Time Traffic Information (6AM) 

The following optional equipment can be ordered : 

• Concierge Sen/ices option 6AN: 3 years, (fee applies) 

• Internet option 6AR: 1 year subscription, (fee applies) 







Advanced 



BMW Assist 
eCall 

TeleService 

BMW Online 

Remote 

Services 

BMW Apps 

Real-Time 

Traffic 

Concierge 

Internet 






Information 



6AC 

6AE 

6AK 

6AP 

6NR 

6AM 

6AN 

6AR 

10-yeos 

10 yow 

10-yeats 

10-years 


10* years 

10-years 

10-yeai* 



ConnectedDrive realignment for 2014 MY vehicles. 


For detailed information on the realignment of the telematics services of ConnectedDrive 
please refer to PKOD. 


7.4.1. BMW Assist eCall 

The Enhanced Automatic Collision Notification (eCall) function was previously only available in 
conjunction with the optional equipment "BMW Assist with enhanced Bluetooth and USB" (option 
6NL). The feature was thus always in the upper price segment. This is now set to change with the 
ConnectedDrive realignment. 

The BMW Assist eCall (intelligent emergency call) (option 6AC) and BMW TeleServices (option 
6AE) are now offered to the customer as standard equipment for 10 years on all BMW 2014 models. 
These features are activated in conjunction at the vehicle delivery. Unlike before with the optional 
equipment "BMW Assist with enhanced Bluetooth and USB (option 6NL), the customer does not have 
to complete an application to be able to use the services. 

As described in the chapter "BMW TeleServices up to 03/2013", the necessary hardware is also 
automatically activated with BMW TeleServices. The function remains identical to the former optional 
equipment "BMW Assist with enhanced Bluetooth and USB" (option 6NL). 


79 






















5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


Enhanced Automatic Collision Notification key points are: 

• In the event of an accident (collision, rollover, etc.), which exceeds the first crash threshold 
(belt tensioner or active head restraint are activated), the transmission of information is 
enabled for speedy and specific assistance at the place of the accident. 

• Data on the exact position of the vehicle is transmitted via the TCB P-SIM to the BMW Call 
Center; vehicle identification number, vehicle type and vehicle color and also data collected 
from airbag sensors in the vehicle. 

• Entry of how many people are sitting in the vehicle and which airbags have been deployed. 
System sensors are used to register the intensity of the crash. Front, rear, side or also multiple 
collisions, as well as any rollover, depending on the model, can be identified and differentiated 
from each other. 

• Using this data the rescue workers obtain detailed information about the type of collision. 

An algorithm compiled by BMW with scientific support calculates the risk of injury of the 
occupants in order to be able to duly prepare adequate medical supplies for those involved in 
the accident. 

• The specially trained employees who work in the BMW Call Center (open 24/7) establish 
telephone contact with the occupants of the vehicle and upon request support them until 
the arrival of the rescue workers. There is also the option of a telephone conference were the 
BMW Call Center establishes a direct voice contact between the occupants and the rescue 
coordination center. 

• There is also the option to manually activate the emergency call. For example, for other road 
users to call for assistance as quickly as possible. 



Button for manual activation of the emergency call 


80 


5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


7.4.2. BMW TeleServices from 03/2013 

The BMW TeleServices systems are generally installed in every vehicle with a telematics system from 
03/2013. From a technical point of view nothing will change for the BMW TeleServices systems. The 
change of the number of the optional equipment from 6AA/6AB to 6AE is the main change. 

Automatic activation in the pre-delivery check 

The activation (provision) of BMW TeleServices and the connected telematics systems within the 
framework of the pre-delivery check is new. Here the activation can be started automatically. After 
a replacement of the headunit or the telephone control unit the activation of the telematics services 
(BMW Online) is also performed following the control unit programming. The automatic activation of 
BMW Online is also part of the final activities following programming of the headunit and the telephone 
control unit. An online connection of the workshop systems to BMW AG is necessary for automatic 
activation of BMW Online. The automatic activation is only possible with use of the Headunit High and 
the relevant telematics control unit (TCB). 

Manual activation 

If online availability cannot be guaranteed during the pre-delivery check, manual activation is still 
possible. In the case of an active ConnectedDrive contract this is done as before in the menu 
"ConnectedDrive > Service status > BMW Online". 


7.4.3. ConnectedDrive services 

The BMW Online ConnectedDrive Services (option 6AK) succeeds BMW Online and BMW Apps 
(option 6NR). The services are already active for the customer from delivery of the vehicle. A separate 
application is no longer necessary. The duration of the "Online", "Send to car" and "Weather in 
navigation" services is three years from date of purchase. The duration for Apps is unlimited. Free 
registration in the ConnectedDrive portal is required to use personalized services. BMW Online 
ConnectedDrive Services (option 6AK) is standard equipment on the higher end vehicles like the 5 
Series, 6 Series, 7 Series and X5/X6 models. It is offered as a Navigation bundle in all other vehicles 
(XI, X3, 3 Series and 4 Series) 

The following is included in the ConnectedDrive Services package: 

BMW Online with News RSS Feeds, Office and application programs (Wiki® Local, etc.) 

BMW Send to car (Google®Send to car) 

• Weather in the navigation map 

• BMW Apps (without video and plug-in function; Navigation Professional (option 609) remain a 
prerequisite) 

Remote Services (option 6AP; My BMW Remote App for iPhone® and Android®) 


81 


5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 



Range of functions of BMW Online ConnectedDrive Services, option 6AK 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

BMW Online 

2 

Send to car 

3 

Weather in map 

4 

BMW Apps 


(r) (r) 

The Remote Services (option 6AP; My BMW Remote App for iPhone and Android ) is included in 
the BMW Online ConnectedDrive Services package. The Remote Services is standard equipment 
on the higher end vehicles like the 5 Series, 6 Series, 7 Series and X5/X6 models and is offered as a 
Navigation bundle in all other vehicles (XI, X3, 3 Series and 4 Series). It is valid for a term of 10 years. 
ConnectedDrive Service is the prerequisite for subsequent booking of these additional functions. 

7.4.4. Additional ConnectedDrive functions 

If the BMW Online ConnectedDrive Services (option 6AK) package is in the vehicle, additional 
functions can be ordered separately from March 2013. The functions were to a large extent elements 
of BMW Assist that have been re-packaged. 


82 














5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


Some ConnectedDrive functions which can be ordered include: 

• Advanced Real Time Traffic Info (option 6AM) 

Remote Services (option 6AP; My BMW Remote App for iPhone® and Android®) 

• Concierge Services (option 6AN; the previous BMW information service) 

• Internet (option 6AR) via P-SIM 




Additional functions that can be ordered 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Advanced Real Time Traffic Information (ARTTI) (part of BMW Online 
ConnectedDrive Services (option 6AK)) 

2 

Remote Services (part of BMW Online ConnectedDrive Services (option 6AK)) 

I 3 

Concierge Services (this feature is now available as an “up sell” option). 

4 

Internet (this feature is available as an “up sell” option). 


These functions can be ordered when placing the order for the vehicle or afterwards directly in the 
vehicle via access to the ConnectedDrive Portal. The portal is currently under construction. The 
ordering of additional functions in the vehicle is planned for the second half of 2013. 


83 













5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


Advanced Real Time Traffic Information 

With the navigation option, you'll also get 3 years of ARTTI because the revised system uses an 
internet feed to give more precise and accurate traffic information. It is important to note however that 
E Chassis code models cannot get ARTTI because they do not have the new iDrive 4.2 Navigation 
system (HUH) but they still have RTTI as a source of traffic information. 

The optional equipment Advanced Real Time Traffic Information supplies almost real-time traffic 
information for the BMW navigation system on highways, national roads and, unlike the predecessor 
system RTTI, also on intercity connections. This information includes precise details on the traffic 
situation on the current route and on potential detours. 

This information is updated every three minutes via data transfer by means of UMTS (3G) of the P-SIM 
card integrated in the Telematic Communication Box (TCB). Color road markings on the navigation 
map displayed in the BMW refer to current obstructions. 

Concierge Service 

The telephone information service of the BMW Call Center offers support in selecting destinations 
and arranging a trip, can be ordered under the optional equipment Concierge Service (option 6AN). 
The information service is available seven days a week, 24 hours a day. Detailed information on so- 
called Points of Interest (e.g. filling stations shown in the navigation system), opening periods and 
address data are transmitted directly to the vehicle by the BMW Call Center. The driver can then save 
the address data to the contacts with the touch of a button (saved on the hard disk of the headunit). It 
is also possible to immediately save the address destination to the destination input of the navigation 
system. 

Concierge and Internet are available on all vehicles as optional “upsell” features but some cars, like 
the XI and Z4 require BMW Online to get it. All models will require Navigation to get these option - 
remember the 6 and 7 come with Navigation standard. 

7.4.5. Internet 

As of July 2013 production, vehicles equipped with our new Navigation, often referred to as HU-H 
or iDrive 4.2, will have 3G Internet capabilities and our new TouchPad controller. As with Concierge 
Service, this feature is available as a separate option on vehicles with option 609 Navigation and there 
is an additional cost to the customer. 

With the optional equipment Internet (option 6AR) the customer has the option to surf the Internet 
using the control center operating system (CON central information display (CID)) via a data line of the 
P-SIM card (TCB) permanently installed in the vehicle (i.e. does not use the customer’s phone data). It 
is available on both the front CID display as well as on the Rear Seat Entertainment screens. For safety 
reasons, “Internet” is not available on the front screen while driving, but is available on the rear screens 
while driving. Each display is independent of one another so in essence while the rear passenger side 
is browsing the internet the rear driver side is able to watch a movie. 

The CON at the center console assumes the role of a mouse. Also the direct input of Internet 
addresses or calling up personal favorites lists is also possible using the CON (controller). The 
transmission of the data is based on the Headunit High in conjunction with the TCB. 

The speed of the data transmission is done on the basis of UMTS (3G; HSDPA downstream with 
maximum 7.2 Mbit/s). This guarantees immediate transmission of the selected Internet pages to the 
vehicle, a special BMW server ensures optimized display on the screen. 


84 


5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


The BMW Internet is implemented for the Headunit High with a newly designed browser based on 
WebKit. WebKit is a free HTML rendering library, whose basic information is used to build a web 
browser. The browser also includes support for the BMW plug-in functions "Text-to-Speech" and 
"Speech control". Customers will be able to do online banking, email, or search web pages . It also 
allows to set a favorite homepage, for example, Google or Yahoo can set as the homepage in the 
vehicle. 

Navigating the internet is made much easier with our new iDrive Touch pad with a touch sensitive 
interface on the top of the dial, allowing the driver to write on the controller itself. So, instead of 
scrolling to a letter to spell out a word, you can simply write that letter with your finger on the top of 
the controller and iDrive will interpret your input. This feature is useful anywhere that a speller wheel is 
used, such as Navigation, Multimedia Search, Contacts Search, Phone Numbers and so on. 

The Internet can only be used for browsing and it is not be able to stream video with Netflix or 
YouTube. 

A Viewer function for documents embedded in emails (PDF, MS Word, MS Excel, MS PowerPoint) is 
offered as a highlight. The Viewer function is reserved for emails, which are shown in the web browser. 
This function is not supported for emails which are sent via Bluetooth telephone (MAP). 

The following graphic explains the internet connection procedure. 


U<4fcjy 

7) ^ 







P-SIM Internet 

Index 

Explanation 

Graphic 

Internet connection procedure via P-SIM 

1 

Central information display 

2 

Data transmission between headunit and TCB 

3 

Outside vehicle antenna or for the hands-free system with USB interface 
(option 6NH) 


85 






5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


Index 

Explanation 

I 4 

Data line to provider 

5b 

Data line to BMW server (backend) 

I 6 

Firewall or proxy server of BMW backend 

7 

Data line P-SIM to Internet 


Internet is available as an annual subscription for $100/year and requires the following: 


• New navigation system (i.e. Drive 4.2) 

• Option 6AK (“BMW Online”) 

Three simple ways of adding or renewing services (i.e. Internet, Concierge, ARTTI: 

• Calling BMW Assist at 1-888-333-6118 

• Contacting BMW Assist using the “SOS” button in their vehicle 

• Creating a new ESA 


In-vehicle BMW Assist hotline New ESA 



Add new services: 



Renew services: 



86 














5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


7.5. BMW Apps 

For the BMW 5 Series LCI the functions of BMW Apps iOS and Android is now standard equipment. 



BMW Apps on the smartphone Galaxy S III 


The BMW Connected app for Android is being rolled out with a smaller range of functions than the iOS 
version. The range of functions is gradually being adjusted through regular updates. 


The apps for Android are automatically started using a USB upon connection of the smartphone and 
run in the background. The web radio function is currently not supported for the Android app. 


7.6. Audio playback with Android 

Audio files on Android smartphones are played differently depending on the connection mode. 
However, the operating principle and the appearance in the central information display do not differ. 


Connection mode 

Audio playback using 

USB via "external devices" 

Headunit High 

BMW app for Android ("connection assistant") 

Android smartphone 


It is not possible to play music via the two connection modes at the same time. In order to access the 
mass storage device of the Android smartphone, the USB mode must be activated if necessary and 
the device disconnected from the headunit and connected again via USB. 


87 











5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


(s;f USB Galaxy Nexus 






USB device: accessory mode 

1. To call up media files on the 
device, activate USB mode. 


2. Remove device and reconnect vla~ 
USB 


Activation of USB mode for Android app 


7.7. Snap-in adapter 

By the end of 2013 new snap-in adapters are being introduced for the connection of smartphones to 
BMW vehicles. 



Snap-in adapter 


Index Explanation 


Snap-in adapter for iPhone 5 


Snap-in adapter for Samsung smartphones 


The new Apple iPhone 5™ features a special connection plug (Lightning). The snap-in adapter for 
the iPhone 5™ has been custom-designed for this model of phone. The functions of the Music and 
Media versions have now been brought together for the first time in a Music/Media snap-in adapter for 
the iPhone 5™. When the iPhone 5™ does not provide an analog audio signal to the Lightning plug, 
the signal is generated in the Music/Media snap-in adapter. The Connect and Music/Media snap-in 
adapters have an integrated fan. This is specially designed to protect the temperature-sensitive area 
of the iPhone 5™ from overheating by circulating air around it. This delays the premature temperature- 
based switch-off of the device. 

The Basic version can be used in all cars with base plate and supports telephone and charging 
functions. The Music/Media version supports telephone, charging, entertainment and Apps. It is 
required in cars with SA 6NF that use an analog and digital audio signal. The Connect version supports 
telephone, charging, entertainment and Apps. It is required in cars with SA 6NS that use only a digital 
audio signal. The iPhone 5™ does not support video function on the plug side, therefore it is not 
possible to play back video in the car. 


88 







5 Series LCI 

7. Entertainment and Communication 


The video and plug-in functions are components of the optional equipment BMW Apps (option 6NR) 
and should be integrated in the Enhanced USB and Bluetooth plus Smartphone Integration (option 

6 NS). However, these were cancelled with the introduction of the iPhone5 due to the removal of 
analog video support. 

The following new variants are planned: 

• "Basic" snap-in adapter for iPhone 5 (84 21 2 351 307) 

• “Connect” snap-in adapter for iPhone 5, with a fan (84 21 2 351 308) 

• "Music/Media" snap-in adapter for iPhone 5, with a fan (84 21 2 351 309) 

• Snap-in adapter for Samsung smartphones 

• Generic snap-in adapter for Android smartphones 


89 



5 Series LCI 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls 

8.1. ID transmitter 


8.1.1. Programming third and fourth button 



Programmable Buttons on ID transmitter 


Index Explanation 

1 Third button 

2 Fourth button 


In the BMW 5 Series LCI the customer has the option to assign different functions to the third and 
fourth button on the ID transmitter. These functions are vehicle-specific and may not be available in all 
5 series LCI vehicles. The functions are assigned via a menu in the central information display. 


p r : (• 

Doors/Key \ 232 pm Black # 

Key button settings V 

aT Driver's door \ 

^ ** Tailgate ♦ door(s) \ 

* A o Pathway liqhtinq 

✓ Doors/fc^y 1 

Profiles 1 

Doors/key 

[5 Last seat position automatic 
c? Lock if no door is opened 


90 







5 Series LCI 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls 


L 


Speea 


On 


iate 


Lighting 
Driving mo 
✓ DoorsAey 
Profiles 


<£? Doors/key \ 2:33 pm 


Eyed 




Key button settings 

oT Driver's door 


li . 


Tailgate + door(s) 


J 


O Auxiliary cooling 


Doors/key 

C7 Last seat position automatic 
gt Lock if no door is opened 


5 Series LCI configuration of third button in central information display 


The following options are available for the third and fourth buttons depending on the vehicle and 
options: 


Button Function 


Third button 

• Unlock tailgate 

• Unlock all doors and tailgate 

• Unlock small tailgate (F07) 

• Unlock all doors and small tailgate (F07) 

Fourth button 

• Pathway lights 


• Auxiliary cooling (F10 hybrid only) 


• Panic mode 


91 







5 Series LCI 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls 

8.1.2. Changeover of symbol for fourth button 

The 5 Series LCI no longer has the silver horn symbol on the fourth button, is replaced with a red horn 
symbol. 

The red horn button if pressed will activate the pathway lights and if pressed longer than two seconds 
the panic mode of the alarm is activated. 



8.2. Touchpad Controller 

• Controller with seven buttons with touchpad in all 5 series LCI vehicles. 

The labelling of the button "CD" has been changed to "MEDIA" similar to other current BMW models. 

8.2.1. Controller with touchpad 



Controller with touchpad 


92 




5 Series LCI 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls 

The controller introduced with the headunit CIC High with turn and press controller and seven keys 
is replaced in the BMW 5 Series LCI worldwide with a touchpad controller that uses a touch control 
panel at the top at the turn and press controller. In the touchpad control panel the customer can input 
location information for the navigation system or telephone numbers and contact details. In the map 
operation the map section for example can be moved and enlarged or reduced by finger movement. 
Using the touchpad control panel the mouse pointer can also be moved for the Internet function. 

The touchpad controller supports nine gestures during the input. This means that it is now possible to 
adjust controller settings in the central information display by lateral movements on the touchpad. 

The gesture input can now also be used for other functions such as the operation of the Internet. 
Characters entered using the word match principle are now also recognized with an input at an angle 
between 0° and 90°. 



Angular range of input using wordmatch principle with touchpad 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Input using controller with touchpad 

B 

Displays in Central Information Display (CID) 

I 1 

Edge of angular range for input 

2 

"Angle" of input 

3 

Angular range for input 


93 








5 Series LCI 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls 

For the evaluation of inputs an additional control unit "Touch box" is used in separate country versions. 



Touch box TBX control unit 


The Touch box control unit is required for interpreting the contact sensors of the touchpad controller 
for the Headunit High user interface. The Touch box (TBX) is connected to the controller and Headunit 
High via theK-CAN2. 



Signal path, controller with touchpad 


94 






5 Series LCI 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls 


Index 

Explanation 

I 1 

Central Information Display (CID) 

2 

Headunit High 

3 

Controller with touchpad 

4 

Touchbox (TBX) 


8.3. Instrument cluster 

The basic version of the instrument cluster with 4 analog round instruments is still used as standard 
equipment in the F10 LCI. The basic instrument cluster contains a TFT display with a resolution of 
640 x 160 pixels among the instrument dials. Its diagonal screen size is 5.7". The round instruments 
are always enclosed by a closed ring. 



5 series LCI Basic instrument cluster 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

TFT display 

B 

Closed instrument rings 


The instrument cluster with extended contents (option 6WA) is the standard cluster in the FI OH and 
F07 it is offered as optional equipment in the F10. It’s equipped with 4 analog round instruments and a 
9.2" TFT display. The display has a resolution of 960 x 160 pixels and is integrated in the lower area of 
the cluster. 


95 









5 Series LCI 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls 



Instrument cluster with extended scopes option 6WA 


8.4. CID power display in SPORT mode 

In the BMW 5 Series LCI additional displays in SPORT mode are available. The displays can be called 
up in the CID. 



$3 V 2:28 pm O Ch arlie 



Power 


240 
120 360 

ft lb 

0 480 


To 


w 


5 series LCI SPORT mode displays in the CID 


96 





5 Series LCI 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls 

8.5. Driver assistance system operating facility 

The individual assist systems can be activated or deactivated via the assist systems operating facility 
which is located next to the steering wheel in the dashboard. 



BMW 5 Series LCI Driver assistance system operating facility 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Lane change warning 

2 

Intelligent Safety 

(collision warning with braking function and pedestrian warning) 

3 

Lane departure warning 

4 

Night Vision with person detection 

5 

Head-Up Display 


The new Intelligent Safety button replaces the previous button for the collision warning with braking 
function. Using the Intelligent Safety button the following front protection functions of the collision 
warning, collision warning with braking function and BMW Night Vision can be activated and 
deactivated depending on the equipment in the vehicle. 

• Collision warning (camera-based collision warning and collision warning with braking function) 

• Pedestrian warning (pedestrian warning with city braking function and BMW Night Vision) 

If only one function is available in the vehicle, the function is switched on or off each time the button is 
pressed and the LED above the button is turned on or off respectively. If both functions are installed 
in the vehicle, a menu appears in the CID when the button is pressed in which the functions can be 
individually switched on or off. The LED above the button illuminates as soon as at least one of the 
functions is switched on. The front protection functions are automatically switched on each time the 
engine is started via the START-STOP button. In the case of the lane change warning and the lane 
departure warning as before the last setting is always retained even after an engine start. 

From the information pages on Intelligent Safety you can also get to the menus for setting and 
adjusting the warning time of the collision warning. 


97 









5 Series LCI 

8. Displays, Indicators and Controls 



BMW 5 Series LCI Displays on the central information display 


8.6. IHKA operating facility 



The operating facility IHKA in vehicles with automatic air conditioning along with 4-zone control, has 
been adapted in the BMW 5 Series LCI. The IHKA can be switched off by pressing and holding the 
button "OFF/Reduce amount of air". In addition, seven different air distributions are now available on 
the driver's side and six on the passenger's side. 


The labelling on the button "ALL" was changed to "SYNC". By pressing the "SYNC" button the 
settings of the driver's side are transferred to the passenger's side and are also transferred to the rear 
passenger compartment. 


98 









Bayerische Motorenwerke Aktiengesellschaft 
Qualifizierung und Training 
RontgenstraBe 7 

85716 UnterschleiRheim, Germany 


