Table of Contents 
BMW ALPINA B7 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

Technical Data.4 

ALPINA History.6 

Body.14 

Exterior.14 

Spoilers.15 

Front.15 

Rear.15 

The Read Lid.16 

Wheels .16 

Wheel Locks .17 

Interior.18 

Steering Wheel.18 

Electronics.19 

Drivetrain. .20 

Engine .20 

Supercharger.21 

Design .22 

Clutch.24 

Service.24 

Boost Regulator/ SecondaryThrottle .25 

Pressure Sensor .26 

Cooling Module.26 

Chassis .27 

Suspension.27 

Brakes .27 

Differential.27 


Initial Print Date: 01/07 Revision Date: 






























BMW ALPINAB7 


Model: E65 

Production: from 11/2006 (2007 MY) 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify a BMW ALPINA B7. 

• Explain the differences between a conventional E65 and a B7. 

• Know what additional service is required on the supercharger. 


2 


BMW ALPINA B7 




Introduction 


Committed to developing the best performing vehicles in the luxury market, BMW with 
ALPINA has created a special high performance version of BMW's 7 Series luxury 
sedan. The 2006 BMW ALPINA B7 brings togetherthe luxury, pioneering design, and 
advanced technology of the 7 Series Sedan with the scintillating performance of a 
supercharged, 500hp V-8 engine. 

To powerthe BMW ALPINA B7, ALPINA specially developed a higher-performance 
version of BMW's 4.4-liter, 90-degree V-8 engine and mated it to a 6-speed automatic 
transmission featuring steering wheel mounted shift controls. 

The motor produces 500 horsepower at 5,500 rpm along with maximum torque of 
516 Ibs.-ft. at 4,250 rpm, and propels the B7 from 0-60 mph in a mere 4.8 seconds. 

ALPINA 21-inch wheels carry Z-rated performance tires, while the sport-tuned 
suspension includes Active Roll Stabilization. 

The B7 aerokit includes a rear spoiler to improve stability, handling, and performance 
at high speeds. 

ALPINA was established in 1964 as an official and approved "ennobler” of BMW 
automobiles. Their tradition is to take production BMW vehicles and make them even 
more appealing to connoisseurs of automotive finery. 

With this new model, BMW will raise the benchmark for the segment in terms of 
performance, refinement, technology, and luxury. 



3 

BMW ALPINA B7 



















Technical Data 


General 

Curb weight, lb. 

4476 

Weight distribution, 
front/rear, % 

51.0/49.0 

Wheelbase, in. 

117.7 

Track, front/rear, in. 

62.3/62.2 

Length, in. 

198.4 

Width, in. 

74.9 

Height, in. 

58.1 

Body 

Type 

4-door sedan 

Drag coefficient (CD) 

0.31 

EPA size classification 

Large 

Engine & Electrical 

Engine type 

DOHC 32-valve (4-cam) V-8 

Engine features 

Supercharged & intercooled, steplessly variable induc¬ 
tion system, Valvetronic variable intake-valve lift & Double 
VAN OS variable intake- & exhaust-valve timing 

Cylinder block & heads 

Aluminum 

Bore xstroke, mm/in. 

92.0 x82.7/3.62 x 3.26 

Displacement, cc/cu in. 

4398/268 

Compression ratio 

9.0:1 

Power @ rpm, hp 

500 @ 5500 

Torque @ rpm, Ib-ft. 

516 @ 4250 

Engine-management system 

Motronic M E 9.2.1 

Fuel requirement 

Premium unleaded 

Fuel capacity, U.S. gal. 

23.3 

Battery capacity, amp-hr. 

90 

Generator output, amp./W 

180/2520 

Drivetrain 

Drive system 

F rant engine/rear drive 

Automatic transmission 

ZF 6 HP 26,6-speed with external oil cooler, SWITCH- 
TRON 1C shift system & modified internal components 


4 


BMW ALPINA B7 




























































Drivetrain (Cont.) 

Ratios: 


1st 

4.17:1 

2nd 

2.34:1 

3rd 

1.52:1 

4th 

1.14:1 

5 th 

0.87:1 

6th 

0.69:1 

Reverse 

3.40:1 

Final drive ratio 

3.64:1 

Chassis 

Body/frame construction 

Unitized all-steel structure with aluminum hood & front 
fenders 

Front suspension 

Strut-type in aluminum; double-pivot lower arms, coil 
springs, twin-tube gas-pressure arms, coil springs, twin- 
tube gas-pressure shock absorbers, Active Roll 
Stabilization, aluminum subframe; ALPINA sport calibra¬ 
tion 

Rear suspension 

4-link Integral suspension in aluminum, coil springs, 
twin-tube gas-pressure shock absorbers, Active Roll 
Stabilization, aluminum subframe; ALPINA sport calibra¬ 
tion 

Steering type 

Rack & pinion, vehicle-speed-sensitive power assist & 
variable ratio, with ALPINA oil cooler 

Turning circle, ft. 

39.7 

4-wheel ventilated disc brakes: 
Diameter xthickness, mm/in. 

374 x 36/14.7 x 1.42 front/ 370 x 24/14.6 x 0.94 rear 

Wheels 

Cast alloy, 21 x9.0 front/21 xl0.5 rear 

Tires 

Performance, 245/35ZR-21 front/285/30ZR-21 rear 

Stability-enhancement system 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC), including Dynamic 
Traction Control, antilock braking (ABS), Dynamic Brake 
Control & cornering/braking stability enhancement 

Performance Data 

Acceleration, 0-60 mph 

4.8 sec. 

Top speed 

186 mph 

EPA est. M PG, city/highway 

15/23 


5 

BMW ALPINA B7 
















































ALPINA History 


ALPINA was founded by Burkhard Bovensiepen (1936 - 
present). His passion with performance vehicles began 
with the purchase of a used Fiat 1500. Not satisfied with 
the performance of the vehicle, he took it to a friend to 
give it a check-up and perform some tuning modifications. 

Burkhard and his friend added a Weber carburetor, a more 
aggressive camshaft and opened up the muffler. This 
raised the horsepower from 67 bhp to 75 bhp. Shortly 
thereafter, a cloud of blue smoke began to follow the car 
and Burkhard decided to stop driving Fiat. 



Bovensiepen had always been interested in BMW cars, and when BMW introduced the 
1800 in 1963, which was more powerful than the 1500, the customers who had recent¬ 
ly purchased a 1500 were disappointed; he saw an opportunity. 


The BMW four-cylinder engine had four well-designed intake ports and only one small 
carburetor, so he recognized that he could improve the performance of the car with 
modification to its intake system. And with that, the first BM W-ALPINA tuning kit was 
created.The tuning kits costed 980 DM including installation and raised performance of 
the 1500 to parity with the newer 1800. 

BMW's research and development department tested the ALPINA kit and they found 
nothing wrong with ALPINA's work, so ALPINA got support from the factory which was 
invaluable. That support made the company's products more desirable to BMW 
enthusiasts, but it also meant that installation of an ALPINA system did not void the 
BMW warranty. 


ALPINA did not receive immediate acclaim from the press. Auto motor und Sport said 
that ALPINA's engine modifications would have have a bad effect on longevity and relia¬ 
bility. Bovensiepen asked Auto motor und Sport to test the car instead of just comment¬ 
ing on the concept of BMW tuning. 

That test showed that the ALPINA-1500 was equal in terms of performance of the 1800 
model.The ALPINA carshowed no signs of stress or fragility. Auto motor und Sport 
were clearly enthusiastic about the ALPINA's performance. They also noted that the 
quality of the car's fit and finish was such that it appeared to have come directly from 
BMW. 


BMW was very impressed and when the higher-performance 1800 ti was introduced, it 
was fitted with engine components identical to those developed by ALPINA. 

Today, the ALPINA headquarters and factory is located in Buchloe, Germany. 


6 

BMW ALPINA B7 





1961 


' I 


Derek Bell, Harald Ertl, Niki Lauda and Brian Muir win the 
European Touring Car Championship forALPINA and 
BMW. Niki Lauda sets an absolute Touring Car record for 
the six-hour race on the Nurburgring, driving the BMW 
ALPINA Lightweight Coupe. The oil crisis rocks the motor 
industry. ALPINA works through this difficult time without 
layoffs. Two factors have a hand in this: the good reputa¬ 
tion of the company, as well as the flexible reaction to 
market needs by a team of employees who were, already 
then, unusually bound to their firm. ALPINA develops 
engines that run on regular gas - engines that are at once 
frugal and powerful 


1964 

Produced in his father's fine mechanical factory by the 
young business and engineering student, the engines 
produced with ALPINA dual-carburetor's receive praise 
not only from the automotive press, but also from BMW 
and its legendary sales boss, Paul G. Hahnemann. BMW 
certify the exceptional quality of these ALPINA products 
by awarding BMW vehicles with the ALPINA system the 
full factory guarantee 


1965 

ALPINA Burkard Bovensiepen KG is established on 
the 1st of J anuary in Kaufbeuren.The firm has eight 
employees 


1967 

The name ALPINA is augmented in its profile by the 
unmistakable, newly-created company logo - 
trademark & seal of quality in one 



auto 

motor 

-•sport 



■vi tS :-1 'K'-i-** 


BMW 1500 


MIT 


ALPINA-ANLAGE 


.w. -i i 1*1 111 KUtaHk CH HI 

JU r 3 Mb IM^ *■ IH1 I-A U.I- 

WV m U H-ii. J .-‘- I- In- r 1 -'- .-i i>-1 

Ifnri^rj 3 h> ix UHPA *"i -I- -'x >■*+- 4 * • *■ 

•lI ii .rii II hdk pHuJi u r j..i_-,l 

Limi.r [KxbH -W1 N HI- 

KnJV'ri -.-i u Wly^l P5 ^ L j 

P* Mr Hi |l g II I I I | 

-jL- Ii Ail Fj!-tI.i/ .“■ J xM 

bjfakv V i4w w -j ki ■>.-iu|«*.• m !■ pj-atxtf din 

4WUL-I iMn i^rTr.-.' -Ui - 

1 •iiir V-rxjBii-hr' ' JjH IxW ■IK-' 1- 

niKKi M rf M- 

» H-■-*■■■ »-* | II 

>■* <2 «-H-+ - xi x 

■I j-W -*«■■■ * -■ ■■ T * ' H” 1 i iM p Wt 

.fTj, Uv■. . _ . p-. mi X EM 

+• h-V’l'h*x.* , i 

■Jb-i j 'l-i J-u - Tint- 

ibinru 1#^-- 'XH't* in 

MII* KIM VJ P .xitiar. 




BMW ALPINA B7 

































1968 


ALP IN A engages Touring Car Motorsport- the beginning 
of a incomparable success story. Pilots such as Derek 
Bell, Harald Ertl, J ames Hunt, J acky Ickx, Niki Lauda, 

Brian M uirand Hans Stuck are found on ALPINA's payroll 
between 1968 and 1973 


1970 

ALPINA wins the European Touring Car Championship, 
the 24 Hours of Spa-Francorchamps, as well as all major 
German Championships: Road Course, Hill-Climb and 
Rallye 


1971 

ALPINA convinces BMW that a lightweight version of the 
BMW 3.0 CS is needed to continue to be successful in 
Touring Car racing. BMW tasks ALPINA with the project 
leadership forthe lightweight BMW 3.0 CSL Coupe.The 
ALPINA CLASSIC wheels in 20-spoke design were the 
visual hallmarks of ALPINA's participation in a sports 
machine officially offered by BMW 


1973 

Derek Bell, Harald Ertl, Niki Lauda and Brian Muir win the 
European Touring Car Championship forALPINA and 
BMW. Niki Lauda sets an absolute Touring Car record for 
the six-hour race on the Nurburgring, driving the BMW 
ALPINA Lightweight Coupe. The oil crisis rocks the motor 
industry. ALPINA works through this difficult time without 
layoffs. Two factors have a hand in this: the good reputa¬ 
tion of the company, as well as the flexible reaction to 
market needs by a team of employees who were, already 
then, unusually bound to their firm. ALPINA develops 
engines that run on regular gas - engines that are at once 
frugal and powerful 


8 

BMW ALPINA B7 








1975 


With selected partners from amongst the BMW dealer 
body, ALPINA begin the development of a German dealer 
network. At the same time, importerships in England and 
Switzerland are established 



1977 

Dieter Quester is European Touring Car champion in a 
BMW ALPINA 3,5 CSL, after exciting battles with the 
heavily-favored J aguar-Coupes. At the end of this suc¬ 
cessful season, ALPINA steps out ofTouring Car racing 
fora period often years, to dedicate all efforts to the 
development of fascinating road-going automobiles 


1978 

To wide press acclaim, ALPINA presents three automo¬ 
biles at Lago di Garda in Italy, each completely developed 
at ALPINA.The BMW ALPINA B6 2,8 is a 3-Series BMW 
with six-cylinder engine, at a time when BMW only sold 3- 
Series with four-cylinder engines. Such high displacement 
in a relatively light car creates a whole new level of driving 
ease.The BMW ALPINA B7 Turbo, based on the 5-Series 
BMW, is the fastest saloon in the world. With 300 horse¬ 
power, the B7 Turbo Coupe establishes itself amongst the 
most powerful Coupes. Each of these new-generation 
ALPINA engines have a fully-electronic computer ignition, 
unique at the time in the automotive world 


1979 

Burkard Bovensiepen incorporates a new business 
endeavor, the ALPINA wine importership. In an impres- 
sively-shortspan of time, ALPINA wins over nearly all of 
Germany's top restauranteurs as clients, as well as many 
wine lovers.The ALPINA importership to J apan is 
opened, and a successful partnership begins - in 2001 
ALPINA delivered the 2000th BMW ALPINA to J apan 



BMW ALPINA B7 


















1981 


"Auto motor und Sport" organizes the Shell Kilometer 
Marathon, a fuel-saving challenge.The 80 mpg-carwas 
not yet a topic, yet a BMW ALPINA 318i wins in class 
with fuel economy of 105.72miles per Imperial gallon 


1983 

ALPINA is officially registered as an automobile 
manufacturer by the German Ministry of Transport, 
the Kraftfahrtbundesamt 


1985 

ALPINA converts its entire automotive production to 
engines with catalytic converters. What's special about 
that? Instead of installing the more commonly used 
ceramic catalytic converters standard in the automotive 
industry, ALPINA are the first manufacturer to exclusively 
install metal catalytic converters, using EMITEC technolo¬ 
gy. Not until years later will this concept be found in other 
high-tech automobiles 


1987 

The International German Touring Car Championship 
enjoys great public interest, thanks in part to new rules 
decisively influenced by Burkard Bovensiepen. Ellen Lohr, 
Andy Bovensiepen, Fabien Giroix, Peter Oberndorferand 
Christian Danner, driving the BMW ALPINA M3 Gruppe A, 
earn multiple victories, along with many good placings. 
ALPINA are also pioneers in terms of the environment 
impact of racing cars - the metal catalyst debuts in the 
BMW ALPINA M3 Gruppe A and becomes standard 
equipment n every DTM race car 


10 

BMW ALPINA B7 
















1988 


Due to capacity constraints, priorities have to be drawn. 
The decision is taken in favor of the development and pro¬ 
duction of new BMW ALPINA automobiles. As a result, 
ALP IN A withdraw at season's end from racing 


1989 

ALPINA create a highlight in presenting the BIO Bi-Turbo. 
Paul Frere, the well-known journalist and racing driver, 
writes in Road &Track about this automobile: "Forme this 
is the car... I think this is the best 4-door in the world " 


1990 

ALPINA expand. The number of employees has grown in 
the meantime to 120, necessitating the construction of a 
new, generously-dimensioned building for administration 
and production 


1992 

With the advent of the BMW ALPINA B12 5,7 Coupe, 
ALPINA is the first automobile manufacturer to realize an 
electronic clutch management system termed ALPINA 
SFIIFT-TRONIC. Foregoing use of the clutch is a breeze in 
light of the six-speed gearbox' dynamic driving character¬ 
istics 



BMW ALPINA B7 




























1993 

ALPINA SWITCH-TRONIC opens a new, sporty automatic 
driving dimension. The combination of manual gear selec¬ 
tion coupled to the traditional ease of driving an automatic 
convinces many died-in-the-wool stick-shift drivers to 
make the move to this modern automatic system. One of 
the merits of ALPINA's SWITCH-TRONIC is the ability to 
shift the gears using buttons on the back of the steering 
wheel, much like Formula racing drivers shift their semi¬ 
automatic gearboxes 


1995 

ALPINA is the first automobile manufacturer to introduce 
into series production the SUPER-CAT, an electrically 
heated, metal catalytic converter, as found in the BMW 
ALPINA B12 5.7 E-KAT.This joint project with BMW and 
EM ITEC represents the use of a completely new emis¬ 
sions control technology, undercutting the 1996 
European emission standard by 80% with regard 
to HC, NOxand CO, respectively 


1999 

A new era begins: ALPINA presents a diesel automobile 
forthe first time in its 35-year history, the BMW ALPINA 
DIO BITURBO at the Geneva Salon d'Automobile - the 
most powerful diesel saloon in the world. The engineering 
development of the super-diesel is a co-operative project 
between BMW and ALPINA 


2002 

Based on the BMW Z8, ALPINA build the BMW ALPINA 
ROADSTER V8 with SWITCH-TRONIC forfriends of luxu¬ 
rious and comfortable open motoring. A limited series of 
555 automobiles world-wide, this exclusive model leads 
ALPINA to officially enter the North American market, 
where the ROADSTER V8 is an immediate success with 
450 sales.The balance of 105 found homes in J apan and 
Europe, warming the hearts of their owners 




BMW ALPINA B7 
























2003 


With the advent of the BMW ALPINA B7, ALPINA realize 
a new engine concept, a mechanically-driven radial com¬ 
pressor- combining for the first time ever charging and 
VALVETRONIC - this leading to very low fuel consump¬ 
tion on this 500-horsepower automobile 



13 

BMW ALPINA B7 







Body 

Exterior 

The exterior of the BMW ALP IN A B7 is essentially the same as the standard production 
E65. The chassis remains untouched but further refinements have been made in the fol¬ 
lowing areas: 

• Front bumper cover 

• Rear bumper cover 

• Rear lid spoiler 

• Wheels 

• Signature ALP IN A pinstripes and hood/trunk badges 





BMW ALPINA B7 














































































Spoilers 

Due to the higher speeds that the BMW ALPINA B7 is capable of compared to the 
standard production variant, extra aerodynamical elements needed to be added for 
stability at high speeds. 

Front 

The front bumper cover is made of two indi¬ 
vidual sections bonded together.The original 
bumper cover is still utilized but modified on 
the lower section in orderto bond the signa¬ 
ture ALPINA lower bumper cover. 

This serves not only to identify the vehicle 
as an ALPINA version of the E65, but allows 
extra airflow to the cooling module assembly 
and increases the downforce to the front of 
the vehicle that is needed for increased 
stability at high speeds. 




Rear 

The rear bumper cover has been taken 
directly from the E65 standard production 
vehicle. Only a small portion where the 
exhaust pipe protrudes had to be modified. 
A finishing trim piece is then bonded and 
riveted on to give it a finished look. 



15 

BMW ALPINA B7 































The Read Lid 

The rear deck lid has a spoiler attached to aid in the aerodynamics at higher speeds. 


Wheels 

The BMW ALPINA B7 is equipped with 21” 
20 spoke wheels. 

The valve stem is concealed behind the anti¬ 
theft equipped center hub cap. The air is 
channeled through a hollowed outspoke on 
the rim. 


The tire dimensions are as follow: 



Wheel 

Tires 

Front 

9" x 21" 

245/35 ZR21 

Rear 

10.5" x 21" 

285/30 ZR21 




Valve Stem Location 


16 

BMW ALPINA B7 





















































Wheel Locks 

The BMW ALPINA B7 comes with a mechanically locking center hub cap forthe wheels. 
In order to remove the center cap, a mechanical key is needed. A set of keys is delivered 
to the customer upon delivery. All wheel locks forthe vehicle are keyed the same. 



Wheel Lock Unlocking Procedure 




3. While pressing cap inward rotate 





6. Insert Key and Remove Cap 


4. M ake certain tumbler is exposed 


5. Remove finger 



BMW ALPINA B7 










Interior 


The interior of the vehicle will be the same as offered in the regular production E65. 
The ALPINA specific components will be: 

• Steering Wheel 

• Floor Mats 

• BMW ALPINA plaque on overhead console 

• Door sills trim piece 

Steering Wheel 

The steering wheel on the BMW ALPINA B7 is derived from the E60 steering wheel. 

The factory steering wheel is modified by ALPINA in Buchloe, Germany and adds func¬ 
tional microswitches located behind the steering wheel that can be used for shifting the 
transmission without evertaking yourhands off the steering wheel (SWITCH TRONIC). 



18 

BMW ALPINA B7 







Electronics 

The electronic system on the BMW ALP IN A B7 corresponds to that of the regular 
production E65. 

Minor changes have been made in the programming and coding of the vehicle to 
account for ALPINA specific functions. 

Example: The steering wheel electronics control unit has been modified 

to identify the upshift/downshift button on the steering wheel. 

The transmission shift points have been changed. 


19 

BMW ALPINA B7 




Drivetrain 


Engine 

The BMW ALPINA B7 is equipped with a modified 
N62B44 engine. The engine is entirely assembled at 
the ALPINA facility in Buchloe Germany to include 
higher performance components such as entire piston 
assemblies and front timing case covers (for super¬ 
charger mounting/oil supply). 


The entire engine is assembled in approximately one day. The same MasterTechnician 
that starts the assembly process sees it to conclusion. The final process for the techni¬ 
cian is to stamp the identification number on the block by hand. 




20 

BMW ALPINA B7 




























Supercharger 

The main advantage of the ALPINA modified N62B44 engine is the use of a planetary 
gear driven supercharger that drives a Nautilus or Radial impeller. 

The ratio of the supercharger gears is 17.5:1. This indicates that with a speed of 6,000 
rpm, the supercharger is capable of rotating at a speed of 105,000 rpm. 

Because of these extreme characteristics, the tolerances on the mechanical elements of 
the supercharger are imperative. 

The design/concept of the supercharger was originally developed and patented byZF. 

ZF was unsuccessful in utilizing the design in production because of reliability issues 
due to the metals used. 

ALPINA has perfected the design and materials utilized, thus allowing this type of super- 
chargerto be utilized. ALPINA has been very successful with the design of the super¬ 
charger. 




BMW ALPINA B7 






Design 

The supercharger uses a planetary gearsetto multiply the speed from the pulley. The 
ratio between the input speed and the output speed is 17.5:1 (105,000 rpm @ 6,000 
engine rpm!). 


The ring gear is driven whenever the drive clutch is engaged. The ring gear then drives 
the planetary gears that are meshed to the center sun gear. 



SUN GEAR 
(Drives Impeller) 



C lose- up View of 
S uperchanger Gears 




C utaway View of 
Supercharger 


BMW ALPINA B7 










The supercharger utilizes the engine oil supply as its cooling and lubrication system. 


In order for the oil to be transferred to the center assembly of the supercharger, the upper 
timing case cover on the 2 nd bank (cylinders 5-8) had to be modified to include an oil 
passage. This passage allows oil to flow through it and overto the Supercharger mount¬ 
ing bracket. 



Supercharger Mounting Bracket 

(Oil Passage Exposed) 


Note: It is extremely importantthatthetwo alignment dowel pins are installed 
on the support bracket. Failure to do so will result in damage to the 
supercharger. 


The supercharger has an oil restricting orifice on the bottom mounting area. It is crucial 
that this restricting orifice is installed before mounting otherwise it would result in low 
engine oil pressure. 



Supercharger- Oil Restricting Orifice (Right) 


23 

BMW ALPINA B7 














Clutch 

The supercharger is not engaged while the vehicle is idling. In orderto make this possi¬ 
ble, a centrifugally engaged clutch is utilized. The clutch is fully engaged aten engine 
rpm of greater than 1,100 rpm. 

Because of the de-coupling of the supercharger at low rpm, the idle quality and fuel 
economy of the BMW ALPINA B7 is improved. 




Bell Housing/Pulley Installed Bell Housing/Pulley Removed 

(Clutch Exposed) 

Service 

The clutch friction material has to be checked every 60,000 miles for wear. 
The minimum thickness is 2 mm. 



Clutch Material with Springs and Weights 



BMW ALPINA B7 













Boost Regulator/ Secondary Throttle 

One majorconcern during the development of the engine was to combine the Valvetronic 
with a supercharging system. The Valvetronic operates with an almost neutral pressure in 
the intake system (no throttle losses but 50mbar vacuum pressure to realize the 
crankcase ventilation). 

As soon as you have a charger (it is irrelevant which system), the valvetronic won't oper¬ 
ate any more to save fuel. 

The radial compressor of the B7 runs from approximately 1,100 rpm together with the 
engine and provides an airflow which would increase the intake manifold pressure slowly 
until the final pressure of 0.8 bar (overpressure). 



As mentioned before, the system does not work fuel savingly with more than 50 mbarat 
parts load. To counteract this, the boost pressure regulator (throttle in front of the super¬ 
charger) reduces the airflow to the supercharger and still keeps the vacuum pressure of 
50 mbarin the intake system. 

As soon as full power is indicated by the driver, the boost pressure regulator opens and 
lets the full airflow into the engine. 

"The opportunity we have is to close the regulator like you can put your hand 
on a fan - the air spins around, the charger needs no power and nothing will 
be damaged. No measured air has to be blown off like when you use a 
wastegate. 

In other words, only the fuel which matches the measured air will be given 
into the combusting compartment and burned. That's why the B7 is eco¬ 
nomical and powerful together." 

- Axel Rimpler- ALPINA Burkard Bovensiepen GmbH +Co. KG 


25 

BMW ALPINA B7 










Pressure Sensor 


An additional pressure sensor is located 
before the main throttle housing (before 
intake manifold) and is used to deter¬ 
mine the boost pressure created by the 
supercharger. 



Cooling Module 


The cooling module is made up of six different coolers and is mounted in the front 
of the vehicle. 

The six coolers are: 

• Air Intercooler 

• Engine Coolant Radiator 

• Engine Oil Cooler 

• Transmission Fluid Cooler 

• PowerSteering Fluid Cooler 

• AirConditioning Condenser 

All of the cooling modules are prepared and assembled in the ALPINA plant in Buchloe 
Germany and shipped to the BMW manufacturing plant in Dingolfing. The installation of 
the module is completely integrated into the manufacturing process. 



26 

BMW ALPINA B7 
















































C hassis 


Suspension 

The BMW ALPINA B7 utilizes the existing 7 Series chassis but modified the hardware to 
match the higher performance level of the B7. 

The ARS system is standard equipment and the springs and absorbers have been tuned 
by a joint collaboration between BMW, ALPINA, and Michelinto make the calibration 
firmer. 

Brakes 

The brakes have been upgraded to match the equipment on the middle eastern 
version 760i. These are of a larger size than on the present US version 750i. 


Brake Measurement Comparison (B7 vs. 750i) 

Model 

B7 

750i 

B7 

750i 

Front 

374 mm 

348 mm 

36 mm 

30 mm 

Rear 

370 mm 

345 mm 

24 mm 

24 mm 


Differential 

The BMW ALPINA B7 uses the same dif¬ 
ferential as the 760i. 

This differential, although being used in the 
production ofthe 760i, includes "ALPINA 
engineered" strengthening modifications. 

The modifications have been integrated 
into the BMW line. 




BMW ALPINA B7 
















