Table of Contents 


E53 AWD and DSC III 

Subject Page 

E53AWD .3 

Drivetrain .3 

Drivetrain-TransferCase .4 

E53 DSC III .5 

Features.5 

Hill Decent Control (HDC).5 

Automatic Differential Brake (ADB).6 

Traction Control.8 

Off-Road ABS Control Module Programming.8 

Components.11 

Control Module Hydraulic Unit.11 

Rotation Rate/Transverse Acceleration Sensor .12 

Brake Pressure Sensor .13 

DSC III Components.14 

HDC Switch.14 

DSC Switch.14 

Wheel Speed Sensors.14 

Steering Angle Sensor .15 

Brake Fluid Level Warning Switch.16 

Diagnosis.17 


Initial Print Date: 12/03 


Revision Date: 























E53AWD&DSC III 


Model: E53 

Production: From 9/00 to 9/03 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand transfer case design 

• Understand ADB/DSC III features 


2 

E53 AWD and DSC III 




E53 AWD 


Drivetrain 

The transfer case, driveshafts, final drives and half shafts make up the drivetrain assembly. 

The transfer case is always mounted in the same position on the X5. This applies to 
other markets and future models that will utilize different transmissions for different 
engine configurations. With these models, the transmission tail shafts will be modified to 
match up with the transfer case. 

The rear drives haft is a two piece unit using a center bearing, while the front drive shaft 
is a single piece that is splined to the transfer case and bolted to the front differential. 



The breathervents for both differentials and the transfer case are mounted higher up on 
the chassis to prevent water from entering if the vehicle is driven offroad through water. 
The front breather passes up into the engine compartment and is mounted under the 
leftside ignition coil cover. The rear breather passes along the underside of the body 
and is mounted behind the leftside wheel arch cover. The breather vent for the transfer 
case is mounted up high in the driveshaft tunnel. 



3 

E53 AWD and DSC III 










Drivetrain-T ransfer C ase 


The transfer case is manufactured by New Process Gear Division of New Venture Gear 
Company. It is identified as model NV 125. 

It incorporates a planetary gear set and chain to provide the torque split and all wheel 
drive. The output torque of the transmission is applied to the planetary carrier of the gear 
set. The rear drive shaft is connected to the annulus gear and the front drive shaft is con¬ 
nected to the sun gear through the chain drive. 

As the output shaft of the transmission turns, the planetary carrier rotates, causing the 
planetary gears to drive the sun gear and annulus gear. 



A torque split of 68% rear/ 32% front is provided through the gearing of the planetary set. 



68 % 

32% 


4 

E53 AWD and DSC III 




E53 DSC III 


Features 

Note: This section only describes the new DSC features that are associated with 
the AWD system. AllotherBosch DSC 5.7features remain unchanged. 

Hill Decent Control (HDC) 

Hill Decent Control (HDC) is designed for off road use to automatically slow the vehicle 
and maintain a steady speed on steep gradients. This function allows the driver to focus 
on steering and controlling the vehicle without having to use the brakes to slow the vehicle. 

HDC is activated manually through the push button switch located in the center switch 
panel located in the console. When activated, the vehicle's speed is held to approximate¬ 
ly 5 MPH by the DSC system pulsing the brakes to maintain the speed. 

The following conditions must be met before the HDC will activate: 

• Push button pressed - LED "ON" 

• Vehicle speed: <25 MPH 

• Accelerator pedal pressed <15% 

• Downhill driving recognized 

Downhill is recognized from the vehicle's speed and engine load from the engine control 
module. The accelerator pedal and engine load signals are passed overthe CAN bus to 
the DSC control module. 

The HDC switch can be 
pressed at speeds <37MPH 
and the LED will come on to 
indicate standby mode. 

However the system will not 
activate until the vehicle's speed 
is below 25. 

The driver can accelerate with 
HDC active up to approximately 
20% engine load.The HDC will 
stop regulating as long as the 
driver is requesting a speed 
increase. If the vehicle's speed 
is >37 MPH, the HDC function 
is automatically switched OFF. 



5 

E53 AWD and DSC III 






Automatic Differential Brake (ADB) 

On dry pavement with no wheel slip, the vehicle's driving torque is split 68% rear and 
32% front through the planetary gear differential transfer case. 

If one or more wheels spin or slip, the DSC will activate a regulation process and the 
brakes on the effected wheel(s) will be pulsed.The driving torque will be distributed 
through the differential to the remaining wheels with a good coefficient of friction 

The driving torque will be applied through the differential as follows: 

• Three wheels - with one wheel spinning. 

• On two diagonal wheels with two wheels spinning on different axles. 

• One axle only with two wheels spinning on the same axle. 

0 nee the spin or slip is under control, the drive torque will again be applied to all wheels. 



6 

E53 AWD and DSC III 























































\ 




7 

E53 AWD and DSC III 
















































































































Traction Control 

The traction control feature of the DSC III on the X5 cannot be switched OFF with the 
DSC switch. Pressing the button will only switch off the dynamic stability control function 
of the DSC. 

The traction control feature is needed at all times to provide anti-spin control especially 
when driving the vehicle off road. The DSC warning lamp in the instrument cluster will still 
come on when the system is switched off manually or there is a fault in the system. 

Offroad traction control orHDC regulation places an additional load on the brakes. To 
prevent overheating of the brakes and rotors, the temperature of the rotors is calculated 
overtime from the road speed and amount of brake application. If the temperature of one 
or more rotors goes above 600o C, the traction control or HDC function for that wheel 
will be cancelled temporarily. Once the temperature of the rotor goes below 500o C, the 
traction application will be re-activated. 

The normal braking function (including ABS) is always active at any temperatures. 

Off-Road ABS Control Module Programming 

The programming for ABS regulation have changed to allow a higherthreshold for ABS 
regulation when driving off-road in loose gravel or dirt. A locked wheel is more effective in 
slowing or stopping the vehicle because of the wedge that is built up in front of the tire. 

The programming in the DSC control module allows one or both front wheel(s) to lock up 
to a speed of 12 M PH as long as the vehicle is traveling straight ahead. If the DSC control 
module receives a signal from the steering angle sensor indicating a turn, ABS regulation 
will activate to prevent the lock and allow the vehicle to be steered. 


8 

E53 AWD and DSC III 



DSC III Components/IPO 


ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 



KL 30 
KL 15 




DSC SWITCH 


HDC SWITCH 


/^s 



rLTLTI 


•— u 

1 

WHEEL 

=□ 

1 1 

1 ' 

SPEED 


=□ 

1 rLrLri 

1 1 

SENSORS 



i ruui 


BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


ELECTRONIC 
BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 



X. 


TO LCM 



PARK BRAKE 
SWITCH 


DSC III 



POWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 


PUMP 


INLET (4X) 


OUTLET (4X) 


CHANGEOVER (2x) 


PRE-LOAD (2x) 


hj— 

~mmr 


mms— 

■iflcmi -1 


DSCIII 

HYDRAULIC 

UNIT 


POWER SUPPLY 
GROUND 

SENSOR TEST 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


CHARGE PUMP 
CONTROL 



STEERING ANGLE 
SENSOR WITH 
INTEGRAL MICRO¬ 
PROCESSOR 


CAN 




n 

EML Ills 

uuu 


WHEEL SPEED X4 


EDO 

IKE&DMEI 
DIAGNOSIS 



9 

E53 AWD and DSC III 









































































































































































DSC III Hydraulic Unit 


LOW BRAKE 
FLUID SIGNAL 



DSC 

HYDRAULIC UNIT 


0 


G 







10 

E53 AWD and DSC III 




































































































































































Components 


Control Module Hydraulic Unit 

The control module is integrated into the hydraulic unit as one compact unit. This 
reduces the size and wiring required for DSC operation. Additionally the motor relay and 
valve relay have been replaced by solid state final stages in the control module. 

The hydraulic unit continues to use: 

•Two pre-charge solenoid valves 

•Two changeover solenoid valves 

• Four intake solenoid valves 

• Four outlet solenoid valves 

• One return pump 



11 

E53 AWD and DSC III 




Rotation Rate/Transverse Acceleration Sensor 

Located under the center console behind the M RS III control module, the rotation rate 
and transverse acceleration sensor provides two inputs to the DSC control module. The 
sensor is isolated from body/chassis vibrations through its rubber mounting. 

For rotational speed, the sensor produces a reference signal of 2.5 volts and a linear volt¬ 
age signal from 0.7 to 4.3 volts. This linearvoltage input signal is used by the DSC control 
module as the degree of rotational rate (yaw). 

The sensor also produces a linearvoltage signal forthe lateral acceleration (G-force)that 
ranges from 0.5 to 4.5 volts. The DSC control module uses this input to determine the 
side forces acting on the vehicle for DSC regulation. 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ACCELERATION SENSOR INPUT 






ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR/ 
ACCELERATION SENSOR 




Location of the Rotation Rate/Transverse 
Acceleration Sensor underthe centerconsole 


12 

E53 AWD and DSC III 
















































Brake Pressure Sensor 

A brake pressure sensor is installed in the hydraulic unit to determine the degree of pres¬ 
sure build-up for Dynamic Brake Control. It is installed in the front axle brake circuit. 

The sensor receives its power supply from the DSC control module and produces a lin¬ 
ear voltage input signal ranging from 0.5 to 4.5 volts depending on how hard the brakes 
are applied. 



13 

E53 AWD and DSC III 







DSC III Components 


HDC Switch 

The hill decent control function is activated by 
pressing the HDC switch located in the center 
console. The LED will come on steady when the 
function is in standby and flash when HDC is reg¬ 
ulating 

DSC Switch 

The system is active whenever the ignition is 
switched on. When pressed, the switch provides a 
momentary 12 volt signal to the DSC III control 
module to switch the system off (DSC indicator in 
cluster illuminated.) When pressed again, the sys¬ 
tem switches back on (DSC Indicator in cluster 
goes off.) 




Wheel Speed Sensors 

• 2 wire Hall Effect Sensor - "Square wave generator”. 

• 48 pulse incremental wheel incorporated in wheel 
bearing coverfor contaminant protection. 48 pulses = 
one complete wheel revolution. 


Stabilized 8 volt power supply to hall element on one 
wire, ground path for sensor through second wire 
back to control module. Signal is generated by the 
pulse wheel affecting voltage flow through hall ele¬ 
ment creating a low of .75 and a high of 2.5 volts. 

Sensors identical to DSC II and ASC V systems. 

Sensors provide immediate vehicle speed recogni¬ 
tion. 






r\ r\ 


14 

E53 AWD and DSC III 


MAGNET 













































Steering Angle Sensor 

The Steering angle sensor is mounted at 
the bottom of the steering spindle (in front 
of the flex coupling). 

The sensor is equipped with a processor 
and is directly linked to the CAN bus to 
communicate with the DSC III module. 

The sensor still utilizes two potentiometers 
to determine the steering angle and the 
rate of steering. These are the raw signals the CAN Bus microprocessor utilizes to create 
the steering angle signal for broadcast on the CAN bus. 

The sensor requires calibration after repairs to the steering or suspension system (found 
in DIS Service Functions). Once the calibration is completed the sensor now also sends 
an identification number overthe CAN bus to the DSC III module. The ID provides con¬ 
firmation in the DSC module that the steering angle sensor is properly calibrated. 

If the ID differs due to component swapping it will not be possible to enterthe DSC sys¬ 
tem for diagnosis. The DIS will request that the steering angle sensor be recalibrated 
using the service functions. Once complete a new ID number is generated and the DSC 
III control module and Steering angle sensor are properly mated. 

The DSC III logic checks the plausibility of the steering angle sensor against the other 
DSC III inputs (front wheel speeds, rotation and lateral acceleration sensors). If battery 
voltage is interrupted, the current steering wheel rotation is recalculated by the DSC 
module evaluating the front wheel speeds. 

Replacement steering angle sensors must be ZCS coded when installed in the vehicle 
prior to the calibration procedure. 

Notes: 



v 

CAN BUS MICROPROCESSOR 


15 

E53 AWD and DSC III 























Brake Fluid Level Warning Switch 



D-IBU 


A new fluid level switch is incorporated into the reservoir cap. 

• With sufficient fluid level the reed contact is closed. 

• When level drops below allowable limits, switch opens. 

Since the normal position is closed, this circuit is monitored 
for shorts to + and ground. 




The LCM constantly monitors the input. If the ground signal is momentary, the LCM sig¬ 
nals the Instrument cluster of the condition. The instrument cluster then informs the 
DSC III control module overthe CAN bus. If the signal is received just priorto the activa¬ 
tion of the charge pump, the charge pump activation is delayed. 


If the signal is present for more then 25 seconds, the LCM issues two I BUS message for 
the Instrument Cluster: 


1. Post "Brake Fluid Level" in the Matrix display 

2. Notify the DSC III via CAN that the Fluid level has been low for more than 25 
seconds. 


The DSC III control module immediately switches DSC III functions off and continuously 
illuminates the DSC indicator in the cluster. 


16 

E53 AWD and DSC III 































































Diagnosis 

Diagnosis and troubleshooting of the DSC III system is carried out using the DIS Tester or 
MoDiC.The DSC control module performs a self check every time the ignition is 
switched on. The warning lamps for DSC and ABS will remain on during the self check. 

Any faults with the system will cause the lamps to remain on when the engine is started. 
Faults that only effect the DSC operation will cause the DSC warning lamp to remain on, 
however ABS can still function. 

If the battery has been disconnected, the DSC warning lamp will remain on until the vehi¬ 
cle receives road speed signals front the front wheel speed sensors and the steering 
angle sensor can calculate the direction of travel. 





DIS & 
MoDiC 


17 

E53 AWD and DSC III 






































































































