Table of Contents 


E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8+ 

Subject Page 

xDrive with DSC 8+ . ....4 

xDrive .5 

DSC8+.5 

System Circuit Diagram .6 

System Components .9 

ATC 300 Transfer Case.10 

DSC8+Control Unit.12 

Bus Overview .12 

Principles of Operation.13 

Power Flow .13 

DSC/DSC8+Control Unit.14 

Dynamic Stability Control .15 

ASC-X/ADB-X.15 

Hill Decent Control (HDC).16 

Dry Braking .17 

Brake Standby.18 

Automatic Soft Stop .19 

Fading Compensation.20 

Drive-off Assistant .21 

Service Information.22 

Oil, Transfer Case, and Clutch Monitoring.22 

Oil .22 

Transfer Case and Clutch .22 

Diagnosis .23 

Programming (flashing).23 

Warning Indicator Lamps .23 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 04/05 





























Subject 


Page 



E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8+ 


Model: 525xi, 530xi, 530xiT 
Production: From April 2005 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Familiarize yourself with DSC8+features 

• Explain the xDrive mechanical operation 

• Describe the xDrive power flow 


3 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 




xDrive with DSC8+ 


Note: This section only contains changes to xDrive forthe E60, 61, 90,91. 

Detailed information on xDrive is covered in the E83/E 53 xDrive module. 

From 04/2005, the BMW 5 Series wagon and sedan (optional) will have all wheel drive 
capability utilizing the tried and tested all-wheel drive system xDrive of the X3 and X5. 

The innovative all-wheel xDrive is a system for controlling and regulating the "infinitely" 
variable drive torque distribution overthe front and rear axle. The xDrive uses the system 
functions of the DSC to positively influence the vehicle handling by specifically distribut¬ 
ing the power in the event of understeer or oversteer. 

With the controlled multi-disc clutch in connection with the xDrive it is now possible to 
resolve the conflict between traction and vehicle handling. 

This is been achieved in that the xDrive does not predefine the torque distribution by a 
fixed transmission ratio as is the case with the previous systems. Instead, distribution of 
the drive torque is dependent on the clutch lockup torque of the controlled multi-disc 
clutch in the transfer case and on the transmitted torque at the front and rear axle. 

Driver Benefits 

In addition to the previous functions, a series of additional safety and comfort functions 
will now be available to the driver with the introduction of the DSC8+in the E60/E61. 

The expanded DSC8+functions include: 

• Dry braking 

• Brake standby 

• Automatic soft-stop 

• Fading warning and assistance 

• Drive-off assistant 

• Hill descent control HDC 

Besides the outstanding chassis characteristics ofthe BMW 5 Series, the all wheel drive 
system offers traction advantages not only on snow and ice but also on unsurfaced 
roads. 


Note: Because many system components and functions and are shared 
between the xDrive and DSC 8+ system, they will be discussed 
together in this section. 


4 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 





x Drive 


The innovative xDrive four-wheel drive is a system that controls and regulates the distrib¬ 
ution of driving torque to the front and rear axles. The measured variables of DSC are 
used by xDrive but are also influenced by modified handling performance. 

The multi-disc clutch is the heart of the xDrive. By using the controlled multi-disc clutch, 
it is possible to resolve the conflict between traction and handling performance. 

This is achieved through the fact that torque distribution is not determined by a fixed gear 
ratio in the xDrive as was the case in the previous systems. Instead, the distribution of dri¬ 
ving torque is dependent on the locking torque of the controlled multi-disc clutch in the 
transfer case and on the transferable torque to the front and rear axles. 

DSC8+ 

The DSC8+system adds features to the DSC8 system already in use in the E60 sedan 
and combines features used in other DSC systems (E53/83). Due to the mechanical 
composition of the xDrive system, the programming for DSC regulation has also been 
changed. 

Present DSC 8 functions: 

• ABS Anti-lock Braking System 

• ADB Automatic Differential Brake 

• EBV Electronic Braking Force Distribution 

• CBC Cornering Brake Control 

Present DSC functions: 

• TCC Transfer Case Control 
(control of multi-disc clutch in transfer case) 

• ASC-X Automatic Stability Control X 
(special function for all-wheel drive vehicles) 

• ADB-X Automatic Differential Brake X 
(special function for all-wheel drive vehicles) 

• HDC Hill Decent Control 

New DSC/DSC8+functions 

• Dry braking • Brake standby 

• Automatic soft stop • Fading assistance 

• Drive-off assistant • Trailer stabilization control 

• Hill descent control HDC 


ASC Automatic Stability Control 
DSC Dynamic Stability Control 
DBC Dynamic Brake Control 
MSR Engine Drag Torque Control 


5 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 



System Circuit Diagram 



E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 































































































































































































































System C ircuit Diagram Legend 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Instrument cluster 

2 

Outside temperature sensor 

3 

Safety and gateway module (SGM) 

4 

Steering column switch cluster (SZL) 
with HDC button 

5 

Electronic transmission control module (EGS) 

6 

Transfer case control unit (VGSG) 

7 

Temperature sensor 

8 

Electronic motor, actuator drive 

9 

Coding resistor 

10 

Motor position sensor 

11 

Accelerator pedal module (FPM) - (not for US) 

12 

Digital motor electronics (DM E) control unit 

13 

Wheel speed sensor, front right 

14 

Handbrake switch 

15 

Dynamic traction control (DSC8+) 

16 

Wheel speed sensor, rear right 

17 

Brake wear sensor, rear right 

18 

Wheel speed sensor, rear left 

19 

DSC button 

20 

Center console switching center (SZM) 

21 

Controller (CON) 

22 

Brake light switch (BLS) 

23 

Brake wear sensor, front left 

24 

Brake fluid level sensor 

25 

Wheel speed sensor, front left 

26 

CCC orM-ASK 

27 

Central information display 

28 

Yaw rate/longitudinal/transverse acceleration sensor (Y-sensor-2) 

29 

Rain light sensor (RLS) 

30 

Car Access System (CAS) 


7 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 































































8 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 



System Components 



The xD rive/DSC 8+ system is composed of the following major components: 

• ATC 300 transfer case 

• Adjusting levers 

• Servomotor with motor position and temperature sensor 

• Coding/classification resistor 

• Transfer case control unit 
DSC8+control unit 
Wheel speed sensor 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Oil Pan lead through 

4 

Propeller shaft to front axle 

2 

Right drive shaft, front 

5 

Front axle differential 

3 

Transfer case 

6 

Left drive shaft, front 


9 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 























ATC 300 Transfer Case 

The transfer case ATC 300 (Active Torque Control) is used on the E60/E61. 

In view of the restricted package space of the transmission tunnel in the BMW 5 Series, it 
was not possible to adopt the transfer case from the BMWX3 (ACT400)with the same 
torque rating. 

On the BMW 5 Series it was not possible to drive the forward power flow diagonally as is 
the case on the X3 with a chain, but rather it is necessary to divert it L-shaped with the 
aid of spur gears (pinions), resulting in a modified design of the transfer case. 

The actuator drive and the actuation of the control lever were also modified. The clutch 
package remains unchanged. The forward connection is provided by a bolted on drive 
shaft. 

The flange of the ATC transfer case is the same for automatic and manual transmissions. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Propeller shaft to front axle 

8 

Clutch housing 

2 

Drive flange to front axle 

9 

Output flange to rear axle 

3 

Control cam 

10 

Propeller shaft to rear axle 

4 

Transfer case 

11 

Disc package 

5 

Idler gear 

12 

Actuator drive 

6 

Drive gear 

13 

Drive pinion 

7 

Control lever 

14 

Output gear 


10 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 



























The ATC 300 is installed in the E61 and E60 all wheel drive models.The ATC 400 is 
installed in the E83 and the ATC 500 in the E53 M U. 

The ATC 300 differs from the other transfer cases because it is gear driven not chain 
driven. The basic functions and operations remain unchanged. 

The difference between the transfer cases are: 

• ATC 400 & 500 are chain driven vs. ATC 300 which is gear driven 

• ATC 300 & 400 uses a four bolt flange to connect to the front propeller shaft vs. 
ATC 500 which uses a splined connection 

• ATC 500 utilizes one more disc in the multi-disc clutch than the ATC 300 & 400 

• ATC 500 has 19mm greater length between the input shaft and the output shaft to 
the front axle than the ATC 400. (the ATC 300 uses gears not a chain) 


ATC 500 Transfer Case 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Input from manual / automatic transmission 

5 

Clutch discs 

2 

Output to rear axle prop, shaft 

6 

Adjusting levers with ball ramp 

3 

Output to front axle prop, shaft 

7 

Chain 

4 

Servomotor 

8 

Disc cam 


11 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 
















DSC8+Control Unit 

The DSC8+control unit is installed in the engine compartment essentially consists of 
three components: 

• Add-on control unit 

• Valve block with integrated pressure sensors 

• Pump motor 

The newly developed changeover valves permit even more exact control in the low pres¬ 
sure range, resulting in the following advantages: 

• Reduction of control noise 

• Improvement in control quality and control comfort 

• Improvement in automatic brake intervention by the active/dynamic cruise control 
AC C/DC C 

• Improvement in the control accuracy of the HDC function 

• Realization of additional brake functions 


Bus Overview 

The transfer case control unit(VGSG) is on the PT-CAN. VGSG shares information with 
DSC for overall xDrive control and has diagnostic communication. 


E MG 


EMC 


LM 


lltL 


r_:in 



1 

J 


[HArt ! 

K 



ms 


nr I 

A 


|\I1M |j„ CAJZ 


I 

5MFA 



EHC 


CCC 


■DDC 


s-iuD 


W 







rai 


TOP-MPi 


ULF 




TfAFA 


S FZ 


SB FA 


HJSft 'f.SU* f 


IMBF 


SZL 




\Hy, 


DKG 




BKP 


DDE 


— E13E 


AufTuFA - 


*LiV6F - 


ACC 


1 

EMBF 


ZH 


f.-CJiK 

.■ii-ivVi;..'..- 

UQST 

Ul* 

■HKA 

0 



PT-C AM == 

f-ClM 

eled 

LaTAH 


Bus Topology Chart of E61 Sports Wagon (530xiT) 


12 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 























































































Principles of Operation 


Power Flow 

When the multi-disc clutch in the transfer case is disengaged, no driving torque is trans¬ 
mitted to the front axle. All of the driving torque is then distributed to the rear axle. This is 
because the input shaft (1) is splined providing a permanent connection to the rear axle 
propeller shaft output flange (2).The multi-disc clutch couples the rear axle propeller 
shaft output flange to the front propeller shaft output (3). 

The driving torque on the front axle is increased or decreased by regulating the locking 
pressure of the multi-disc clutch, providing a stepless coupling of the front axle to the 
drivetrain.This depends on driving situations and road conditions. When the multi-disc 
clutch is fully engaged, the front and rear axles turn at the same speed. 

Driving torque distribution (front/rear) is based on available traction at each axle. For 
example, when traction is identical on the front and rear axles and a driver accelerates 
from a stop in first gear at full throttle, the rear axle is capable of sustaining greater driving 
torque as the vehicle weight shifts from the front to the rear. 

Another example is when the front axle is on a high traction surface and the rear axle is on 
ice. In this case, virtually 100% of the available driving torque is transmitted to the front 
axle. Based on available traction, virtually no driving torque can be supported by the rear 
axle . Obviously, when more driving torque is transmitted to the front axle, driving torque 
on the rear axle is proportionally reduced due to lack of traction. 


*5 



Color 

Explanation 

Red 

Torque from engine to rear axle 

Green 

Controlled torque to front axle 

Dark Blue 

Rotation to drive multi-disc clutch 


13 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 







DSC/DSC8+Control Unit 

As in the earlier DSC control units, there are two microprocessors incorporated in the add 
on DSC8+control unit. The difference is that in the DSC8 and DSC8+both processors 
do not calculate the same algorithms but rather one processor is responsible for perform¬ 
ing control and monitoring calculations and checking the plausibility of the wheel speeds. 

There are also two semiconductor relays integrated in the DSC8+control unit, one for the 
pumpmotorand the other for the solenoid valves. 

On exceeding a road speed of 6 km/h, an electronic self-test is started, during which the 
pump motor and all solenoid valves are briefly actuated. If the brake is operated at a dri¬ 
ving speed of 6 km/h, as may be the case with "two-foot drivers", the self-test will be per¬ 
formed at a speed of 15 km/h. 

The check of the wheel speed signals is already started at a speed of 2.75 km/h. 

In connection with the xDrive, the DSC 8+control unit also undertakes the task of calcu¬ 
lating the lockup torque for the multi-disc clutch in the transfer case. 

The lockup torque is always optimally set and controlled to suit the corresponding driving 
situation. 

The drive torque distribution over the front and rear axles is based on the lockup torque. 
The lockup torque to be set is derived from the pilot control and from a higher-ranking 
traction and vehicle dynamics regulator corresponding to the driving situation. 

The DSC8+control unit sends the data, concerning the lockup torque, on the PT-CAN to 
the transfer case control unitVGSG. 

Conversely, the transfer case control unit signals the lockup torque actually set as well as 
the load on the transmission fluid, electric motor and multi-disc clutch. 


14 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 



Dynamic Stability Control 

DSC8+offers several new features from April 2005 production vehicles. They are: 

• ASC-X/ADB-X 

• Hill descent control HDC 

• Dry braking 

• Brake standby 

• Automatic soft stop 

• Fading assistance 

• Drive-off assistant 

• Trailer stabilization control 

■ ASC-X/ADB-X 

Unlike regular road vehicles, SAVs are also meant to demonstrate satisfactory handling 
characteristics and appropriate traction on unconventional roads. In order to provide opti¬ 
mum propulsion with sufficient cornering stability on both normal roads and other road 
surfaces, Automatic Stability Control X (ASC-X) contains a detection function to distin¬ 
guish between them. 

When off-road terrain is detected, wheel slip threshold is increased to provide sufficient 
traction force with the increased levels of traction loss. 

ASC-X is supplemented by the Automatic Differential Brake (ADB-X) function, which 
applies the brakes to the wheels per axle, for side to side torque transfer. For example, 
when a wheel is spinning on one side (up to the slip setpoint), the brakes are applied to 
that wheel and the driving torque is transferred through the axle differential to the wheel 
with the higher traction. This provides superb capabilities when there are diagonal trac¬ 
tion losses (ie. left front/right rear). 

ADB-X remains active when DSC is deactivated. Furthermore, ADB-X can develop full 
capability because the engine power is not reduced, even during extreme four wheel 
drive operation. Only that wheel which has a low traction receives the brake application. 

The brake disc can overheat with excessive ADB-X intervention with DSC deactivated. In 
this situation, the operation is discontinued at a disc temperature of approx. 700 2 C and is 
resumed when this temperature drops below approx. 400 2 C. This is a calculation per¬ 
formed by the DSC control unit based on brake application time, pressure, wheel speed, 
etc. 


15 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 




Hill DecentControl (HDC) 

As on previous all wheel drive vehicles in the BMW line, the E61 all-wheel drive also fea¬ 
tures the hill descent control facility for safe vehicle operation on steep downhill inclines. 
The HDC stabilizes the vehicle and prevents the wheels locking.The DSC8+module 
controls the build-up of braking pressure at all four wheels so that the vehicle drives 
downhill at a speed of approx. 7.5 mph (12 km/h). 

The HDC function is activated in the central information display via the menu: 

Settings => Vehicle settings =>HDC 

The HDC ON function can be activated by setting a tick in the menu and deactivated by 
removing the tick. 

Furthermore, the HDC ON/OFF function can be selected with one of the two free but¬ 
tons (asterisk, hash) in the steering wheel button menu. 


< HDC ► p 

HDC ein 


CD 01-12 Vi+ ..ill 10:16 


Menu HDC ON / Active 


16 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 



Dry Braking 

The water spray produced in wet conditions coats the brake discs with a waterfilm, caus¬ 
ing delayed response of the brakes. In connection with previous systems it was therefore 
recommended to operate the brakes from time to time. 

The dry braking function is dependent on the position of the wiper switch and therefore 
on the signal of the rain/lights sensor. The brake discs are kept dry by lightly applying the 
brake pads cyclically as required, this achieving improved braking response in wet condi¬ 
tions. 

While doing so, the pressure in the brake system is increased by approx. 1 bar and the 
brake pads are applied for approx. 1.5 seconds. 

Dry braking takes place underfollowing conditions: 

• Driving speed >70 km/h 

• Continuous wipe operation in stage 1 or 2 

The repeat interval depends on the wiper stage: 

• Continuous wipe stage 1 - 200 s 

• Continuous wipe stage 2 - 120 s 

• Generally 90 s as from 09/2005 

This applies only when the driver himself does not apply the brake during this time. 

The driver notices no deceleration or noise. 



Left disc with waterfilm before dry braking Right brake disc after dry braking 


17 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 




Brake Standby 

Quick release of the accelerator pedal causes the brake pads to be applied against the 
brake disc thus reducing the stopping distance (by approx.. 30 cmAOO km/h) during 
emergency braking. The DSC module builds up slight brake pressure (approx. 2.5 bar) 
temporarily (approx. 0.5 seconds) in order to eliminate the clearance between the brake 
pad and brake disc by applying the brake pads. 

The brake standby function is activated under following conditions: 

• Driving speed >70 km/h 

• M inimum time between brake application 8 s 

• The brake standby function is not activated in connection with sudden acceleration 
(sports driving style). 

The DM E/DDE control unit makes available the signal indicating quick release of the 
accelerator pedal via the PT-CAN. 

The sensitive driver may perceive a slightly harder brake pedal. No delay or noise is dis¬ 
cernible forthe driver. 



Index 

Explanation 

P 

Braking pressure in Bar 

T 

Time in milliseconds 

1 

Pilot pressure applied by driver 

2 

Braking pressure progression with brake standby 

3 

Braking pressure progression without brake standby 


18 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 





























































Automatic Soft Stop 

Due to the transition from sliding friction to static friction on the brake disc, a stopping jolt 
occurs when braking to a standstill where the occupants perceive an increased feeling of 
deceleration. 

When braking lightly (< 25 bar) at constant pressure to bring the vehicle to a halt, the soft 
stop function automatically reduces the braking pressure at the rear axle just before the 
vehicle comes to a stop. This consequently reduces the positive acceleration peak per¬ 
ceived by the occupants by approx. 50% while extending the action time. 

The speed and standstill status are recognized by way of the wheel speed sensors. 


i 



Q.S IjO -1,5 2.0 2,5 

[ 6 ] 


Index 

Explanation 

m/s ^ 

Deceleration 

s 

Time in seconds 

Red 

Deceleration without soft stop 

Blue 

Deceleration with soft stop 

-50% 

Reduction of occupant deceleration 


Note: This function is inactive at medium to high deceleration or in the event of 
ABS control in order notto lengthen the stopping distance. 


19 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 















































































Fading Compensation 

High temperatures (>550°C) can occur at the brake discs when driving downhill over 
long periods or as the result of extreme multiple braking operations ( >80 bar). These 
high temperatures cause a change in the coefficient of friction of the brake pads resulting 
in the braking effect diminishing (fading). 

For this purpose, the temperature of the brake disc is calculated by means of a tempera¬ 
ture model contained in the DSC8+software. The braking pressure applied by the driver 
is measured by the delivery pressure sensor and compared with the current vehicle 
deceleration (target/actual value). 

When the braking effect diminishes, the fading compensation provides assistance for the 
driver in that pressure is additionally built up by the DSC module. 



Brake Disc with Fading 


20 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 











D ri ve-off A ss ista nt 

When negotiating uphill gradients, the drive-off assistant holds the vehicle for a short time 
(approx. 1.5 s) after releasing the brake so that the vehicle drives off comfortably without 
the need to use the handbrake. The braking pressure required by the driver to hold the 
vehicle is maintained automatically in the system. 

When driving off, the braking pressure is not reduced before the torque is sufficient for 
the vehicle to drive off. The holding pressure in the brake system (10 to max. 70 bar) is 
dependent on the uphill gradient. 

Uphill gradients are detected by the DSC sensor with the aid of a longitudinal accelera¬ 
tion sensor. 

The function is active both when driving forwards (transmission in Drive) and when 
reversing (transmission in Reverse) on uphill gradients (up to 50 %). 



Drive-off Assistant Function 


21 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 





Service Information 


Safety Notice!!! 


On a vehicle equipped with an automatic transmission, 
when driving onto brake analyzers, move the selector 
leverto the "N" position . On a vehicle equipped with a manual transmission, 
do not release the clutch pedal once on the brake analyzer. 


This keeps the transfer case clutch open and the vehicle cannot be pulled 
off the analyzer. 



Towing: Use only a flatbed carrierfor all xDrive vehicles! 


Oil, Transfer Case, and Clutch Monitoring 
■ Oil 

All xDrive transfer cases use Shell Gearoil part number83 22 0 306 816. 

There is no scheduled service for the transfer case oil. Oil Monitoring is performed by the 
VTG control module to determine when a service (change) is due.The VTG calculates 
transfer case and clutch wear based on the amount of slip, engagement pressure 
(torque), speed and mileage. 

This calculation accounts for: 

• normal "dry" road driving (Integrator 1) 

• "adverse" road driving (Integrator 2) 

• "other" road extreme driving (Integrator 3) 

Depending on individual vehicle use - driving styles and driving conditions, the transfer 
case oil service interval will vary. 

When a service is due, this will be indicated by a Fault Code and additional details are 
available using the DISplus/ GT1. Service functions provide directions on changing the 
transfer case oil and updating the VTG control module with the necessary reset and 
adaption procedure. This is extremely important for CBS. 

Transfer Case and Clutch 

The transfer case and clutch have separate monitoring characteristics. These values are 
stored as adaptive values in the VGSG control unit and must be transferred to a new con¬ 
trol unit if replaced. 

The value for both can be obtained using the diagnostic software under: 

Control Unit Functions =>VTG => Diagnosis requests =>Transmission 
Control Unit Functions =>VTG => Diagnosis requests =>Clutch 


22 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 





Diagnosis 

Diagnosis is available forfault repairs and service procedures using the DISplus/GTl. 

The test plan forthe VGSG contains valuable information on: 

• Replacing control unit 

• Replacing transfer case 

• Transferring adaptation values 

- Automatic 

- Manual 

• Reading out adaptation values 

Programming (flashing) 

Both the transfer case control unit (VTG) and the DSC control unit are programmable and 
the new control unit(s) must be programmed when replaced. The wear values stored in 
the VTG control module (to be replaced) must be transferred to the replacement VTG. 

Warning Indicator Lamps 

The warning indicator lamps forthe xDrive/DSC are found in the instrument cluster as 
shown on the bottom of this page. 




The warning indicator lamps and acoustic signals (gong) are assigned to the xDrive / DSC 
system states of malfunction described on the next two pages. 


23 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 







Check Control Messages Relating to xDrive/ DXC8+ 


Fixed Variable Check control Information in central information display 

indicator indicator message 
lamp lamp 




DSC disabled! 


You have disabled DSC. Restricted vehicle stability 
while accelerating and cornering. 



DTC enabled, DTC enabled. 

DSC restricted! Dynamic traction control DTC increases forward 

propulsion on unpaved surfaces, however, it 
decreases vehicle stability. 



DSC failed! 
Drive with 
moderation 


DBC failed. 

No additional braking assistance from DBC in 
emergency braking situations. 

Drive with moderation. 

Have checked by your BMW dealer as soon as 
possible. 



DSC failed! 
Drive with 
moderation 



Control systems! 
Drive with 
moderation 


Control systems! 
Drive with 
moderation 


Brake pads! 
Replace 


Brake fluid! 
Stop cautiously 


Brakes too hot! 
Allow to cool 
down 


DSC failed. 

Restricted vehicle stability while accelerating and 
cornering. 

Drive with moderation. 

Have checked by your BMW dealer as soon as 
possible. 

Brake and vehicle control systems failed. Reduced 
braking and vehicle stability. Avoid abrupt braking 
where possible. 

Have checked by nearest BMW dealer. 

Brake and vehicle control systems failed. Drive 
with moderation, avoid abrupt braking where 
possible. Have checked by nearest BMW dealer. 


The brake pads are worn. 

Have replaced by nearest BMW dealer. 


Brake fluid level too low. Reduced braking 
efficiency. Stop cautiously. Contact nearest BMW 
dealer. 


Brakes too hot 

Critical temperature as a result of permanent 
heavy load. Danger - reduced braking efficiency. 
Allow brakes to cool down. Stop if necessary. 


24 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 













Check Control Messages Relating to xDrive/ DXC8+ (cont'd) 


Fixed Variable Check control 
indicator indicator message 
lamp lamp 



Brakes 
overheated! 
Allow to cool 
down 

4x4 system and 
DSC failed! 


4x4 system 
defective! 

Drive with 
moderation 

4x4 system, DSC 
and ABS failed! 


4x4 System, 
DSC, ABS and 
emergency EBV 
failed! 

HDC enabled! 


HDC disabled! 



No HDC control! 
Drive slower 


HDC currently 
not available! 


Information in central information display 


Brakes overheated 

Critical temperature exceeded. Braking efficiency 
no longer guaranteed. Stop at the next opportunity 
and allow to cool down substantially. 

4x4 system and DSC failed! Vehicle stability 
restricted. Drive with moderation. Have checked 
by your BMW dealer as soon as possible. 


4x4 system defective 

Vehicle stability restricted. Drive with moderation. 
Have checked by your BMW dealer as soon as 
possible. 

4x4 system, DSC and ABS failed! Vehicle stability 
restricted. Drive with moderation. Have checked 
by your BMW dealer as soon as possible. 


4x4 System, DSC, ABS and emergency EBV 
failed! Vehicle stability restricted. Drive with 
moderation. Have checked immediately by your 
BMW dealer. 


HDC disabled. 

Hill descent control HDC is disabled at speed 
above 60 km/h (37 mph). 

System can be re-enabled at speed below 35 km/ 
h (22 mph). 

HDC not possible! 

Control range ends at 

35 km/h (22 mph). To use HDC, reduce speed 
accordingly. 

HDC not available. 

Automatic brake intervention interrupted for safety 
reasons as brakes are overheated. 

Shift down and drive carefully in order to reduce 
temperature. 


AB5 

ABS 

O 

Drive-off 

Drive-off assistant inactive 

assistant 

Caution, vehicle can roll back! Have checked by 

(©) 

inactive! 

your BMW dealer at next opportunity. 

BRAKE 

BRAKE 




m Li 



BRAKE 



Electronics fault! 
Stop cautiously 


Central vehicle electronics failed. Continued 
journey not possible. Contact nearest BMW 
dealer. 


25 

E60/E61 xDrive with DSC8 + 















