Table of Contents 


Coding & Programming Equipment 

Subject Page 

Equipment and Software .4 

DISplus (Diagnostic Information System).4 

GT1 (Group Tester 1) .4 

SSS (Software Service Station).4 

Diagnostic Head.5 

OPPS Head - (Optical Testing & Programming System) .5 

OPS Head - (Optical Programming System) .6 

Deutronic Automatic Battery Charger.6 

Hardware Operating Conditions.7 

Coding & Programming Software.7 

Latest DIS CD xx.7 

Latest CIP xx.x.8 

Networks.9 

Vehicle Bus Systems.9 

Workshop LAN Network .10 

Network Structure.11 

Network Connections .12 

Accessing Configuration Information.14 

Workshop Network Components.18 

Common Terminology .19 

Network .19 

Local Area Network (LAN) .19 

Ethernet.19 

Ethernet Cable (CAT 5).19 

RJ-45 Connectors.19 

Wall Jack .19 

Switched HUB.20 

Network Server.20 

Automatic/Online Updates.20 

Access Point.20 

Interface Name.21 

IP Address .21 

IP Subnet Mask.21 

Gateway.22 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 





































Subject Page 

Remote Coding, Individualization & Programming Terminals_23 

Software Service Station .24 

OPPS/OPS/Diagnostic Head .24 

OPPS .25 

OPS.25 

Diagnostic Head.25 

MOST Direct Access Port.26 

Equipment Configurations.27 

Procedure for Coding & Programming.29 

Review Questions.31 












Coding & Programming Equipment 
Model: All 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the equipment needed to perform a Coding or Programming session 

• Determine what components make up a workshop network 

• Understand the terminology used with regard to networks and configurations 

• Connect the various components needed for Coding & Programming a vehicle 

• Properly prepare a vehicle for Coding or Programming 


3 

Coding & Programming Equipment 




Equipment and Software 


Coding and Programming of a control module can only be performed within the work¬ 
shop network using BMW Group Equipment and Software. 


As of 2004 the standard diagnostic equipment available for a workshop consists of: 



DISplus (Diagnostic Information System) 

Used For: Vehicle Diagnosis, Coding, Programming and 

Individualization 

(Refer to SIB070300) 

With PROGMAN (CD14) the DISplus will no longer be 
able to do coding and programming directly, it will only be 
used as a remote terminal that can initiate Coding & 
Programming through SSS. 

Connection: Direct to LAN/Workshop Network or Direct 
to OPPS/OPS/Diagnostic Head 




GT1 (Group Tester 1) 

Used For: Vehicle Diagnosis, Coding, Programming and 

Individualization 

(Refer to SIB0801 02) 

With PROGMAN (CD14) the GT1 will no longer be able 
to do coding and programming directly, it will only be 
used as a remote terminal that can initiate Coding & 
Programming through SSS. 

Connection: Wireless LAN or Direct to LAN/Workshop 
Network or Direct to OPPS/OPS/Diagnostic Head 


SSS (Software Service Station) 

Used For: Vehicle Coding, Programming and 
Individualization. NO DIAGNOSTIC CAPABILITY. 

(Refer to SIB0701 03) 

With release of PROGMAN (CD 14) the SSS becomes 
the only tool for performing Coding, Programming and 
Individualization. All requests from GT1 or DISplus will be 
performed by the SSS. The SSS can also be used to 
directly initiate a Coding, Programming or Individualization 
request. 

SSS will be capable for coding/programming multiple 
vehicles, Max 5 vehicles at a time. 

Connection: LAN/Workshop Network or Direct to 
OPPS/OPS Head 


4 

Coding & Programming Equipment 































Diagnostic Head 



Interface between vehicle and DISplus, GT1 or SSS 
Used For: 

• Vehicle Diagnosis, Coding, Programming and 

Individualization 
(Refer to SI B08 01 02) 

• Not to be used for programming vehicles with a 

MOST bus (E60/63/64/65/66...) 

Connection: 

• Wireless to LAN/Workshop Network via access 
point 

• Wireless connection direct to GT1 


• Directly to LAN/Workshop Network using DK l_AN 
cable 


• Directly to GTI/DISplus/SSS using DK LAN Cable 
and adapter 


Refer to section on Equipment Configuration 


OPPS Head - (Optical Testing & Programming 
System) 



Interface between vehicle and DISplus, GT1 or SSS 
Used For: 

• Vehicle Diagnosis, Coding, Programming and 
Individualization on Most bus equipped vehicles. 
(Refer to SI B07 03 02) 

Note: The OPPS is NOT ABLE to perform 
Diagnosis, Coding, Individualization & 
Programming on an l-bus equipped vehicle. 


• Optical diagnosis of MOST and Byteflight Bus sys¬ 
tems. 


• Simultaneously program vehicles equipped MOST 
Bus system (except E65/66) via MOST Bus access 
port and OBD Connections. 


Connection: 

• Directly to LAN/Workshop Network connection 
using DK LAN cable or 

• Directly to GT 1/DISplus/SSS using DK LAN Cable 
and adapter. 


Refer to section on Equipment Configuration 


5 

Coding & Programming Equipment 































OPS Head - (Optical Programming System) 


Interface between vehicle and DISplus, GT1 or SSS 



Used For: 

• Vehicle Diagnosis, Coding, Programming and 
Individualization 
(Refer to SI B07 02 04) 

Note: The OPS is not able to perform optical 
diagnosis of MOST Bus and Byteflight sys¬ 
tems nor can it be used to perform Diagnosis, 
Coding, Individualization & Programming on 
an l-bus equipped vehicle. 

Connection: 


• Directly to LAN/Workshop Network or 

• Directly to GTI/DISplus/SSS using DK LAN Cable 
and adapter. 


Refer to section on Equipment Configuration 



Deutronic Automatic Battery Charger 

Used For: 

• Maintaining proper vehicle battery voltage level 
during Diagnosis, Coding and Programming. 

(Refer to SI B04 11 02) 

• Follow the initial setup of the charger as indicated 
in the SIB. 

Connection: 

• During Coding or Programming Procedure the bat¬ 
tery charger must be in the Power Supply (PS) 
mode. 

• Place the charger into the power supply mode by 
depressing the “MENUE” button 3 times in rapid 
succession. 

Refer to section on Equipment Configuration 


6 

Coding & Programming Equipment 















Hardware Operating Conditions 


Device 

Operating Temperature 

Relative Humidity 

GT1 

+3°C - +43°C = 

+37.4°F - +109.4°F 

10 - 80% (no condensation) 

OPPS/OPS 

+3°C - +43°C = 

+37.4°F - +109.4°F 

10 - 90% (no condensation) 

SSS 

+10°C - +35°C = 

+50F - +95°F 

10 - 90% (no condensation) 

Monitor SSS 

+3°C - +35°C = 

+37.4°F - +95°F 

10 - 90% (no condensation) 


Coding & Programming Software 

Whenever coding and programming are to be performed on a vehicle, the latest version 
of software for DISplus/GT 1 and SSS must be loaded/installed on the equipment being 
used. 

The DIS CD xx contains the diagnostic programs (test modules, schematics, system sta¬ 
tus values...) prior to CIP 15.0 all coding and programming information for early produc¬ 
tion vehicles (E31, E32, E34, E36, E38, E39, E46, E53 and E52) was also available. 


Note: With the introduction of CIP 15.0 all coding and programming informa¬ 
tion will be migrated to CIP and incorporated within Progman. 

Whenever a new version of either DIS CD xx or CIP xx.x is released this indicates that an 
update or addition to a specific coding, programming or diagnostic routine has occurred. 
The change can be reflected by a new/updated programming software for a specific con¬ 
trol module, the ability to code a new module or the ability to perform a new retrofit pro¬ 
cedure when installing a new system. 


Latest DIS CD xx 

The latest information pertaining to the most current version of CD xx that is available and 
to be installed on all DISplus, GT1 and SSS units in the workshop can be obtained by 
referencing SI B07 02 96, on the BMWcenternet TIS website. The service bulletin pro¬ 
vides clear instructions on loading the latest DIS CD xx and also identifies what modules 
in a vehicle require coding after being replaced. 



DiSTTograias V33.fi: G&tffiO 

Important note 

Radio hi rid problem 

Power module disconnection 
connected; 1c i nnrml 0- and wc 
minutes (60 minutes with opli 

Power module disconnection 
custoiner-iolsted problems 

Remedy; 

For longer work breaks, the r: 
disconnected. 

Fault symptoms 
The fault patterns entered in 1 
as imponeiit information in rei 

If there is a customer complai 
which diagnosis is being earn 
fault patterns inustthcrelore l 
m die "Fault pattern se Sects on" 

Status test module 
A test module will only then 
as "processed" if it tins been 
message Test module comp'll 


Diagnosis 
Model series E37 

Scope of diagnosis 1(30 % available 

Test module available foi reading out the Inst 72 
Cheek Control messages that occurred in the 
Vehicle. 

Chu be found at: Service Functions-.?'Vehicle 
InforrrwtiwteiCheck Control Messages 
Explanation of tests in SET 6? 01 04 074 

Test module available for reading out the anti-theft 
aFarm menwry entries. 

Can he found at Service Functions-?Vehiclo 
lnfomtatian->DWA Activations 

E53 Series 

Diagnosis for adapted for N6Z644 due to stricter 
OSD requirements. 

Model series EGO EDI 

Revision of energy d; agnosia 
Revised MOST system analysis. 



To determine what updates and additions 
occurred on DIS CD xx, currently installed on 
the DISplus/GT 1: 

Select “Diagnosis” 

Select “Services” 

Select “News” 

All major changes are viewable in the “New 
Features” overview, pertaining to the CD 
installed. 


7 

Coding & Programming Equipment 






































Latest CIP xx.x 


1 BMW Group GenterNet - Microsoft Internet Explorer JZW^X 


rv E* f^jrry, iMo * 

vj 3afi * ■ ' ! / smch FjwhIh «^VWdj ^ - . 0 * ^ 


Jlmt/i ftT’-acw'twnrt.ranym^n .fc-hjri >hi 


0«*V( Owyp i,.i|*ih+r 



EJ .- 

BMW of North America, LLC 


Wlul's New 

lAiimfeon «M*d miwi 
S4 *M 30 


Repair Inlernrutlen 

■l," I'*. 1 . :- •/-;• L V 

r - ■ ' . \ ■•*■ "I-, ", ■ ■■ ■ 


Service InformatKH* 

’Pi Jt-ir-i ars-3 >.i»yiUrF-. 
■StfVKI fudHttlgV BMv 

[Sttfl 

■SW VefSKiwOmn 

Opcwling Fliwl* 

ii-’-g I* j- h 

TccIuwmI Tnwrwng 

J ' .Ij.l'C. I 

■EJj- Ftrfjirt: Form 

Paris I n Tar maiidri 


l*bpr TimM 

•KSD 

■ViTwai rfc i-. 

Special TCKrfl 

■SrtPtimi T-^ik DgiiiHlB 

£TM lnF^rmatWi 

■*.■.■ -■ j ay inr'- -j- f •j, 

■Wring Spsiw^from EM 

Technician Feedback 

■€ -i :. • . ■ ■■ >•- i: ■■ m pm 


•;j,- 


- £)Cio 



fcgi^KI hH*U 


Model Map 

xUotW Mjp 


OBO 

'I ■: .■■> I v - 

"Fnoce LmAip ApftcAn 
*StalF l®M?r*ire :'-i' 4 
S >30 1 • ■n-.’PTi :- .’■:, •■ i- 

•Cfllpl &rs»na 

ASAP 

■■', ilF l . 


DCS 

‘PhAw Ccnwimufega Sts^n 


r.' jleruls Ordering 

■ ■ mi I • ! 


The latest information pertaining to the most 
current version of CIP that is to be installed on 
all DISplus, GT1 and SSS units in the work¬ 
shop, can be obtained by referencing DCS 
messages on the TIS website located at 
www.BMWcenternet.com 

Select “Dealer Communication System”. 


n) ns 

# IniwnDl 

3 EMW Group CenterNet - Microsoft trite met Explorer 

r . r & X 

Hr FM Utan fMfn T^kh Hr\$ 

O ^ " © * ■] i > FMirift Wfd<j <■- * , B - o ^ ^ 

w 

«. hhpi /iw/rtr tnnwienltrrwLrD^vnuln.b!^ Kp 

■ ,£j G4 

riUV. Qrcup Cfcnii Urti 

■" I 

Ip ‘iViik.tHi’rt E| cim kiii itaHMBytarii 




Dealer Communication System 

Ibn Hum n uud In March lor auiing CCS Mtnsapn 

Pttu# Not* whan *rrk- | dtfjM, you ->kJ Ictoa Im VM OU mryv iDimtf 


frms (hr bUtor t> ifJiHwn a irA ry mnragn n4fch 14 mama cu"u4y 

Hiprnj ipw 4 rpt>|. jtani mm jr™ n® ■ m rnxq g m <* ft L 

n*rt**^n 

MOTE: Only Paris DCS mr-iuges of a pe-nnmvenl naturp art aEornd 
■n T-S 


Meyca^e Pale . 


Message SjCie:! 



t.v^ i ji ph nju 




J 

Ji 


tins ■ cirrfr Cjm untaCsn 9irtJfi' 



3 EMW Group CenterNet - Microsoft Internet Explorer 


- c? x 

Wr m yum fffKrtn T«lt iWn 


r 

O ftr:. ■ ; , f^jicr. Franim -r H * 

A 


«. ’iqpF nftforrvm a n jMfln K|i 


“ £|tio 

j IlhM er^ip c«ni+n»r 1 

t '.■■'jlrrL.-TH 0 iLfjiin 

9 L^- 






I 


■V ; 


Dealer Communication System: 

PCI 

l i viivii lkk on i task iMfj v b iinpiiK bin einrirS{K™>i r i> 


Dili I Bub*«1 


U n.W* VIVMTAHT nr.PIK^AV." Hfii Hi' 0*n>ATION 
HJ gj JffM c* Pw~ ».. :H Vm.. w* CCC 
0414 UW*i CiP V»^ 

ijUUSSB <■ ‘'H-.-uxbiM W5S 'Oj..r.s<:«p vij ?i 


‘7* 3WJ 

■V!f?3M 

BiLCaDW 
■i iftjpty 

I2im* 

"iMW 

f'-JTroJ 

VW7W 

*1WW 

MT7QM 

! 


C*.! 7 2 KroWTO W fcFOpaaton W wii 6v>«ig 
Srtot mp*Pt. CE^PH...F,iW,?i 
r "r***-*™ "gnOftPr 
M 

Et-rt'C;IllLIiP^ni tw w.‘fP,W ' 

i.yri.^vu w 

ftinguntM, gpvrai 
Wn*WKW*, CIPV.'Ij? 

“ i-VMm ICK C'f V Jf V3 I 

r> L.H>,i P J4* CIP VII 1 1 

frHoqig jU T KBj ; Paraligr— p. %rfh l.IlP 11 Q 

C nH4lfillWa gpvno 

Cnf . flEilii 


#] H5 ■ PMtof L-(MrmMncmai f|p ^ 


« I.Jf-IiH 


Enter “CIP” as a search criteria under 
“Message Subject”. 


A listing of the search results is displayed and 
the messages pertaining to what the latest 
CIP version is, can be accessed. 


8 

Coding & Programming Equipment 




































































Networks 

As the level of technology in our vehicles continues to increase so does the level of tech¬ 
nology that we use in our diagnostic and programming equipment within the workshop. 

In order to meet the ever growing demand for more rapid transfer of information we can 
no longer have multiple “stand alone” systems, therefore various infrastructures have 
been created to allow multiple “stand alone” devices/systems to interact with each other 
to share information. 

The sharing of information with various control modules in our vehicles has been occur¬ 
ring for quite some time, now we will also be doing this with the diagnostic equipment in 
the workshop as well. 

Vehicle Bus Systems 

In order to make the components used in our 
vehicles more efficient we utilize bus struc¬ 
tures (commonly referred to as 1-Bus, K-Bus, 

MOST Bus, Byteflight, PT-CAN, etc.). By 
using bus structures in vehicles, we can 
accelerate communication between several 
different control modules. Many common 
vehicle systems (such as entertainment, safe¬ 
ty, powertrain, etc.) are “stand alone” systems 
but also require information from other mod¬ 
ules/systems in order to be more efficient. In 
order to obtain the required information the 
systems must also be able to simultaneously 
communicate without interfering with each 
other, which is accomplished by using various 
bus structures. 

Example: 

The ISIS (Intelligent Safety Integration 
System) system on the E65 uses the byteflight 

Byteflight bus structure. 

Depending on the eguipment level of the E65, the ISIS may consist of 11 satellite com¬ 
ponents (Control Modules/Sensors) that are connected, using fiberoptic cables, to the 
SIM (Safety Information Module) which monitors the status of the satellite components. 
Since this is a safety system, components need to be activated within a fraction of a sec¬ 
ond in order to be effective, there can not be any processing delays. The SIM is con¬ 
nected to the ZGM (Central Gateway Module) which monitors the activity of the SIM and 
will direct information to the SIM and other devices in the vehicles as necessary. 


D-Bus 


K-CAN 


5 


ZGM 


3 


PT-CAN 



5ZL. 




U 5JSL I 



3A5R 


STVL 


SIM 



stvr 



SSVL 



SSVR 


^ 5 l] I jiSr 


SSH 


9 

Coding & Programming Equipment 







































Workshop LAN Network 

A network is nothing more than a group of devices interconnected so that they can com¬ 
municate with each other. A LAN is a network that is localized to a specific area, such as 
a workshop or office. 

The bus systems (1-Bus, K-Bus, PT-CAN, Byteflight, MOST Bus,...) that we have been 
using in our vehicles for quite sometime, are nothing more than networks with different 
configurations. By looking at the byteflight system mentioned previously, a similarity to a 
workshop network can be established. 


DCS 

Network 


BMW NA 



Workshop Network 

All workshops are currently equipped with a GT1, DISplus, SSS, OPS, OPPS, Diagnostic 
Head, Access Point, desktop computer(s) and printer(s) which can be considered as 
satellite components (control modules/sensors). In order for these components to com¬ 
municate with each other, either directly or indirectly, they must be interconnected via a 
cable/wire to a common point or switching device. Consider the switching device/hub to 
be similar to the SIM, which monitors all devices connected to it and allows the devices 
to communicate with each other. The interconnection of these devices results in the 
establishment of a network localized to the workshop area thereby establishing a Local 
Area Network (LAN) in the workshop. 


10 

Coding & Programming Equipment 















































Network Structure 

By having the workshop configured to allow the various devices used on a daily basis to 
be interconnected/networked with each other, as indicated in the illustration, additional 
components can easily be added and online updates can automatically be installed on all 
connected devices, as long as they have an approved IP address. 

Example: The network that exist in the workshop is not much different than the net¬ 
work structure that is used in our vehicles. In order for control modules to 
communicate with each other they must be correctly identified. The identifi¬ 
cation process can be considered to occur as part of the coding procedure 
which is done at the end of the assembly process or at anytime a new com¬ 
ponent/module/system is added to the vehicle. By not recoding the vehicle 
after adding or removing a module/system, the communication on a particular 
bus can be hampered especially if a response form a module that is no 
longer installed is expected or a new module transmits data that is not 
expected by anyone else on the bus because it is not correctly identified. 

The VO for a vehicle can be considered to contain the IP addresses of the 
modules installed in the vehicle. 

If the devices on the workshop network do not have a rigidly assigned IP address, online 
updates to specific devices can not occur. The operation/performance of a network can 
be greatly hampered if multiple devices share an address, since the transmitted data is 
not able to reach the correct device, it can result in jamming up the operation of the net¬ 
work. 



11 

Coding & Programming Equipment 














































































































































Network Connections 

When establishing a network which will utilize multiple access terminals/jacks it is recom¬ 
mended that the jacks and cables attached to the specific jacks are numbered and that 
the corresponding end of the cable that connects to the router/switched hub should be 
numbered as well. 

Example: The illustration below shows a basic network structure with no miscellaneous 

devices connected, other than a Server and Switched Hub. The cables run¬ 
ning to/from the Switched Hub are all numbered on both ends to make trou¬ 
bleshooting the network easier in the event of a problem with the cabling, 
wall jack or Switched Hub connections. 

Not having the cable and wall jacks number would be like trying to trou¬ 
bleshoot a problem with an electrical circuit in the vehicle where all the wires 
are the same color and the components connected have no pin assign¬ 
ments. 



12 

Coding & Programming Equipment 


Network Connections 















Once additional devices are connected it becomes very important that the configuration 
information (IP Address, Gateway Address, Subnet Mask and Device Name) is entered 
correctly for each device that is connected to the network. Each device must be assigned 
a specific/unique IP Address. 

It is very important that the IP address not be shared by multiple devices located on the 
network, as this can result in “Locking-up” the network, which can have a detrimental 
effect on any control module(s) being programmed or coded. 



13 

Coding & Programming Equipment 




















Accessing Configuration Information - DISplus/GTI & Interface(s) 





The screen now displays the network config¬ 
uration information for the device being used 
DISplus/GTI. 


14 

Coding & Programming Equipment 






































































































Select “Diagnostic Head”. 




Select “Free diagnostic head”. 

Note: In order for an interface to be dis¬ 
played it must be connected to a 
vehicle and the ignition turned on. 



Administration Diagnostic head configuration 


Network configuration information for the 
selected interface is displayed. 



Free diagnostic heads 


: RH GE 17O.3-4.Z20 13 


Diagnostic head 
Host name 


RH GE 


P address 


170.3J.2Z8.19 


N elwm k in a sk 


255 


255 


255 


Default gateway 


170 


34 


22a 


Co or 


170 


34 


22 a 


Example: A red color band will be assigned 
to this interface once “OK” is 
selected. 


15 

Coding & Programming Equipment 






























































































Workshop Layout 



16 

Coding & Programming Equipment 
















































































































































































































































































































Workshop Layout Index 


Device # 

Device Name/Description 

1 

Software Service Station (SSS) 

2 

Network Printer 

3 

Switched Hub (Cisco Switch WS C2950-24) 

4 

BMW Network 

5 

GT1 

6 

Wall Jack/Ethernet Connection point to workshop Network 

7 

Access Point 

8 

Deutronic Automatic Battery Charger 

9 

OPS 

10 

Workshop PC 

11 

DISplus 

12 

OPS Head 

13 

Diagnostic Head 

14 

Network Server 


17 

Coding & Programming Equipment 

































Workshop Network Components 

A LAN currently exists in all workshops to allow the diagnostic equipment (DISplus, GT1, 
SSS, OPPS, OPS & Diagnostic Head) to communicate with each other. In order to suc¬ 
cessfully diagnose, code and program a vehicle, it is required to have all equipment con¬ 
nected to the workshop network. 

Components used to create a network infrastructure in the workshop consist of: 

Access Point 

Allows direct wireless access to LAN for GT 1 and 
Diagnostic Head 

OR 

Diagnostic head establishes connection to LAN via 
wireless communication and thereby can be connected 
to DISplus or GT1, which are connected to LAN 

Access point is connected directly to LAN. 

Symbol - Model Spectrum 24/AP 3020-100 

Wall Jack 

Connection point for devices such as GT1, DISplus, 
Access Point, SSS, Diagnostic Head, OPPS/OPS Head, 
Printer and Network Server to Switched Router via 
RJ45 cable. 


CAT 5 Ethernet Cable with RJ-45 Connectors 

Used to establish a connection between: 

• Wall jack and Switched Router/Hub 

• Wall jack and devices such as GT1, DISplus, 
Access Point, SSS, Diagnostic Head, OPPS/OPS 
Head and Network Server. 

Switched Hub 

LAN switched distribution hub for all devices connected 
to the network. Routes communication telegrams/mes¬ 
sages to specific devices from specific devices. Allows 
multiple devices to communicate with each other with¬ 
out reducing data transfer rate. 

Cisco Switch WS-C2950-24 





Server 

Central computer which controls interface/communica¬ 
tion between all devices on the Workshop LAN and 
communication to external networks and internet. 
Keystone device for network operation along with 
switch/router. 


18 

Coding & Programming Equipment 















Common Terminology 
Network 

A group of computers that are interconnected with each other and able to communicate 
with each other either by transferring data via a wired or wireless connection. 

Local Area Network (LAN) 

A network that exists within a specific area. 

Example: By having all computers, testers and printers in the workshop 

interconnected results in a Workshop LAN. 


Ethernet 

The term Ethernet is a communications protocol used to define a method & speed by 
which interconnected devices are able to communicate with each other by either a wired 
(twisted pair) or fiberoptic connection. 

Common Ethernet communication protocol terms: 

lOBaseT - Able to transmit data at a rate of 10Mbps for a maximum distance of 

100 meters per segment. 

100BaseT - Able to transmit data at a rate of 100Mbps for a maximum distance of 

1000 meters per segment. 

The speed differences are obtained by modifying the method of encoding the data to be 
transferred. The maximum distance consist of the distance from switched hub to wall jack 
plus length of cable used to connect a particular device. The greater the distance the 
greater the chance of signal loss/disturbance. 

Ethernet Cable (CAT 5) 

A standard used to define an 8 wire cable (4 twisted pair) that is commonly used to inter¬ 
connect various computers in the establishment of an ethernet network. Certified to 
transmit data at a maximum rate of 100Mbps. 

RJ-45 Connectors 

The plastic connectors at the end of a CAT 5 cable, used to connect the cable to 
device/computer, wall jack and hub. 

Wall Jack 

Accepts RJ-45 connectors when connecting devices to the network. Connection point 
for devices like DISplus, GT1, SSS, OPPS, OPS, Diagnostic Head, workshop computers 
and printer. 

Recommendation is that outlet/jack is numbered and the corresponding end of the ether- 
net cable connected to the switched hub is numbered as well, to assist in troubleshoot¬ 
ing in the event of a problem. 

Example: A wall jack outlet is labeled as #1 the other end of the cable at the hub 

should also be labeled #1. 


19 

Coding & Programming Equipment 



Switched HUB 

Allows multiple devices to send information over the network at the same time without 
slowing down the communication process. A switched hub essentially isolates the two 
devices that are communicating, thereby providing each component on the network a 
separate connection at the maximum data transfer rate of the network. 

Example: A switched HUB is similar to the use of cloverleafs on the highway, traffic 

does not need to stop if a change in direction needs to be made, plus traffic 
flows smoothly from point to point. 

A regular HUB does not provide each component with a separate connection point to the 
network but rather a shared connection point. By sharing a connection point the data 
transfer rate of the network is reduced when multiple devices try to communicate. 

Example: A regular HUB is similar to the use of a 4 way intersection, the smaller the 

amount of traffic using the intersection the guicker a car can go through the 
intersection and reach its desired destination. The greater the traffic the 
longer it will take for a car to reach its desired destination. 

The switched hub installed as part of the workshop wiring project is a Cisco WS-C2950- 
24. 

Network Server 

A computer that provides information/data to other computers located on the network. A 
server allows computers on its network to access information on another network, such 
as the internet. The server is the keystone device that allows computers on its specific 
network to access information on another network. 

As an example a server can obtain and distribute software updates to all computers locat¬ 
ed on its network, instead of having to physically install the updates to each computer 
individually. 

Automatic/Online Updates 

The ability to connect the network server to the BMW server and check for new software 
updates (Diagnostic, Coding & Programming data) then downloads the information to all 
computers/eguipment located on the network automatically at a specific time. 

Example: New updates can be installed on SSS, GT1 and DISplus overnight in order to 

have latest data available the next morning. 

The application that performs online updates is referred to as JETstream. 

Access Point 

The access point is a wireless communication device that is able to establish a wireless 
connection with a GT1 and/or a diagnostic head and allows them to communicate with 
other devices on the network. 

Manufactured by Symbol - Model Spectrum 24 /AP 3020-100. 


20 

Coding & Programming Equipment 



Interface configuration 

OPS 

InlfifiCI nirnii: 0FS.1 

Sjstewjy: 


Cqiilpm b rat 
lypaj 


132. 9.« 


MAC 


IP addr«;i; 


wee.'.'C.eo^; 

imwi 


IP lubn &t mail!: 2H 23S233.0 


i w ™ 


K aamma 


fJtlwchrktonliguralian 
SSS nimi |n.|<l|: 

SS5 nnnm |n*wj: ^aun**^ 
Gateway: »2.«*_9.eJ 


MAC afldrcji: 
IP address; 


AAecee&D-FF ee 

: »I.1HjOAT 


|P sgbnvE mas k; 233 2332-17.D 


Ul&yi £3 


Kwassa 


t 


Continue 


Continue 



Interface Name 

The specific name assigned to the device (Ex. OPS Blue A) 

IP Address 

It is a unique four segment number used to identify a specific device located on a specific 
network. The number represents the address of the device on the network and is neces¬ 
sary when communicating with other devices located on the network. 

Example: 92.168.100.10 

Usually the first three segments are used to identify the network and the last 
segment identifies the device. The IP Subnet Mask information generally 
defines which segments are needed to identify the network and which identi¬ 
fy the device. 

In order for a devices on the network to communicate with other devices on the network 
it must know the addresses of those devices. If a print command is sent from a computer 
to a printer on the network, the command must be addressed specifically to the desired 
printer. 

Example: An IP address is no different than your home address, in order to receive a 

letter specifically directed to you, your name and address must be correctly 
displayed on the letter. 

IP addresses are assigned by the network administrator/provider and are rigidly assigned 
to the device(s) located within the workshop network, by entering it into the device during 
the initial setup. 

IP Subnet Mask 

This information is used to define which segment(s) of the four segment IP address 
specifically identifies the device and which identify the specific network. 

Example: 255.255.255.0 

Indicates that the first three segments (255.255.255) identify the specific 
network that the device is located on. The last segment (0) indicates that 
this is the segment that will identify the specific device. 


21 

Coding & Programming Equipment 








































































Gateway 

This information identifies the four segment address of the component located on the 
network responsible for communicating from the current network to another network. If 
there is no address in this location then a connection to any devices outside of the cur¬ 
rent network can not be established. 

Note: The network and device address information must be entered exactly as 
defined by the network administrator for your facility, otherwise the 
devices can not be accessed. 



Workshop Exercise - Device Network Configurations 


7. Identify what version of DiS CD xx.x is installed on the DiSpius/GT 1. 


2. Identify what the latest version CIP xx.xx installed on the tester should be and 
approximately when it was released. 


3. Locate the network configuration information for the devices located on the net¬ 
work in the workshop area. 


4. What components of the configuration information are the same? 


5. What is the address of the workshop network? 


22 

Coding & Programming Equipment 




Remote Coding, Individualization & Programming Terminals 




$ 
s 

With the release of CIP 15.0 and the implementation of Progman (see Progman section 
for additional information) the DISplus and GT1 will only be capable of performing vehicle 
diagnosis and activation/initiation of a Coding, Individualization or Programming task 
through the SSS. A special program management tool (Progman) will only allow the 
DISplus and GT1 to act as remote terminals to the SSS (regarding Coding, 
Individualization & Programming), which means that the SSS will be the single supplier of 
Coding, Individualization and Programming information to a vehicle and its respective 
control modules. By having all devices (DISplus, GT1 and SSS) connected to the net¬ 
work, the DISplus and GT1 can be utilized to perform diagnosis on a new vehicle after a 
request for vehicle programming as an example, has been sent to the SSS for the current 
vehicle. 

Example: GT 1(7) is connected to the LAN via 

access point (3) and to OPPS head (6) 
which is connected to LAN(4) and 
vehicle (5): 

1. Diagnosis of complaint is completed and test 
module result indicates that a control module 
needs to be updated/reprogrammed. 

2. Coding and Programming/CIP is accessed on 
GT 1(7) and a reguest to program specific con¬ 
trol module on vehicle (5) connected to OPPS 
head (6) is made. 

3. The SSS (1) takes over the programming 
process and begins to reprogram the control 
module and recode the vehicle (5). 

4. At this point the GT1(7) is free to connect to a 
new OPPS/diagnostic head and begin a diag¬ 
nostic routine or initiate another 
programming/coding session on a new vehicle. 




23 

Coding & Programming Equipment 


TE04-499G 

























































Software Service Station 

The Software Service Station (SSS) was 
released to all centers for the sole purpose of 
Coding and Programming vehicles that can only 
be Coded/Programmed using CIR The SSS is a 
dedicated desktop PC, that supplements the 
DISplus and GT1 diagnostic systems, since the 
SSS is only capable of performing Coding and 
Programming it frees up the DISplus and GT1 for 
diagnostic functions (refer to SI B07 01 02). 

With the release of CIP 15.0 and the implemen¬ 
tation of Progman, the SSS replaces the DISplus 
and GT1 (Group Tester One) diagnosis systems as the primary programming system. 

The DISplus and GT1 will only be able to send a reguest to Program or Code a vehicle 
directly through the SSS. The SSS performs the actual programming and coding 
process. In this configuration the SSS is able to program up to five vehicles at a time and 
the DISplus and GT1 are free to be used for other tasks, provided that all devices are 
connected to the workshop network and have been assigned specific IP addresses . 

As with the DISplus and GT1, data is supplied to the Software Service Station by means 
of a CIP DVD-ROM or CD-ROM, additional data can also be provided by online updates 
via JETStream. 

OPPS/OPS/Diagnostic Head 

The OPPS (Optical Testing and Programming System), OPS (Optical Programming 
System) and the diagnostic head can all be used with the Software Service Station to 
serve as the interface to the vehicle. Optimal programming speed on MOST bus 
equipped vehicles is obtained bv using the OPPS/OPS head connected to the OBD con¬ 

nector and directly to the MOST access port on E60. E63/64 and newer vehicles. 



24 

Coding & Programming Equipment 


TEQ3-4936 





















OPPS 

The OPPS was first introduced with the E65 and is able to: 

• Acts as interface between vehicle and DISplus/GTI/SSS 

• Reduce programming time of MOST Bus control modules 

Diagnosis the fiber optic communication system utilized 
tru 1 . 







1 Jl 


G i 


2 



on the byteflight and MOST bus systems. 

Simultaneous! 

E65/66 up to 


vehicles equipped with a MOST bus system (except 
prod.) via MOST Bus access port and OBD connections. 



Perform vehicle diagnosis, coding and programming on all vehicles equipped with a 
MOST bus.. 

Communicates via a wired connection(DK LAN cable ) to Network or directly to 
GTI/DISplus/SSS 


The OPPS is NOT ABLE to perform Diagnosis, Coding & Programming on ar 
l-bus equipped vehicle. 


OPS 


The OPS is able to: 

• Acts as interface between vehicle and DISplus/GTI/SSS 

• Reduce programming time of MOST Bus control modules 

• Simultaneously program vehicles equipped with a MOST 
bus system (except E65/66) via MOST Bus access port and 



OBD connections. 


Perform vehicle diagnosis, coding and programming on all vehicles equipped with 
a MOST bus. 


• Communicates via a wired connection(DK LAN cable ) to Network or directly to 
GTI/DISplus/SSS 


The OPS is NOT ABLE to perform Diagnosis on the fiber optic communica¬ 
tion system utilized on the byteflight and MOST bus systems nor can it be 
used to perform Diagnosis, Coding & Programming on an l-bus equipped 
vehicle. 


Diagnostic Head 

The diagnostic head is able to: 

• Acts as interface between vehicle and DISplus/GTI/SSS 

• Perform vehicle diagnosis, coding and programming and 
Vehicle & Key Memory on most vehicles. 

Should not be used for coding and programming 
vehicles equipped with 
a MOST bus (E60/63/64/65/66...) as processor is too slow. 

• Communicates via a wired connection(DK LAN cable ) to Network or directly to 
DISplus/GTI/SSS 

• Wireless communication to LAN/Workshop Network Connection via Access Point 



25 

Coding & Programming Equipment 


TE03-493e TE03-4937 













MOST Direct Access Port 



The MOST Direct Access port is installed on vehicles equipped with a MOST bus such 
as E60/E62/E63.... The port is utilized to allow separate programming of control modules 
connected to the MOST bus when using the OPPS/OPS head for Programming & 
Coding. By using this port in conjunction with the OBD socket when programming a 
vehicle the overall programming/coding time is reduced. 

Access to the port differs corresponding to the 
model. 


For E60 the port (5) is located on the left side of the 
glove box (3) behind the strut (2). To access the 
connection remove the cover (1) and remove the ter¬ 
minating plug (4) from the cable to allow connection 
to the port (5). 


Example: Referring to the illustration below - Parallel programming of an E60 using 

OPPS head in conjunction with short OBD cable (1) P/N 666 111 and MOST 
bus programming cable (2) P/N 663 121 which connects to the MOST 
Access Port located in the glovebox. The OPPS is connected to the network 
via DK LAN cable 3. 

NOTE: The OPS can be substituted for the OPPS. 



26 

Coding & Programming Equipment 





























Equipment Configurations 

The diagnostic and programming equipment available in the workshop should always be 
configured to have the DISplus, GT1 and SSS connected directly to the LAN/Workshop 
network. To ensure uninterrupted service/data transmission, it is highly recom¬ 
mended that the radio/wireless connection of the diagnostic head is NOT used 
to perform any type of Programming or Coding function. 

The normal configuration (when coding or programming) of the DISplus & GT1 to the 
diagnostic/OPPS/OPS head are as follows: 



S09 02 U01 



S07 02 U14a 


DISplus (1) - Connected to network 
using SI LAN cable (2) 

+ Diagnostic/OPPS/OPS head (3) - 
Connected to network using DK LAN 
cable (4) 

+ OBD or Diagnostic plug cable - 
Connecting diagnostic head to vehicle 


GT1 (1) - Connected to network using 
SI LAN cable (3) and LAN adapter 
BT1:1 (2) 

+ Diagnostic/Opps head (5) - Connected 
to network using DK LAN cable (4) 

+ OBD or Diagnostic plug cable - 
Connecting diagnostic head to vehicle. 


Note: For optimum programming 

speed the OPPS/OPS head (5) 
can be substituted for the diag¬ 
nostic head: 

+ Connect OPPS/OPS head (5) directly 
to a network drop via a DK LAN cable 
(4) 

+ Connect OPPS/OPS head to the OBD 
connector using the short OBD cable 
P/N 663 111 


27 

Coding & Programming Equipment 









In the event that the workshop network is disabled/down the DISplus and GT1 can still be 
used to diagnose a vehicle by utilizing the following configurations: 

GT1 (1) - Not connected to network 

+ Diagnostic/OPPS head (5) - Connected 
to GT 1 using DK LAN cable (4) and 
LAN adapter BT1:1 (2) plus LAN 
adapter BT X (3)) 

+ OBD or Diagnostic plug cable (5) 
Connecting diagnostic head to vehicle 


DISplus (1) - Not connected to network 

+ Diagnostic/OPPS/OPS head (3) - 
Connected to DISplus using DK LAN 
cable (4) and PC LAN cable (2) 

+ OBD or Diagnostic plug cable - 
Connecting diagnostic head to vehicle 


Note: OPPS/OPS can not be used to perform diagnosis on an l-bus equipped 
vehicle (i.e. E32, E36, E38, E46, E53...). 



28 

Coding & Programming Equipment 




Procedure for Coding & Programming 


An important prerequisite for ensuring trouble-free programming is the correct prepara¬ 
tion of the vehicle. 

A diagnostic procedure must first be performed on the vehicle prior to any pro¬ 
gramming. Programming must not be started before faults in the vehicle elec¬ 
trical system are ruled out. 

Correct preparation of the vehicle avoids errors during programming. 

The programming procedure may be terminated if a bus signal is generated as the result 
of activation of electric loads during programming. The programming procedure should 
be repeated following termination. In exceptional cases it may be necessary to replace 
the control unit if communication is no longer possible. 

Prior to beginning any programming or coding procedure some general guidelines need 
to be considered in order to ensure that the process goes as smoothly as possible: 

Check Action/Procedure 

Engine 

Turn off engine, ignition key on - KL15 


Manual gearbox/SMG 

Transmission in neutral. 
Parking brake applied. 


Automatic Transmission 

- Transmission in position R 

- System temperature below 80°C. 

Attention: Do not apply parking brake on vehicles equipped with the 
electromechanical parking brake. 

Loads 

- All electric loads, lights and indicator lights switched off. 

- Wipe/wash system switched off. Insure that the wipers can move freely. 
Wipers may be activated during programming. 

Do Not Block the Wipers. 






29 

Coding & Programming Equipment 













Check 


Action/Procedure 



>12,6 V i 

r P 



Diagnosis 

Perform quick test. 

Using the diagnosis system, rectify any problems before programming and clear 
stored fault codes. 


Battery 

The battery should be sufficiently charged at the start of the programming proce¬ 
dure (12.6 V). 


Battery Charger 

IMPORTANT: Vehicles must be connected to the Deutronic Automatic Battery 
Charger prior to beginning the programming or coding procedure, this is the only 
approved battery charger for MOST bus-equipped vehicles.(see SIB 04 11 02). 

During the programming or Coding procedure the battery charger must be in the 
Power Supply (PS) mode. 

Place the charger into the power supply mode by depressing the “MENUE” but¬ 
ton 3 times in rapid succession. 

Do not connect or disconnect the charger during programming. The system volt¬ 
age must not drop below 12.6 V during the programming procedure. 




Progman 



DO NOT USE Radio Connection for Programming or Coding!! 

Diagnostic head/OPPS head (5) must be connected directly to a network drop to 
ensure uninterrupted programming. 

The DK LAN cable (4) MUST NOT BE routed through an open window of the 
vehicle,leave a door open. 

Programming 

Check CKM values, also observe individual settings on the vehicle if applicable, 
start programming procedure. 

Attention: The data status of the Software Service Station must always 
be kept updated! 




Make sure that no switches, radio etc. are operated during programming as this 
could terminate the programming procedure. 

DO NOT TOUCH CODING/PROGRAMMING ACTIVE !! 


30 

Coding & Programming Equipment 













Review Questions 

1. What vehicles can not be programmed using a diagnostic head? 


2. How can an OPPS or OPS Head be used to speed up the coding or program¬ 
ming process? On what vehicles can the procedure not be used? 


3. What does it mean when a new DIS or CIP version (CD/DVD) is released? 


4. What is the similarity between our vehicle bus structure and a workshop net¬ 
work? 


5. What is the importance of an IP address? What can happen if the address is 
shared? 


6. What are the steps that should be followed prior to starting a Coding or 
Programming session? 


31 

Coding & Programming Equipment 






