Table of Contents 


F01 Exterior RearView Mirrors 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

Outside Mirrors .3 

System Overview.4 

Input/output - Outside Mmirrors .4 

System Circuit Diagram - Outside Mirror High .6 

Functions .10 

Overview .10 

Mirror Adjustment .10 

Outside mirror adjustment High .10 

Detecting position of outside mirrors .10 

Mirror Heating .10 

Outside mirror .10 

Undervoltage .11 

Terminal 50 .11 

Mirror Fold-in .11 

Electrochromic Outside Mirrors .12 

Outside Mirror with Memory Function.12 

Identification transmitter.12 

Storing memory position .12 

Calling up memory position .12 

Automatic Parking Function .13 

Folding Mirror Manually .13 

Motor Protection by Repeat Interlock .13 

Mirror Auto Remote Fold-in Function (Comfort Function) .13 

System Components.14 

Overview .14 

Driver’s Door Switch Cluster .14 

Design of the Outside Mirrors .15 

Drive unit with memory .15 

Footwell Module .15 

Junction Box Electronics .15 


Initial Print Date: 01/09 Revision Date: 


































Exterior RearView Mirrors 


Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the operation of the exterior rearview mirrors on the F01/F02 


F01 Exterior Rear View Mirrors 




Introduction 


Outside Mirrors 

For the F01/F02, there is only one variant of the outside mirrors. The outside mirrors can 
be electrically adjusted as standard. The outside mirrors are equipped with a mirror heat¬ 
ing system. 

Optional Interior and exterior mirrors with automatic anti-dazzle function (electrochromic) 
can be ordered as an optional extra. This option requires the interior rear-view mirror with 
automatic anti-dazzle function. 

The outside mirrors with memory function are connected via the LIN-bus and additional¬ 
ly feature the following functions: 

• Outside mirror fold-in 

• Electrochromic outside mirrors 

• Electrical seat adjustment with memory 



3 

F01 Exterior RearView Mirrors 





System Overview 

Input/output - Outside Mmirrors 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Instrument cluster 

5 

Outside mirror, passenger's side 

2 

Footwell module FRM 

6 

Mirror adjustment switch in driver's 
door switch cluster SBFA 

3 

Outside temperature sensor 

7 

Outside mirror, driver's side 

4 

Junction box electronics JB 

K-CAN2 

Body CAN 2 


4 

F01 Exterior Rear View Mirrors 


































Instrument cluster (1) records the outside temperature and makes this information avail¬ 
able to the vehicle electrical system. 

Junction box electronics (4) supply the outside mirror heating. The outside mirrors (5 + 6) 
can be adjusted with the mirror adjustment switch in the driver’s door switch cluster (6). 


5 

F01 Exterior RearView Mirrors 



System Circuit Diagram - Outside Mirror High 


® 



® li- - ® 


6 

F01 Exterior Rear View Mirrors 



















































Index 


Explanation 


Index 


Explanation 






1 

Central gateway module (ZGM) 

14 

Electrochromic outside mirror, 
driver's side 

2 

Car Access System (CAS) 

15 

Memory, outside mirror potentiometer, 
driver’s side 

3 

Outside temperature sensor 

16 

Motor for folding mirror function, 
driver’s side 

D 

Junction box electronics (JB) 

17 

Outside mirror heating, 
driver’s side 

5 

Outside mirror heating, passenger’s side 

18 

Footwell module (FRM) 

6 

Motor for folding mirror function, 
passenger’s side 

19 

Instrument cluster 

B 

Memory, outside mirror potentiometer, 
passenger’s side 

20 

Front distribution box 

8 

Electrochromic outside mirror, 
passenger’s side 

LIN-Bus 

Local Interconnect Network bus 

9 

Actuator motor for passenger’s side 
outside mirror 

Kl. 30B 

Terminal 30 basic operation 

10 

Driver’s door switch cluster (SBFA) 
with mirror selector switch 

Kl. 58g 

Terminal 58g 

11 

Driver’s door switch cluster (SBFA) 
with mirror adjustment switch 

K-CAN2 

Body CAN 2 

12 

Driver’s door switch cluster (SBFA) 

PT-CAN 

Powertrain CAN with mirror folding switch 

13 

Actuator motor for driver's outside mirror 




7 

F01 Exterior RearView Mirrors 
























































K-CAN2 signals atfootwell module 


m. 


In/out 

Information 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

Vehicle speed 

Wheel speed sensor > 

Dynamic Stability Control 

Mirror fold-in lock (inhibit) 

In 

Status, electrochromic interior 
rear-view mirror 

Photodiode, rear-view mirror > 
roof function center 

Dip outside mirror 


The instrument cluster (19) receives the value corresponding to the outside temperature 
from the outside temperature sensor (3) and makes it available via the PT-CAN. The 
footwell module (18) evaluates the K-CAN2 signal and initiates activation of the outside 
mirror heating (5 and 17). 

The mirror adjustment motors (9 and 13) are driven by the electronic mirror module. The 
electronic mirror module receives the request to adjust the outside mirrors via the LIN- 
bus. 

The outside mirrors are connected via the LIN-bus. All information such as the memory- 
position or mirror functions, e.g. dip outside mirrors, is transferred via the LIN-bus. 


8 

F01 Exterior Rear View Mirrors 

















Functions 


Overview 

The following outside mirror functions are possible depending on the vehicle equipment: 

• Mirror adjustment in up/down and left/right directions 

• Mirror heating 

• Mirror fold-in 

• Electrochromic mirror, outside mirror with memory function 

• Automatic parking function 

• Manual adjustment 

• Motor protection by repeat interlock 

Mirror Adjustment 

Outside mirror adjustment High 

The driver’s door switch cluster is connected via the LIN-bus to the footwell module. 

The footwell module checks the status of the mirror adjustment switch every 20 ms. The 
electronics in the driver’s door switch cluster evaluates the mirror adjustment switch and 
sends the signal via the LIN-bus to the footwell module. In turn, the footwell module initi¬ 
ates activation of the adjustment motors. 

To protect the mirror drive unit, the mirror adjustment is limited to a maximum activation 
time of 10 seconds. Activation is maintained within this period of 10 seconds until the 
mirror adjustment switch is released. 

Activation is also maintained until the outside mirror blocks or reaches its end position. 

Detecting position of outside mirrors 

The High version of the outside mirrors has two potentiometers that register the mirror 
adjustment. The potentiometers receive their 5V voltage supply from the electronic mir¬ 
ror module. The determined values of the potentiometers are stored in the footwell mod¬ 
ule for the memory function. 

Mirror Heating 

The mirror heating is operable as from terminal 15 ON. 

Outside mirror 

The mirror heating is activated by the footwell module. The corresponding information is 
passed on to the electronic mirror module via the LIN-bus. 

The instrument cluster makes available the outside temperature value via the PT-CAN. 
The signal is transferred to the K-CAN2 by the central gateway module. 

10 

F01 Exterior RearView Mirrors 




The junction box electronics provide the information for the wipers via the K-CAN2. 
The percentage switch-on time is calculated from both values in the footwell module. 
The following table shows the values for the percentage ON time: 


Temperature in °C 

<-10 

-10 to 5 

5 to 15 

15 to 25 

25 to 35 

>35 

Heating capacity in % 

100 

75 

50 

0 

0 

0 

Heating capacity with wipers ON in % 

100 

100 

75 

50 

25 

0 


The percentage increase is still retained for 300 seconds after the wiper is switched off. 


The maximum electric heating output is 28 W that is set by means of voltage and current 
measurement in the mirror. 

Undervoltage 

The electronic mirror module switches off the mirror heating in the event of undervoltage. 
This has a positive effect on the charge balance of the battery. The cutout threshold is at 
10.8 V. 

The electronic mirror module switches on the mirror heating again as from a voltage of 
11.6 V. 

Terminal 50 

The “terminal 50 ON” status is output during the starting procedure. The mirror heating 
is switched off for the duration. 

Mirror Fold-in 

The mirror fold-in function is controlled by the footwell module. For this purpose, the 
footwell module requests the status of the mirror fold-in switch. The driver’s switch clus¬ 
ter evaluates the mirror fold-in switch and forwards the request via the LIN-bus. The 
footwell module initiates the fold-in function. 

The electronic mirror module receives the request and executes this function by activat¬ 
ing the corresponding fold-in motor. The footwell module receives the request via the 
LIN-bus. Both outside mirrors are folded in towards the vehicle thus reducing the vehicle 
width. 


11 

F01 Exterior RearView Mirrors 




Electrochromic Outside Mirrors 

The automatic dip function (anti-dazzle) of the outside mirrors is dependent on the set¬ 
ting of the interior rear-view mirror. The function is available as from “terminal 15 ON”. 

The interior rear-view mirror forwards the anti-dazzle request to the junction box electron¬ 
ics on the LIN-bus. The junction box electronics transfer the request to the K-CAN. The 
footwell module is now able to receive the request. 

The footwell module sends this request via the LIN-bus to the electronics in the outside 
mirrors. The electronics implement the request to dim the outside mirrors. 

Outside Mirror with Memory Function 

The outside mirror High features a memory function that is stored in the footwell module. 
Three memory locations are available for this purpose. They are: 

• Current position when leaving the vehicle 

• Memory position of memory button 1 

• Memory position of memory button 2. 

Identification transmitter 

Up to three personalizable ID transmitters are possible per vehicle. 

When the vehicle is locked using the ID transmitter, the current mirror position is stored in 
the memory location for the key memory of the ID transmitter currently used. 

As a result, the mirror position last set, referred to the ID transmitter used, is always reas¬ 
sumed when the vehicle is unlocked. 

Storing memory position 

The position of the outside mirrors is stored in the footwell module by pressing the “M” 
button followed by pressing one of the memory buttons within 7 seconds. 

The footwell module evaluates signals from the memory buttons on the LIN-bus and 
transmits this information on the K-CAN2. As a result, the seat module also knows when 
to store the current seat position. 

Calling up memory position 

When the memory button is pressed, the footwell module receives the request to adjust 
the outside mirrors to the memory position. The footwell module sends the request to 
the K-CAN2. The seat module is therefore aware of the request and instructs the seat to 
move to the memory position. 


12 

F01 Exterior Rear View Mirrors 



Automatic Parking Function 

The outside mirror on the front passenger’s side is swivelled downward when reverse 
gear is engaged so that the kerb can be easily viewed. 

The automatic parking function is activated under following conditions: 

• Terminal 15 ON and 

• Reverse gear signal and 

• Mirror selector switch set to driver position. 

The footwell module receives the reverse gear signal via the K-CAN2. The automatic 
transmission control unit then makes this signal available. 

Folding Mirror Manually 

The outside mirrors can be folded in or out manually. The outside mirrors could lose their 
set position when folded in or out manually. It may be therefore necessary to fold out the 
outside mirrors, fold them in and then fold them out again. 

The outside mirrors will then again be in the correct locked position. 

Motor Protection by Repeat Interlock 

The outside mirrors feature a repeat inhibit facility to avoid thermal overheating byfre- 
guently folding the mirrors in and out. The motors cannot be activated for 180 seconds 
when the repeat inhibit is active. 

Mirror Auto Remote Fold-in Function (Comfort Function) 

The auto remote fold-in function for the outside mirrors can be activated through follow¬ 
ing components: 

• Identification transmitter 

• Driver’s door lock cylinder 

• Outer door handle. 

For example, the “Lock” button on the ID transmitter must be pressed for longer than 
5 seconds to trigger the fold-in function. Fold-in is then initiated. Initially, the panoramic 
glass roof is closed, followed after a time delay by the front/rear windows. 

With the option “Fold-in outside mirrors” The outside mirrors are folded in simultaneously 
with closing the rear windows. 


13 

F01 Exterior RearView Mirrors 



System Components 


Overview 

The following components are installed in the F01/F02 for the purpose of operating the 
outside mirrors: 

• Driver’s door switch cluster with 

- Outside mirror adjustment switch 

- Outside mirror selector switch 

- LIN-bus link 

• Outside mirrors 

• Footwell module 

• Junction box electronics 

• Components for comfort/convenience function 

- Car Access System 

- Driver’s door lock cylinder 

- Remote control receiver in the diversity module. 

Driver’s Door Switch Cluster 

The driver’s door switch cluster is connected via the LIN-bus to the footwell module. 

The adjustment motors in the Low version of the outside mirrors are controlled directly 
by the mirror adjustment switch in the driver’s door switch cluster. 

The driver’s door switch cluster in the High version of the outside mirrors is connected 
to the outside mirrors via the LIN-bus. 

The electronic mirror module in the outside mirrors evaluates the LIN-bus signals and 
activates the adjustment motors. 

Note: The driver’s door switch cluster is connected to terminal 30B, terminal 
31. The driver’s door switch cluster receives the status of terminal 58g 
from the footwell module on the LIN-bus. 


14 

F01 Exterior RearView Mirrors 




Design of the Outside Mirrors 
Drive unit with memory 

The drive unit with memory function additionally consists of the following components: 

• Electronic mirror module 

• Position potentiometer 

• Folding mirror motor 

• LIN-bus 

• Electrochromic glass. 

Note: In combination with the Active Blind Spot Detection (Lane Change 

Warning) the outside mirror also contains the display for the warning. 



Footwell Module 

The master function for controlling the outside mirrors is integrated in the footwell mod¬ 
ule. 


On vehicles with memory function, the mirror position of the respective memory button 
(driver’s seat) is stored in the footwell module. 

The outside mirrors (high) and the driver’s door switch cluster are connected to the 
footwell module via the LIN-bus. The outside mirror functions are activated via the LIN- 
bus. 


Junction Box Electronics 

The junction box electronics power the low version of the outside mirror heating system. 

The signal is pulse width-modulated and has a freguency of 1 Hz. 

The junction box electronics also reguest the status of the electrochromic interior rear¬ 
view mirror on the LIN-bus. The mirror electronics feed back the current status of the 
electrochromic interior rear-view mirror. The junction box electronics send the status to 
the footwell module on the K-CAN2. The footwell module is therefore aware of the status 
and is able to control the dimming of the outside mirrors accordingly. 

15 

F01 Exterior RearView Mirrors 


