Table of Contents 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 

Subject Page 

Introduction .5 

The F01/F02 with Slide/tilt Sunroof .5 

Slide/tilt Sunroof Operating Concept .5 

System Overview.6 

Input/output slide/tilt sunroof.6 

System Circuit Diagram - Slide/tilt Sunroof .8 

Functions .11 

Overview.11 

Reading Operation Reguests .11 

Slide/tilt sunroof button .11 

Identification transmitter.12 

Driver’s door lock barrel .12 

Outer door handle .12 

Controlling Slide/tilt Sunroof Motors.13 

Anti-trapping Protection Function .13 

Blocking Protection .13 

Overheating Protection .13 

Panic Mode .14 

Load Deactivation .14 

Terminal 58g .14 

Opening/closing the Slide/tilt Sunroof .14 

Control functions .15 

Directions of movement .15 

Opening sunroof shade .15 

Opening sunroof shade (one-touch control function) .15 

Opening sunroof shade and glass panel .16 

Tilt position .16 

Closing glass panel .16 

Closing the glass panel (one-touch control function) .16 

Closing glass panel and sunroof shade .17 

Closing the sunroof shade .17 

Wind deflector with roof open .17 

Auto-remote opening .17 

Auto-remote closing .17 


Initial Print Date: 01/09 


Revision Date: 





































Subject Page 

System Components.18 

Spare Parts of Slide/tilt Sunroof .18 

Electrical Components .18 

Control Units .19 

Car Access System 4 .19 

Footwell module .19 

Roof control module .19 

Slide/tilt Sunroof Motors .19 

Service Information.20 

Initialization .20 

Initialization with the Button .20 

Interruption in Power Supply .21 

Clearing the initialization .21 
















Subject 


Page 



Sliding Tilting Sunroof 

Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 

■ilECTIWB 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the operation of the sunroof on the F01/F02 


4 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 


Introduction 


The F01/F02 with Slide/tilt Sunroof 

The slide/tilt sunroof is an option on the F01/F02. Several control units are involved in 
the operation of the slide/tilt sunroof. 

The roof control module controls and monitors the motors of the slide/tilt sunroof. 

The roof control module (FZD) is linked with the Car Access System CAS which enables 
or disables operation of the slide/tilt sunroof. 

The footwell module FRM supplies the signal from the door contacts. The Junction Box 
electronics provide the power supply for the motors via terminal 30. 

The dynamic stability control acquires the signals from the wheel speed sensors while 
the integrated chassis management makes available the speed signal to the vehicle 
electrical system. 

Slide/tilt Sunroof Operating Concept 

The button for operating the slide/tilt sunroof has three directions of movement. In addi¬ 
tion to the manual and overpress functions, the button has a double-click function in the 
three movement directions. 

With the double-click function the button is actuated twice within a short time into the 
overpress position or tilt position. 

This allows the customer to have the slide/tilt sunroof opened and closed automatically 
from any position of the slide/tilt sunroof and sunroof shade. 

While moving, the slide/tilt sunroof can be stopped by pressing the button again. 


5 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 




System Overview 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Footwell module FRM 

8 

Roof control module 

2 

Door contacts (4x) in the vehicle doors 

9 

Identification transmitter 

3 

Driver's door lock barrel 

10 

Outer door handles, 
driver's side and passenger side 

4 

Wheel speed sensor 

11 

Car Access System 4 CAS 4 

5 

Dynamic stability control 

K-CAN2 

Body-CAN2 

6 

Junction Box electronics JB 

PT-CAN 

Powertrain CAN 

7 

Slide/tilt sunroof motors 




6 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 







































7 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



System Circuit Diagram - Slide/tilt Sunroof 



8 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 


UN-Blb 





















































Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hall sensors, driver's door lock barrel 

7 

Slide/tilt sunroof motor 

2 

Footwell module (FRM) 

8 

Remote control receiver in Diversity module 

3 

Car Access System (CAS) 

K-CAN2 

Body-CAN2 

4 

Slide/tilt sunroof motor 

LIN-Bus 

Local Interconnect Network bus 

5 

Front power distribution box 

Kl. 30 

Terminal 30 

6 

Roof control module FZD with 
button for slide/tilt sunroof 




◄o 


K-CAN2 signals at roof control module 


In/out 

Information 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

Vehicle speed 

Wheel speed sensor > Dynamic 
stability control > 

Release wind deflector Integrated 
chassis management 

In 

Outside temperature 

Outside temperature sensor > 
instrument cluster 

Value used in determining over¬ 
heating protection for the slide/tilt 
sunroof motors 

In 

Slide/tilt sunroof enable 

Car Access System 4 > roof con¬ 
trol module 

Enable for slide/tilt sunroof opera¬ 
tion 

In 

Terminal 50 status 

Car Access System 4 > roof con¬ 
trol module 

Interruption in sunroof slide/tilt 
sunroof actuation 

In 

Auto-remote opening 

Identification transmitter > Car 
Access System 4 

Slide/tilt sunroof auto-remote 
opening 

In 

Auto-remote opening 

Driver’s door lock barrel > footwell 
module 

Slide/tilt sunroof auto-remote 
opening 

In 

Auto-remote closing 

Identification transmitter > Car 
Access System 4 

Slide/tilt sunroof auto-remote 
closing 

In 

Auto-remote closing 

Driver’s door lock barrel > footwell 
module 

Slide/tilt sunroof auto-remote 
closing 

In 

Auto-remote closing 

Outer door handle > Comfort 
Access 

Slide/tilt sunroof auto-remote 
closing 

Out 

Anti-trapping protection 
function deactivated 

Roof control module > instrument 
cluster 

Anti-trapping protection function 
indicator deactivated 


9 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



































Auto-remote opening and auto-remote closing can be operated from the identification 
transmitter/remote control or via the lock barrel in the driver’s door. This is done by hold¬ 
ing down the lock/unlock button until the slide/tilt sunroof is closed/opened. 

The lock barrel operates in a similar fashion. The mechanical key must be held in the 
lock/ unlock position until the slide/tilt sunroof is closed/opened. 

With comfort access, the slide/tilt sunroof can be closed by touching the touch-sensitive 
area on the outer door handle. The touch-sensitive area must be touched until the slide/ 
tilt sunroof is closed. 


10 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



Functions 

Overview 

The roof control module receives signals from the other control units for the functions of 
the slide/tilt sunroof. 

The executing control unit is the roof control module. It controls the slide/tilt sunroof 
motors while also monitoring motor rotation. 

The slide/tilt sunroof is equipped with two motors. One motor is for the glass panel and 
the other for the sunroof shade. 

The following functions of the slide/tilt sunroof are integrated in the roof control module: 

• Reading operation requests 

• Controlling slide/tilt sunroof motors 

• Opening/closing the slide/tilt sunroof and sunroof shade 

• Anti-trapping protection function 

• Blocking protection 

• Panic mode 

• Load cut-out during start procedure 

• Terminal 58g 

• Initialization 

Reading Operation Requests 

Slide/tilt sunroof operation may be requested through the following controls: 

• Slide/tilt sunroof button 

• Identification transmitter 

• Driver’s door lock barrel 

• Outer door handle in Comfort Access 

Slide/tilt sunroof button 

The button for the slide/tilt sunroof is located in the roof control module. 

When operated, the button sends a low signal to the electronic module that drives the 
slide/ tilt sunroof motor corresponding to the button selection. 

The power to the LED (locator lamp) of the button in the roof control module is supplied 
from “Terminal 58g ON”. 


11 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 





Identification transmitter 

The auto-remote opening/closing function is initiated by pressing the button on the iden¬ 
tification transmitter. 

Driver’s door lock barrel 

The convenient opening/closing function is triggered by turning and holding the mechani¬ 
cal key or the spare key in the open/ close position in the driver’s door lock barrel. 

Outer door handle 

Auto-remote closing can only be triggered using the outer door handle with Comfort 
Access. The touch-sensitive area must be touched for a longer time to start auto-remote 
closing. 

Only then will the roof control module execute auto-remote closing. Releasing the touch- 
sensitive area interrupts auto-remote closing. 


12 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



Controlling Slide/tilt Sunroof Motors 

The roof control module actuates the integrated relay when it receives a corresponding 
reguest for the slide/tilt sunroof. The slide/tilt sunroof motor is supplied with power 
through the relay. 

The relay contacts are monitored by the roof control module to ensure trouble-free oper¬ 
ation of the motor and the slide/tilt sunroof. In addition, the motor speed is calculated and 
the direction of the motor’s rotation is detected from the pulses of the Hall sensors. 

The distance the slide/tilt sunroof must cover during the opening or closing procedure is 
defined in the roof control module. The slide/ tilt sunroof motor generates a certain num¬ 
ber of pulses within this distance and therefore recognizes the end positions of the 
slide/tilt sunroof. 

Anti-trapping Protection Function 

Both the glass panel and the sunroof shade are eguipped with an indirect anti-trapping 
protection function. The indirect anti-trapping protection function operates on the basis of 
the power consumption of the slide/tilt sunroof motor. 

If the roof control module detects a trapping situation, the corresponding motor is 
stopped and controlled in the opposite direction. This opens the glass panel or sunroof 
shade again (approximately 20 cm) and releases the obstruction. 

Blocking Protection 

If the pulses from the Hall sensors drop out for more than 500 ms during an opening or 
closing operation, the roof control module detects a blockage. 

The power supply to the motor is switched off. 

Overheating Protection 

The overheating protection for the slide/tilt sunroof motor is calculated in the roof control 
module. To this end, a temperature sensor is mounted on the board in the roof control 
module to measure the ambient temperature. 

The roof control module calculates the current temperature of the motor based on the 
running time of the slide/tilt sunroof motor. 

The warm-up and cool-down periods are stored in a temperature model in the roof con¬ 
trol module. 

The current temperature is stored in the memory before the roof control module passes 
into sleep mode. The motor temperature is made egual to the ambient temperature when 
the vehicle is started again. 


13 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



Panic Mode 

The slide/tilt sunroof is closed with maximum closing force in panic mode. Panic mode is 
triggered by pressing and holding, reversing, releasing and again pressing and holding 
the slide/tilt sunroof button. 

A valid enable signal from Car Access System is the precondition for executing the emer¬ 
gency closing function. 

It is necessary to release and press the button again as the first time the button is 
pressed the anti-trapping protection function is still active. The slide/tilt sunroof closes 
with maximum force after pressing the button again within a short period of time. 

It is possible to activate panic mode up to a vehicle speed of 16 km/h (10 mph). Panic 
mode can be activated from both the tilt position (approximately 100 ms) and from the 
open position (approximately 1 s). 

Load Deactivation 

Operation of the slide/tilt sunroof is stopped/ interrupted during the vehicle start proce¬ 
dure. 

The Car Access System sends “Terminal 50 ON” status. The signal is received by the 
footwell module and Junction Box electronics via K-CAN2. 

The Junction Box electronics and the footwell module prevent operation of the slide/tilt 
sunroof during the starting procedure or interrupt current operation. 

This protects the battery during the starting procedure. 

Operation of the slide/tilt sunroof can resume on completion of the starting procedure. 

Terminal 58g 

When the exterior lighting is switched on, the footwell module sends this information via 
KCAN2. 

The roof control module receives this information and adopts the set value for the instru¬ 
ment lighting. 

The LED in the button for the slide/tilt sunroof is controlled by a pulse-width modulated 
signal from the roof control module. This achieves a constant brightness of the LED even 
under fluctuating system voltage conditions. 

Opening/closing the Slide/tilt Sunroof 

The button can be moved to two engaged positions in the opening and closing direc¬ 
tions. In the first engaged position, a movement is initiated which is only executed for as 
long as the button is being pressed. 


14 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



Control functions 

• Opening sunroof shade only 

• Opening sunroof shade and glass panel (to comfort position) 

• Glass panel tilt position and sunroof shade ventilation position 

• Closing glass panel only 

• Closing glass panel and sunroof shade 

• Closing sunroof shade only with glass panels already closed. 

All control functions are also available as one-touch control functions (comfort functions). 
The one-touch control function is reached by pressing the button again to the second 
engaged position in the direction required for the slide/tilt sunroof. 

The one-touch control function automatically opens or closes of the slide/tilt sunroofs. 

Directions of movement 

Initial state: 

The glass panel and sunroof shade are closed. 

Opening sunroof shade 

Press “OPEN” 1 x 

• Signal from switch to roof control module 

• Roof control module controls the rear motor for as long as the 
button is pressed or until the sunroof shade is fully opened. 

• Rear motor opens the sunroof shade 

• Glass panel remains closed. 

Opening sunroof shade (one-touch control function) 

Press “OPEN” 1 x 

• Signal from switch to roof control module 

• Roof control module activates rear motor 

• Rear motor opens the sunroof shade 

• Glass panels remains closed 


15 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



Opening sunroof shade and glass panel 

Press “OPEN” 2 x (double-click function) 

• Signal from switch to roof control module 

• Roof control module first activates the rear motor 

• Rear motor opens the sunroof shade 

• Roof control module controls the front motor after a time, from a short distance from 
the sunroof shade. 

• Front motor opens the glass panel 

• Rear motor raises wind deflector. 

Tilt position 

Press “TILT” 1 x 

• Signal from switch to control unit 

• Roof control module activates both motors 

• Front motor tilts the glass panel 

• Rear motor moves the sunroof shade into the gap position (front ventilation position). 

Closing glass panel 

Press “CLOSE” 1 x 

• Signal from switch to roof control module 

• Roof control module controls the front motor for as long as the button is pressed or 
until the glass panel is fully closed. 

• Front motor closes the glass panel. 

Closing the glass panel (one-touch control function) 

Press “CLOSE” 1 x past the first stop 

• Signal from switch to roof control module 

• Roof control module activates front motor 

• Front motor closes the glass panel. 


16 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



Closing glass panel and sunroof shade 

Press “CLOSE” 2 x (double-click function) 

• Signal from switch to roof control module 

• Roof control module first activates the front motor 

• Front motor closes the glass panel 

• Roof control module controls the rear motor after a time, from a short distance from 
the glass panel. 

• Rear motor closes the sunroof shade and releases the wind deflector so that the 
glass panel can press it down. 

Closing the sunroof shade 

(only possible if glass panel is already closed) Press “CLOSE” 1 x 

• Signal from switch to roof control module 

• Roof control module activates rear motor 

• Rear motor closes the sunroof shade. 

Wind deflector with roof open 

The roof control module receives the speed signal from the integrated chassis manage¬ 
ment. The dynamic stability control DSC evaluates the wheel speed sensors. 

The roof control module controls the rear motor to release the wind deflector from a road 
speed of 180 km/h (112 mph). Conseguently, the wind deflector is depressed into a 
lower position. 

Note: The motor only runs lightly, the sunroof shade does not move. 
Auto-remote opening 

The slide/tilt sunroof can be opened by extended actuation of the unlock button with the 
identification sensor by turning the mechanical key in Open direction. 

Note: Movement of the power windows must be completed before auto¬ 
remote opening of the slide/tilt sunroof can be started. 

Auto-remote closing 

The slide/tilt sunroof can be closed by extended actuation of the lock button with the 
identification sensor by turning the mechanical key in Close direction. 

If the vehicle is eguipped with Comfort Access, auto-remote closing can be started by 
touching the touch-sensitive outer surface. 


17 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



System Components 

Spare Parts of Slide/tilt Sunroof 

The slide/tilt sunroof in the F01/F02 consists The following table lists the most important 
of mechanical and electrical components. 


Mechanical components 

Electrical components 

Glass panel 

Button 

Sunroof shade 

Control unit (CAS 4, FRM, FZD) 

Slide/tilt sunroof module 

Sunroof motors 

Wind deflector 



Electrical Components 

The following graphic shows all the electrical components of the slide/tilt sunroof system 
together with the appropriate control units. 

(Refer to the “Body/Complete Vehicle section fora description of the Mechanical com¬ 
ponents of the sunroof.) 





18 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 










Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Car Access System 

6 

Dynamic stability control 

2 

Junction Box electronics 

7 

Roof control module 

3 

Remote control receiver in Diversity module 

8 

Door lock with door contact 
*Hall sensors, lock barrel, only driver's door 

4 

Footwell module 

9 

Slide/tilt sunroof motor 

5 

Central gateway module 




Control Units 


Car Access System 4 

The Car Access System 4 issues the enable signal for the slide/tilt sunroof. 

“Terminal 50 ON” status is sent via K-CAN2 while starting the engine. The roof control 
module prevents activation of the motors for the slide/tilt sunroof or interrupts current 
operation. This means that there is more energy available from the battery for the starter 
to start the engine. 

Footwell module 

The footwell module makes available the status of the door contacts and the driver’s door 
lock barrel. 

The footwell module also supplies the roof control module with information concerning 
the “Terminal 58g ON” status. 

Roof control module 

The roof control module contains the complete functions of the slide/tilt sunroof. The roof 
control module is always installed in connection with the slide/tilt sunroof. 

The relays reguired to drive the slide/tilt sunroof motors are integrated in the roof control 
module. 

Slide/tilt Sunroof Motors 

One motor for the slide/tilt sunroof has two Hall sensors. 

The Hall sensors are located on the motor shaft and are offset against one another by 
90°. 

When the motor is running, this results in two temporally offset Hall signals that are used 
to register the direction of rotation of the motor and for the anti-trapping protection func¬ 
tion. 

Note: Two motors are fitted to move the slide/, tilt sunroof. 


19 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 




Service Information 


Initialization 

Initialization of the slide/tilt sunroof involves the following procedures that are necessary 
to ensure complete functionality of the slide/tilt sunroof: 

• Normalization 

Normalization means locating the mechanical end position at the stop for the tilt 
position. This position is stored and is used in calculating the remaining end posi¬ 
tions for the slide/tilt sunroof. 

• Learning the characteristic curve 

The learning procedure registers the closing force necessary for each direction of 
the slide/tilt sunroof and stores this value. 

Complete functionality of the slide/tilt sunroof can be guaranteed only by full initialization. 

The initialization procedure can be initiated with the button for the slide/tilt sunroof or via 
the diagnosis system. 

Initialization with the Button 

Initialization is performed as follows: 

• Press and hold control button in slide/tilt sunroof Tilt direction 

The glass panel moves into the tilt position and the sunroof shade into the ventila¬ 
tion position 

• After approximately 15 seconds the initialization run starts in the tilt direction and 
stores the end position 

• The slide/tilt sunroof is closed after 5 seconds in the Tilt position 

• The slide/tilt sunroof is then opened and the end position stored. 

Note: The control button must remain pressed during the entire initialization 
procedure. The initialization procedure must be repeated if the button is 
released. 

Initialization takes approximately 120 seconds. 


20 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 




Interruption in Power Supply 

An interruption in the power supply does not require a new normalization. The initializa¬ 
tion is invalidated if the power supply is interrupted during the initialization. A new initial¬ 
ization will then be necessary. 

Clearing the initialization 

Initialization is cleared under the following circumstances: 

• Failure of the power supply during initialization 

• Hall sensor fault detected 

• Position implausible 

• Certain calls in the diagnostics 

• Changed vehicle coding 

• Coding data faulty. 


21 

F01 Sliding Tilting Sunroof 



