Table of Contents 

F01 Anti-theft System 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

Anti-theft System.3 

System Overview.4 

Anti-theft System Circuit Diagram .4 

Functions.6 

Overview .6 

Activating the Anti-theft System .6 

Deactivating tilt sensor and ultrasonic 

interior movement detector.6 

Deactivating the anti-theft system .7 

Unlocking the trunk .7 

No crosswise operation .7 

Feedback from the Anti-theft System .8 

Feedback via DWA LED .8 

Confirmation from turn signal indicators .8 

Confirmation via the emergency power siren .9 

Comfort Access .9 

Alarm Trigger .10 

Door contacts .10 

Trunk lid switch .10 

Flood .10 

Ultrasonic interior movement detector .11 

Tilt alarm sensor .12 

Self-monitoring of emergency current siren .12 

Line monitoring - DWA bus .12 

Alarm Output .13 

Audible alarm .13 

Visual alarm .13 

Autarkic alarm .13 

Panic mode .14 

Alarm termination.14 

Diagnosis.15 

Ultrasonic interior movement detector alarm memory .15 


Initial Print Date: 01/09 Revision Date: 



































Anti-theft System 

Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 

BBIECIIME& 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the anti-theft system used in the F01/F02 


2 

F01 Anti-theft System 




Introduction 


Anti-theft System 

The anti-theft system is available as an option. The task of the anti-theft system is to 
indicate unauthorized access to the vehicle by emitting an alarm. The alarm can be trig¬ 
gered both audibly and visually. To do this, however, the anti-theft system must be acti¬ 
vated. When activated, the alarm monitors the whole of the vehicle interior. 

In addition the anti-theft system monitors the engine compartment and the vehicle’s rest 
position. In order that nothing can be stolen from the trunk, the anti-theft system moni¬ 
tors opening of the trunk lid. 

The alarm also signals an attempt to tamper with the vehicle, e.g. cutting of the supply 
line to the emergency power siren. 

The anti-theft system’s ultrasonic interior movement detector is entirely integrated in the 
roof function center. 

The ultrasonic signal passes into the inside of vehicle through apertures in the grille of 
the roof function center. The emergency power siren and combined tilt sensor is located 
near the rear wheel arch. 


3 

F01 Anti-theft System 




System Overview 

Anti-theft System Circuit Diagram 


© 




© 



4 

5 




© 



© 



© 


4 

F01 Anti-theft System 















































Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hood switch 

10 

Trunk lock with trunk-lid switch 

2 

Car Access System 4 (CAS4) 

11 

Door contact, rear driver's side 

3 

Anti-theft system (DWA) LED 

12 

Door contact, driver's door 

D 

Junction Box electronics (JB) 

13 

Footwell module (FRM) 

5 

Front power distribution box 

14 

Roof function center (FZD) with ultrasonic 
interior movement detector USIS 

6 

Door contact, passenger's door 

LIN-Bus 

Local Interconnect Network bus 

D 

Door contact, rear passenger's side 

K-CAN2 

Body CAN2 

8 

Rear power distribution box 

Kl. 30 

Terminal 30 

9 

Emergency power siren with integrated 
tilt alarm sensor (SINE) 




The anti-theft system on the F01/F02 is equipped with an ultrasonic interior movement 
detector for monitoring the vehicle interior. The ultrasonic interior movement detector 
USIS is fully integrated in the FZD. 

The anti-theft system is equipped with an ultrasonic interior movement detector. The 
ultrasonic interior movement detector has been fully integrated into the FZD. 

The door switches (6, 7, 11, 12, Hall-effect sensors) are monitored by the footwell mod¬ 
ule (13). As soon as the status of a Hall-effect sensor changes, the ultrasonic interior 
movement detector (14) receives that information via the K-CAN2. If the anti-theft system 
is activated, an alarm is triggered. 

The hood switch (1) is monitored by the Car Access System 4 (2). If the status changes, 
an alarm is triggered in the same way. 

Opening of the trunk lid is monitored by the Junction Box electronics (4). If the status of 
the trunk-lid switch (10) changes, it triggers an alarm. 


5 

F01 Anti-theft System 








































Functions 


Overview 

When activated, the anti-theft system on the F01/F02 monitors the entire vehicle. The 
doors and hood/trunk lid, emergency current siren, the vehicle interior and the DWA bus 
in particular are monitored. The anti-theft system can be activated or deactivated at ter¬ 
minal 30. It is not possible to activate the anti-theft system when the Terminal R or 
Terminal 15 signal is present. 

Activating the Anti-theft System 

The anti-theft system is activated when the vehicle is centrally locked. Activation can be 
triggered by the following components: 

• Driver’s door lock barrel 

• ID transmitter 

• Outside door handle with Comfort Access (sensitive surface) 

After the vehicle has been centrally locked, the emergency power siren is first activated 
together with the tilt alarm sensor. Then the signals from all door switches, the hood 
switch and the trunk-lid switch are checked for plausibility. Once the contacts are set, 
they are then linked to the vehicle monitoring system by the anti-theft system. 

The tilt sensor and the ultrasonic interior movement detector must be adjusted to the 
vehicle’s situation each time the vehicle is centrally double-locked. This is called initializ¬ 
ing. The tilt alarm sensor delivers information on the vehicle’s rest position. If this value is 
plausible, the tilt alarm sensor is included in the vehicle monitoring process. 

The anti-theft system’s ultrasonic interior movement detector monitors the passenger 
compartment. It therefore takes a little time before the ultrasonic interior movement 
detector can actively be used for the anti-theft system. The ultrasonic interior movement 
detector is switched to ‘activated’ approximately 30 seconds after the contacts have 
been linked to the anti-theft system. 

Note: You should wait approximately one minute before testing the interior 
motion detector. 

Deactivating tilt sensor and ultrasonic interior movement detector 

It is advisable to deactivate the tilt sensor and ultrasonic interior movement detector in 
the following situations: 

• Vehicle in tilt-type duplex garage 

• Vehicle on ship transport 

• Vehicle on car transporter 

• Persons or animals in vehicle 


6 

F01 Anti-theft System 




Deactivation is performed by centrally double-locking or auto-remote closing the vehicle 
a second time within 10 seconds of doing so the first time. To acknowledge, the anti¬ 
theft system LED is lit for 2 seconds. 

Note: The tilt sensor/ultrasonic interior movement detector can be 
permanently deactivated by coding. 

Deactivating the anti-theft system 

The anti-theft system is deactivated by the “unlock” or “selective unlock” central locking 
functions. An audible and/or visual signal can be output in connection with deactivating 
corresponding to the country-specific version. 

If an alarm was triggered during the time when the anti-theft system was activated, the 
anti-theft system LED flashes for 5 minutes. If a terminal status changes, e.g. if the cen¬ 
tral locking is unlocked, while the LED is flashing then the LED stops flashing. If the alarm 
is deactivated while the alarm is active, the deactivate instruction is not acknowledged 
and the alarm signal is completed. 

Unlocking the trunk 

The tilt alarm sensor and ultrasonic interior movement detector are blanked out if the lug¬ 
gage compartment is unlocked and opened on an armed vehicle. Loading the vehicle 
might result in a new vehicle resting position. Initialization of the ultrasonic interior move¬ 
ment detector and the tilt sensor starts 6 seconds after the trunk is closed again. 

Note: When the trunk is closed, the visual confirmation signal is repeated 
to indicate to the driver that the trunk is properly closed. 

No crosswise operation 

If crosswise operation is not implemented, an alarm is triggered when the anti-theft sys¬ 
tem is deactivated. 

This only applies to activating with the ID transmitter and deactivating via the driver’s door 
lock. The footwell module detects that the vehicle has been unlocked via the driver’s door 
lock and broadcasts that information via the K-CAN2. 

The Car Access System detects that the driver’s door lock has been unlocked but does 
not unlock the vehicle. The anti-theft system remains activated and triggers the alarm 
when the driver’s door is opened. 

This function is coded on the Car Access System. 


7 

F01 Anti-theft System 



Feedback from the Anti-theft System 

When the alarm is activated, the system does not signal confirmation until all doors, the 
hood and the trunk have been closed. That confirmation may be in the form of a visual or 
audible signal. If confirmation is by a visual signal, the alarm LED or the hazard warning 
lights may flash, for example. If the confirmation signal is audible, it is produced by sound¬ 
ing the emergency power siren, for example. 

Feedback via DWA LED 

The DWA LED serves as an indicator showing the status of the anti-theft system. The 
roof functions center supplies the DWA LED with signals from the ultrasonic interior 
movement detector. 


DWA Status 

DWA LED 

Deactivated 

OFF 

Activated 

ON 

Armed, but not all contacts closed 

Blinks for 10 seconds, then continues flashing 

Ultrasonic interior motion/tilt sensor OFF 

Lights up for 2 seconds and then remains on 

Alarm triggered 

Flashes for 5 minutes, then continues flashing in bursts 

Deactivating 

Goes out 

Deactivating after alarm 

Flashes for 5 minutes or stops if a terminal status changes 
(central locking unlocked) 


When blinking, the DWA LED is driven at a freguency of 0.5 Hz. The switch-on time is 
60 milliseconds. When the DWA LED flashes, it is activated at a freguency of 2 Hz. 

Confirmation from turn signal indicators 

Visual confirmation by the turn signal indicators of anti-theft system activation and deacti¬ 
vation serves as an indication for the vehicle user. 

The feedback is coded specifically to the country and/or vehicle. 


DWA Status 

Signal of hazard warning lights 

Activation 

Hazard warning lights flash once 

Deactivation 

Hazard warning lights flash twice 

Activation after “Easy Access” to trunk 

Hazard warning lights flash once after trunk is closed 

Deactivating after alarm 

Hazard warning lights flash four times at double frequency 


8 

F01 Anti-theft System 





Confirmation via the emergency power siren 

The audible confirmation signal to the vehicle user when activating and deactivating the 
alarm is individually coded for the country of purchase. 


DWA Status 

Signal from siren 

Activation 

Signal tone sounds once 

Deactivation 

Signal tone sounds twice 

Activation with doors open or trunk lid open 

No signal tone, sounds only after closing 
last door or trunk lid 


Comfort Access 

If the vehicle is locked but the trunk is open, it is possible for the ID transmitter to be inad¬ 
vertently left in the trunk. If the trunk lid is closed in such circumstances, it is automatical¬ 
ly opened again to prevent the ID transmitter from being locked in. 

In addition to automatically opening the trunk lid, the anti-theft system emits an audible 
warning. The warning consists of the emergency power siren sounding a two-tone signal 
three times. The footwell module also activates the visual signal by the hazard warning 
lights. 


9 

F01 Anti-theft System 




Alarm Trigger 

The anti-theft system can be triggered by the following components: 

• Door contacts 

• Trunk lid switch 

• Hood switch 

• Ultrasonic interior movement detector 

• Emergency power siren with integral tilt sensor. 

Door contacts 

The status of the door contacts is evaluated by the footwell module and signalled to the 
ultrasonic interior movement detector. The status of the individual door contacts is includ¬ 
ed in the vehicle monitoring system 6 seconds after the status signal “door closed” is 
issued. This means that an alarm can be triggered via a door that is already closed even if 
another door contact is still open. 

Trunk lid switch 

The status of the trunk lid switch is analysed by the Junction Box electronics and sig¬ 
nalled to the ultrasonic interior movement detector. When the trunk lid is closed, the 
Junction Box electronics receives a low signal (approximately 0 V). If the trunk lid is 
unlocked when the anti-theft system is activated, the signals from the trunk lid switch, 
ultrasonic interior movement detector and tilt sensor are initially suppressed. 

The signals are also suppressed if the trunk lid is unlocked using the ID transmitter when 
the anti-theft system is activated. The trunk lid switch is reinstated as part of the vehicle 
monitoring system 6 seconds after the lid is closed. Once there are no other doors open 
and the trunk lid is closed, the initialization procedure for the ultrasonic interior movement 
detector and the tilt sensor starts. 

Because of the manipulation prevention system, unlocking the luggage compartment 
with the aid of the mechanical key when the DWA is activated will cause an alarm to be 
triggered. 

Hood 

The status of the hood switch is analysed by the Car Access System and signalled to the 
ultrasonic interior movement detector. The status of the hood switch is included in the 
vehicle monitoring system 6 seconds after the status “hood closed” is signalled. 

The Car Access System interprets a hood switch that is not connected as closed. When 
the hood is closed, the Car Access System receives a low signal (approximately 0 V). 


10 

F01 Anti-theft System 



Ultrasonic interior movement detector 

The ultrasonic interior movement detector captures and evaluates movements in the 
vehicle interior. Initialization of the ultrasonic interior movement detector is started 6 sec¬ 
onds after the hood, trunk lid and the last door have been closed. 

The ultrasonic interior movement detector is operational 30 seconds after the start of ini¬ 
tialization and is included in the vehicle monitoring system. The ultrasonic interior move¬ 
ment detector has been integrated into the roof function center. The FZD is connected to 
the K-CAN2 and DWA bus. ~ 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Front of roof function center 

4 

Roof function center connector 

2 

Sensor ultrasound emission grille 

5 

Rear of roof function center 

3 

Funnels for the ultrasonic sensors 




Note: For the ultrasonic interior movement detector to function properly, it is 
very important that the grille (2) is fitted correctly. The funnels must be 
touching the grille to prevent/reduce interference between the ultrason 
ic sensors. The grille must be engaged at the sides and fully located in 
position in the center. 


11 

F01 Anti-theft System 






























Tilt alarm sensor 

The tilt alarm sensor registers the vehicle rest position when it is activated and detects 
changes in the position, e.g. jacking up the vehicle. The tilt alarm sensor is integrated in 
the emergency current siren. 

Initialization of the tilt sensor is started 6 seconds after all doors, the trunk lid and the 
hood are closed. The tilt sensor is ready for operation 60 seconds from the start of initial¬ 
ization and is then included in the vehicle monitoring system. 

If the tilt alarm sensor detects vehicle movement, a corresponding signal is sent to the 
ultrasonic interior movement detector. The anti-theft system decides whether the move¬ 
ment is sufficient to trigger an alarm. 

To ensure a false alarm is not triggered as the result of the vehicle rocking, the angle val¬ 
ues for the longitudinal and transverse axis are determined every 90 ms. An alarm is trig¬ 
gered only if the vehicle remains in an inclined position for longer than approximately 
1.5 seconds. 

Note: Testing the tilt sensor: 

Activate the anti-theft system then wait for one and a half minutes. Then 
raise the vehicle with a jack at one of the wheels. The alarm should be 
triggered before the wheel has been raised completely off the ground. 

Self-monitoring of emergency current siren 

A self-monitoring facility that is activated immediately after the anti-theft system has been 
activated is implemented in the emergency current siren. The emergency current siren 
monitors its own power supply and detects overvoltage, undervoltage and line break 
(open-circuit). 

If anyone attempts to manually interfere with the emergency power siren or its supply 
leads, the emergency power siren will trigger an alarm. At the same time, it reports this 
alarm to the ultrasonic interior movement detector regardless of whether the DWA bus 
has been affected. 

Line monitoring - DWA bus 

The ultrasonic interior movement detector and the emergency current siren are connect¬ 
ed via the DWA bus. As soon as the anti-theft system has been activated, the DWA bus 
is monitored cyclically every 2 seconds. 

If the anti-theft system does not register with the SINE within 3.2 s, an alarm is initiated. 

The anti-theft system sends a line monitoring reguest on the DWA bus to the emergency 
current siren. The emergency power siren must respond within 100 ms. If no response is 
received, the anti-theft system triggers an alarm. The line monitoring facility is also active 
while the alarm is triggered. 

The anti-theft system in the roof function center measures the system voltage. The line 
monitoring facility is switched off at a system voltage below 9 V. This avoids false alarms. 

12 

F01 Anti-theft System 



Alarm Output 

If an alarm criterion is fulfilled with the anti-theft system activated, the alarm is output 
(triggered) audibly and/or visually corresponding to the country-specific coding. 


Audible alarm 

The emergency power siren receives a signal via the DWA bus when the ultrasonic interi¬ 
or movement detector triggers an alarm. It is fitted in the rear right wheel arch. The emer¬ 
gency current siren confirms receipt of the alarm reguest and triggers the audible alarm. 



Emergency power siren on F01/F02 


If the alarm reguest is not acknowledged, the anti-theft system will repeat the alarm 
reguest up to eight times. 

Depending on the country-specific coding of the emergency current siren, an intermittent 
or interval tone is generated. If the anti-theft system is deactivated, the audible alarm is 
stopped immediately and without response. 


Visual alarm 

Depending on the country-specific version, the following components of the exterior 
lighting can be activated for the visual alarm: 

•Turn signal indicators 

• Dipped-beam headlights 

• High-beam headlights. 

When the anti-theft system triggers an audible alarm, a visual alarm is simultaneously trig¬ 
gered for 5 minutes. The anti-theft system sends the reguest for flashing lights to the 
footwell module via the K-CAN2. In turn, the footwell module activates the components 
of the exterior lighting system. 

The visual alarm cannot be extended by repeated alarm triggering. 

If the anti-theft system is deactivated, the visible alarm is stopped immediately and with¬ 
out response. 


Autarkic alarm 

If the emergency power siren’s wires are tampered with, it initiates the autonomous alarm. 
If the DWA bus is also cut through, the ultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor 
detects this situation by the absence of the reply from the emergency current siren. In 
turn, the ultrasonic interior movement detector triggers the visual alarm. 


13 

F01 Anti-theft System 


Panic mode 

Panic mode is a means of attracting attention by triggering an alarm when under threat 
from the outside or in the event of an accident, for example. 

Panic mode is initiated by pressing the trunk lid button on the ID transmitter. The button 
must be pressed for longer than 2.5 seconds irrespective of whether the anti-theft sys¬ 
tem is activated or not. 

The alarm is stopped by pressing any button on the ID transmitter. Panic mode is not 
stored. On completion of panic mode, the anti-theft system assumes the setting that 
was selected prior to panic mode. 

Panic mode is at present only coded in US vehicles. 

Alarm termination 

An alarm initiated fortesting purposes or by accident can be stopped by deactivating the 
anti-theft system. 


14 

F01 Anti-theft System 



Diagnosis 

All information is stored in the non-volatile alarm memory. 

Ultrasonic interior movement detector alarm memory 

The alarm memory of the ultrasonic interior movement detector stores all alarms apart 
from the autonomous alarm. The alarm memory contains the following information: 

• Cause of alarm trigger 

• Subseguent alarm triggers 

• Date 

• Time 

• Ambient conditions 

- Outside temperature 

- Window position 

- Sunroof position 

- Heating. 

An alarm history is formed from the beginning to the end of the alarm. The manner in 
which the alarm is ended is also defined. The alarm can be terminated by deactivating it 
or by allowing it to run its course. The last 10 alarms are stored in the alarm memory. 

Autonomous alarms are stored by the roof function center if the connection between the 
roof function center and the emergency power siren is in functional order. 


15 

F01 Anti-theft System 



