Table of Contents 


F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid 
Actuating System 


Subject Page 

Introduction .5 

Features of the Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid 

Actuating System .5 

System Overview.6 

Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid 

Actuating System Input/outputs.6 

Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid 

Actuating System Circuit Diagram.8 

Functions .12 

Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating Points .12 

Operation by Luggage Compartment Lid Buttons .13 

Direction of luggage compartment lid movement .13 

Luggage compartment lid button, A-pillar .14 

Central double-lock button .14 

Outer luggage compartment lid button .15 

Interior luggage compartment lid button .16 

ID transmitter luggage compartment lid button .16 

European variant .16 

US variant .17 

Automatic Opening .18 

Automatic Opening Procedure .18 

Luggage Compartment Lid Opening with Comfort Access .18 

Automatic Closing .19 

Closing Luggage Compartment Lid .19 

Manual Opening and Closing .20 

Moving the Luggage Compartment Lid by Hand .20 

Luggage compartment lid lift active .20 

Luggage compartment lid lift in sleep mode .20 

Terminal 30B OFF.20 

Luggage Compartment Lid Movement Inhibit Conditions .21 

Additional Functions of the Luggage Compartment Lid Lift.22 

Position Detection .22 

Obstruction Detection .23 

Obstruction detection principle .23 

Repeat Interlock .23 


Initial Print Date:01/09 


Revision Date: 



































Subject Page 

System Components.24 

Control Units, Control Elements and Spindle Drives .24 

Luggage Compartment Lid Lift .24 

Car Access System .25 

Junction Box Electronics .25 

Control Elements .25 

Outer Luggage Compartment Lid Button .25 

Interior Luggage Compartment Lid Button .25 

Central Double-lock Button .26 

ID transmitter luggage compartment lid button .26 

Luggage compartment lid button, A-pillar .26 

Lock barrel, luggage compartment lid .26 

Spindle Drives .26 

Luggage Compartment Lid Contact Switch .27 

Service Information.28 

Control Unit Replacement .28 

Teaching in the Luggage Compartment Lid End Stops.28 

Spindle Drive Replacement .28 





















Subject 


Page 



Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid 
Actuating System (HKL) 


Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 

OBJECTIVES 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the operation of the HKL system on the F01/F02 


4 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 


Introduction 


Features of the Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid 
Actuating System 

The automatic luggage compartment lid actuating system will be available on the F01 as 
from its launch in 09/08. It will be available to order as an option and only concerns the 
luggage compartment lid. 

Automatic luggage compartment lid operation improves vehicle access in that the lug¬ 
gage compartment lid is opened or closed automatically at the press of a button. 

A spindle-driven system is fitted in the F01 for the first time to actuate automatic open¬ 
ing or closing of the luggage compartment lid. 

The automatic luggage compartment lid actuating system makes it possible to open and 
close the luggage compartment lid automatically at the push of a button. 

If the vehicle is eguipped with Comfort Access, it is even possible to open the luggage 
compartment lid while the vehicle is locked. 

The luggage compartment lid can open automatically when the exterior luggage com¬ 
partment lid button is pressed. The only requirement being that a vehicle-specific ID 
transmitter must be present in the immediate vicinity of the rear end of the vehicle. 

In connection with Comfort Access, it is now also possible to centrally lock the vehicle 
doors from the luggage compartment lid. The “central double-lock” button used for this 
purpose is located in the luggage compartment lid next to the button for automatically 
closing the luggage compartment lid. 



Central double-lock button F01/F02 


Closing the luggage compartment lid can also be initiated by pressing the 
“central double-lock” button. 


5 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 





System Overview 


Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System Input/outputs 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Outside temperature sensor 

8 

Interior luggage compartment lid button 

2 

Instrument cluster 

9 

Drive for automatic soft-close luggage 
compartment lid lock 

3 

Control unit for automatic luggage compartment 
lid actuating system HKL 

10 

Central locking, luggage compartment lid 

4 

Lock barrel, luggage compartment lid 

11 

Luggage compartment lid button, outer luggage 
compartment lid recessed handle 

5 

Identification transmitter 

12 

Car Access System 

6 

Dynamic Stability Control 

13 

Luggage compartment lid button, A-pillar drive 

7 

Luggage compartment lid spindle 




6 


F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



























Luggage compartment lid lift (3) controls and monitors opening or closing of the luggage 
compartment lid. Opening or closing of the luggage compartment lid can be triggered by 
luggage compartment lid buttons (8,11,13). The luggage compartment lid can be 
unlocked and opened by purely mechanical means with the lock barrel in the luggage 
compartment lid (4). 

The signals from the outside temperature sensor (1) and vehicle speed (6) are evaluated 
to determine whether the luggage compartment lid may be opened or closed in 
response to a press of a button. 


7 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System Circuit Diagram 



8 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



























































































































Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central gateway module (ZGM) 

11 

Luggage compartment lid lock with luggage 
compartment lid switch/ lock barrel 

2 

Footwell module (FRM) 

12 

Automatic soft-close luggage compartment lid 

3 

Luggage compartment lid button, A-pillar 

13 

Spindle drive motor, left 

4 

Car Access System (CAS) 

14 

Luggage compartment lighting, underside 
of rear window shelf 

5 

Junction box electronics (JB) 

15 

Remote control receiver in diversity module 

6 

Rear power distribution box 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

7 

Spindle drive motor, right 

K-CAN2 

Body-CAN2 

8 

Luggage compartment lid lift (HKL) 

Kl. 30 

Terminal 30 

9 

Inner luggage compartment lid button/ 
central double-lock button 

Kl. 30B 

Terminal 30, basic operation 

10 

Outer luggage compartment lid button 

LIN-Bus 

Local Interconnect Network bus 


m. 


K-CAN signals at the luggage compartment lid lift 


In/out 

Information 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

Outside temperature 

Outside temperature sensor > instru¬ 
ment cluster 

Value for calculating overheating pro¬ 
tection for the spindle motors 

In 

Driving speed 

Wheel speed sensors > Dynamic sta¬ 
bility control > Integrated chassis 
management 

Permit/deny control functions of the 
luggage compartment lid 


The radio signal from the identification transmitter is received by the rear window anten¬ 
na. The remote control receiver in diversity module (15) forwards the signal to Car Access 
System (4). The Car Access System is the master control unit for the central locking 
function. 


Once the signal has been successfully verified, the Car Access System issues a com¬ 
mand to control the central locking in the luggage compartment lid. 

The junction box electronics (5) execute the command to control the central locking in 
the luggage compartment lid. The junction box electronics register the status of the lug¬ 
gage compartment lid switch (11) for the "automatic luggage compartment lid actuation" 
function. The status of the luggage compartment lid switch is sent on the K-CAN to the 
luggage compartment lid lift (8). The status is one of the triggering criteria for luggage 
compartment lid operation. 


9 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 





























Sensors (13 and 7) in the spindle drives monitor the movement of the luggage compart¬ 
ment lid. The luggage compartment lid lift is therefore able to reverse the closing move¬ 
ment of an obstructed luggage compartment lid, allowing the obstruction to be freed. 

An obstruction to luggage compartment lid movement during the opening procedure 
causes the luggage compartment lid to stop and it is not reversed. 

As a backup to the Hall sensors, the luggage compartment lid lift monitors the power 
consumption of the spindle drive. An increase in current when the luggage compartment 
lid blocks causes the luggage compartment lid to stop and, if need be, reverse. 


10 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 




11 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Functions 


Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating Points 

The luggage compartment lid can be unlocked and opened or closed from various oper¬ 
ating points. The operating points are the: 

• Outer luggage compartment lid button 

• Luggage compartment lid button on the interior of the luggage compartment lid 
(only when the luggage compartment lid is open) 

• Central double-lock button on the interior of the luggage compartment lid (only 
when the luggage compartment lid is open) 

• Luggage compartment lid button on the identification transmitter 

• Luggage compartment lid button on A-pillar in vehicle interior 

• Luggage compartment lid lock barrel (mechanical unlocking). 

The automatic luggage compartment lid actuating system cannot be activated when the 
vehicle is in motion, only when the vehicle is stationary. 

Automatic luggage compartment lid actuation is controlled and monitored by a control 
unit. This control unit is designated luggage compartment lid lift HKL. 

The HKL has an integrated “soft-opening” or “soft-closing” function. This means that 
the closing or opening speed is slowed shortly before the end stops are reached so that 
the luggage compartment lid moves softly into the respective end stop. The soft end 
stop is achieved by a change in the pulse width of the control voltage. 

The luggage compartment lid moves guietly and smoothly. This gives the impression of 
a harmonious movement during the luggage compartment lid opening or closing proce¬ 
dure. 

To achieve this, the speed of the luggage compartment lid movement is regulated by the 
HKL. Luggage compartment lid movement depends on whether the luggage compart¬ 
ment lid is covered with hoarfrost or snow. If the weight of the snow is too heavy for the 
luggage compartment lid, no luggage compartment lid movement will take place. 


12 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 




The HKL receives signals on the K-CAN from the following control units: 

• Car Access System 

- Luggage compartment lid button, A-pillar 

- Central double-lock button 

- Enable for operating luggage compartment lid or terminal status 

- Request from identification transmitter 

• Integrated Chassis Management Driving speed signal 

• Junction box electronics 

- Outer luggage compartment lid button 

- Luggage compartment lid button on interior of luggage compartment lid. 

Operation by Luggage Compartment Lid Buttons 

The luggage compartment lid can be opened, stopped or closed by pressing one of the 
luggage compartment lid buttons. It is also possible to stop or resume the movement of 
the luggage compartment lid from any open position. Tapping a luggage compartment lid 
button is sufficient input for the luggage compartment lid to continue to the respective 
end position (luggage compartment lid open or closed). The luggage compartment lid 
movement stops automatically as soon as the end position is reached. 

Direction of luggage compartment lid movement 

The direction of movement of the luggage compartment lid changes with every second 
press of the interior or exterior luggage compartment lid button. Initial state of luggage 
compartment lid closed: 

• Button stroke > Open 

• Button stroke > Stop 

• Button stroke > Close 

• Button stroke > Stop 

• Button stroke > Open, etc. 


13 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Luggage compartment lid button, A-pillar 

The interior luggage compartment lid button on the A-pillar can only be used to open or 
stop the luggage compartment lid. 

• Button stroke > Open 

• Button stroke > Stop 

• Button stroke > Open 

• Button stroke > Stop, etc. 

Central double-lock button 

In vehicles eguipped with Comfort Access, the inner luggage compartment lid button is 
installed together with the central double-lock button. 


Inner luggage compartment lid button 
and central double-lock button F01/F02 



The central double-lock button is connected to the Car Access System. The central dou¬ 
ble-lock button is used to lock and centrally arrest the vehicle doors. To provide maximum 
convenience for the customer, closing the luggage compartment lid can be initiated by 
pressing the central double-lock button. 

The central double-lock button can only be used to close and stop the luggage compart¬ 
ment lid. 

• Button stroke > Close 

• Button stroke > Stop 

• Button stroke > Close 

• Button stroke > Stop, etc. 

Note: A command sent from the central double-lock button can only be exe¬ 
cuted with the luggage compartment lid open. This is due to the fact that 
the button has a connection to ground via the luggage compartment lid 
contact switch only when the luggage compartment lid is open. 


14 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Outer luggage compartment lid button 

The junction box electronics evaluate the status of the luggage compartment lid button. 

Evaluation depends on whether or not the vehicle is in sleep mode. If the vehicle is in 
sleep mode, it will have to be woken first. Only then can the reguest be sent to the HKL 
on the K-CAN. The HKL triggers the appropriate reguest. 

When closed, the luggage compartment lid is unlocked by the junction box electronics. 
The luggage compartment lid lift HKL then opens the luggage compartment lid. The lug¬ 
gage compartment lid is completely opened automatically. 

The outer luggage compartment lid button can be used to open, stop or close the lug¬ 
gage compartment lid. 

• Button stroke > Open * 

• Button stroke > Stop 

• Button stroke > Close ** 

• Button stroke > Stop 

• Button stroke > Open 

• Button stroke > Stop etc. 

* Always in open direction with luggage compartment lid closed 
** Always in close direction with luggage compartment lid completely open. 

Note: Additional information on luggage compartment lid operation can be 
found under “Manual opening and closing”. 


15 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Interior luggage compartment lid button 

Parallel to the outer luggage compartment lid button, the inner luggage compartment lid 
button is connected to the junction box electronics. For this reason, the junction box elec¬ 
tronics do not distinguish between the two luggage compartment lid buttons. 



Inner luggage compartment lid button F01/F02 


Note: A command sent from the inner luggage compartment lid button can 

only be executed with the luggage compartment lid open. This is due to 
the fact that the button has a connection to ground via the luggage com¬ 
partment lid contact switch only when the luggage compartment lid is 
open. 

ID transmitter luggage compartment lid button 

If the complete vehicle is locked, it is possible to trigger an automatic opening of the lug¬ 
gage compartment lid by pressing the luggage compartment lid button with the luggage 
compartment lid symbol. Firstly, the luggage compartment lid is unlocked. Then the lug¬ 
gage compartment lid begins to open automatically. 

Operation of the luggage compartment lid with the identification transmitter is subject to 
specific legal reguirements. There are differences between the European variant, the US 
variant and the Canadian variant. 

European variant 

Pressing the luggage compartment lid button with the luggage compartment lid symbol 
on the identification transmitter: 

• Luggage compartment lid closed 

- Short press Luggage compartment lid opens to end position 

- Press and hold Luggage compartment lid opens to end position 

• Luggage compartment lid open 

- Pressed and held > Luggage compartment lid closed to end 
or until button released. 

It is possible to initiate the opening procedure by means of the luggage compartment lid 
button while the luggage compartment lid is closed. Releasing the luggage compartment 
lid button has no effect. The luggage compartment lid is opened until it is completely 
open. A brief press of the luggage compartment lid button while the luggage compart¬ 
ment lid is opening stops the opening procedure. 


16 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 




A long press of the luggage compartment lid button while the luggage compartment lid is 
opening triggers the luggage compartment lid closing procedure. The opening procedure 
stops first to allow the luggage compartment lid to begin closing immediately. The closing 
procedure ends if the luggage compartment lid button is released or the “CLOSED” posi¬ 
tion is reached. 

Note: The Car Access System evaluates the requests from the identification 
transmitter. The luggage compartment lid lift receives the requests on 
the K-CAN. The signal must be routed through various bus systems. 
These bus systems are: 

• LIN-bus (diversity module > CAS) 

• K-CAN2 (CAS > ZGM) 

• K-CAN > (ZGM > HKL). 

US variant 

The luggage compartment lid movement does not begin until the luggage compartment 
lid button has been released. The identification transmitter sends a message indicating 
that the luggage compartment lid button has been released. From this message, it is 
possible for the luggage compartment lid button stroke to be detected. Automatic open¬ 
ing is initiated after the luggage compartment lid has unlocked. The luggage compart¬ 
ment lid is completely opened. 

Note: The remote control cannot be used to close the luggage compartment 
lid on the US variant for legal reasons. 


17 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Automatic Opening 

The luggage compartment lid is opened or closed automatically when one of the luggage 
compartment lid buttons is pressed. A basic prereguisite being that there must be no 
“inhibit condition” present. You will find a description of the inhibit conditions in the 
“Luggage compartment lid movement inhibit conditions” section of this Product 
Information. 

Automatic Opening Procedure 

The following procedure begins with a closed luggage compartment lid. 

• Luggage compartment lid button with luggage compartment lid symbol pressed 
briefly 

Note: On the US variant, the luggage compartment lid button on the identifica¬ 
tion transmitter must be released otherwise the luggage compartment 
lid will not be opened automatically. 

• Power supply switched to luggage compartment lid lift and reguest to unlock the 
luggage compartment lid issued by the Car Access System 

• The junction box electronics unlock the luggage compartment lid. Initially, the lug¬ 
gage compartment lid lock is actuated. 

• The luggage compartment lid contact switch changes from closed to open. 

• The HKL controls the spindle drives to open the luggage compartment lid. 

The luggage compartment lid is completely opened. If one of the inhibit conditions 
becomes active during luggage compartment lid movement, this will stop further move¬ 
ment of the luggage compartment lid. 

Luggage Compartment Lid Opening with Comfort Access 

Vehicles eguipped with the Comfort Access option also have a "keyless opening" lug¬ 
gage compartment lid function. 

The junction box electronics wake a sleeping vehicle in response to the outer luggage 
compartment lid button being pressed. The junction box electronics send the reguest on 
the K-CAN2. The Car Access System with Comfort Access receives the reguest and 
arranges for the identification transmitter to register with the vehicle. 

Once the identification transmitter has been successfully verified by the Car Access 
System, the latter arranges for the luggage compartment lid to be unlocked. The junction 
box electronics execute the unlocking procedure. As soon as the status of the luggage 
compartment lid contact switch changes, the junction box electronics issue a notification 
on the K-CAN2. The central gateway module implements the signal on the K-CAN. In 
response, the HKL then executes the automatic opening procedure. 


18 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Automatic Closing 

With the exception of the luggage compartment lid button in the A-pillar, all luggage com¬ 
partment lid buttons are able to initiate automatic closing. 

This luggage compartment lid button cannot be used to start the automatic closing pro¬ 
cedure. 

Closing Luggage Compartment Lid 

The luggage compartment lid can be closed by pressing the inner luggage compartment 
lid button, outer luggage compartment lid button or central double-lock button. 

The junction box electronics wake a sleeping vehicle in response to the inner luggage 
compartment lid button being pressed. The junction box electronics send the reguest on 
the K-CAN2. The Car Access System with Comfort Access receives the reguest and ini¬ 
tiates the automatic closing procedure. 

In response, the HKL then executes the automatic closing procedure. 

As soon as the status of the luggage compartment lid contact switch changes, the junc¬ 
tion box electronics issue a notification on the K-CAN2. The central gateway module 
implements the signal on the K-CAN. The HKL then knows that the closing process has 
ended. 


19 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Manual Opening and Closing 

Moving the Luggage Compartment Lid by Hand 

It is possible to open or close an open luggage compartment lid at anytime in any vehicle 
idle mode situation. Three vehicle statuses govern the manual opening and closing pro¬ 
cedure. These are: 

• Luggage compartment lid lift active 

• Luggage compartment lid lift in sleep mode 

• Luggage compartment lid lift at terminal 30B OFF. 

Luggage compartment lid lift active 

While terminal 30B is switched on, detection of manual luggage compartment lid move¬ 
ments is straightforward. 

The HKL detects luggage compartment lid movement by means of Hall sensors located 
in the spindle drive motors. The HKL evaluates the pulses of the Hall sensors and stores 
the current position of the luggage compartment lid. 

This position is used as the starting position for subseguent luggage compartment lid 
movement. 

Luggage compartment lid lift in sleep mode 

The current position of the luggage compartment lid is stored in the HKL before the vehi¬ 
cle enters sleep mode. 

Once the vehicle is in sleep mode, the HKL checks the Hall sensors on a cyclical basis. 
The vehicle is woken if a luggage compartment lid movement is detected. The HKL is 
then switched on and detects the luggage compartment lid being moved by hand. 

Terminal 30B OFF 

If terminal 30B is switched off, the power supply to the spindle drives is switched off and 
so too are the Hall sensors. In this situation, therefore, manual luggage compartment lid 
movements can no longer be detected. 

If the position of the luggage compartment lid has been altered manually, the stored value 
would no longer match the current value. 

At the next reguest, the luggage compartment lid is always closed first. The HKL detects 
the lower end stop from the status of the luggage compartment lid contact switch. This 
enables the current position of the luggage compartment lid to be compared with the 
stored starting position. The position of the luggage compartment lid is, in this way, newly 
referenced. 


20 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Note: If the luggage compartment lid movement is stopped before the lower 
end stop is reached, the luggage compartment lid will be opened the 
next time it is operated. 

Since the position of the luggage compartment lid has not yet been referenced, 
the luggage compartment lid is only opened by as much it was previously 
closed. 

Luggage Compartment Lid Movement Inhibit Conditions 

The luggage compartment lid is not permitted to be operated in various situations. These 
situations include engine starting or driving or cases where there may be a risk of vehicle 
damage. 

If luggage compartment lid operation needs to be inhibited while the luggage compart¬ 
ment lid is closing, an attempt is made to complete the movement that has commenced 
through to the end. For example, an attempt is made to complete luggage compartment 
lid movement until it closes while the vehicle is driving off. The luggage compartment lid 
lift will terminate actuation if the luggage compartment lid comes up against a blocking 
situation. 

The inhibit conditions are listed as follows: 


Inhibit condition 

Explanation/information 

Vehicle speed 
v max > 3 km 

The speed signal is made available by the integrated chassis management. 

Note: The luggage compartment lid can be set in motion in the presence of an 
invalid road speed signal. 

Outside temperature 
< - 30 °C and + 80 °C > 

The outside temperature signal is issued by the instrument cluster. 

Note: The luggage compartment lid can be set in motion in the presence of an 
invalid temperature signal. 

On-board supply voltage 
< 9 Vto 16 V> 

In the event of undervoltage < 9 V or overvoltage > 16 V, the luggage compartment lid 
can no longer be set in motion. 

Engine start 

(status “terminal 50 ON”) 

The signal is issued on the K-CAN2 by the Car Access System. Cancellation if luggage 
compartment lid movement in progress, luggage compartment lid operation is inhibited. 


If the luggage compartment lid is reversing, the inhibit conditions are ignored and the lug¬ 
gage compartment lid movement is followed through to the end. 


21 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 





Additional Functions of the Luggage Compartment Lid Lift 

Position Detection 

The spindle drives are each integrated with a motor. The motor contains two Hall sen¬ 
sors. The Hall sensors are arranged with relative offset. This enables detection of the 
motor’s direction of rotation. In addition, it is possible to draw conclusions as to the 
remaining path of the luggage compartment lid based on the Hall sensor pulses. 

The complete movement range of the luggage compartment lid from “CLOSED” to 
“OPEN” is recorded during assembly in the works. The HKL therefore knows how many 
Hall sensor pulses were generated between lower and upper end stop of the luggage 
compartment lid. 

The number of Hall sensor pulses corresponds to the distance covered by the luggage 
compartment lid. With this information, the HKL is able to determine the opening angle of 
the luggage compartment lid. 

The path of the luggage compartment lid is subdivided into various segments. From the 
Hall sensor pulses, the HKL knows the segment in which the luggage compartment lid is 
positioned. If the luggage compartment lid is fully open, it is positioned within the range 
of the upper segment. From there, the luggage compartment lid is always moved in the 
closing direction. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Upper segment 

2 

Range between the upper and 
lower segment 

3 

Lowermost segment 


If the luggage compartment lid is in the 
range of the lower segment, i.e. closed, the 
luggage compartment lid is always moved in 
the opening direction. 

The current position of the luggage com¬ 
partment lid is stored by the HKL before it 
enters sleep mode. When the vehicle wakes 
up, the most recently stored position is used 
as the current position. 


S 

I 

Luggage compartment lid segments F01 


22 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 










Obstruction Detection 

Obstruction detection is active during the luggage compartment lid opening and closing 
procedure. An obstruction to luggage compartment lid movement during the opening 
procedure causes the luggage compartment lid to stop moving immediately. If the lug¬ 
gage compartment lid is obstructed in the closing direction, the HKL briefly controls the 
spindle drives in the opposite direction. If the luggage compartment lid remains obstruct¬ 
ed, the HKL stops controlling the spindle drive motors. 

There is no reversal of the direction of movement if the luggage compartment lid is 
obstructed as it opens or closes at the end stop. 

Obstruction detection principle 

The HKL evaluates the Hall sensor pulses in the spindle drive motors. The motor current 
is also recorded. 

If the motor current increases and the Hall sensor pulses drop out, the HKL detects that 
the luggage compartment lid is being obstructed. 

Note: Obstruction detection is deactivated during initialization of the luggage 
compartment lid lift. This allows the luggage compartment lid drives to 
be controlled with the maximum current available. 

Repeat Interlock 

The HKL is equipped with a repeat interlock to prevent the motors from overheating. The 
motor run-time is cumulated for the repeat interlock. 

If the sum exceeds a maximum running time of 2 minutes, a new operation command will 
be rejected. An action that is already in progress always follows through to the end. 

After a cooling phase of 6 minutes, it is possible for the motor to accrue a run-time of 2 
minutes again. 

The current motor run-time is stored by the HKL before it enters sleep mode. 

The motor run-time of the repeat interlock is halved when the control unit is woken from 
sleep mode. 

The repeat interlock is cleared in the event of a terminal 30B reset. This means that a 
motor run-time of 2 minutes is immediately available. 


23 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



System Components 


Control Units, Control Elements and Spindle Drives 

Luggage Compartment Lid Lift 

The luggage compartment lid lift is fitted on the right-hand side in the luggage compart¬ 
ment floor. The HKL controls and monitors the operation of the automatic luggage com¬ 
partment lid actuating system. 

The control logic module is connected to terminal 30B. The HKL is also connected to 
terminal 30 for the load current through the spindle drives. 

In sleep mode, the HKL reguires a certain amount of closed-circuit current. With terminal 
30B OFF, the HKL is no longer supplied with off-load current. 

Note: Terminal 30B is switched off with a delay. 

The luggage compartment lid lift operates at a voltage of between 9 V and 16 V. Outside 
this range, the functions may no longer be supported. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Not for US market 

3 

HKL control module 

2 

Not for US market 




24 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 















Car Access System 

The Car Access System is fitted next to the steering column. It is the master control unit 
for the central locking. It is therefore also responsible for having the luggage compart¬ 
ment lid unlocked. 

Junction Box Electronics 

The junction box electronics are connected to the front power distribution box. 

Note: The power distribution box and the junction box electronics are two sep¬ 
arate components. This is an important point for the Service to note. 

The central locking of the luggage compartment lid is controlled by a power output stage 
in the junction box electronics. The automatic soft-close drive is supplied by a relay in the 
distribution box at the rear. The junction box electronics control the relay. 

Control Elements 

Outer Luggage Compartment Lid Button 

The outer luggage compartment lid pushbutton switches to ground. The signal from the 
outer luggage compartment lid button is sent to the junction box electronics. The junc¬ 
tion box electronics signal the status of the outer luggage compartment lid button to the 
luggage compartment lid lift. 

Interior Luggage Compartment Lid Button 

The luggage compartment lid button switches to ground. The signal from the luggage 
compartment lid button is sent to the junction box electronics. The junction box electron¬ 
ics signal the status of the luggage compartment lid button to the luggage compartment 
lid lift. 

The lighting of the luggage compartment lid button is only supplied with power under the 
following conditions: 

• Luggage compartment lid open and 

• Terminal 30B ON. 

Note: A command sent from the inner luggage compartment lid button can 

only be executed with the luggage compartment lid open. This is due to 
the fact that the button has a connection to ground via the luggage com¬ 
partment lid contact switch only when the luggage compartment lid is 
open. 


25 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Central Double-lock Button 

The central double-lock button is connected to the Car Access System and switches to 
ground. The Car Access System makes the button status available on the K-CAN2. 

Note: A command sent from the central double-lock button can only be exe¬ 
cuted with the luggage compartment lid open. This is due to the fact that 
the button has a connection to ground via the luggage compartment lid 
contact switch only when the luggage compartment lid is open. 

ID transmitter luggage compartment lid button 

The status of the luggage compartment lid button on the identification transmitter is eval¬ 
uated by the electronics in the identification transmitter. 

The identification transmitter sends an encrypted message to the vehicle by radio wave. 
The message reaches the remote control receiver via the antenna in the rear window. 
From there, the message is made available to the Car Access System. 

The Car Access System verifies the message. Once the message has been successfully 
verified, the Car Access System sends out the reguest on the K-CAN2. 

Luggage compartment lid button, A-pillar 

The luggage compartment lid button is resistance-coded. The status of the luggage 
compartment lid button is evaluated by the Car Access System. The Car Access System 
issues the status on the K-CAN2. 

Lock barrel, luggage compartment lid 

The lock barrel in the luggage compartment lid is connected to the luggage compart¬ 
ment lid locking mechanism by means of a bowden cable. When the bowden cable is 
operated with the mechanical key, the luggage compartment lid lock releases and the 
luggage compartment lid can be opened. 

Note: Opening the luggage compartment lid with the mechanical key can 
trigger an alarm in the antitheft system. 

Spindle Drives 

Each spindle drive comprises the following components: 

• Spindle drive 

• Drive motor 

• Drive motor Flail sensor 

• Spring 

• Fixture of the spindle drive to the luggage compartment lid 

• Fixture of the spindle drive to the body 

• Ball bearing for the spindle drive. 

26 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Note: A defective spindle drive must be replaced as a complete unit. 

Luggage Compartment Lid Contact Switch 

The luggage compartment lid contact switch is switched to ground while the luggage 
compartment lid is not open. The status of the luggage compartment lid contact switch is 
evaluated and made available by the junction box electronics. 


27 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



Service Information 


Control Unit Replacement 

Teaching in the Luggage Compartment Lid End Stops 

If the luggage compartment lid lift control unit has been replaced, a new teach-in proce¬ 
dure will be necessary for the upper end stop. To do this, the luggage compartment lid 
has to be moved until obstructed by the upper stop. 

The obstruction of the luggage compartment lid, and thus the drop-out of the Hall sen¬ 
sor pulses, marks the point at which the luggage compartment lid has reached its maxi¬ 
mum opening angle. From this point, a value of approximately 5 % of the total opening 
angle is deducted. This will be the future opening angle of the luggage compartment lid. 
This point is also named the soft stop. 

The soft stop prevents the luggage compartment lid from opening as far as the end stop 
and being damaged. 

Note: The lower end stop is determined by the change in status in the contact 
switch of the luggage compartment lid lock from open to closed. The 
junction box electronics send out the status of the luggage compart¬ 
ment lid contact switch on the K-CAN2. 

Spindle Drive Replacement 

It is necessary to disconnect the plug connections when replacing the spindle drives. To 
protect the control unit or the spindle drives, terminal 30B should be switched off 
beforehand. 

If the HKL is woken in this situation, it checks whether the spindle drives are connected. 
If the spindle drives are in fact not connected, a fault code memory entry will be generat¬ 
ed. In response to the fault code memory entry, the HKL prevents control of the spindle 
drives. The automatic luggage compartment lid actuating system does not work, even if 
the spindle drives are connected now. 

The HKL control unit must be allowed to enter sleep mode once more and terminal 30B 
switched off. The spindle drives are checked again the next time the control unit is 
woken. If the check is successful, the automatic luggage compartment lid actuating sys¬ 
tem is switched to active again. 

After replacing the spindle drives, closing and opening of the luggage compartment lid 
must be adapted to given vehicle conditions. The luggage compartment lid lift does not 
recognize the position of the luggage compartment lid after installing the new spindle 
drives. 


28 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 




The spindle drives must be taught-in at the vehicle to enable the luggage compartment 
lid to recognize the position. The corresponding diagnosis order must be carried out for 
this purpose. This will ensure smooth opening and closing of the luggage compartment 
lid. 

Note: The service information does not replace the current information avail¬ 
able to Service, nor does it replace repair instructions. 


29 

F01 Automatic Luggage Compartment Lid Actuating System 



