Table of Contents 


F01 BMW Night Vision 2 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

System Overview .5 

System Circuit Diagram F01/F02.5 

Connection of Control Units and Camera .7 

PT-CAN.7 

System Functions.8 

The BMW Night Vision 2 System Principle .8 

Principle of Pedestrian Detection.9 

Various Forms of Indication.11 

Availability Indicator in CID .12 

Symbols in HUD (Head-up Display).13 

Warning in Vehicles w/out HUD.13 

Sequence of signals .13 

Switch-on Conditions.14 

Operation by Drive .15 

Calling Up Menu.15 

Contrast and Brightness.15 

Pedestrian Detection.16 

Visibility.16 

System Components.17 

Night Vision 2 Camera .18 

Night Vision 2 Control Unit .19 

Service Information.20 

Adjusting Camera Pivot Position .20 

Changing Protective Window.21 

Replacing Camera Washer Jet.21 

Displays Indicating Defective System .22 

Programming and Coding .22 

Initializing Software.22 


Initial Print Date: 01/09 


Revision Date: 
































BMW Night Vision 2 

Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the Night Vision 2 System in the F01/F02 

• Describe the functions of the Night Vision 2 System in the F01/F02 

• Identify the components of the Night Vision 2 System in the F01/F02 


2 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 




Introduction 


The BMW Night Vision 2 system provides the driver with a black-and-white image of the 
driving environment ahead of the vehicle in the control display CD or central information 
display CID. 

BMW Night Vision 2 is a passive system without active infrared illumination. Objects 
situated ahead of the vehicle are shown in varying degrees of brightness depending on 
the temperature of these objects. This enables the driver to detect in good time heat- 
emitting objects such as, for example, persons, animals and other vehicles. 

This thermal image is recorded with a Far Infrared camera (FIR) via a special imaging 
sensor which detects the infrared radiation in a specific wavelength range. 

Intelligent algorithms in the control unit makes it possible to automatically detect persons 
in the image. Following evaluation of distance and direction of movement, a symbol on 
the central information display CID and in the head-up display HUD warns the driver of 
any persons at risk. 



3 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 












The BMW system is distinguished from infrared systems by its robust resistance to 
dazzling, its long range and its clearly structured image. 

The system offers the customer the following advantages: 

• Highlighting of non-illuminated, heat emitting objects such as pedestrians, cyclists, 
vehicles and animals. 

• Better overview of the driving situation thanks to the depiction of the route of the 
road beyond the headlight cone. 

• Improved vision in twilight (dawn/dusk) and darkness. 

• Symbol warning of persons at risk in the area ahead of the vehicle. 

• No dazzle in the screen image caused by the headlights of oncoming vehicles. 

• Display of dark courtyard and garage entrances. 

Night Vision 2 is designed as a supporting system, which, with a modified driving style, 
affords the driver a better overview of the road conditions ahead of the vehicle. 

Note: The driving speed must be adapted to the relevant visibility conditions. 


4 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 



System Overview 


System Circuit Diagram F01/F02 



5 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 

































































































































































































Legend for System Circuit Diagram F01/F02 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Night Vision 2 camera 

11 

Video switch (VSW) 

2 

Central gateway module (ZGM) 

12 

Electromagnetic parking brake (EMF) 

3 

Footwell module (FRM) 

13 

Power distribution box, rear right 

4 

Night Vision 2 control unit (NVE ) 

PT-CAN 

Powertrain controller area network 

5 

Control panel, driver assist systems 

(BEFAS) 

K-CAN 

Body controller area network 

6 

Instrument cluster (KOMBI) 

LIN-Bus 

Local Interconnect Network bus 

7 

Central information display (CID) 

D-Bus 

Diagnosis bus 

8 

Car Information Computer (CIC) 

KI.31L 

Terminal 31, ground 

9 

Controller (CON) 

KI.15N 

Terminal 15, after running (voltage) 

10 

Junction box (JB) 




6 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 













































Connection of Control Units and Camera 

The Night Vision 2 control unit and the night vision camera are connected through the 
following cables: 

• Private CAN-bus; Diagnosis, programming and camera control 

• LVDS-Video; Video signal from the camera 

• CAN_POW; Power supply from control unit to camera, heating of camera lens 

• Ground; Common ground of camera and control unit for suppressing interference. 

The video signal is sent via a shielded LVDS cable between the camera and control unit. 
In the control unit the signal is converted into an dCVBS (d = differential) video signal and, 
depending on the equipment specification, transmitted to the CIC or the video switch. 

The camera is powered under the following conditions: 

• BMW Night Vision 2 switched on by pressing button in control panel of driver assist 
systems BEFAS 

• Rain-driving lights sensor detects twilight or darkness. 

The BMW Night Vision 2 control unit is powered by the rear distribution box via terminal 
15N. 

PT-CAN 

The PT-CAN connection of the Night Vision 2 control unit serves to transmit the diagno¬ 
sis and programming data and to read out the information from the RLS (brightness), the 
JB (driving lights status, wiper speed) and ICM (road speed and yaw rate). In addition, the 
terminal status and the vehicle identification number (VIN) are transferred to the control 
unit via the PT-CAN. 


7 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 



System Functions 


The BMW Night Vision 2 System Principle 

The BMW Night Vision 2 camera is a heat image camera that converts thermal radiation 
into electronic signals. 

The thermal image is converted first by the sensor into electrical signals and then, with 
the aid of image-processing software, into a visible image in the control display or central 
information display. 

The sensor elements alter the resistance in proportion to the temperature. The higher 
the temperature, the higher the electrical signal and the whiter the pixel will be shown. 

Heat radiation is absorbed and dissipated by virtually every solid or liquid body. However, 
the heat emitted is not visible to the human eye because it is located in the long-wave 
infrared range. From a physical standpoint, this represents electromagnetic waves with a 
wavelength of 8 pm to 15 pm. This long-wave infrared radiation is known as Far Infrared 
(FIR). 

The advantage of utilizing radiation in the far infrared range is the greater range com¬ 
pared with near infrared systems (NIR) with a wavelength of 0.7 pm to 1.4 pm. These 
systems additionally require illumination in precisely this wavelength. Essentially, FIR 
systems consist of an optical element, a thermal imaging camera, a control unit and a 
display. 


The principle 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Environment ahead of vehicle 

4 

BMW Night Vision 2 control unit 

2 

Optical element 

5 

Control display 

3 

Thermal imaging sensor 




8 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 
































The BMW Night Vision 2 system collects in its front lens the infrared radiation of 
heat-emitting objects such as persons, animals or vehicles in a specific wave range. 

Principle of Pedestrian Detection 

The Night Vision 2 control unit is equipped with three processors containing software, 
which, in addition to image processing for display, execute an automatic person detection 
function. The software searches the image for objects with human shape and classifies 
these objects as persons. 

Their position, speed and distance to the vehicle are then determined. The risk level is 
analyzed based on these parameters as well as on the speed and yaw rate of the vehicle 
and a warning is triggered. 

The warning for the driver, indicating persons at risk, is given in the form a corresponding 
symbol in the central information display CID or head-up display HUD. 



9 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 












These ranges change with increasing vehicle speed and follow the direction of the 
vehicle as a function of the current steering angle (yaw rate). 

In order not to unnecessarily distract the driver not all persons identified in the image 
are signalled by a symbol. Only persons who are in a certain area directly in front of the 
vehicle are indicated by a symbol. 

The system also warns of pedestrians located in an extended area to the left and right of 
the vehicle and are moving towards the central area (threat of collision). 


I\MKUI I 



Symbols in HUD 

People who are within the central zone are always indicated. Persons in the extended 
area are only indicated if they are moving in the direction of the central area. 

Under optimum conditions, the automatic pedestrian detection function operates at a 
distance of up to 100 m. At a driving speed in excess of 100 km/h (62 mph), the time 
between signalling and passing the person and therefore the reaction time for braking 
and evasive maneuvers is reduced. 


Note: The pedestrian detection function is deactivated at speeds below 
10 km/h (6mph). For more information regarding this feature refer to 
the Vehicle Owner’s Manual. 


10 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 



Various Forms of Indication 


The following table shows the different forms of indication in the two display instruments 
CID and HUD. 


Situation 


Indication in CID 


Indication in HUD 


No pedestrians in the danger zone. 


There is a person at a great distance 
from the vehicle. 


There is a person at a closer distance 
from the vehicle. 


A person is crossing the road 
from right to left. 


A person is crossing the road 
from left to right. 



11 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 























Availability Indicator in CID 

The availability of the Night Vision 2 
system can be restricted by environ¬ 
mental conditions such as heavy rain, 
extreme +/- temperatures or 
fluctuations in light conditions. 



Availability indicator in CID 


Note: Only non-availability of person detection function is indicated. 

The symbol corresponds to the "Pedestrian Detection" button 
in the function bar. 

The possible situations for the availability indicator in the CID are listed in the following 
table. 


Situation 


Symbol 


Display 


The driver has activated the person detection function and 
the system is available 


The driver has activated the person detection function but the 
system is not available, the Night Vision 2 image is still shown 


i^/i 

A r 


The driver has deactivated the person detection function, the 
Night Vision 2 image is still shown 


r w ' 



12 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 
















Symbols in HUD (Head-up Display) 


If a person is detected at a great distance inside the 
warning range of the system the pedestrian figure will 
be shown distinctly above the road symbol. This is 
refered to as long-distance warning. 



Long-distance warning 


If a person is detected in close range, inside the warn¬ 
ing zone of the system, the pedestrian figure will be 
shown distinctly on the road symbol. This is refered to 
as short distance warning. 



Short-distance warning 


Warning in Vehicles w/out HUD 

The warning symbol is shown on the CID in vehicles without HUD or with HUD deactivat¬ 
ed. In addition, the CID initially flashes yellow 3 times when the warning comes on in 
order to catch the driver's attention. 

The warning is shown as soon as a person enters the warning zone directly ahead of the 
vehicle or a person crosses the road from the left or from the right. 


Sequence of signals 

The following graphic shows the exact sequence of warning signals and is designed to 
illustrate the functional principle in connection with the table. 



Functional principle 


13 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 








































































Functional principle legend 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Yellow display 

2 

Normal display 

3 

Interval approximately 0.5 seconds 

4 

The warning symbol remains for as long as there is a 
pedestrian in the danger zone, but at least 3 seconds 


Switch-on Conditions 

The BMW Night Vision 2 is activated as soon as the button in the control panel of the 
driver assist systems BEFAS is pressed. 

The following basic conditions can exist: 

• The rain/driving lights sensor detects sufficient ambient light and the driving lights are 
switched off; BMW Night Vision 2 is ready for operation approximately 2 seconds 
after the button in BEFAS is pressed. A message is shown in the control display dur¬ 
ing this period of 2 seconds. 

• The rain/driving lights sensor detects insufficient ambient light and the driving lights 
are switched on; BMW Night Vision 2 is ready for operation immediately after the 
button is pressed. BMW Night Vision 2 cannot be activated when 

• The driving lights are switched off 

• The rain/ driving lights sensor detects insufficient ambient light 

• The driving speed is greater than 5 km/h (3 mph). 


Once BMW Night Vision 2 has been activated, 
a message appears in the control display to the 
effect that the system cannot be used at night 
without headlights. 


Night Vision 2 button in the BEFAS 



14 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 










Operation by iDrive 

The individual functions and settings can be selected and activated through the Drive. 


The following settings can be selected 
on the F01/F02: 

• Brightness 

• Contrast 

• Pedestrian detection. 


-cf. 

J 1 *' 


€ 

& 

" 

jL „ 

J 




BMW Night Vision 2 menu in the F01/F02 


Calling Up Menu 

The "Night Vision 2" menu can only be selected if the system has been activated by 
pressing the button in the BEFAS. 

Providing the preconditions have been met, the menu can be selected as follows: 

• Press the controller, the "BMW Night Vision" menu is shown on the control display. 

• Select the desired menu item, e.g. "Brightness", by turning the controller. 

• Press the controller to activate the function. 

• Set the required value and confirm by pressing. 


Contrast and Brightness 

Both values can be personalized and changed 
on a scale between 0 % and 100 %. 



Adjusting brightness 


Note: For detailed information on the operation and functions of the Night 
Vision 2 System refer to the vehicle Owner’s Manual. 


15 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 










Pedestrian Detection 

The person detection function can be activated 
and deactivated. 


Visibility 

The illumination range in front of the vehicle 
with low beam is less than 50m/54yd. 

Normal driving light illumination by fitted halo¬ 
gen headlights is 100m/109yd. 



Activating/deactivating person detection 


The high beam illumination range provided by xenon headlights is 150m/164yd. However, 
people can only be detected in this range if they are wearing reflective clothing. 

Night Vision 2 will detect heat-emitting objects in the image up to a distance of about 
300m/328yd, regardless of the amount of reflection their clothing gives off. 

Automatic pedestrian detection has a maximum range of 100m/109yd. This specified 
distance is dependent on weather factors. 


The range of vision is also reduced in the Night Vision 2 image in the case of thick fog or 
heavy rain. Night Vision 2 is designed as a supporting system, which provides the driver 
a better overview of the road conditions ahead of the vehicle. 


Comparison of BMW Night Vision 2 range of vision with different headlights 



Note: The driving speed must be adapted to the relevant visibility conditions. 


16 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 






System Components 


The BMW Night Vision 2 system consists of the camera, control unit, camera washer jet, 
button and the sensor system. 

The BMW Night Vision 2 system consists of the following components: 

• Night Vision 2 camera with camera bracket in the kidney grille and 
camera washer jet 

• Night Vision 2 control unit 

• Button in BEFAS 

• Sensor system 



Installation locations - Night Vision 2, BMW 7 Series, F01/F02 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Night Vision 2 camera 

2 

Night Vision 2 control unit 

3 

Button in control panel of driver assist systems BEFAS 


17 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 






















Night Vision 2 Camera 

The thermal imaging camera consists of a heated protective window, optical element 
and a thermal imaging sensor. The thermal imaging sensor is made up of a multitude 
of sensor elements. 

Each display pixel is assigned one such sensor element. The sensor elements generate 
an electrical signal as a function of the impinging intensity of heat radiation. 

The higher the temperature, the brighter 
the corresponding pixel will be displayed. 

The heat radiation is converted into elec¬ 
trical signals on the basis of the principle 
of a change in resistance. 

The image can be replaced up to 30 
times per second. In order to ensure an 
image of consistent quality, it is necessary 
for the camera to be calibrated approxi¬ 
mately every 120 - 180 seconds. This 
calibration can take up to approximately 
0.3 seconds. For this reason, the image 
may be seen to freeze briefly in the dis¬ 
play. 

The Night Vision 2 camera is mounted with a bracket directly behind the left kidney grille. 
The camera is equipped with a sensor which detects heat-emitting objects in the far 
infrared range (wavelengths from 8 pm to 14 pm). The camera resolution is 324 x 256 
pixels. 

The maximum angle of view is 24°. The camera operates in an ambient temperature 
range of -40°C/-40F to +80°C/176°F. The imaging sensor is thermally insulated to pro¬ 
vide protection against heat influences from the camera surroundings. 

The washer jet is screwed to the camera bracket and is situated directly below the 
protective window. It is directly connected to the headlight washer system and therefore 
operates in connection with it. 

A heater element is incorporated on the inside of the protective window to prevent it from 
misting over or freezing up. The heater is located at the edge of the protective window 
outside the camera's field of vision. 



18 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 


Night Vision 2 Control Unit 


The control unit is installed behind the compart¬ 
ment in the area of the A-pillar directly under the 
light switch cluster. 

The control unit calculates the displayed 720 x 
480 pixel image from the 324 x 256 pixel raw 
data image supplied by the camera. Automatic 
pedestrian detection is executed in the control 
unit. The diagnosis, programming and coding 
data are also transmitted to the camera through 
the control unit. 



BMW Night Vision 2 control unit 


The camera and the protective window heater 
are powered via the control unit. The raw image 
data from the camera are transmitted through a 
LVDS cable to the control unit. 

The image output by the control unit is made 
available in the head unit in the form of a 
dCVBS signal. 

The camera-housing cover features a 6-pin 
plug connection. 



6-pin plug connection 


The button for switching BMW Night Vision 2 on 
and off is integrated in the BEFAS. 



Button in the BEFAS BMW 7 Series 


19 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 



Service Information 

Adjusting Camera Pivot Position 

The pivot position of the camera can be adjusted by means of an adjusting screw at the 
bracket. 



Camera alignment 


The following steps must be taken to adjust the camera on the F01/F02: 

• Open hood(1). 

• Remove sealing lip (2) on front panel. 

• Open headlight cover (3). 

• Position headlight adjustment unit with spirit level in front of vehicle. 

• Insert Allen key (4) through the opening in the front panel and set the camera 
to the required position; the line in the image must be parallel to the spirit level. 

• Reassemble all parts that have been removed in reverse order. 

20 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 













Changing Protective Window 

In the event of damage the camera 
protective window can be replaced. 


Replacing front lens 



Replacing Camera Washer Jet 

A washer jet with a direct connection to the headlight washer system for cleaning the 
protective window is mounted on the camera. 

Follow the procedure below to replace the washer jet: 

• Remove bumper panel. 

• Remove left-side kidney grille. 

• Undo two recessed cross head 
screws (1). 

• Release the hose clip on the con¬ 
necting hose to the headlight 
washer system and remove the 
washer jet towards the front. 

• Reinstall all parts that have been 
removed in reverse order. 

Camera washer jet 



Note: Camera alignment is only possible with a BMW diagnosis system. For 
detailed information on howto service the Night Vision 2 camera, lens or 
washer jet please refer to the Repair Instructions available in TIS. 


21 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 






Displays Indicating Defective System 


In the event of a system defect, the following 
warnings are shown in the F01/F02: 

• Check Control message in the instrument 
cluster. 

• The same Check Control message in HUD 
if installed. 



Njght Vision 

9:35 ausgefallen! 99765 


Display indicating defective system 


Programming and Coding 

Initializing Software 

When replacing the camera, it is always necessary to initialize the software by entering an 
enable code (FSC). 

Note: The vehicle identification number (VIN) must always be entered when 
ordering a new camera or a new control unit. 

The camera is programmed by through of the control unit. The control unit receives the 
programming data for the camera through PT-CAN. The control unit forwards this data to 
the camera through the "private CAN-bus". 


22 

F01 BMW Night Vision 2 



