Table of Contents 


F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

History .3 

Rear Seat Entertainment - E65 .3 

Rear Seat Entertainment - E70 3 

Rear Seat Entertainment - F01/F02 .4 

System Overview .5 

RSE Circuit Diagram .8 

System Functions.12 

Speaker Control.13 

Connecting External AV Devices .14 

Digital and Satellite Tuners .15 

Digital Tuner .15 

Satellite Tuner.15 

Language .16 

System Components.17 

Component Location .17 

RSE System.18 

Rear Displays .19 

Infrared Transmitters .20 

Headphones .21 

Infrared Headphones .21 

Hard-wired Headphones .21 

RSE Control Unit.22 

Switch-on Conditions .23 

RSE Remote Control .24 

RSE Remote Control Function .25 

Service Information.26 

Diagnosis .26 

Teaching-in the Remote Control .26 

Programming and Coding.27 

DVD Area Code .27 

Audio Test CD .28 


Initial Print Date: 01/09 Revision Date: 



































Rear Seat Entertainment System (RSE) 


Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 

■MICTWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the Rear Seat Entertainment System of the F01/F02 

• Identify the components of the Rear Seat Entertainment System of the F01/F02 


• Describe the functions of the Rear Seat Entertainment System 


2 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 


Introduction 


History 

Rear Seat Entertainment - E65 

The rear seat entertainment system in the E65/E66 featured a folding rear display with a 
screen diagonal of 6.5” and a resolution of 400 x 240 pixels. The display was driven by 
the MOST control unit -rear display SG-FD. It converted the analog RGB signals into a 
digital LVDS signal. 

In the E65/E66 it was already possible to listen to several audio sources simultaneously. 
For instance, while the driver listened to the radio through the speakers, the rear passen¬ 
ger could enjoy a CD through hard-wired headphones. The analog signals made avail¬ 
able by the audio devices were placed on the MOST-bus. The headphone interface KHI 
prepared the signals separately for each headphone socket. 

Hard-wired headphones could be connected to the headphone connection module. 

Rear Seat Entertainment - E70 

A larger rear display with a screen diagonal of 8” and a distinctly higher resolution of 
800 x 480 pixels is fitted in the E70 with rear seat entertainment. The folding display 
is installed between the seats. 

The rear display control unit and rear seat entertainment RSE are connected to the 
K-CAN. Picture transmission takes place directly via LVDS and the signal no longer 
needs to be converted. The RSE control unit features its own DVD player making it 
possible to conveniently change DVDs while driving. 

External devices such as game consoles, video cameras and hard-wired headphones 
can be connected directly to the RSE control unit. A headphone interface KHI for signal 
processing is not required. 

An infrared transmitter is integrated in the base of the rear display to allow operation of 
wireless infrared headphones. 

The rear seat entertainment system is remote-controlled. All audio settings made with 
the remote control relate only to the hard-wired headphones. 


3 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 




Rear Seat Entertainment - F01 /F02 

Rear seat entertainment option (6FG) is part of the ZRP Rear entertainment Package 
available on the F01/F02 and is refered to as the ” Mid version” in the ISTA Diagnostic 
Eguipment. 

The rear seat entertainment system F01/F02 features several innovations in terms of 
eguipment and operation. 

Two folding 800 x 480 pixel displays with an infrared transmitter are integrated into the 
backrests of the front seats. For the first time in a BMW vehicle, the RSE control units are 
integrated in the MOST-bus. 

The Car Information Computer CIC serves as the master control unit of the MOST-bus. 
Please refer to the F01/F02 Bus Systems training material for detailed information on the 
MOST. 

The rear seat entertainment system features: 

• Two displays with a screen diagonal of 8” are fitted. 

• The same program can be viewed on both screens. 

• An external device (e.g. game console) may be connected to the right or left side of 
the RSE and the feed from the external device shown on the selected side. 

• The system is controlled by remote control. 


4 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



System Overview 


Audio playback takes place either through the vehicle’s speakers or via headphones. 

The volume of the speakers can be adjusted via the multifunction steering wheel, the 
head unit or with the remote control. The volume is controlled speed-dependent during 
playback through the speakers. The driving speed is registered by the wheel speed 
sensors. 

The sound settings can be configured on the CIC or with the remote control. If audio is 
played back via the headphones, the volume can be adjusted either on the headphones 
(infrared headphones) or using the remote control (hard-wired headphones). The infrared 
headphones receive their signals from the infrared transmitter. 



Rear Seat Entertainment System (RSE) 

External devices can be connected via the two AV inputs directly to the RSE control 
unit or via the AUX-ln connection or the USB-audio interface in the center console. 
The USB-audio interface provides an additional jack and a USB connection for a 
type A USB connector. 


5 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 









6 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



































Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central information display (CID) 

7 

Rear display FD with rear display control 
unit and infrared transmitter 

2 

Head unit, Car Information Computer (CIC) 

8 

Remote control 

3 

Drive controller 

9 

Rear seat entertainment control unit (RSE MID) 

4 

Central gateway module (ZGM) 

10 

DVD changer (DVD) 

5 

Rear display FD2 with rear display control 
unit and infrared transmitter 

11 

Video switch (VSW) 

6 

Infrared headphones 

12 

Not for US 


When playing a DVD in the CIC, the picture cannot be transmitted to the rear seat 
entertainment system. When playing a DVD in the RSE control unit the picture is not 
transmitted to the CIC. However audio playback is possible in both cases. 

During playback via the DVD changer, picture and sound are transmitted to the CIC 
and the rear seat entertainment system. 

For safety reasons, no picture is shown in the CID while the vehicle is being driven, 
although audio playback is still possible. 

When an external device (e.g. game console) is connected to one of the AV inputs of 
the RSE control unit, the video signal is output on the right or left display depending 
on where the source is connected. A selected DVD can still be viewed on the other 
display. 

The RSE control unit features a FBAS or CVBS (composite video baseland signal) 
video signal input. 

The RSE control unit has a CVBS video signal input connected to the DVD Changer 
through the video switch to display of media played in the DVD Changer on the rear 
screens. In this case the video switch is needed because a source with a CVBS output 
(e.g. DVD changer) is connected to the CIC and the RSE. 

The CIC has only three CVBS inputs, If there are more than three video sources to be 
connected to the CIC a video switch has to be included to comply with the eguipment 
configuration. 

Note: (FBAS) Farb-Bild-Austast-Synchron is CVBS (Composite Video 

Baseband Signal) in which just the video signal is transmitted through 
a single wire with the audio signal handled separately. 


7 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



RSE Circuit Diagram 



8 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 





























































































































































Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central gateway module (ZGM) 

12 

Car Access System 4 (CAS4) 

2 

Car Information Computer (CIC) 

KL.30B 

Terminal 30 basic operation 

D 

Infrared transmitter, right 

KL.58G 

Signal, footwell module light (FRM 3) 

5 

Rear display (FD2) with rear display 
control unit (SG-FD2) 

FBAS 

FBAS signal 

6 

Fuse 

IR 

Infrared signal 

D 

Video switch (VSW) 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

8 

Aerial diversity module with aerial amplifier 

K-CAN 2 

Body CAN2 

9 

Rear seat entertainment control unit (RSE) 

LVDS 

Low voltage differential signal 

10 

Rear display (FD) with rear display 
control unit (SG-FD) 

MOST 

Media Oriented System Transport 

11 

Infrared transmitter, left 




MOST Signals at RSE Control Unit 


In/Out 

Signal 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

Control signals 

FBD antenna 

> Antenna diversity module 

> CAS4 

> ZGM > 

RSE control (entertain¬ 
ment source, track selec¬ 
tion, etc.) 

In 

Date, time 

Instrument cluster> 

Display in FD and FD2 

In 

RSE release 

Drive controller 
>CIC> 

Access rights 

In 

Terminal status 

> CAS4 

> ZGM > 

Activation conditions 

Out 

Control signals 

> FD and FD2 

> Display 

ON/OFF, setting 


K-CAN Signals at SG-FD and SG-FD2 


In/Out 

Signal 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

RSE status 

RSE > ZGM > 

RSE standby 

In 

FD and FD2 status 

ZGM > RSE > 

FD and FD2 standby 


9 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



















































































The FD and FD2 rear displays each have their own control unit. The SG-FD and SG- 
FD2 control units are connected to the K-CAN. The rear displays are connected via 
LVDS to the RSE control unit. All video information is transmitted via the LVDS link. 
The rear displays receive the ON/OFF signal from the RSE control unit. The ZGM 
places the MOST signal on the K-CAN and is sent to the rear displays. 

During audio playback through the vehicle’s speaker system, the RSE control unit 
routes the audio signal via the MOST to the head unit CIC or the Top-HiFi amplifier. 

Programming, coding and diagnosis of the rear seat entertainment system (6FG) 
take place via MOST. 

Function diagram - remote control of rear seat entertainment system 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Remote control 

4 

Car access module 4 (CAS4) 

2 

Rear window with antenna, remote 
control services (FBD) 

5 

Central gateway module (ZGM) 

3 

Antenna diversity module with 
antenna amplifier 

6 

Rear seat entertainment 
control unit (RSE) 


10 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 













The commands entered by means of the remote control are transmitted by radio waves. 
The same frequency is also used for the radio remote control key. The frequency used is 
dependent on the national variant and therefore relevant for coding. The commands are 
received by the FBD antenna and routed via the antenna diversity module to the CAS4. 

The CAS4 converts the signals into K-CAN2 messages and routes the signals to the 
ZGM. The ZGM places the signals on the MOST-bus. The RSE control unit receives the 
signals via the MOST. 


11 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



System Functions 


The rear seat entertainment system must be switched on to execute all its functions. 
The driver can use the Drive to select the access rights for the rear seat entertainment 
system. 


°=] Main menu 



r 


0:11 •***11® 


CD/Multimedia 
Radio 
Telephone 
Navigation 
Contacts 
BMW Assist 
Vehicle Info 
Settings ^7 


CID main menu - settings 

Select submenu "Settings" (2) in Main menu (1) with the Drive. 
Select the submenu "Rear system enable" in the "Settings" menu. 



CID rear system enable, driver 


12 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 






Four different functions can be selected in the “Rear control” menu (1): 

• “Driver control” (2): 

Everything that does not disturb the driver can be controlled in the rear 
compartment. 

• “Equal control” (3): 

The driver and the rear passengers can execute all functions with equal 
authorization. 

• “Rear control” (4): 

The driver can control everything that does not disturb the rear passengers. 

• “Switch off rear DVD system” (5): 

Switch off rear seat entertainment system. The rear seat entertainment 
system cannot be switched on again before any other priority is selected. 

Note: The driver can control the volume of the speakers in all four settings. 
Audio playback is muted by pressing the (ON/OFF) rotary pushbutton 
on the CIC. 


Speaker Control 

Speaker control must be switched on 
to facilitate audio playback through the 
speakers. The hard-wired head¬ 
phones are muted when speaker con¬ 
trol is activated. 


I 


Options 

Switch off display 
Rear operates 


The rear displays adopt the feed from 


Headphones 

the currently active source. 

vV/ v Loudspeakers 

The speakers can then be controlled 


r ™ 

from the rear seat entertainment 


I Q HD radio 

system. 


/ o' RDS 


To switch on speaker control, select 
“Rear operated speakers” (2) in the 
“Options” menu (1). 


FD Options - speakers 


13 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 


Connecting External AV Devices 

External devices can be connected to the RSE control unit via the AV inputs. External 
devices can also be connected via the AUX-ln connection or the USB-audio interface 
(6FL) in the center console. Connected video devices are recognized automatically. 


Note: The connection is automatically deactivated after unplugging the 
external video device. A blue image may be shown on the rear 
screen if the connection is not deactivated automatically. 


The corresponding input must be activated when a pure audio device is connected. 


Follow the following steps to connect an external device: 


• Switch on the rear seat entertainment 
system. 

• Open the flap on the RSE control unit 
when connecting to the AV inputs. 

• Fold open the center armrest when 
connecting to the AUX-ln connection 
or USB-audio interface (6FL). 

• Connect the external audio device to 
the corresponding input and switch 
on. 

• Select the “CD/Multimedia” menu 
item (1) in the Main Menu. 



(33 CD/Multimedia 


CD/DVD w 
Music collection 


v External devices 
Tone 


FD CD/Multimedia - external devices 


• Then select the “External devices” menu item (2) in the “CD/Multimedia” menu (1). 


The available connections and their status are now shown: 

• USB-audio interface (1) 

• AUX-ln connection, Center console (2) 

• RSE control unit, AV input, left (3) 

• RSE control unit, AV input, right (4). 

Note: Once an external device has 
been connected to the RSE it 
remains connected until it is 
turned off or disconnected. 

FD - activating external devices 

14 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 







Digital and Satellite Tuners 


The digital tuner and the satellite tuner can also be controlled from the rear seat 
entertainment system. Various satellite and digital radios are available corresponding to 
the national market specification. 

• In Band On Channel (IBOC) is the digital tuner in the USA 

• Satellite Digital Audio Radio Service (SDARS), is the satellite supported 
subscription radio in North America. 

In the F01/F02, the digital tuners are integrated in the CIC and no longer installed 
externally. 

The SDARS satellite tuner is installed in the luggage compartment and connected to 
the MOST-bus. 

Proceed as described in the following to select a digital or satellite tuner. 


Digital Tuner 

Select the HD Radio "IBOC" menu item (2) 
in the "Radio" menu (1). 



Digital Radio 


Satellite Tuner 

Select the “Satellite radio” menu item (2) in 
the “Radio” menu (1). The stations can be 
scanned and selected in the same way as 
terrestrial stations. 


V Radio 

FM 



AM 

V Satellite radio 
Presets 
Weather band 
Tone 


Satellite Radio 


15 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 




Language 

The selected language always applies to the complete vehicle. When the language is 
changed in the CIC, this language will also be adopted by the rear seat entertainment 
system. After changing the language in the rear seat entertainment system, the change 
will also be adopted in the CIC. 


16 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



System Components 

The rear seat entertainment system consists of the following components: 

• RSE control unit with DVD player 

• One FBAS/CVBS (composite video baseland signal) video signal input 

• Two separate AV (audio video) inputs 

• Headphone connections in the rear center console 

• Two 8” rear displays (built into the backrests of the front seats) with 
incorporated rear display control units and infrared transmitters. 

• Remote control 

Component Location 



Rear Entertainment Component Locations 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central information display (CID) 

4 

Remote control 

2 

Head unit (CIC) 

5 

RSE control unit 

3 

Rear display FD2 8" 

6 

Rear display FD 8" 


17 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 
















RSE System 

The rear seat entertainment system offers the following equipment: 

• Radio tuner with RDS 

• Audio playback through 

- Infrared headphones 

- Hard-wired headphones 

- Audio speakers in the vehicle 

• AUX-ln connection in center console (analog jack) 

• Connection to external equipment via AV input, e.g. video camera, 
games console or portable playback equipment 

• Operation through remote control. 

Optional extras: 

• DVD changer (above glove compartment) 

• USB/audio interface in center console 

(for connecting media USB sticks or mp3 players e.g. Apple iPod®) 

• Digital and satellite radio tuners 

- In Band On Channel IBOC 

- Satellite Digital Audio Radio Services, SDARS (with subscription) 


18 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



Rear Displays 



RearView of the Rear Display 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear display control unit SG-FD 

4 

K-CAN and power supply connection 

2 

Infrared transmitter 

5 

Rear display connection 

3 

Photodiode 




Both the FD and FD2 rear displays have their own control unit SG-FD. The control units 
are connected to the K-CAN. 

The rear displays are connected via LVDS to the RSE control unit and are switched on 
and off by the RSE control unit via MOST > ZGM > KCAN. 

In comparison to earlier systems with 8-wire LVDS cable, the signals in the F01/F02 are 
sent via a 2-wire LVDS cable. 


19 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 


































Signal transmission via this 2-wire LVDS line offers four distinct advantages: 

• Higher data transfer rate 

• Simplified wiring 

• Runtime differences between the individual lines are avoided 

• Serial 2-wire LVDS data transmission is now much more cost-effective 

The photodiode is used to automatically control the brightness of the rear display. 


Technical dataTFT-LCD Displays 

Rear seat entertainment 

Visible screen diagonal 

8" 

Resolution in pixels 

800 x 480 

Luminous intensity in Candela 

625 Cd/m2 

Colors 

WVGA 262144 (18-bit colors) 

Switching time at 25°C 

20-25 ms 

Format 

15:9 


Note: For further information on the 2-wire LVDS system refer to the F01/F02 
CICtraining material. 


Infrared Transmitters 

The infrared transmitters consist of six infrared diodes. They are located behind a plastic 
cover in the housing of the rear display. 

The RSE control unit powers the infrared transmitters which use infrared light to transmit 
the audio signals to the headphones. The infrared diodes begin to light as soon as the 
RSE control unit is switched on. 

The infrared diodes then stay on for as long as at least one side of the RSE is still active. 
The diodes go out 5 seconds after switching off the last rear display. 


20 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 


















The infrared transmitters use the following frequencies to send the audio signals: 


Left channel 

Right channel 

2.3 MHz 

3.2 MHz 

2.8 MHz 

3.8 MHz 


To ensure trouble-free operation of the infrared headphones, note the following: 

• An unimpeded line of sight between the receiver on the headphones and the 
infrared transmitter is essential. 

• The cover on the infrared transmitter is clean and free from scratches. 


Headphones 

Headphones are not included on delivery of the F01/F02. BMW recommends the use of 
headphones that have been specifically designed for the rear seat entertainment system 
and are available to order from BMW Parts. 


Infrared Headphones 

The infrared headphones used must comply with IEC DIN 61603-2. 

If infrared headphone accessories are used, they must match the frequencies of the 
infrared transmitter. 

There is no restriction regarding the maximum number of infrared headphones that can 
be used. 


Hard-wired Headphones 

All commercially available hard-wired headphones with a minimum impedance of 8Q can 
be connected. 

The connection jacks have a diameter of 3.5mm. These connection jacks must be used 
for headphones only. 


21 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 










RSE Control Unit 




@ ® ® © ® ® 

Front and RearView of the RSE Control Unit 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

ON/OFF switch, left 

8 

ON/OFF switch, right 

2 

Jack plug for hard-wired headphone, left 

9 

Fan, left 

3 

AV input, left (yellow: video, white:audio signal, 
left, red: audio signal, right) 

10 

Power supply, connection for 
infrared transmitters, one CVBS video input 

4 

Slot in DVD player 

11 

MOST connection 

5 

AV input, right 

12 

FD connection 

6 

Jack plug for hard-wired headphone, right 

13 

FD2 connection 

7 

DVD drive Eject button 

14 

Fan, right 


22 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 

































Switch-on Conditions 

The two ON/OFF switches are used to switch the rear seat entertainment system on/off. 
They switch the RSE control unit and the rear display on/off on the selected side. 

The infrared diodes begin to light as soon as the RSE control unit is switched on. 

The infrared diodes then stay on for as long as at least one side of the RSE is still active. 
The diodes go out 5 seconds after switching off the last rear display. 

The RSE control unit can be switched on as of terminal 30B. After “terminal R OFF”, 
the RSE control unit can be switched on within the run-on time of 30 minutes. After the 
control unit has been switched on, it remains active until the energy management detects 
the start capability limit. 

Further information on terminal control and the new terminal designations can be found 
in the F01/F02 Energy Management training material. 

The RSE control unit supports following media: 

• Video DVD 

• Video CD 

• Super Video CD 

• Audio CD 

• DVD or CD with compressed data formats 

The following compressed data formats are supported: 

• Video 

- MPEG-1 video 

- MPEG-2 video 

• Audio 

- MPEG-1 Layer 2 Audio 

- MPEG-1 Layer 3 Audio MP3 with ID3-Tags 

- MPEG-2 Layer 2 Audio 

- Windows Media Audio WMA with WMA-Tags 

- Advanced Audio Coding AAC 

The DVD audio format is not supported by the RSE control units. 

However, if the DVD contains a video track, it is usually played. 

Note: Data that is protected with Digital Rights Management 
DRM cannot be reproduced. 


23 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



RSE Remote Control 




RSE Remote Control Buttons explanation 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Menu 

7 

Volume 

2 

Thumbwheel 

8 

Track search/track skip 

3 

Confirmation button 

9 

Wireless symbol 

4 

Option 

10 

Back 

5 

Battery symbol 

11 

Four-way directional controller (four buttons) 

6 

Selector slide, left/right 




24 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 























RSE Remote Control Function 

The remote control features two LED for checking operation and battery voltage. 
Transmission of a wireless signal is acknowledged by the green send signal lighting. 

The remote control signals are only sent if the rear seat entertainment system is 
switched on. 

If the battery voltage reaches a critical level, the red battery symbol will light instead of the 
green send symbol each time a button is pressed. The battery in the remote control must 
be replaced to ensure continued operation. 

The thumbwheel, the confirmation button and the four-way directional controller mimic 
the Drive controller functions: 

• Turning the thumbwheel corresponds to turning the Drive controller. 

• Pressing the corresponding button on the four-way directional has the same 
effect as operating the Drive controller to the left, right, forwards or back. 

• Pressing the confirmation button corresponds to pressing down on the Drive 
controller. 

The entire remote control changes over to the selected side by operating the selector 
slide. 

The remote control is available in a frequency of 315 MHz for the US version. 


25 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



Service Information 


Diagnosis 

The BMW diagnostic system contains the diagnostics for the rear seat entertainment 
systems under “Rear seat entertainment”. The RSE, the two rear display SG-FD and 
SG-FD2 are defined as the control units. 

Fault code memory checks, testing schedules and test modules are available for follow¬ 
ing components: 

• Rear seat entertainment control unit 

• Rear displays 

• Remote control 

Component activation is also possible for the control unit: 

• General 

- Reset of RSE control unit 

• Display 

- Test card, test of video inputs and video outputs 

• Audio 

- Sine generator (test noise) 

• Drive 

- DVD emergency eject 

Teaching-in the Remote Control 

There is a Service Function for teaching-in the remote control in the diagnostics under 
Rear Seat Entertainment. 

The testing schedule works through the following steps: 

• The entry of the currently assigned remote control for the rear seat entertainment 
system is deleted in CAS4. 

• The remote control for the rear seat entertainment system is taught in. 

• Successful teaching-in of the remote control is acknowledged by automatic closing 
and opening of the central locking. 

It is not possible to exchange the remote control. Only the taught-in remote control is 
functional in the vehicle. 


26 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 




Programming and Coding 
DVD Area Code 

The RSE control unit can be programmed and coded. The DVD area code can be 
changed during coding. 

DVD area codes were introduced to restrict playback of DVDs to particular markets. DVDs 
are generally released earlier in one region than in another region. The earth has been 
divided into different regions and an area code has been assigned to each region: 


Area Code 

Region 

1 

Canada, USA and US Territories 

2 

Europe, Japan, Middle East, Egypt, South Africa, Greenland 

3 

South east Asia including Hong-Kong and South Korea 

4 

Australia, New Zealand, Caribbean, Central and 

South America, Pacific Islands 

5 

Former CIS States, Indian subcontinent, Mongolia, North Korea, Africa 
(except Egypt and South Africa) 

6 

China 


So that the area code functions, each DVD player is equipped with its own area code, 
determining for which market the device is intended. 

European devices are preset with area code 2, whereas American devices have area 
code 1. Each DVD can have one or more area codes, depending on the region(s) for 
which it is intended. 

Area code 0 identifies DVDs that are released for all regions. A DVD may also be released 
for certain regions, e.g. 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, i.e. all countries except the USA. 

When inserting a DVD, the RSE control unit checks whether the region defined in the 
control unit matches the DVD country code. As a result, only DVDs with the area code 
defined in the RSE control unit can be played. 

The area codes are changed by coding the RSE control unit. During the first 100km, the 
area code can be changed as often as desired. After the first 100km, the RSE control 
unit permits the area code to be changed a maximum of five times. If changes are no 
longer possible, the RSE control unit must be replaced when a DVD with a different area 
code is to be played. 


27 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 

















Audio Test CD 

A new audio test CD has been released fortesting the drive in the RSE control unit in the 
F01/F02. 

The audio test CD can be used to check following problems: 

• Drive test 

• Problems during medium playback 

• Permanent or sporadic interruption in CD/ DVD operation 

• Disc cannot be read by drive. 

Note: Only the current version of the audio test CD must be used for testing 
purposes. The audio test CD can be ordered through BMW Parts. 


28 

F01 Rear Seat Entertainment System 



