Table of Contents 


F01 Passive Safety Systems 

Subject Page 

Introduction .5 

Model Overview.6 

System Overview .7 

F01/F02 Bus System Overview .7 

ACSM3 System Circuit Diagram .10 

System Functions.12 

Crash-relevant Functions.13 

Evaluating the Sensor Signals .13 

Crash and Rollover Detection .14 

Detecting a crash and determining the triggering 

times and the order .15 

Triggering the output stages of the firing circuits.15 

Output of Crash Telegram .16 

Crash Entries .16 

Emergency Call Functions .17 

Manual emergency call .17 

Automatic emergency call .17 

System Monitoring Functions.18 

System Self-test (Pre-drive check) .18 

Indication of System Operability .18 

Cyclic Monitoring .18 

Fault Indication and Fault Code Storage .19 

Fault Output (Diagnosis) .19 

Deactivating the Front Passenger Airbag.20 

OC3 Mat .20 

Passenger Airbag OFF light .21 

Electric Motor Driven Reel .22 

System Circuit Diagram for Electric Motor Driven Reel .23 

Design and Function of the Electric Motor Driven Reel .25 

Electric motor driven reel, not working .26 

Electric motor driven reel in operation .27 


Initial Print Date: 01/09 


Revision Date: 

































Subject Page 

System Components.28 

Driver Airbag.28 

Front Passenger Airbag .28 

Crash Safety Module .29 

Sensors and Switches .30 

Central Sensor .30 

Rollover Detection .31 

Digital data transmission by means of current interface .31 

Up-Front sensor.32 

OC3 Mat .32 

B-Pillar Sensor .33 

Door Pressure Sensor.33 

Seat Belt Buckle Switches .34 

Actuators .35 

Adaptive Driver Airbag, with Active Vent .35 

Vent Valve .36 

Adaptive front passenger airbag with active vent valve.38 

Knee Airbags.39 

Curtain/Plead Airbag .40 

Seat-integrated Side Airbag .42 

Seat Belt Pretensioner .43 

Automatic seat belt tensioner with adaptive force limiter.44 

Active Plead Restraint .48 

Triggering in the event of a rear-end collision .49 

Safety Battery Terminal .50 

Airbag Warning Lamp .50 

Passenger Airbag OFF light .51 






























Subject 


Page 



Passive Safety Systems 


Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 

■MICTWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the ACSM3 system of the F01/F02 

• Describe the function of the ACSM3 system of the F01/F02 

• Identify the components of the ACSM3 system of the F01/F02 


4 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


Introduction 


The F01/F02 passive safety system aims towards the objectives and characteristics of 
the E65/E66. The passive safety system fulfils all legislative requirements. 

Extensive measures were taken on the body and on the occupants safety and protection 
systems. The passive safety system includes not only the restraint systems, but also a 
special body structure which offers a defined crash performance. In the event of an acci¬ 
dent, the forces introduced are reduced in a defined manner and therefore have less on 
an impact on the occupants. 

The restraint systems ensure that the risk of injury is further reduced. 

The third generation ACSM is used as the central airbag control unit for the passive 
safety system on the F01/F02. It differs from the previous crash safety modules in 
having a sensor system placed in position. 

The ACSM III provides up to 32 ignition outputs. 



BMW safety concept with safety passenger cell and airbag systems in the example of an E60 


5 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 




Model Overview 


The passive safety system ACSM, the replacement system to the byteflight, is already 
used on the following models. 


Model series 

Model 

Used as of 

Variant 

E60 

5 Series Saloon 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E61 

5 Series Touring 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E63 

6 Series Coupe 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E64 

6 Series Convertible 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E85 

Z4 Roadster 

01/2006 

ACSM 1 

E86 

Z4 Coupe 

05/2006 

ACSM 1 

E88 

1 Series Convertible 

04/2008 

ACSM 2 

E70 

X5 SAV 

11/2006 

ACSM 2 

E71 

X6 SAC 

04/2008 

ACSM 2 

E93 

3 Series Convertible 

03/2007 

ACSM 2 

F01 

7 Series Saloon 

11/2008 

ACSM 3 

F02 

7 Series Saloon long version 

11/2008 

ACSM 3 


6 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 
























































System Overview 

F01/F02 Bus System Overview 



aao- 


2 


0 


2 

Q 


2 

w 

3 


□ 


a 

< 

2 


0 


tn 

s 


2 

UJ 



O 


3 

O 

K 




o 

o 


ll 

X 

a 

c 



X 

® .c 
® o» 


si 

z> 



I 1 i i 


z 

o 

o 


a 

o 


o 

X 


L) 

> 

n: 


i:; 

•^11 II 
1 i f 


la] 


I I S 

x x a 


$ 


3 

o 


2 

x 


a 

N 


O 
a 
m a 



7 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 






















































































Legend for F01/F02 Bus System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

ACSM 

Crash Safety Module (Advanced Crash Safety Module) 

AL 

Active steering system 

CAS 

Car Access System 

CIC 

Car Information Computer 

CID 

Central information display 

CON 

Controller 

DME 

Digital Motor Electronics 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

DVD 

DVD changer 

EDCSHL 

Electronic damper control, rear left satellite 

EDCSHR 

Electronic damper control, rear right satellite 

EDC SVL 

Electronic damper control, front left satellite 

EDC SVR 

Electronic damper control, front right satellite 

EGS 

Electronic transmission control 

EHC 

Electronic ride-height control 

EKPS 

Electrical fuel pump control 

EMA LI 

Electrically motorized reel, left, (seat belt) 

EMARE 

Electrically motorized reel, right, (seat belt) 

EMF 

Electromechanical parking brake 

FD 

Rear compartment display 

FD2 

Rear display 2 

FKA 

Rear compartment heating/air conditioning system 

FLA 

High-beam assistant 

FRM 

Footwell module 

FZD 

Roof functions Center 

GWS 

Gear selector lever 

HiFi 

HiFi amplifier 

HKL 

Luggage compartment lid lift 

HSR 

Rear-axle drift angle control 

HUD 

Head-up display 

ICM 

Integrated Chassis Management 

IHKA 

Integrated automatic heating/air conditioning 

JBE 

Junction box electronics 

KAFAS 

Camera-based driver assistance systems 

KOMBI 

Instrument cluster 

NVE 

Night Vision electronics 

PDC 

Park Distance Control 

TPMS 

Tire Pressure Monitoring System 


8 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


















































































Legend for F01/F02 Bus System Overview (cont.) 


Index 

Explanation 

OBD 

Diagnosis socket 

RSE-Mid 

Rear seat entertainment 

SDARS 

Satellite tuner 

SMBF 

Passenger's seat module 

SMBFH 

Rear passenger seat module 

SMFA 

Driver's seat module 

SMFAH 

Rear module on driver' seat side 

SWW 

Lane change warning 

SZL 

Steering column switch cluster 

TCU 

Telematics control unit 

TOP-HIFI 

Top-HiFi system 

TRSVC 

Control unit for rearview camera and Side View (Top Rear Side View Camera) 

ULF-SBX High 

Interface box - high (USB / audio interface) 

VDM 

Vertical dynamics management (central control unit for electronic damper control) 

VSW 

Video switch 

ZGM 

Central gateway module 


9 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 







































ACSM3 System Circuit Diagram 




10 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 
























































































































































Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central gateway module 

2 

Up-Front sensor, left 

3 

Instrument cluster 

4 

Car Access System 

5 

Crash safety module 

6 

Up-Front sensor, right 

7 

Door pressure sensor, left 

8 

Front airbag, driver 

9 

Coil spring for airbag 

10 

Knee airbag, driver 

11 

Passenger Airbag OFF light 

12 

Knee airbag, passenger 

13 

Front airbag, passenger 

14 

Door pressure sensor, right 

15 

Flead airbag, left 

16 

B-pillar sensor, left 

17 

Adaptive belt force limiter, driver 

18 

Belt contact, driver 

19 

Seat belt pretensioner, driver 

20 

Side airbag, driver's side 

21 

Active head restraint, driver 

22 

Central sensor with rollover detection 

23 

Belt contact, passenger 

24 

Seat belt pretensioner, front passenger 

25 

OC3 mat 

26 

Active head restraint, passenger 

27 

Side airbag, passenger side 

28 

Head airbag, right 

29 

B-pillar sensor, right 

30 

Adaptive belt force limiter, passenger 

31 

Telematics Control Unit for emergency call 

32 

Safety battery terminal 


11 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 




System Functions 


The function of the ACSM is to permanently evaluate all sensor signals in order to detect 
a crash situation. As a result of the sensor signals and their evaluation, the Crash Safety 
Module identifies the direction of the crash and the severity of the impact. 

Also included is information on the occupants and whether they have their seat belts 
fastened or not. From this information, measures are taken to selectively trigger the nec¬ 
essary restraint systems. 

The crash safety module monitors the system itself and indicates that the system is 
ready for operation when the airbag warning lamp (AWL) goes out. 

If a fault occurs during operation, this is stored in a fault memory, which can then be read 
out for diagnostic purposes. 

If a crash situation is detected, this is communicated to the other users in the bus-sys¬ 
tem network by way of a bus signal. The relevant control units respond to this signal by 
executing their own activities according to the severity of the crash. 

The activities include: 

• Opening the central-locking system 

• Activating the hazard warning flashers 

• Switching on the interior lighting 

• Deactivating the fuel pump 

• Switching off the auxiliary heating 

• Automatic emergency call. 

A function of ACSM is the seat belt reminder function, which uses optical and acoustic 
signals to remind the driver and front passenger to fasten their seat belts. 

The functions of the ACSM are divided into: 

• Crash-relevant functions 

• System monitoring functions 

• Additional comfort functions. 


12 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 




Crash-relevant Functions 

The Crash Safety Module must fulfill the following crash-relevant functions: 

• Evaluating the sensor signals 

• Crash and rollover detection 

• Determining the triggering times and order 

• Triggering the output stages of the firing circuits 

• Output of a crash telegram for other users in the bus system network 

• Crash documentation 

• Emergency call functions. 

Evaluating the Sensor Signals 

The sensors serve to detect and verify front-end, side-on and rear-end impact as well as 
a rollover. 

The sensor signals are transmitted straight to the crash safety module and are evaluated 
there. 


13 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



Crash and Rollover Detection 

In addition to the longitudinal acceleration sensor and lateral acceleration sensor the cen 
tral sensor also incorporates rollover detection. Rollover detection consists of a rate of 
yaw sensor and two low-g sensors. One low-g sensor measures in the Y direction, the 
second sensor in the Z direction. 

Additional airbag sensors are mounted in the B-pillars. These each consist of a longitudi 
nal acceleration sensor and a transverse acceleration sensor. 

Together with the transverse acceleration sensor in the central sensor, the transverse 
acceleration sensors serve to detect side-on crashes. Pressure sensors are also used in 
the front doors to detect side-on crashes. 

Together with the longitudinal-acceleration sensor in the central sensor, the longitudinal- 
acceleration sensors serve to detect front-and rear-end crashes. 

There are two airbag up-front sensors for front-end crash detection. They are located on 
the front area of the engine side members. 


ACSM Sensor system 







14 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 











Detecting a crash and determining the triggering times and the order 

The Crash Safety Module uses the values transmitted by the sensors to determine the 
direction and severity of the crash. The threshold values of two independent sensors 
must be exceeded in order to detect a crash. In the case of a front-end crash, for example, 
the relevant high acceleration values from the B-pillar satellite and from the longitudinal 
acceleration sensor must be detected in the crash safety module. Triggering the output 
stages of the firing circuits 

Based on the acceleration values and crash severity and direction, an algorithm deter¬ 
mines the triggering (firing) points and the order of the restraint systems to be activated. 

A possible imminent rollover is also detected and the appropriate protection systems are 
activated. 

Triggering the output stages of the firing circuits 

The firing-circuit output stages are only triggered if the airbag algorithm detects that the 
threshold has been exceeded via different sensors, e.g. the airbag sensor in the B-pillar 
and the central sensor. 

The crash safety module is powered by the Car Access System 4 (CAS4) using terminal 
30b. At terminal 30b the crash safety module is in energy-saving mode, which means it is 
active at the bus and can also transmit the belt status to the EMA controller. Airbag func¬ 
tionality is blocked and only ready for operation at terminal 15 on completion of the sys¬ 
tem self-test. 

The firing capacitors, which also serve as an energy reserve, are charged up by a switch¬ 
ing controller. These capacitors make the firing energy available in the event of a crash. If 
the voltage supply is interrupted during a crash, the firing capacitors serve briefly as an 
energy reserve. 

The output stages of the firing circuits consist of a high-side and a low-side power circuit- 
breaker. The high-side power circuit-breaker controls the firing voltage, while the low-side 
power circuit-breaker switches to ground. The output stages of the firing circuits are con¬ 
trolled by the microprocessor. 

The high-side and low-side power circuit-breakers also serve the purpose of checking 
the firing circuits during the system self-test. 


15 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



Output of Crash Telegram 

In the event of a collision involving triggering of the restraint systems, the Crash Safety 
Module sends a crash telegram to the users in the bus-system network. Parallel to this, 
the TCU is informed via a direct single-wire line to transmit an emergency call. 

As a result, the respective control units perform the following functions depending on the 
crash severity: 


Function 

Control Unit 

Switch off electric fuel pump 

Digital Motor Electronics DME 

Switch off the auxiliary heating 

Integrated automatic heating and air conditioning system IHKA (Not for US) 

Release central locking 

Junction box electronics JBE 

Switch on hazard warning lights 

Footwell module FRM 

Switch on interior lights 

Footwell module FRM 

Transmit emergency call (only 
when airbag triggered) 

Telematics Control Unit TCU 


Crash Entries 

In the event of a collision where one or more actuators are triggered, a crash entry is 
stored in a non-erasable memory. After three crash entries, a non-erasable fault entry is 
stored in the fault memory with the instruction to replace the crash safety module. 

Note: The three crash entries could also be stored during the course of an 
accident. Each crash entry is assigned a system time. 

The electronic control unit remains capable of firing even after three crash entries. 

The crash entries cannot be erased and serve the purpose of subsequent device diagnosis. 
A maximum of three crash entries can be stored. The control unit must then be replaced. 


16 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



















Emergency Call Functions 

The emergency call functions are country-dependent and are available to customers in 
countries with BMW ASSIST infrastructure. This means an appropriate service provider 
with a call Center must be available. Another precondition for being able to make an 
emergency call is the availability of a telephone network. 

With BMW ASSIST, the customer has a manual and an automatic emergency call as well 
as other functions. 

A manual and an automatic emergency call function is provided as standard. 

Furthermore, the driver has the option of activating a breakdown call. Irrespective of 
whether the customer orders a telephone or not, each vehicle is eguipped with a 
telematics control unitTCU, a telephone antenna, an emergency antenna, a handsfree kit 
and a GPS antenna for determining position. 

Manual emergency call 

The manual emergency call is intended for customers to reguest help guickly if they are 
present when an accident occurs without being involved themselves. 

The emergency-call button is located in the roof function Center. The emergency call 
button is connected directly to the TCU. 

Pressing the emergency-call buttons establishes a voice connection with the relevant 
country provider. The voice connection is indicated by a flashing LED in the switch. 

Automatic emergency call 

The crash safety module sends a crash telegram to the TCU in the event of an accident 
of corresponding crash severity. The TCU places an emergency call, which at the same 
time contains the location of the vehicle. 

Parallel to this, attempts are made to set up a voice connection with the vehicle occu¬ 
pants to obtain more information on the accident (severity of the accident, number of 
injured) so that further rescue operations can be initiated. 


17 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



System Monitoring Functions 

The Crash Safety Module must execute the following system monitoring functions: 

• System self-test (pre-drive check) 

• Indication of system operability 

• Cyclic monitoring 

• Fault indication and fault code storage 

• Fault output (diagnosis) 

• Seat belt reminder function 

• Deactivation of the front passenger front airbag, the knee airbag 
and side airbag in via the seat-occupancy detector. 


System Self-test (Pre-drive check) 

ACSM performs a system self-test as from terminal 15. The airbag warning lamp is acti¬ 
vated for approximately 5 seconds during the system self-test. 


When the system self-test is concluded and no 
fault has been found, the airbag warning lamp 
goes out and the system is ready for operation. 


Indication of System Operability 

ACSM system operability is indicated by the 
airbag warning lamp (AWL) going out in the 
instrument cluster. 



Airbag warning lamp 


Cyclic Monitoring 

Once the system self-test has been successfully concluded and the system is ready for 
operation, a cyclic monitoring procedure is performed for fault monitoring purposes. 
Cyclic monitoring serves the purpose of internal diagnosis of the ECU and the overall 
airbag system. Cyclic monitoring is carried out for as long as the system is at terminal 15. 


18 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


Fault Indication and Fault Code Storage 

The crash safety module has a non-volatile fault memory. The airbag warning lamp indi¬ 
cates any entry in the fault memory. 

A distinction is made between internal and external faults when entering the fault code. 

Events such as triggering of an airbag or seat belt pretensioner are also stored in the fault 
memory. 

Note: The entry of a triggered restraint system in the fault memory does not 
mean that the restraint system was defective in the crash situation, 
rather it only means that the restrain system is not available for further 
triggering. 

Fault Output (Diagnosis) 

With the aid of the ISTA diagnostic system, the fault memory can be read out via the 
diagnostic interface. After rectifying the faults or after replacing the triggered 
components, the fault memory can be cleared with the diagnosis command “Clear fault 
memory”. 

Note: The cleared fault code memory entries are transferred to the past events 
memory. A maximum of 15 faults can be stored in the past events memo¬ 
ry. When another entry is added, the first entry is deleted. The past 
events memory is set up as a ring memory and can only be read out by 
the development department. The past events memory is not available to 
the Service department. 


19 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



Deactivating the Front Passenger Airbag 

US law requires that specified child seats tested to specifications with a child roughly one 
year old on the front passenger seat be automatically detected and the passenger airbags 
be deactivated. 

In order to meet legislative requirements, the OC3 mat (Occupant Classification OC) was 
developed. 

OC3 Mat 

The OC3 mat (Occupant Classification) detects a child seat specified in accordance with 
NHTSA and which is occupied on the basis of the pressure per unit area and disables the 
passenger airbag. 

The OC3 mat consists of conductors in a pressure-sensitive resistance grid, so-called 
FSR elements (Force Sensitive Resistance). The conductors are connected to the elec¬ 
tronic evaluation unit. 

The FSR elements are wired in such a way that they can be sampled individually. When 
the mechanical load on a sensor element increases electrical resistance decreases and 
the measurement current changes accordingly. 



OC3 Mat 


20 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 









By analysing the signals from the individual sensors, the analyzer can map the occupancy 
of the seat surface and identify local concentrations of weight. The relationship between 
the areas and the load points indicates whether there is a person ora child seat holding a 
small child present. 

A ) Q J 

The electronic evaluation unit of the OC3 


mat sends a telegram via the LIN-bus to the 
Crash Safety Module. 

The front passenger airbags (front and side 
airbags) are disabled when a child seat with 
small child is detected. The crash safety 
module activates the passenger airbag OFF 
indicator lamp in the roof function Center. 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Surface imprint of a person 

B 

Surface imprint of a child seat 



Example of various surface imprints 


Passenger Airbag OFF light 

The passenger airbag OFF light in the roof console comes on when the child restraint 
system has detected a small child on the front passenger’s seat. Furthermore, the pas¬ 
senger airbag OFF lamp lights up when the seat is not occupied by a person. 

The brightness of this light is controlled by automatic regulation of the display lighting. 

Note: The Passenger Airbag OFF light is activated if the OC3 mat detects a 
child seat with a child approximately one-year old or if the front passen¬ 
ger seat is not occupied. 


21 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 

















Electric Motor Driven Reel 

Debuting in the F01/F02, an electric motor driven reel (EMA) is used for the seat belt. 

The electric motor driven reel is paired with the multifunction seat. 

The electric motor driven reel reduces seat belt slack when fastening the seat belt using 
low retracting force as soon as the doors are closed. Removing the belt slack ensures 
that the seat belt fits the driver or front passenger. Thus better restraining action can be 
provided in the event of a crash. 

Another advantage of the electric motor driven reel is the pre-tensions to the occupants 
before a possible accident with increased retracting force, thus also reducing the inci¬ 
dence of slipping out of the belt and the risk of submarining. 

The dynamic driving control sensors in the ICM (Integrated Chassis Management) record 
data such as longitudinal acceleration and lateral acceleration, yaw rate, etc. The ICM 
passes on the data via the PT-CAN to the two EMA control units. The DSC also delivers 
information such as speed and brake pressure. The ACSM sends a message about the 
status of the belt contact to the two EMA control units. 

From this data, the EMA control units calculate whether there is a critical driving situation, 
e.g. vehicle oversteer and as a result activates the electric motor, which pretensions the 
seat belt. 

If there is now an accident with correspond¬ 
ing severity, the belt tensioner is also trig¬ 
gered and the seat belt fastened securely to 
the occupants. 

The pre-tensions of the seat belt can reduce 
the force on the occupants in the event of an 
accident. 


1 -® 

Seat belt with electric motor driven reel 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

EMA control unit 

2 

Electric motor 

3 

Automatic reel 

4 

EMA drive unit 



22 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 











System Circuit Diagram for Electric Motor Driven Reel 



23 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


















































Bus signals 


In/out 

Information 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

Terminal control 

CAS > EMA LEI EMA Rl 

Status terminal 30b 

In 

Vehicle speed 

DSC > EMA LEI EMA Rl 

Vehicle speed 

In 

Braking torque 

DSC > EMA LEI EMA Rl 

Emergency braking detection 

In 

Yaw speed 

ICM > EMA LEI EMA Rl 

Detection of skidding tilt 

In 

Steering angle effective at 
the front axle 

ICM > EMA LEI EMA Rl 

Steering effort 

In 

Longitudinal acceleration 

ICM > EMA LEI EMA Rl 

Acceleration 

In 

Lateral acceleration 

ICM > EMA LEI EMA Rl 

Lateral acceleration 

In 

Accelerator pedal angle 

DME > EMA LI/ EMA RE 

Driver power request 

In 

Belt contact status 

ACSM > EMA LEI EMA Rl 

Information whether the 
seat belt is fastened 

In 

Door contact 

FRM > EMA LEI EMA Rl 

Information whether the doors are closed 


24 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 







































































Design and Function of the Electric Motor Driven Reel 

The electric motor driven reel is an extension of the functions of the existing automatic 
reel. The F01/F02 front automatic seat belt reels are also equipped with a pyrotechnic 
devices that operate the adaptive force limiters, as on E65/E66. The adaptive force lim¬ 
iters work independently from the (EMA) electric motor driven reels. 

The electric motor driven reel essentially consists of an electric motor, a drive unit and a 
coupling, which establishes the connection to the automatic reel. 

Components of the electric motor driven reel 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Electric motor 

4 

Ring gear 

2 

Drive unit 

5 

Automatic reel 

3 

Belt shaft 




25 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


















Electric motor driven reel, not working 

The following image shows the design of the drive unit in detail (A). The locking pawls are 
retracted. 

Image (B) shows the drive unit with ring gear. The ring gear and the belt shaft can rotate 
freely. The seat belt can be pulled out or rolled up. 



Drive unit with separate components (A) and freely rotatable ring gear (B) 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Drive gear for the electric motor 

3 

Worm gear 

2 

Drive gear for the drive shaft 

4 

Drive wheel with coupling 


26 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 













Electric motor driven reel in operation 

When the driver or front passenger fastens their seat belt or there is a critical driving situa¬ 
tion in terms of driving dynamics, the electric motor is activated and moves the drive 
shaft using the worm gear. 

The worm gear turns the drive wheel with the coupling. The locking pawls move out and 
engage in the ring gear (C). 

The ring gear, which is located on the belt shaft, drives the belt shaft (D). The seat belt is 
rolled up on the belt shaft and thereby shortened. This tensions the seat belt to the occu¬ 
pants. 



Locking pawls move out (C) and the ring gear turns the belt shaft (D). 


27 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



System Components 


Driver Airbag 

In conjunction with the seat belt, the driver’s front 
airbag is designed to reduce the risk of serious 
injury to the driver’s head or thorax during a head- 
on collision. The front airbag for the driver’s side 
is located in the hub cushion of the steering 
wheel. The driver front airbag is eguipped with a 
gas generator. 

The airbag is triggered depending on the severity 
of the crash. 


Front Passenger Airbag Dnver airbag 

In conjunction with the seat belt, the front passenger front airbag, just as the driver front 
airbag, is designed to reduce the risk of serious injury to the passenger’s head or thorax 
during a head-on collision. The front passenger front airbag is located under the dash¬ 
board. 

Inflation of the front passenger airbag breaks the dashboard at defined points and opens 
two flaps, which are connected to the dashboard by means of fabric tapes. The passen¬ 
ger airbag opens in the direction of the windshield. The passenger airbag emerges in an 
upward direction and is supported on the windshield and on the instrument panel. 




Front passenger airbag with pyrotechnically activated vent valve 

Note: The F01/F02 uses driver and passenger airbags with pyrotechnically 
activated vent valves which are explained under the “Actuators” section 
of this training material. 


28 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 








Crash Safety Module 

The crash safety module in US vehicles is identical to vehicles for the rest of the world. It 
is adapted to the law and country-specific requirements by programming and coding. 

With ACSM3 Crash Safety Module is now integrated into the PT-CAN. 

There are no sensors located in the crash safety module. 



Crash safety module 

The crash safety module has a new installation location for the F01/F02 is behind the 
glove compartment. 



Crash safety module installation location 


29 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 











Sensors and Switches 

All of the following sensors and switches were used on the previous ACSM systems with 
the exception of the Central Sensor, its functions where integrated inside the crash safety 
module: 

• Central sensor 

• Up-front sensor 

• OC3 mat 

• B-pillar sensor 

• Door pressure sensor 

• Seat belt buckle switches 

• Emergency call button 


Central Sensor 

The central sensor is located centrally in the vehicle on the transmission tunnel. 

In addition to the longitudinal acceleration sensor and lateral acceleration sensor, the cen¬ 
tral sensor has also been extended to incorporate rollover detection. 

The longitudinal and lateral acceleration sensors detect positive and negative vehicle 
acceleration in a measuring range of 0-100 g.The longitudinal and lateral acceleration 
sensors detect acceleration in the event of a head-on, side or rear-end collision. 



30 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


Rollover Detection 

Rollover detection is provided by a rate of yaw sensor and two additional low-g sensors. 
The low-g sensors act in Y and Z directions. 

There are different factors which can cause a car to overturn or roll over. 

The most common causes are: 

• The car hits a ramp (e.g. a crash barrier) on one side or the vehicle tilts due to the 
terrain. The car rotates about its longitudinal axis as a result of the high angular 
velocity. 

• The car skids sideways off the road surface and its wheels become buried in soft 
soil. The kinetic energy could be sufficient to upend and overturn the car. 

• The car skids sideways off the road into the kerb and is upended. 

The crucial factors which determine whether the car overturns are not just the angle of 
rotation but also the angular velocity or angular acceleration at which the car is set into 
the roll. All these vehicle movements can also occur after a front-end, side-on or rear-end 
crash. 

The two Low-g sensors have a small measuring range of 0-2 g and can therefore detect 
small accelerations and decelerations with great accuracy. 

For example, when the vehicle skids sideways off the road surface and buries itself with 
its wheels in soft ground. 

The sensors provide a voltage as measured variable. This voltage is a measure for the 
acceleration and is converted directly into digital signals in the sensor. The digital values 
are sent to the crash safety module for evaluation. The crash safety module evaluates the 
signals from the two Low-g sensors and the rate of yaw sensor. The results are compared 
with the stored algorithm. If the processor detects that a rollover situation is imminent, the 
seat belt pretensioners and the head airbags are triggered. 

The sensor cluster is connected via a four-wire lead. A current interface which transfers a 
special report is used so that for the five sensors, this saves on six leads. This interface is 
also used for the other airbag sensors, so that, here too, savings can be made on leads 
and thereby weight. 

Digital data transmission by means of current interface 

The recorded acceleration values of the micro-mechanical acceleration sensors are con¬ 
verted in an ASIC (Application Specific Integrated Circuit) into digital signals. With the aid 
of a data telegram, the digital signals are transmitted unidirectionally to the Crash Safety 
Module. 

The signals are transmitted via a current interface, which supplies the electronic circuitry 
with voltage. 


31 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



The electronic circuitry receives a voltage level of approximately 5-10 mA via the current 
interface. The level rises at a step of 20 mA when a data telegram is transmitted so that 
only two lines per measurement channel are required. 

The transmitted data is evaluated in the crash safety module. 

Up-Front sensor 

The airbag up-front sensors in the front area of the 
side member on the left and right sides serve to 
detect a head-on collision. They deliver additional 
information on the progress and severity of the col¬ 
lision to the crash safety module. 

Each airbag up-front sensor consists of an acceler¬ 
ation sensor for recording the deceleration, a signal 
conditioner and an ASIC for data transmission. 

The measured values are sent in the form of a data 
telegram to the crash safety module and are used 
in the calculation of the algorithm. 



OC3 Mat 


US legislation stipulates that the use of a child restraint system tested by NHTSA and 
holding a small child on the front passenger seat must be detected automatically and the 
front passenger airbag disabled. 


The OC3 mat can detect an occupied child seat 
tested in accordance with the regulation (NHTSA 
FMVSS 208) on the basis of the pressure per unit 
area and disable the passenger airbag (front and 
side airbag). The passenger airbag OFF light 
comes on when a child restraint system tested in 
accordance with NHTSA and holding a small child 
was detected on the front passenger’s seat. 



Note: NHTSA FMVSS 208 stands for National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208 


32 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 







B-Pillar Sensor 

The B-pillar airbag sensor consists of a longitudinal acceleration sensor and a transverse 
acceleration sensor. 



The acceleration sensors measure both the acceleration and the deceleration in the 
X and Y directions. The resultant from the X and Y signals is the definitive factor in deter¬ 
mining the direction of the impact. 


The B-pillar airbag sensors serve the purpose of 
detecting head-on, side and rear-end collisions. 


The B-pillar airbag sensors on the left and right are 
of identical design and are allocated by way of 
mechanical coding during installation. 


Door Pressure Sensor 

The airbag sensors in the front doors serve the purpose of verifying the plausibility of the 
acceleration signals from the B-pillar airbag sensors and the central sensor during side 
crash detection. 

The airbag sensors are situated in the inner panels of the front doors and measure the 
increase in pressure in the event of a side-on impact. 

In the event of a side-on impact with the door, the outer door panel is pressed inward, 
thus reducing the inner door space and increasing the pressure. This change in pressure 
is measured by the airbag sensors. 

The airbag sensor also includes an electronic mod¬ 
ule, in addition to the pressure sensor, which digi¬ 
tizes the pressure values and transmits them cycli¬ 
cally to the Crash Safety Module. The data is trans¬ 
mitted in the same way as the B-pillar airbag sen¬ 
sors. 

The pressure values are evaluated in the crash 
safety module. 



33 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


Seat Belt Buckle Switches 

The seat-belt buckle switches signal whether the 
seat belts are fastened or not. The signals from the 
seat belt buckle switches are transmitted to the 
Crash Safety Module and are used for triggering the 
reguired restraint systems and for the seat belt 
reminder function. 

The seat belt buckle switch is located in the seat 
belt buckles of the driver’s and front passenger’s 
seat. 

The seat-belt buckle switch is designed as a two- 
wire Hall-effect switch. The crash safety module 
powers the Hall switch via a current interface. The 
current intake of the switch varies depending on 
whether the seat belt is fastened or not. The seat 
belt buckle switch is permanently monitored as 
from terminal R “ON”. 



34 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


Actuators 

The crash safety module is used in to control the following actuators: 

• Adaptive driver airbag 

• Adaptive front passenger airbag 

• Driver/front-passenger side knee airbag 

• Curtain (head) airbags, left and right 

• Side airbag, integrated in the left and right front seats 

• Front seat belt pre-tensioner, front left and right 

• Automatic seat belt tensioner with adaptive force limiter 

• Active head restraint, front left and right 

• Safety battery terminal 

The following warning lamps are additionally activated: 

• Airbag warning lamp AWL 

• Seat belt mannikin 

• Passenger Airbag OFF light (POL) 

Adaptive Driver Airbag, with Active Vent 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Gas generator with exhaust vents 

2 

Actuator for vent valve 


Driver airbag without airbag 


35 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 








Driver airbag, rear, without retaining plate 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Connection of the squib for 

The active vent valve 

2 

Connection of the squib 
for the first stage 

3 

Connection of the squib for 
the second stage 


Vent Valve 

Airbags with pyrotechnically activated vent valve are used for the first time in a BMW vehi¬ 
cle on the F01/F02. 

This measure serves to adapt the hardness of the airbag in possible accident scenarios 
with small persons or persons sitting close to the steering wheel. 

On the basis of the crash severity, belt status and seat position information, the crash 
safety module decides whether the vent valve is activated or not. 

The vent valve is an exhaust vent incorporated into the airbag, which is closed by an 
arrester band. The arrester band ends in a cylinder, in which there is a blade. In the event 
of triggering, the blade is pushed in the cylinder by the pyrotechnical actuator and the 
arrester band is cut through. 

Due to the airbag inner pressure, the exhaust vent opens outwards and the hardness of 
the airbag is controlled by the gas venting. 


36 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 










Activation of the active vent valve 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Vent valve is closed by arrester band 

3 

Cylinder 

B 

Squib triggered, blade is deployed 

4 

Piston with blade 

C 

Blade cuts through retaining strap 
and vent valve opens 

5 

Squib 

1 

Retaining strap 

6 

Squib connection 

2 

Housing 




The active vent valve is normally activated for smaller, lighter occupants. 

If the system, (due to the seat position) detects a heavy occupant, a reduction of the 
airbag pressure is not desirable. 

In this case, the active vent valve remains closed and is activated at a later stage for 
disposal firing, when the occupant is no longer in contact with the airbag. 


37 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 




































Vent valve remains closed Vent valve is opened 



Normally heavy occupant Small, light occupant 


Adaptive front passenger airbag with active vent valve 


© ®© ® ® 



Front passenger airbag, two-stage with vent valve 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Cover for airbag 

4 

Actuator for active vent valve 

2 

First stage squib 

5 

Inflator assembly 

3 

Airbag housing 

6 

Second stage squib 


38 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


















Knee Airbags 

The knee airbags on the driver’s side and front-passenger side are designed to control 
the forward movement of the occupant in the event of a head-on impact. 

In the event of a collision in which the driver or front passenger are not wearing seat belts, 
the knee airbag provides support to protect the knees. This initiates a controlled forward 
displacement of the upper body, which is cushioned by the deployment on the corre¬ 
sponding airbag. 

A knee airbag on the driver and front passenger side are standard eguipment for the 
F01/F02. 

The knee airbag is designed as a single-stage airbag with inflator assembly. The volume 
is approximately 20 liters/ 5.2 Gallons. 

The gas generator is triggered in the event of a crash of sufficient severity and the result¬ 
ing gas fills the airbag. 

When occupant’s knees make contact with the airbag, the load is distributed over the 
area of the airbag, thus supporting the occupant. 

The knee support results in a controlled forward displacement of the upper body that is 
taken up and absorbed by the airbag. 

The knee airbag on the driver’s side is located below the steering column in the footwell 
trim while the knee airbag on the passenger side is located in the footwell trim. 



F01/F02 driver's side knee airbag, 


Note: The driver and front passenger knee airbags are also triggered by occu¬ 
pants wearing seat belts, though at a higher crash severity than if the 
seat belts are not fastened. 


39 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



F01/F02 passengers side knee airbag 



Curtain/Head Airbag 

On the F01/F02, the curtain airbag for the driver and front passenger side is used 
as head airbag. 

The head airbag extends from the A-pillar to the C-pillar and covers the entire side 
section at the level of the side windows. 

It deploys between the occupants, windows and pillar trim panels. 

The system features: 

• Extended coverage for front and rear windows. 

• Reduction of the risk of glass splinters and objects entering the vehicle. 

• Optimized coverage even for different sizes of occupant. 


The curtain airbag is housed folded up in the roof frame. It consists of the inflator assem¬ 
bly and the curtain. 

In the event of a side impact or of a rollover, the inflator assembly is triggered and a 
valve to the pressure tank is opened. The stored gas flows through the gas lance into 
the curtain. 


40 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



Installation location of the curtain airbags on the F01/F02 


The head airbag is set in the correct position by its mounting on the A-pillar and on the 
C-pillar. In addition, the curtain deploys between the side windows, pillar trim panels and 
the occupants. 

The structural strength and stability is preserved for several seconds by the closed sys¬ 
tem. 

In connection with the side airbag in the front seat, it provides optimum protection for the 
occupants in the event of side impact. 

The head airbag reduces the movement of the head and other occupant extremities 
towards the outside during a side impact. This results in lower neck shear forces as well 
as bending moments in the cervical vertebrae. It additionally prevents direct contact with 
the side structure or the obstacle thus reducing the risk of head injuries. 


41 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


Seat-integrated Side Airbag 

The seat-integrated side airbags are mounted on the F01/F02 for the purpose of achiev¬ 
ing optimum interior functionality, an appealing design while satisfying high safety 
requirements. 

The side airbags are folded, together with the inflator assembly (gas generator) in a plas¬ 
tic housing. The airbag module is secured into the backrest and concealed by the rear 
panel. 

The side airbag is triggered in response to a sufficiently strong impact from the side. The 
side airbag emerges between the seat backrest and the rear panel and inflates between 
the door and occupant. 

The air cushion between the door and occupant provides controlled impact damping and 
therefore reduces the load on the occupant. 



Note: It is important that no additional seat covers are fitted as they would 
greatly impair or even immobilize the airbag function. 


42 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



Seat Belt Pretensioner 

The task of the pyrotechnical seat belt tensioner is to minimize the seat belt slack in the 
pelvis and shoulder areas in the event of a crash, thereby improving the restraining action. 

The seat belt catch pretensioners are located on the driver’s and front passenger seats. 
The seat belt catch tensioners are triggered in the event of a head-on or rear-end crash 
and on vehicles with rollover sensor in the event of a rollover. 

In the event of a crash of sufficient severity, the squibs in the seat belt catch tensioner are 
triggered by the crash safety module. The seat belt buckle is connected by means of a 
steel cable to the piston in the tensioning tube. If the squib is triggered, gas pressure is 
created, which moves the piston in the tensioning tube. At this, the seat belt buckle is 
pulled down by the cable and the seat belt is tensioned. 


Seat belt pretensioner 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Seat belt buckle switch 

2 

Connection for the squib 

3 

Tensioning tube with piston 


43 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 











Automatic seat belt tensioner with adaptive force limiter 

The belt force limiter on the F01/F02 works according to the same principle as on the 
one used on the E65/E66. 

For the driver and front passenger, an automatic reel with adaptive force limitation is 
mounted. With the aid of a gas generator, there is a changeover from a high to a low 
power level during the impact, in order to reduce the restraining forces. 

With optimally tuning in connection with the airbag, the kinetic energy of the occupant is 
more uniformly reduced over the duration of the impact. Thus lower occupant stress val¬ 
ues are achieved. 

F01/F02 adaptive belt force limiter 



The adaptive force limitation is based on a two-step torsion bar (step shaft). The torsion 
bar consists of the two head ends at left and right, the step and the central head. 

The belt force is transmitted through the seat belt webbing to the belt reel. The belt roller 
is joined to a sleeve, in which the torgue bar is fitted. There is a shaft ring with locking 
pawls on the sleeve. The locking pawls transmit the torgue to the torsion bar. 

In the first stage, the belt force is transmitted from the seat belt strap on the belt roller via 
the locking pawls to the central head of the torsion bar. If the belt roller is rotated relative 
to the fixed torsion bar, the force is transmitted to the thicker part of the torsion bar. The 
high force level is thus set. 

In the event of an impact with corresponding severity, the gas generator is ignited and a 
piston driven out which rotates the ratchet ring, thus moving the shaft ring axially. 


44 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 







Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Seat belt webbing 

5 

Torsion bar (central head) 

2 

Belt roller 

6 

Sleeve 

3 

Locking pawls 

7 

Locking pawl 

4 

Sleeve 

8 

Housing 


45 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 
















Ignition process 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Ignition 

3 

Shaft ring 

2 

Ratchet ring 

4 

Locking pawls 


The locking pawls are now no longer held by the sleeve. Therefore no more torgue acts 
on the center head of the torsion bar. 

The belt force is now introduced into the step shaft via the right-hand head end, and thus 
passes through the complete torsion bar. Because of the smaller diameter of the right- 
hand side, the torsion bar is rotated further, and thus the force is degraded to a lower 
level. 


46 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 














Force flow with lower force level (stage 2) 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Seat belt webbing 

5 

Sleeve 

2 

Belt roller 

6 

Locking pawls 

3 

Connecting sleeve 

7 

Housing 

4 

Torsion bar 




47 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 












Active Head Restraint 

Used on previous BMW vehicles since 09/2007, Active head restraint are now installed on 
the F01/F02. 

This is the version with pyrotechnical actuator and spring elements for adjustment. 

There are two versions of active head restraints, depending on the seat option installed. 

The memory seat (1) is designed for manual headrest adjustment. 

In order to offer as much convenience as possible, the front section of the head restraint 
can be pulled forward or pushed backward approximately 30 mm. It is a two-stage adjust¬ 
ment. This allows for three different positions for the head restraint depth adjustment. 



(1) : Manually adjustable head restraint on the memory seat. 

(2) : Fixed head restraint on the multifunction seat 


On the multi-function seat, (2) the headrest is adjusted by means of the headrest adjust¬ 
ment. 

The active head restraint reduces the load on the cervical vertebrae in the event of a rear- 
end collision by reducing the distance between the head and the head restraint before 
the occupant moves backwards. This reduces the risk of injury to the cervical vertebrae. 

In the event of a rear-end impact, the front section of the head restraint, driven by a 
spring, is moved towards the front by up to 60 mm within a very short space of time. Even 
before the head is jerked backwards due to the rear-end impact, the active head restraint 
reduces the distance to the head. The reduced distance contributes to increasing the sta¬ 
bilizing and securing function of the head restraints. 


48 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 





Triggering in the event of a rear-end collision 

The crash safety module detects via sensors whether a rear-end collision has occurred. 

If there is an appropriately severe crash, the active head restraints are triggered. This can 
even occur in the case of a slight rear-end collision. 

If the crash safety module detects a massive rear-end collision, other safety components, 
such as e.g. the belt tensioner and the safety battery terminal are also activated. 

The crash safety module deploys the active head restraint, by igniting the head restraint 
actuator squib. The actuator releases the head restraint spring force by activating the 
release plate. This enables the front section of the head restraint to be moved towards 
the front by means of a spring. 

The head restraint drive springs are only locked again once the pyro-actuator has been 
replaced. 

Note: If the active head restraints have been triggered, the pyro-actuators 

must be replaced in the workshop. For more information please refer to 
the repair instructions available in ISTA and TIS. 

Active head restraint, left, normal position, Active head restraint, right, after triggering 



® ® © 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Head restraint support 

3 

Head restraint drive 

2 

Front section of the head restraint 




49 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 












Safety Battery Terminal 

The safety battery terminal is triggered at different thresholds when the Crash Safety 
Module detects a front-end, side-on or rear-end crash of sufficient severity. The connec¬ 
tion between battery and starter/ alternator cable is then separated by pyrotechnical 
teams. The safety battery terminal is located directly at the positive terminal of the battery. 

Despite the safety battery terminal being pressed 
off, it is guaranteed that all consumers relevant to 
safety such as hazard warning lights, interior light¬ 
ing and telephone will continue to be supplied 
with voltage. 


Safety battery terminal 



Airbag Warning Lamp 

The airbag warning lamp (AWL) is located in the instrument cluster. ACSM system oper¬ 
ability is indicated by the AWL lighting up and then going out in during the predrive 
check. The AWL is controlled by means of a signal from the ACSM to the instrument 
cluster on the PT-CAN. The instrument cluster receives a signal on a cyclical basis. If the 
signal fails to materialize, the AWL is activated. 



Airbag warning lamp 


50 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 


Passenger Airbag OFF light 

In the F01/F02, the passenger airbag OFF lamp is located at the front of the roof function 
center FZD next to the interior lights. 

The Passenger Airbag OFF light is activated if the OC3 mat detects a child seat with a 
child approximately one-year old or if the front passenger seat is not occupied. 

The brightness of the Passenger Airbag OFF light is regulated by the automatic display 
lighting. 



Roof function center with passenger airbag OFF light 


51 

F01 Passive Safety Systems 



