Table of Contents 

F01 System Functions 

Subject Page 

Diagnostics Master.5 

Time Master.6 

Centralized Fault Memory .7 

Specification of the Fault Memory Status (pseudo fault reduction) .. .10 

Vehicle Status Management.12 

Start up and Shut Down of the Onboard Communication Network . .13 

Cascading .13 

Wake-up and Sleep Memory.13 

Wake-up of the Vehicle .14 

Calculation of the Vehicle Status and Control of Vehicle Functions . .18 
Control of Operating Modes.18 

Ethernet Access.20 

What is Ethernet? .20 

Ethernet Port .22 

Activation of the Ethernet Access .23 

Vehicle Connection to the BMW Shop Network.24 

Definitions .25 

Authentication .25 

Authentification .25 

Digital Signature.25 

Vehicle Configuration Management.27 

Data Storage.28 

Equipment Installation Table (SVT).28 

Vehicle Order.30 

Vehicle Profile .31 

Initialization of the Vehicle Configuration Management System .32 

Reading and Writing of Data.32 

Example of Vehicle Configuration Management .32 


Initial Print Date: 01/09 


Revision Date: 




























Subject Page 

SWEEPING Technologies.34 

Activation by Means of Activation Code.34 

Introduction of SWT Hardware Activation .34 

Introduction of SWT Software Activation.35 

Activation of the Voice Recognition System in the CCC:.35 

SWEEPING Technologies in the F01/F02 .36 

Update of map data for the navigation system and 

input of the activation code .36 

Delivery Process of the Activation Codes Over ASAP .37 

Input of the Activation Code into the 

BMW Programming System.38 

Planned Expansion Stages.38 

Vehicle Security .39 

History and Fundamentals.39 

Threat Potential.39 

Vehicle Security Measures.40 

Benefits for Customers.40 

Benefits of the Vehicle Security System for the BMW Group 

and the BMW Brand .40 

Vehicle Security Operating Principle.42 

Preservation of Function in the Vehicle Security System.42 





















Subject 


Page 




System Functions 

Model: F01/F02 

Production: From Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the method in which diagnostic data is captured by the control units 

• Identify the components in the system where data is centrally stored 

• Identify and explain the various modes of operation for the control units 

• Explain the purpose and operation of the ethernet connection on the vehicle 

• Explain Sweeping technology 

• Explain the process necessary for updating navigation map data 

• Identify and explain the need for increased security features for the 
data in the vehicle 


4 

F01 System Functions 





Diagnostics Master 


The Diagnostics Master function is a function distributed throughout the vehicle. It is 
divided into the following subfunctions: 

• Time Master 

Includes the centralized specification of a system time for all control units in the 
vehicle, and the application as a time stamp for fault messages from control units. 

• Centralized fault memory 

Includes the saving of fault and Check Control messages with centralized ambient 
conditions. 

• Specification of the fault memory status 

Includes the centralized specification a fault memory block for network fault memory 
entries in specific situations as well as the evaluation/application of the block in the 
client control units. 

One task is often divided over multiple computers in a computer network (this also 
includes control units with bus connections). It is important to specify the computer (or 
control unit) that has the main function. This control unit is then described as the main 
control unit or "master". All other computers (control units) are called “peripherals” or 
"secondary controllers". 

Each subfunction of the diagnostics master includes a master portion and a secondary 
portion. The master portion is always implemented in a single control unit, but the sec¬ 
ondary controller portion in all participating control units. 


Subfunction 

Master 

Time master 

KOMBI 

Centralized storage of fault messages 

ZGM 

Specification of the fault memory status 

Junction Box 


5 

F01 System Functions 














Time Master 


The Time Master is located in the instrument panel and cycli¬ 
cally transmits the system time to all other control units in the 
vehicle every second. 

This system time is set to zero only once in the life cycle of the 
vehicle while in the factory at the end of the production pro¬ 
cess. The system time expresses the time in seconds that 
have passed since initialization in the factory. 

The counter for the system time is not reset when the battery 
is disconnected or when the power to the instrument panel is 
switched off. 

When the battery is disconnected the time value is actually initially lost, but it is updated 
when the power supply is again available. This is achieved by reading the last value stored 
in the non-volatile memory (EEPROM), increasing it by one time unit, and applying it in 
the Time Master as a new system time. The counter for the system time can map a time 
of approximately 136 years. 

The system time is received by all control units, and used it as a time stamp when fault 
messages are stored. 

To allow retention of the system time even after replacement of the instrument panel, it is 
stored redundantly in the CAS similar to the mileage reading. 



6 

F01 System Functions 


Centralized Fault Memory 

This subfunction has the task of centralized storage of fault and Check Control messages 
in addition to the local fault memories for each of the control units and the storage of CC 
messages in the instrument panel. The central gateway module (ZGM) is the master for 
this function and it is also called the Diagnostics Master. 

Whenever faults occur, all control units locally save the fault along with at least the two 
mandatory environmental conditions of kilometer reading and system time. A new func¬ 
tion is that the control units additionally signal the fault code and the system time at 
which the fault occurred (time stamp) to the Diagnostics Master (ZGM). 

The fault memory concept and fault memory process of the control units have not been 
changed by the additional reporting to the Diagnostics Master. This means a control unit 
"very normally" makes a self-defined fault memory entry. The local fault memory entry 
remains untouched in the local fault memory of the secondary control unit. 

The Diagnostics Master then additionally centrally stores the fault code and a fixed set of 
26 ambient conditions at the same time that it indicated in the time stamp. 

The ambient conditions stored on the fault message by the Diagnostics Master include 
different information on the global status of the vehicle such as the: 

• Standard time • Terminal status 

• Vehicle system voltage • Kilometer reading 

• Outside temperature • Vehicle driving speed 

The central fault memory in the ZGM has a size of 18 kB. Between 250 and 1000 fault 
events and Check Control messages can be stored centrally in the ZGM dependent 
upon how many faults occur simultaneously. When the fault memory is full no new faults 
or Check Control messages are stored. The fault and Check Control messages in the 
central fault memory can then only be deleted via the BMW diagnostic system. 

Each fault code and each Check Control message is accepted up to 10 times. Without 
this limit, a constantly occurring fault would very quickly fill the entire central fault memory. 

These ten entries are sufficient for analysis of the fault. 

All central fault memory entries are lost when the ZGM is replaced. 


Note: Primary fault analysis continues to be performed by using the fault mem¬ 
ory entries in each of the control units. The data from the central fault 
memory of the Diagnostics Master serve to supplement and allow a more 
precise diagnosis. Functions for using this data are integrated in the new 
workshop system. 


7 

F01 System Functions 



Advantages: 

Previously (without Diagnostics Master), only the kilometer reading and system time 
(mandatory environmental conditions) and possibly a few additional ambient conditions 
could be found in the local fault memories. 

The ZGM stores 26 additional ambient data items for each fault memory entry from each 
of the control units. 

Additionally, up to 10 time instances at which the fault occurred are recorded in the ZGM 
for a fault code. 

The time stamp with second-precision permits a statement upon the time seguence of 
fault events, which was previously not possible based solely upon the kilometer reading. 
For the first time it is possible to the name the cause and effect with greater clarity for dis¬ 
tributed functions, e.g. the control unit that firstly entered a fault, the control unit that in 
conseguence only entered a fault as a reaction, etc. 

The Check Control messages at the time of the fault are also stored in the Diagnostics 
Master and are also provided with the 26 ambient conditions. "Customer complaints" can 
be assigned better to a vehicle situation because of the Check Control messages and 
above all also corresponding fault memory entries. 

These measures have made a more precise diagnosis possible. 


Note: Up to 55 fault codes (also without time stamp or ambient conditions as is 
currently the case) can still be stored In the CAS and in the identification 
sensor of the F01 /F02. 


8 

F01 System Functions 



Storage of faults in the F01/F02 










Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Two local ambient conditions for fault 1 

7 

Fault message 2 (FM2) 

2 

Fault 1 and 2 local ambient conditions are 
stored in the fault memory of the control unit 

8 

Fault message 1 (FM1) 

3 

Fault message 1 (FM1) and the "time stamp" 
are sent to the Diagnostics Master 

9 

Fault message 2 (FM2) and the "time stamp" 
are sent to the Diagnostics Master 

4 

Central ambient conditions at the 
time when fault 1 occurred 

10 

Fault 2 and 2 local ambient conditions are 
stored in the fault memory of the control unit 

5 

Ambient conditions at the time 
when fault 2 occurred 

11 

Two local ambient conditions for fault 

6 

Diagnostics Master in the ZGM 




9 

F01 System Functions 



















































Specification of the Fault Memory Status (pseudo fault reduction) 

In certain vehicle operating situations invalid fault memory entries (pseudo faults) are 
made as the control units do not behave synchronously in these situations. The critical 
operating situations occur during: 

• Wake-up of the vehicle 

• Start of the combustion engine 

• Under/Overvoltage 

To prevent pseudo faults in these operating situations, a centrally communicated signal 
forbids specific faults from being entered in the local fault memories of the control units. 

These will simultaneously actively prevent these faults being signalled to the master of 
the "storage system context" function and from being entered in the central fault memory. 

The fault memory block is not only effective for network fault memory entries, however 
not for control units-fault memory entries. 

The fault memory entries for control units relevant for exhaust gas and safety are not 
affected by this function and they will always be written. 


10 

F01 System Functions 



Saving of faults is prevented under certain circumstances 






r 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Under/Overvoltage 

block condition: 10.5 V < U < 16 V 

Unblock condition: U > 11 V or U < 15.5 V 

2 

Junction Box (master for the subfunction specification of fault memory status) 

3 

Bus message "status - block fault memory" 

4 

All control units 

5 

Wake-up of the vehicle 

Block condition: wake-up signal 

Unblock condition: three seconds after wake-up signal tw > 3 s 

6 

Engine start (Terminal 50) block condition: Terminal 50 active 


11 

F01 System Functions 










































Vehicle Status Management 


Vehicle status management is a system function with the task of implementing standard¬ 
ized system behavior in different operating conditions for all future BMW vehicles. 

For instance, the different switch-on behavior of the radio. To switch on the radio in the 
E65, the START-STOP button must be pressed (Terminal R is switched on). In the E90, 
on the other hand, the radio can also be switched on without inserting the key's remote 
control into the insertion slot. 

The vehicle status management system calculates a single vehicle status from the termi¬ 
nal status, vehicle movement, battery condition and status of the combustion engine. 
This status is then used to define when a customer function or a group of customer 
functions (e.g. all entertainment functions) has to be available. 

Furthermore, the vehicle status management system controls the operating mode the 
vehicle or specific modules are in. Those functions that are to be available in a mode are 
controlled. 


Example: No radio operation while in the transportation mode. 


Distinction is drawn between the following operating states: 

• Standby 

• Basic control mode 

• Ready to drive 

• Engine start 

• Driving 

A further vehicle status management task is the simultaneous start up and shut down of 
the on-board communication network. 



FOI on the production line 


12 

FOI System Functions 











Start up and Shut Down of the Onboard Communication Network 

The vehicle status management system describes the start up and shut down of the 
onboard communication network. In addition to general requirements, that are binding for 
all control units, the cascading, wake-up and sleep memories are defined. 

Cascading 

The cascading function ensures that all buses in the vehicle electrical and bus systems 
startup in coordination and shut down or "sleep" simultaneously. This function is made 
possible by a master function of the central gateway module (ZGM) that specifies 
whether the vehicle electrical and bus systems may sleep. This master function controls 
the secondary control units, each of which is responsible for the start-up and sleep for 
one bus. Secondary controllers are located in the following control units: 

• ZGM (for K-CAN, K-CAN2, PTCAN, FlexRay and MOST) 

• DME (for the PT-CAN2) 

Wake-up and Sleep Memory 

In the event that the vehicle should not correctly wake-up or sleep, this often results in an 
increased power requirement for the complete vehicle, which may cause an empty bat¬ 
tery and therefore a broken-down vehicle. 

With the wake-up and sleep memory, the vehicle status management makes functions 
available for detection of faulty wake-up and sleep processes and initiation of counter¬ 
measures. For this purpose, the vehicle status management system has firstly recorded 
all possible reasons that could allow a control unit to wake-up the vehicle. When such a 
reason exists, the waking control unit must signal this reason to the wake-up and sleep 
memory that is contained in the ZGM. 

Should a faulty wake-up exist, it is logged in the ZGM (fault memory entry that includes 
also the waking control unit and the wake-up reason as ambient conditions). The time 
and current kilometer reading are always saved as further ambient conditions. In this 
instance, the ZGM initiates countermeasures by transmitting the diagnostic command 
"powerdown". Should faulty wake-up events continue to occur after this, a reset of termi¬ 
nal 30F and then a permanent switch-off of terminal 30F is required. Just as with wake- 
up, faults may also occur for sleep. For such a fault, the wake-up and sleep memory cre¬ 
ates a fault memory entry and initiates the same measures as for faulty wake-up. 


13 

F01 System Functions 



All control units that may wake-up the vehicle are defined and assigned an identification 
number (hexadecimal number). Two seconds after each control unit has completed the 
wake-up process it transmits the bus message "wake-up registration FZM" to the ZGM 
and notifies the reason for the wake-up. 



Example: 

Wake-up by opening the driver's door FRM transmits the following message two seconds 
after the wake-up: 

• Message ID: 0x5F2 (identification number for FRM) 

• Byte 0: 0x27 (bus message "wake-up registration FZM") 

• Byte 1: 0x72 (identification number FRM) 

• Byte 2: 0x10 (Wake-up cause "door contact, front left") 


Wake-up of the Vehicle 

The bus overview of the F01/F02 with wake-authorized and wake-capable control units is 
shown below. 


Wake-authorized control units may wake-up the vehicle electrical and bus systems. 



The wake-authorized control units are shown on the bus diagram on the following 
page by a rising-edge symbol. 


The wake-authorized control units include: 


• K-CAN2: FRM, FZD, JB, 

• K-CAN: IHKA 

• MOST: RSE High, ULF-SBX High, ULFSBX and TCU 


14 

F01 System Functions 










Wake-capable control units are woken up via a wake-up line. 



The wake-capable control units are identified with a "W". These control units are 
woken up via a wake-up line. 


These include: 


• ZGM 

• PT-CAN: DME, ACSM, EMA LI, EMA RE, EGS 

• FlexRay: DSC and ICM 

Additionally, there is a group of control units that are “wake-authorized” as well as wake 
capable: 

• K-CAN2: CAS 

• MOST: Kombi 


• PT-CAN: GWS and EMF 


• FlexRay: SZL 

The remaining control units are then woken up via the bus systems or via switching on 
the power supply. 


15 

F01 System Functions 



Bus overview F01/F02 with wake-authorized/capable control units 


0 


k I'nip 



Jk.Li 



si 




JD 




EHC 


3MFA 


R. 


r 


HKL 


Rl 


SM5F 


SMi-Art swBFh 


Fi- A > T ■ ngr r-Mfi 


COM 


CD 



MJD 


l&PHIFl 


SPARS 






ULFSCk 

High 


pro 



TCU 




LJ 




TRSVC 


FDB 




* 


H^i 


vStor 


Dtf =: 


|J]0 



M fl ' fe 

T- “I ft# 

lw 

*— y-AUAii 

0 

n r-Cid 

[Z frm 

MJ 0 j hKa 

—.. ... ^ L- ■— 

p- 

W/Iyi 


t w A 


EMARE 


l&S 


0 j 1 
■ 

t 

0 

H 


cws 




0 _ 


KAfAS 


5; 

□ 


HrCJHi 

rrtii%3 

■ f ■ / 

mar 

P.-WI 

■-Eh- 

■CTTlt&J 

■MJM ~~ 

■H 

PT-C** - 

LM-Ek- 

(•■■hr, ™ 

lmLIUK 


EP.PS 


0 


lw| 

(U 





SC 





yi^w 



ETlCSHI. 



0 



EDCS^I 


FPC 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

ACSM 

Advanced Crash Safety Module 

DVD 

Digital Video Disc 

AL 

Active Steering 

EDC SHL 

Electronic Damping Control 
(Satellite rear left) 

CAS 

Car Access System (CAS 4) 

EDC SHR 

Electronic Damping Control 
(Satellite rear right) 

CIC 

Car Information Computer 

EDC SVL 

Electronic Damping Control 
(Satellite front left) 

CID 

Central Information Display 

EDC SVR 

Electronic Damping Control 
(Satellite front right) 

CON 

Controller 

EGS 

Electronic Transmission Control 

DME 

Digital Motor Electronics 

EHC 

Electronic Height Control 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

EKPS 

Electric Fuel Pump 


16 

F01 System Functions 





































































































Index 


Explanation 


Index 


Explanation 


EMA LI 

Electrically motorized reel, left 

NVE 

Night Vision Electronics 

EMA RE 

Electrically motorized reel, right 

PDC 

Park Distance Control 

EMF 

Electromechanical Parking Brake 

OBD 

On Board Diagnostic Connector 

FD 

Rear Display, left 

RSE 

Rear Seat Entertainment 
(Mid) 

FD2 

Rear Display 2, right 

SDARS 

Satellite Radio 

FKA 

Rear compartment, 
heating/air conditioning 

SMBF 

Seat module, passenger 

FLA 

High Beam Assistant 

SMBFH 

Seat module, passenger rear 

FRM 

Footwell Module 

SMFA 

Seat module, driver 

FZD 

Roof Functions Center 

SMFAH 

Seat module, driver side rear 

GWS 

Gear Selector Lever 

SWW 

Lane Change Warning 
(Active Blind Spot Detection) 

HiFi 

HiFi Amplifier 

SZL 

Steering column switch cluster 

HKL 

Trunk Lid lift 

TCU 

Telematics Control Unit 

HSR 

Rear axle drift angle control 
(Rear Steering Control Module) 

TOP-HIFI 

TOP-HiFi Amplifier 

HUD 

Head-up Display 

TPMS 

Tire Pressure Monitoring System 

ICM 

Integrated Chassis Management 

TRSVC 

Top Rear Side View Camera 

Module for rear/side view cam 

IHKA 

Integrated Heating and Air Conditioning, 

automatic 

ULF-SBXHigh 

Interface Box, high version 

JB 

Junction Box Electronics 

VDM 

Vertical Dynamics Management 

KAFAS 

Camera-assisted Driver Assistance 
Systems 

VSW 

Video Switch 

KOMBI 

Instrument Cluster 

ZGM 

Central Gateway Module 


17 

F01 System Functions 




















































































Calculation of the Vehicle Status and Control of Vehicle Functions 


The vehicle status management system calculates a single vehicle status from the termi¬ 
nal status, vehicle movement, battery condition and status of the combustion engine. 
This status is then used to describe when a customer function or a group of customer 
functions (e.g. all entertainment functions) has to be available. 

For instance, all functions for geometric adaptation are to be available in the basic control 
mode/stationary operation statuses. The operating states defined through vehicle status 
management are summarized in the following table: 


Operating State 

Identifying Feature 

Function 

Driving 

Engine running 

Active steering 

Engine start 

Starter motor running 

Radio mute 

Ready to drive 

Engine OFF, driver present, 
ignition switched ON 

This is where those functions are activated 
that are required for the driving mode, e.g. 

Park Distance Control, air-conditioning sys¬ 
tem, passive safety systems 

Basic control mode 

Engine OFF, driver present, 
ignition switched OFF 

Radio, seat adjustment 

Standby 

Driver's absence identified by: 

• Secure vehicle, or 

• Non-initiation of driver interaction 
for 30 minutes. 

Functions that have to exist when the driver is 
absent, e.g. DWA, CAS (read-in remote con¬ 
trol) 


Control of Operating Modes 

Those functions that are to be available in an operating mode are defined (e.g. no radio 
operation in transportation mode) via the vehicle status management system. There are 
three operating modes: manufacture, transportation, flash, which are abbreviated in 
German as FeTraFla mode. 

FeTraFla mode replaces the former manufacture, transportation, workshop or FeTraWe 
mode. Workshop mode has rarely been used to date and has been replaced by flash 
mode. 

Flash mode offers the advantage that communication between the control units is 
reduced to a minimum during programming, and therefore higher data transfer rates are 
achieved from the BMW Programming system into the vehicle. Additionally, the control 
units are notified that programming is taking place. 

This prevents the control units from going into emergency operation (e.g. the windscreen 
wiper does not start). 


18 

F01 System Functions 























Flash mode is activated via a diagnostic command. The control units permanently save 
this mode. This has the advantage that the control units still know that they are in flash 
mode after a reset. In earlier vehicles a reset often had the consequence that a control 
unit had interrupted communication and this had consequently caused a flash termina¬ 
tion. 

It is also possible to use the "extended operating modes" to further subdivide a mode in 
order, for instance, to suppress or activate functions only at specific conveyor belt sec¬ 
tions during manufacture. 


19 

F01 System Functions 



Ethernet Access 


The increasing number and complexity of functions in the vehicle cause a constantly 
increasing rise in the number of control units and consequently the data volume in the 
vehicle. When these data are to be updated the vehicles must be programmed over the 
BMW programming system. The number of BMW vehicles that can be programmed has 
constantly increased since the introduction of the E65 in 2001. 

The challenge facing the Service Department is the programming of ever increasing 
data in increasing numbers of vehicles. 

In order to accelerate the programming procedure in the workshop, an Ethernet access 
has been integrated in the diagnostic socket of the F01/F02 in addition to the OBD 
access (D-CAN). 

It is Fast Ethernet compliant with IEE802.3 2005 100 base TX. 

This standardized interface provides a centralized, standardized access in the vehicle. 
This access permits IP-based communication with the vehicle. 

The vehicle is therefore uniquely identifiable as a communication partner in an IP-based 
network, and BMW diagnosis and programming systems can be used in the workshop 
for the data exchange with the vehicle. 

Note: The previously used MOST direct access 
is not installed in the F01/F02. 



What is Ethernet? 

Ethernet is a cabled data network technology for local area networks (LANs). It facilitates 
the data exchange in the form of data frames between all devices (computers, printers, 
etc.) connected in a local network (LAN). Earlier the LAN only extended over one build¬ 
ing. 

Today the Ethernet technology uses fiber glass or radio to also connect devices over 
long distances. 

Ethernet was invented over 30 years ago. A protocol was used as a transmission proto¬ 
col that was in use at that time for radio-based networks. 

Consequently the name Ether, that had been assumed historically to be the medium for 
propagation of radio waves. 

In an Ethernet network, the users in the common cable network transmit messages via 
high-frequency signals. 


20 

F01 System Functions 









Each network user has a unique 48-bit key that is called the MAC address. This ensures 
that all systems in an Ethernet have different addresses. 

MAC is an acronym for Media Access Control. 

The MAC address is required because a commonly used medium (network) can not be 
used simultaneously by multiple computers without data collisions, and therefore com¬ 
munication faults or data losses occur in the short or long term. 

Different data transfer speeds were defined during development of Ethernet. Since 1995 
the 100 Mbits/s standard has been used and it is called Fast Ethernet. 

In the F01/F02, Fast Ethernet compliant with standard IEEE 802.3 2005 100 base TX 
with 100 Mbits/s data transfer rate is used. 

100 Mbit/s Ethernet is also used today as the LAN connection for PCs. 



Ethernet connection for a PC 


In addition to a higher data rate, the 100 Mbits/s Ethernet offers the following advantages: 

• All BMW dealers have an Ethernet infrastructure 

• Ethernet is future-proof 

• Standard IT technologies can be used inside and outside of the vehicle 

• Ethernet allows a cable length of 100 m (cable length today in workshop = 10 m) 


21 

F01 System Functions 


Ethernet Port 


As there were enough free pins in the diagnostic socket it was possible to integrate the 
Ethernet port in this socket. 


This installation location is the optimal solution for the vehicle access. The further advan¬ 
tage lies in that D-CAN as well as Ethernet can be connected to BMW diagnostic and 
programming systems via one connection (ICOM A). 



Five pins are used for the Ethernet port in the diagnostic socket. 


These five lines are routed from the diagnostic socket to the central gateway module 
(ZGM). 


One of the five lines transmits the activation signal. The remaining four lines are twisted 
pair and are used for data transmission. 


Ethernet connection between the diagnostic socket and ZGM 



22 

F01 System Functions 


























□□□□ 


□□□□ 


a 


5 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Not assigned 

9 

Engine speed 

2 

Not assigned 

10 

Not assigned 

3 

Ethernet Rx+ 

11 

Ethernet Rx- 

4 

Terminal 31 

12 

Ethernet Tx+ 

5 

Terminal 31 

13 

Ethernet Tx- 

6 

D-CAN High 

14 

D-CAN Low 

7 

Not assigned 

15 

Not assigned 

8 

Ethernet activation 

16 

Terminal 30F 


Activation of the Ethernet Access 

The Ethernet access is switched off in normal operation. It must be activated prior to 
every usage and then deactivated after it has been used. 

Upon connection of the ICOM A, the activation line (Pin 8) is connected to terminal 30B 
(Pin 16) and this activates the Ethernet access. 

The Ethernet module in the ZGM receives the signal (voltage level of terminal 30B) via 
the activation line. When the ICOM A is disconnected from the diagnostic socket the 
Ethernet access is deactivated. When the customer is in driving mode the Ethernet 
access is always deactivated. 

Each user in an Ethernet is assigned an identification number that is unigue throughout 
the world, the MAC address (Media Access Control). A user in a network is uniquely 
identifiable via the MAC address. The MAC address of the vehicle is located in the ZGM 
and can not be changed. 


23 

F01 System Functions 





























The VIN (Vehicle Identification Number) identifies the vehicle to the BMW programming 
system. Before communication with the vehicle can take place, just the same as for a 
computer network in the office it is necessary for each device in an IP-based network to 
have received a logical identification, called the IP address. The IP address is only unique 
in the respective network segment (subnetwork) and it can be assigned dynamically or 
statically. 

After activation of the Ethernet connection and establishment of the physical connection 
the central gateway module is assigned the IP address from the ICOM A. Through a spe¬ 
cial process, the so-called "vehicle identification", the IP address, VIN and MAC are 
exchanged between the BMW diagnosis or programming systems and the ZGM. This 
allows unique identification of the vehicle in the workshop network and therefore a com¬ 
munication connection can also be established. 

The function of an IP address in a network corresponds to a phone number in the tele¬ 
phone network. Assignment of this IP address is performed per DHCP (Dynamic Host 
Configuration Protocol). This is a process for automatic allocation of IP addresses to new 
end devices in a network. Merely the automatic reference to IP address must be set on 
the end device. 

It must be possible to assign the IP address dynamically (DHCP server) for operation in a 
changing workshop network infrastructure. 

The vehicle should adapt to the network and not the network to the vehicle. After discon¬ 
nection of the ICOM A the assigned IP address is released upon expiry of the time set in 
the DHCP server. 

Data enters into the vehicle and is distributed in the vehicle via the Ethernet access over 
the central gateway module. 

The Ethernet connection does not have any effect upon the operation and time response 
of the D-CAN connection. 

Note: Simultaneous operation of the D-CAN and Ethernet access must be 
prevented, as this makes collisions of diagnostics commands within 
the vehicle probable and therefore communication via both accesses 
can become faulty. 

Vehicle Connection to the BMW Shop Network 

An example of connection of the F01/F02 to the BMW workshop network is shown in the 
diagram below. 

An IP address is automatically assigned to the vehicle after connection of the ICOM A. 
This allows unique identification of the vehicle (the ZGM) in the BMW workshop network, 
and a communication connection is established. 

Authentication must be completed, and a signature is necessary for writing (program¬ 
ming) data into the vehicle. As opposed to this, it is possible to read (diagnosis) data 


24 

F01 System Functions 



immediately after a data line has been connected to the vehicle. The authentication and 
signature prevent third parties from changing data records and memory values. 

Programming is carried out using the Software Service Station and ISTA-R 

The ICOM A must always be connected to the workshop network over LAN cable to 
allow programming to be carried out. 

Programming is always performed over the Ethernet access. Only the diagnosis and no 
programming is performed over D-CAN. 

The connection to the vehicle must be retained until programming has been fully com¬ 
pleted. The ZGM assumes the gateway function and distributes data over the buses to 
the other control units. 

Definitions 

Authentication 

Authentic from the Greek work "authentikos" = valid, real, credible. 

Authentication = confirmation of authenticity 

To authenticate = to make valid, make credible. 

Nowadays the conformation of authenticity is often stated in connection 
with rights of use e.g. for PCs or access to buildings. 

Authentification 

The process of proving the identity (authenticity) upon request. 

For instance, check of the user password by the PC system. 

An example to clarify authentification, authentication and authorization: 

A user wants to log on to his PC. He authenticates himself. 

The PC system wants to check whether the user is entitled to log on to the system: 

It authentifies. 

After it has completed the check, the PC grants access: It authorizes the user. 

Digital Signature 

= Digital acceptance 

From the Latin "Signum" the sign. 

A digital signature in an encryption procedure with the purpose of ensuring the trustwor¬ 
thiness of a person. 

In this case, the authorship and affiliation of data to a specific person is checked. 

Simultaneously the completeness, genuineness and intactness of the signed electronic 
data are checked. 


25 

F01 System Functions 



Vehicle Connection to the BMW Shop Network 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Integrated Service Information Server (ISIS1) 

7 

Integrated Service Information Display (ISID) 

2 

Gigabit switch 

8 

Battery charger 

3 

Printer 

9 

LAN cable 

4 

Integrated Software 

Service Station (ISSS) 

10 

Integrated Measurement 

Interface Box (IMIB) 

5 

BMW Group server 

11 

Workshop trolley 

6 

Workshop PC 

12 

Integrated Communication Optical Module 

(ICOM A) 


26 

F01 System Functions 

































































































































Vehicle Configuration Management 


The vehicle configuration management system (VCM) is a system function and has the 
primary task of centralized storage of data structures in the vehicle. The VCM integrated 
in the central gateway module ZGM as a system function. 

The vehicle order and the l-levels in addition to the security are stored in the CAS. This 
ensures that the information can be restored after the ZGM has been replaced. The 
information stored in the vehicle configuration management system can be called by 
diagnostic commands upon request from the diagnosis system or internal vehicle sys¬ 
tem functions. 

This means that the current vehicle configuration is saved centrally at precisely one place 
and a consistent information status is assured. This configuration knowledge only needs 
to be maintained at only one place. As this information is stored in the vehicle it is avail¬ 
able at all times to all systems outside of the vehicle (diagnosis, programming) and the 
systems inside of the vehicle (system functions). 

A further primary task of the vehicle configuration management system is the query, 
cyclic or upon request, of the configuration of the currently installed control units, and to 
use this to generate an equipment installation table that represents the current status, 
SVT-current. A comparison between SVT-nominal and SVT-current then takes place in 
order to determine whether the configuration installed in the vehicle is the same as the 
configuration that the vehicle should have. A fault memory entry is saved in the VCM if 
this reveals any discrepancies. 

Additionally, upon request the vehicle configuration management system generates lists 
of control units that have specific characteristics. 

Finally, the vehicle configuration management system has the task of determining those 
control units that have different serial numbers since a reference time (writing of SVT 
nominal). 

The Service Department can use this to determine those control units that have been 
replaced since this time. 

After replacement or changes to hardware or software, for instance, it is much easier to 
reestablish a consistent and working status for the vehicle electrical and bus systems. 

Furthermore, the required configuration must not be maintained by each system function 
itself. This produces savings in component development as well as in system integration 
and logistics as compared to previous systems. Additionally, faults due to inconsistent 
configuration information are prevented. 

Deviations from the specified configuration (SVT-nominal) and the current configuration 
(SVT-current) queried by the control units are identified. 


27 

F01 System Functions 




Data Storage 

The vehicle configuration management system provides detailed information on the hard¬ 
ware and software installation status of the vehicle. To the outside, the VCM makes avail¬ 
able that, and only that, which is relevant for its users. Direct access to internal structures 
is prohibited and is instead achieved via defined interfaces. 

The vehicle configuration management system administers the following data for all elec¬ 
trical components in the vehicle: 

• Specified equipment installation table (SVT-nominal) 

• Vehicle order (FA) 

• Vehicle profile (FP) and 

• l-levels 

Equipment Installation Table (SVT) 

The equipment installation table (SVT) contains all equipment installation identification 
lists (SVK) of all users installed in the vehicle electrical and bus systems. 

The equipment installation identification list (SVK) is a list of all components (software 
and hardware). The component is not to be confused with the control unit as a control 
unit may be made up of several units. For instance, a CCC comprises several software 
units such as: user interface (BO), antennas (ANT), audio system controller (ASK), gate¬ 
way (GW) as well as the hardware unit. 

The vehicle configuration management system checks the current configuration 10 sec¬ 
onds after the engine start. This creates the current-equipment installation table. The 
nominal configuration (SVT nominal) is also saved in the vehicle configuration manage¬ 
ment system. If discrepancies are determined between SVT current and SVT-nominal a 
fault memory entry is saved in the ZGM. 

New nominal values are written into the VCM during vehicle programming and coding. 


28 

F01 System Functions 



Storage of data by the vehicle configuration management system 




SVK1 



SW: OA,00.04 
HW: 12.01 <01 
SN: 9 148 487 


® 

FKM 


|-Stufen (*) 



SG2 




SVK2 


SW: xx.yy.zz 
HW:xx,yy,zz 
SN: x xxx xxx 


\ 

SVT ® 


Fahrzeugauftrag (§). 
Fahrzeugprofil (?) 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Control unit 1 

2 

Equipment installation identification list 1 (SVK1) 

3 

Data structure in the vehicle configuration management system 

4 

l-levels 

5 

Equipment installation table (SVT) 

6 

Vehicle order (FA) 

7 

Vehicle profile (FP) 

8 

Equipment installation identification list 2 (SVK2) 

9 

Control unit 2 


29 

F01 System Functions 




























Vehicle Order 

The vehicle order contains all the important equipment features of the vehicle in addition 
to the type code. 


The assembly numbers of the drive control units are stored in the vehicle during assem¬ 
bly and can no longer be changed. It is therefore possible at anytime to identify which 
part numbers of the control units were allocated to the vehicle during production. 


Vehicle order data 


T j 



& - 





- FPWBADR41030GT70375E 


Produktionsort: 

Werk 10.0 

Produktionszeit: 

17.04.2000 

12.00 


Typschliissel: 

AM 34 

Baustand: 

0302 

Baureihe: 

E65 

Lackcode: 

0609 

Polstercode: 

A6C9 

SA: 

210 


534 


630 


690 

ZusBau-DMEI; 

1234567 

ZusBau-DME2: 

1234566 

ZusBau-EGS: 

7654321 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Vehicle identification number 

7 

Paint code 

2 

Production location 

8 

Upholstery code 

3 

Production time 

9 

Options (SA) 

4 

Type code 

10 

Assembly number DME-1 

5 

Build date 

11 

Assembly number DME-2 

6 

Model series 

12 

Assembly number 7654321 


30 

F01 System Functions 










































Vehicle Profile 

The vehicle profile contains additional data that precisely describe the vehicle. In addition 
to the development model series and design they include, for instance, the gearbox type, 
engine, version etc. 

Vehicle order data 











FahrzeuRproiil 

1 - E ntwit: klungsbau rd h ec 

FDOt 

Batter ieklasse: 

BOBO 

Bauarb 

LIMOUSINE 

. Landervarrante: 

Deutschland 

j— Lenksdte: 

LL 

j— SonderaLisgtatturg: 


.— Treibstoff: 

BENZ IN 

Ldstungsklasse: 

(185) UL 

=g Motors 

NG3B44 

— Getriebetyp: 

AUTOMAT IK 

— ZylsnderzahJ: 

8 

■ Hubraum: 

44000CCM 

Bay stand: 

MAERZ_2QQ8 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Vehicle profile 

8 

Fuel 

2 

Development model series 

9 

Performance class 

3 

Battery class 

10 

Emgine 

4 

Design, e.g. Saloon 

11 

Gearbox type 

5 

National-market version 

12 

Number of cylinders 

6 

Steering side 

13 

Cubic capacity 

7 

Optional extra (SA) 

14 

Version 


31 

F01 System Functions 










































Initialization of the Vehicle Configuration Management System 

Initialization of the VCM means the first writing of data. All data (SVT-nominal, vehicle 
order, vehicle profile and the l-levels) is written into the central gateway module through 
the initialization. 

Initialization takes place in the factory and must always be performed when the ZGM is 
replaced. 

Initialization is automatically performed by the programming system. Data from the vehicle 
order (FA) and l-levels on security are always stored in the CAS. The programming sys¬ 
tem firstly collects these data from the CAS and then writes them into the ZGM. 

Reading and Writing of Data 

The SVT-current, SVT-nominal, vehicle order, vehicle profile and the l-levels can be read 
out from the VCM via diagnosis. These data are written in the VCM during vehicle pro¬ 
gramming and coding. SVT nominal, FA, FP and l-levels can be written independently of 
each other. 

For data security reasons, signatures are used in the data exchange between the diagno¬ 
sis or programming systems and the VCM. 

Example of Vehicle Configuration Management 

Upon reguest by other system functions (e.g. integrated Owner's Handbook), the VCM 
extracts a control units list, e.g. a list of all installed control units, from the SVT-current. 

All the contents of the integrated Owner's Handbook are stored in the CIO, but only the 
vehicle-specific contents are shown. For instance, the CIC queries whether the high 
beam assistant is installed. If it is, the contents on the high-beam assistant are shown 
(graphic illustration on the next page). 

Further system functions that revert to information from the VCM are, for instance: 

• Personal profile (needs information on changes to the vehicle configuration). 

• Diagnostics Master (needs list of the actively signalling control units). 


32 

F01 System Functions 



Query to VCM on installed control units 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Integrated Owner's Handbook is called up 

2 

CIC (queries the VCM on installed control units 
and makes vehicle-specific contents available) 

3 

Query to the VCM on installed control units 
e.g. high-beam assistant or KAFAS 

4 

VCM in the ZGM gives information on installed control units 

5 

The high-beam assistant or KAFAS is installed in this vehicle 

6 

The appropriate notes on this topic are shown in the CID 


33 

F01 System Functions 

























SWEEPING Technologies 


SWEEPING technologies allows protection against copying, usage and manipulation of 
IT components and their software. 

The abbreviation SWEEPING stands for Software Enabled Electronics Platform for 
Innovative Next Generation Technologies. 



SWT is based upon an encryption process that uses a key specific to a vehicle and con¬ 
trol unit, the activation code as it is called, to activate a software function or application 
for a control unit. 

The activation code (Freischaltcodes - FSC) is input in the Service Department or by the 
customer. 

This occurs either by an input in the controller or through the import from CD/DVD or 
USB stick as an import medium for the BMW programming system. 

The activation code is then subsequently input in the respective vehicle via the BMW 
programming system. 

The required software is operable only after input of the activation code. 

Activation by Means of Activation Code 

Introduction of SWT Hardware Activation 

The first activation code for a BMW vehicle was used in March 2006 for activation of the 
night vision camera following a replacement. 

The hardware component was activated and therefore made operable. 

A legal requirement was the background for this. Strict conditions applied for the night 
vision camera that was developed especially for military purposes. 

They could only be installed in registered vehicles. This allowed the vehicles with SA 
611 (night vision) to be recorded and accounted for in strict conformity with license con¬ 
ditions. 

Furthermore, usage of a FSC allowed clear allocation of the hardware component (night 
vision camera) to the vehicle in which it was installed. 

An activation code for the night vision camera following a replacement was enclosed in 
the form of a CD. This so-called "subpart" had to be ordered by the parts technician 
over the EPC by giving the vehicle identification number. 


34 

F01 System Functions 




The activation code located on the CD was requested by the BMW programming system 
during the programming. It was then transferred into the BMW programming system and 
imported into the vehicle. 

If a FSC was not entered during programming or coding, it was not possible to activate 
BMW Night Vision. This was displayed after programming/coding by a Check Control 
message in the instrument panel. 

Introduction of SWT Software Activation 

In March 2007 the activation of single software components was commenced at BMW. 
This laid the foundation stone for the business model "software as a product". 

It allowed functions already installed in the vehicle to be made usable for the customer 
and to activate them by means of an activation code. 

This in turn created the opportunity to invoice software licenses individually with the sup¬ 
plier and only after its activation. In addition, copy protection was hugely improved by acti¬ 
vation code activation, an asynchronous encryption method. 

Activation of the Voice Recognition System in the CCC: 

An activation code for the voice recognition system (SA 620) in connection with CCC (SA 
609) became necessary when programming a vehicle from Progman V25.0, as the voice 
recognition system could no longer be used without this. 

This applied for the retrofit of software for the voice recognition system as well as for 
replacement of the CCC. 

Savings in license costs was the background, as invoicing could now be carried out with 
the software manufacturer separately for each vehicle instead of a general license. 

When programming of the CCC (SA 609) was carried out on vehicles up to March 2007 
fitted with the voice recognition system (SA 620) or voice recognition system preparation 
(SA 6UB), the BMW Programming system requested an activation code. 

This activation code was located on a separate DVD or in the ASAP portal (only available 
in the ASAP portal after prior completion of an order). 

On vehicles with a production date from March 2007 (l-level 07-03-5XX or higher) the 
activation code was contained in the CCC. 

In the event of a hardware replacement for the CCC however, it is not possible to import 
the code from the SWT disc. The data does not exist on the CD. 

The necessary code has to be ordered together with the replacement module via EPC 
and will be delivered via the ASAP portal (see page 126). 

Note: Vehicles produced from 3/2007 require an activation 
code acquired from the ASAP portal. 



35 

F01 System Functions 




SWEEPING Technologies in the F01/F02 

From the F01/F02 the activation of software applications and function has been increas¬ 
ingly expanded. 

It is now possible to activate the following applications or software functions via FSC: 

• Software for voice recognition (SA 620) 

• Navigation system application software (SA 609) 

• Navigation system map data (activation code required from the second half of 2009) 

The activation code for the software applications and software functions named above is 
loaded over the BMW programming system into the vehicle in nearly all cases. The CD is 
still necessary for activation of the camera for the night vision camera following a replace¬ 
ment. 


£ 


Update of map data for the navigation system and input of the activation code 

Since 09/2008 with introduction of the Car Information Computer, the navigation system 
map data is stored on a hard disk in the CIC. 

Input of the map data is currently possible from the DVD drive and in later production 
vehicles over the programming system. 

The activation code can also be entered over the programming system or via the con¬ 
troller of the Drive system. An input aid (speller) is available in the Drive display for this 
purpose. 

This activation code along with the current navigation software (Navigation DVD) is hand¬ 
ed to the customer when the customer purchases the map update. 

When the order is placed for the activation code, the parts technician states the vehicle 
identification number of the vehicle for which the navigation map is to be updated. 

A special activation code is consequently created in the BMW AG headquarters, in which 
the vehicle identification number becomes an element of the FSC. 

This means the issued FSC and navigation DVD can only be used for the vehicle 
requested. 



Navigation system map data 


36 

F01 System Functions 















The initial filling of the hard disk integrated in the CIC with map data can, if this manufac¬ 
turer has not already filled it, only be carried out over the BMW programming system. 

For the update of map data, only the cash sale variant with activation code input via the 
speller is subseguently available. 

Delivery Process of the Activation Codes Over ASAP 

The majority of software functions and applications are not activated by customers, rather 
by BMW Service employees over the BMW programming system. 

A special process was created for BMW employees to reguest the activation code from 
the BMW AG headguarters, to download it to the workshop PC and then to import it into 
the corresponding vehicle over the BMW programming system. 

The part number for the activation code is available after input of the vehicle identification 
number in the EPC (Electronic Parts Catalog). 

Upon reguest from the BMW Service employee, the parts technician orders the activation 
code over the appropriate Dealer Management System. 

The activation code is now created in the BMW AG headquarters. It is normally available 
to the Service employee in the ASAP portal within a very short time. 

Note: The delivery time for the activation code may be delayed for up to one 

workday due to country-specific circumstances and the world-wide time 
difference. 

The activation code is now ready for download as a ZIP folder 
(content = 3 files) in the ASAP portal and is shown after input 
of the corresponding vehicle identification number. 

This ZIP folder must be saved in a temporary directory for subsequent extraction of the 
contents. 

These "unzipped" contents are now to be saved in on a CD/DVD or via the use of a USB 
stick as long as it has been formatted as a removable disc. 

Note: No external USB hard drives will be supported. 

Not all USB devices are compatible with the system. 

Note: Cancellation of the activation code is only possible before the start of 
the download. Therefore, a check should be made before the download 
of whether the vehicle identification number of the customer's vehicle is 
correct. The activation code is invoiced when the download starts even 
though it has not been installed in the customer's vehicle. 

Cancellation after the download is therefore no longer possible. 


37 

F01 System Functions 



Input of the Activation Code into the BMW Programming System 

The medium containing the three unzipped files is inserted into the ISSS so that the 
BMW programming system can access these FSC data. 

After the import button has been pressed, follow the on screen instructions to complete 
the import process. 

ISSS 


Import of the activation code into the 
BMW programming system 



Planned Expansion Stages 

In the expansion stage of the BMW programming system planned for the future, the data 
import of the activation code is to happen automatically. 

This would mean that after the reguest by the parts technician, the activation code, would 
be directly available to the BMW programming system after a short waiting time. 

This process, called "SWT-Online", plays an important role particularly for repairs. 
Because after replacement of a Car Information Computer, for instance, work can be car¬ 
ried out on a repair without an activation code having to be ordered. It is made directly 
available to the BMW programming system by "SWT-Online". 

However, it is still necessary to place an order over the parts technician and the Dealer 
Management System for software that has to be paid for, such as the voice input system. 

"SWT-Online" or the ASAP portal can be selected afterwards as the delivery channel. 

Cancellation of the activation code is however only possible over the ASAP portal. 

The channel over the ASAP portal, with download onto the workshop PC and subse¬ 
quent import into the BMW programming system, should therefore continue to be used 
as the backup-solution. 

Should problems occur during the download or data import into the vehicle, technical 
support of the respective market should be contacted or a PuMA instance created. 


38 

F01 System Functions 












Vehicle Security 


History and Fundamentals 

Vehicle security protects the vehicle electrical and bus systems against unauthorized 
manipulative external access. 

The topic of vehicle security experienced its beginnings with the introduction of the E28. 

On this 5 Series, an instrument panel with encoding connector (coding plug) was 
installed from 1980. 

When a new instrument panel was installed, the encoding connector of the old one had 
to be used. If this was not done a manipulation dot lit up to indicate that the kilometer 
reading had been manipulated. 

The kilometer reading was only reset to the correct reading with the old encoding con¬ 
nector. The manipulation dot was no longer displayed. 

A new era in manipulation protection begins with introduction of the master security 
module (MSM) as a module in the central gateway module in the F01/F02 and the client 
security module (CSM) in some selected control units. 

The basis for the reguirement for the vehicle security system is formed by the growing 
amount of electronics and the interlinked networking installed in the vehicle. 

Mention must also be made of the increase in driver-based services. 

Threat Potential 

As electronics increase in vehicles, the possibilities 
also increase of disrupting and infiltrating this sensi¬ 
tive system through manipulation, imitation of hard¬ 
ware and software, and tuning measures (blackbox 
tuning). 

Data storage in the vehicle (e.g. Contacts menu) 
also means that adequate data protection must 
be provided. 



39 

F01 System Functions 






Vehicle Security Measures 

The measures below are carried out to be able to ensure 
vehicle security in the F01/F02: 

• Periodic check of software signatures (signature = digital, 
electronic signature used for checking the complete¬ 
ness, genuineness and intactness of data) 

• Individual stamping of control units on the vehicle in 
which they have been installed 

• Cryptographic protection of the teleservice access 

• Encryption of personal data 

• Periodic checking of memory ranges. 

Benefits for Customers 

The vehicle security system actively protects the personal data of the customer and 
actively guards the vehicle electrical and bus systems against attempted manipulation 
from outside. 



Benefits of the Vehicle Security System for the BMW Group and the BMW 
Brand 

For the BMW Group, the vehicle security system contributes towards unjustified liability 
and to warranty costs not being accrued for manipulation. 

Furthermore, vehicle security has the purpose of preventing vehicles damaged by manip¬ 
ulation giving a bad public image to the BMW brand and therefore damage to our reputa¬ 
tion. 

Master security module in the ZGM of the F01/F02 


Q 

GQ 

O 



40 

F01 System Functions 









































Secondly, the vehicle security system comprises the client security modules located in 
the control units below that are monitored by the master security module: 

• CIC - Car Information Computer 

• KOMBI - Instrument Cluster 

• HUD - Head-up Display 

• CON - Controller 

Overview of the MSM and the individual client security modules 



41 

F01 System Functions 









































































































Vehicle Security Operating Principle 

The master security module periodically transmits queries to the individual client security 
modules. 

Any faults and discrepancies are documented and notified to the BMW AG headquarters 
during transmission of the FASTA data via Jetstream during a service visit. 

It is not possible for Service Department employees to use BMW diagnosis systems for 
accessing the information regarding manipulation stored in the control unit. 

Possible faults and discrepancies in the vehicle security system are: 

• A control unit was replaced without authority. 

• A control unit was manipulated through a change of software or data status. 

• Communication to the MSM was interrupted or manipulated fora control unit 
with a CSM. 

Preservation of Function in the Vehicle Security System 

Any manipulation found in the vehicle security system must not have a negative impact of 
functions relevant for security within the vehicle electrical and bus systems. 



Updates 


JETstream 


FASTA 



Data transmission via JETstream 


42 

F01 System Functions 









