Table of Contents 


M Performance Controls 

Subject Page 

E60 M5 Performance Controls .3 

Components.3 

Instrument Cluster .3 

MDrive Menu.4 

SMG Drivelogic.5 

EDC Electronic Damping .5 

DSC .6 

DSC - M Dynamic Mode (MDM) .6 

Power - M Engine Dynamic Control.7 

Program Selection .7 

Active Seat Backrest .7 

Head-Up Display (HUD) .8 

Enabling M-View.9 

Setting Brightness.9 

Reset to Default .9 

Oil Level Indicator.10 

E9x M3 Performance Controls .11 

The MDrive .11 

M Engine Dynamics Control (Power) .12 

DSC .12 

EDC-K .12 

Servotronic .14 

"Key-Dependent Settings" Menu.14 

Drivelogic Program Selection.14 


Initial Print Date: 05/09 


Revision Date: 



























2 

M Performance Controls 

M Performance Controls 

Model: All M models 

Production: From Start of Production 

BBIICTIMIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Recognize the differences in Driver Instrumentation when compared to the base 
5 Series production vehicle. 

• Recognize and navigate through the MDrive settings. 

• Know how to perform an oil level check and what types of 
measurement or available. 

• Recognize the differences in Driver Instrumentation of the M3 when compared 
to the M5/M6. 



E60 M5 Performance Controls 


Compared to the 545i, the E60 M5 provides the driver with addi¬ 
tional functions relating to the displays, indicators and controls as 
well as for setting the individual systems. 

The M5 instrument cluster is based on the instrument cluster of 
the E60 545i. There are changes to the visual appearance and 
functions. 

The Head-Up Display (HUD) has been adopted from the E60 as 
the additional functions relate to the HUD software. 

The "M-Drive" menu item in the central information display (CID) 
has been created by corresponding software adaptations. 

The M-Drive settings are stored key-specific in the engine man¬ 
agement and are called up accordingly. The engine management 
can store up to 10 different settings in the memory. 



E60 M5 driver information and controls 


Components 

Instrument Cluster 

The instrument cluster in the M5 is based on that of the E60 
Series. Corresponding adaptations have been implemented in 
the visual appearance and scope of functions for use in the M5. 

The additional functions are: 

• Oil level indication in the on-board computer 

• Lighting at terminal 15 ON 

• Oil temperature gauge in rev counter 

• SMG display with Drivelogic display 

The M5 instrument cluster additionally features the following 
indicator lamps: 

• MDM for DSC dynamic mode 

• M-Drive configuration is activated 

• Light ON 



M Performance Controls 

3 






4 

M Performance Controls 


MDrive Menu 

There is a menu in the iDrive system that allows the driver (key 
dependent) to customize certain system settings in the vehicle 
when the entering the Sport Mode via the M button on the steer¬ 
ing wheel (presetting the characteristics). 

This feature is referred to as MDrive. 

To access the MDrive menu use the following path in the iDrive 
system: 

Main Menu => i Menu => Vehicle Settings => MDrive Menu 
The following options can be preset in the menu: 

• SMG Drivelogic 

• EDC 

• DSC 

• Power 

• Active Backrest 

• Head-Up Display 

• Reset to Default 


< v£a MDrive ► t> 

V 

SMG Drivelogic 

S 4 

EDC 

Sport 

DSC 

M Dynamic Mode 

POWER 

P 500 Sport 

Active seat back 

Sport 

Head-Up Display 

M View 

Reset to default 



Activating Settings 

Press the MDrive button on the steering wheel. 

The indicator lamp in the instrument cluster lights up. The settings 
made on the Control Display for the functions contained in MDrive 
are active. 

Deactivating Settings 

Pressing the MDrive button on the steering wheel a second time 
deactivates MDrive. 

Even with MDrive activated, you can change individual settings 
outside MDrive, e.g. with the buttons in the center console. To 
reactivate all settings made for MDrive on the Control Display press 
the button twice. 



Note: If the indicator lamp flashes after pressing the button, 
then MDrive was unable to react, as the ABS Anti¬ 
lock Brake System or DSC Dynamic Stability Control 
is currently controlling the vehicle stability. Press 
the button again when the indicator lamp no longer 
flashes. 



SMG Drivelogic 

You can pre-select or activate your preferred driving program with 
the MDrive button on the steering wheel for the SMG gearbox. 

Selecting "SMG Drivelogic" and press the controller (the first set¬ 
ting is selected). 

Turning the controller will set Drive mode, Seguential mode, or 
"Unchanged". 

“D” Drive Mode signifies the gearbox will go to the automatic 
mode. 

“S” Seguential Mode signifies the gearbox will go to the manual 
mode. 

“Unchanged” signifies the gearbox retain whatever the current 
settings are when the MDrive button on the 
steering wheel is selected. 

After selecting the Drive mode, the Program mode can be 
pre-selected. 

Here, the driver can choose from program numbers 
(balanced/dynamic) to 6 (sporty/purist). 


EDC Electronic Damping 

You can pre-select or activate your preferred driving program with 
the MDrive button on the steering wheel for the SMG gearbox. 

You can choose from three programs: 


“Comfort” Program - Select the "Comfort" program if you 

want comfort-oriented coordination of 
shock absorbers and steering. 

“Normal” Program - The "Normal" program offers a bal¬ 
anced mixture of the comfort and the 
sports program. 


“Sport” Program - Select the "Sport" program if you want 

a consistently sporty coordination of 
shock absorbers and steering. 


Note: The sporty/purist driving program 6 is only available 
with the DSC Dynamic Stability Control deactivated. 
When DSC is activated, the system switches from 
driving program 6 to 5. 


M Performance Controls 

5 



6 

M Performance Controls 


DSC 

The preselection of the DSC setting for the M Drive program offers 
4 options: 

“Unchanged” signifies the gearbox retain whatever the current 
settings are when the MDrive button on the 
steering wheel is selected. 

“Off” signifies that the DSC system will be entirely disabled. 

“On” signifies that the DSC system will be on. 

“M Dynamic Mode” signifies that the DSC system’s MDM 

program will be activated. 


DSC - M Dynamic Mode (MDM) 

The M Dynamic Mode is a mode of the Dynamic Stability Control 
(DSC). It enables driving with greater longitudinal and lateral accel¬ 
eration on dry road surfaces, however with limited vehicle stability. 
The system does not provide stabilizing intervention by reducing 
the engine output and braking at the wheels until the absolute driv¬ 
ing limit is reached. Steering corrections by the driver may also be 
reguired in this driving state. 

The M Dynamic Mode is deactivated each time the engine is 
started. 


MDM indicator lamp The indicator lamp goes out shortly after the 
engine is started. The indicator lamp stays lit: M Dynamic Mode is 
activated. The indicator lamp lights up continuously and the DSC 
indicator lamp flashes: the M Dynamic Mode is active and controls 
the drive and braking forces. 

Note: To Deactivate MDM again, press the button on the 
steering wheel again; the MDM indicator lamp goes 
out. 


WARNING!!! 


With the M Dynamic Mode activated, stabilizing interven¬ 
tions are only carried out to a reduced degree. To maintain 
vehicle stability, drive with DSC activated and the M 
Dynamic Mode deactivated whenever possible. 



Power - M Engine Dynamic Control 

With M Engine Dynamic Control you can influence how sporty the 
reaction of your vehicle to accelerator pedal movements is to be. 
Three programs are available for engine control. 


“P 400” Program - In the "P 400" program the engine reacts 

gently to the movement of the accelerator 
pedal. This is ideal for city driving or driving 
on snow. In the process, the fuel con¬ 
sumption is minimal as the engine output 
is reduced. 

“P 500” Program - The "P 500" program provides maximum 

performance and more spontaneous reac¬ 
tion of the engine to accelerator pedal 
movements. 

“P 500 Sport” Program - In the "P 500 Sport" program the 

engine reacts especially sporty and 
spontaneously with maximum per¬ 
formance reaction to accelerator 
pedal movements. 


Program Selection 

Each time the engine is started, the "P 400" program is activated. 

Press the POWER button to activate the "P 500" program. 
Pressing the POWER button repeatedly switches between 
the programs "P 400" and "P 500". 


Note: You can only activate the “P 500 Sport” program with 
MDrive. For the programs “P 500” and “P 500 Sport” 
the LED in the POWER button lights up. 

Active Seat Backrest 

First set a comfortable backrest width. Based on the backrest width 
set, the lateral support is automatically adapted to the current driv¬ 
ing situation. 

The adaptation of the backrest width and the speed of the adjust¬ 
ment vary depending on the program. You can select from among 
three programs from comfort to sport. The "Sport" program pro¬ 
vides for increased lateral support on both sides when driving 
through a quick succession of alternating curves. 

Three programs are available under active seat backrest 
control are: 

“Comfort” program 

“Normal” program 

“Sport” program 


M Performance Controls 

7 



8 

M Performance Controls 


Head-Up Display (HUD) 

The "M-view" has been added to the Head-Up Display. This 
expansion feature, however, is implemented only in the software of 
the HUD control unit. 


The M-view can be configured in the "Display Settings" menu in 
the i-Drive or with the M-Drive and activated via the M-Drive 
Manager. 


The Head-Up Display in the M-view can show the following infor¬ 
mation: 


• All Warnings 

• Engine Speed with shift lights in the 
speed indicator (not the absolute value) 

• Road Speed 

• Engaged Gear. 



J 


< 

1 FRANKFURTER 

1 RING 

D500m 

16G 

^^ 

1 km/h \ 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

Navigation Instructions 

2 

Cruise Control Status 

3 

Speed 


Note: The visibility of the displays in the Head-Up Display 
is influenced by: 

• Sunglasses with certain polarization 
filters 

• Certain seating positions 

• Objects on the cover of the Head-Up Display 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Current Engine Speed Highlighted 

4 

Speed 

2 

Advance Warning Field 

5 

Gear Display 

3 

Red Warning Field 




• Wet road surface and unfavorable lighting 
conditions 


















Enabling M-View 

To select M-View you have to utilize the display settings Menu of 
the iDrive system. 

With the engine running or the ignition switched on: 

Press the button to activate or deactivate the Head-Up Display. 

1 .Press the button (This opens the start menu). 

2. Press the controller (Opens the i-Menu). 

3.Select "Display settings" and press the controller. 

4.Select "Head-Up Display" and press the controller. 

5.Select desired information of Head-Up Display. 

6. Press the controller. 


Head-Up Display settings ► 

Uy Speed 
Zy Navigation 
U/ Cruise control 


When M View is selected, not all information usually selectable for 
the HUD are not available. Information unavailable in the M view 
appears on the Control Display in gray and cannot be selected. 

The settings are stored for the remote key currently in use. 

Note: The M view for the Head-Up Display can also be pro¬ 
grammed into the MDrive button on the steering 
wheel. 

Setting Brightness 

The brightness of the display is automatically adapted to the ambi¬ 
ent lighting conditions. However, you can change the base setting. 
With the low beams switched on, the brightness can also be 
adjusted with the knurled wheel of the instrument lighting. 

To adjust brightness: 

1 .Open the start menu. 

2. Press the controller to open the menu. 

3.Select "Display settings" and press the controller. 

4.Select "Brightness" and press the controller. 

5. Move the controller to the left to select "Head-Up Display". 

6. Turn the controller until the desired setting is selected. 

The setting is stored for the remote control currently in use. 

Reset to Default 

This option allows all the setting in MDrive to revert to factory or 
default settings. 


M Performance Controls 

9 




10 

M Performance Controls 


Oil Level Indicator 

The M5 is equipped with an electronic oil level indicator. The dis¬ 
play is selected with the BC control. 

The oil level is indicated in the information field of the on-board 
computer (BC) in the instrument cluster. 

The sensor is the quality and condition sensor (QLT) from the E65. 
The entire measurement logic is resident in the engine manage¬ 
ment (MS_S65) control unit. 

The long-term value last stored is shown after starting the engine. 

Basically there are two different measuring methods: 

• Long-term Measurement 

• Quick Measurement 

Note: For more information regarding the oil level indicator 
refer to the M Engine Management section of this 
training material. 



E9x M3 Performance Controls 


The MDrive 

The MDrive menu known from the E6x M5/M6 is also available 
in the E9x M3 if equipped with the navigation system. 

Starting from the Drive main menu, the MDrive menu can be 
called up by pressing on the Drive controller and selecting 
M settings. 

The overall setting is called up/activated by pressing on the M 
button on the steering wheel. Pressing the M button again or 
restarting the vehicle deactivates the settings. The settings can, 
of course, be retrieved again using the M button. 

The following is a list of menu items with selection options that 
are currently available in the MDrive menu: 

• M Engine Dynamics Control (Power) 

- "Unchanged" 

- "Normal" 

- "Sport" 

- "Sport Plus" 


• DSC 

- "Unchanged" 
-"OFF" 

- "ON" 

- "M Dynamic mode" 


• EDC-K (only if fitted) 

- "Unchanged" 

- "Comfort" 

- "Normal" 

- "Sport" 

By selecting "Unchanged", when the M button is pressed (i.e. the 
settings in the MDrive menu are called up), the current settings of 
this system are retained. 

Example: 

The driver has deactivated the Dynamic Stability Control function 
using the DSC button. 

- MDrive setting: M Engine dynamics control "Sport Plus"; 
DSC "Unchanged"; Servotronic "Sport". 

The driver presses the M button on the steering wheel to call up 
the M settings. 

- Only the "Sport Plus" and Servotronic "Sport" settings for M 
engine dynamics control are activated. DSC remains deacti¬ 
vated. 


• Servotronic 

- "Normal" 

- "Sport" 


M Performance Controls 

11 




12 

M Performance Controls 


M Engine Dynamics Control (Power) 

Apart from "Unchanged", three engine control programs are 
available: 

"Normal", "Sport" and "Sport Plus". 

The options determine how spontaneously the engine responds to 
actuation of the accelerator pedal. The maximum engine power is 
not changed. 

Using the power button in the center console, the driver can only 
choose between; "Normal" and "Sport". 

"Sport Plus" is only available in the MDrive menu. 



E9x M3 with manual gearbox shown 


DSC 

Apart from the "Unchanged" setting, in the DSC submenu, the 
options "OFF", "ON" and "M Dynamic mode" can be selected. 

If "M Dynamic Mode" is selected, the Dynamic Stability Control 
(DSC) permits higher slip values at the wheels. The system does 
not activate the stabilizing function until very close to the handling 
limit range, when it influences engine output and/or actively 
engages the brakes. 

In "OFF" mode, an experienced sports car driver can also com¬ 
pletely deactivate the DSC function. 

Using the DSC button in the center console, the driver can switch 
between "OFF" and "ON" or if "M Dynamic Mode" is active, 
between "M Dynamic Mode" and "OFF". 

"M Dynamic Mode" is only available in the MDrive menu. 


EDC-K 

If continuous Electronic Damper Control is fitted together with 
MDrive, in addition to "Unchanged", three EDC programs can be 
selected in the MDrive menu: 

"Comfort", "Normal" and "Sport". 

The driver can use the EDC button in the center console to switch 
sequentially between the three programs. 

Note: For further information regarding EDC-K and DSC 
refer to the Chassis and Suspension section of this 
training material. 



M Drive Bus Diagram 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Servotronic valve 

2 

DME MSS60 

3 

Junction Box distribution box 

4 

Electronic Damping Control controller 

5 

Drive controller 

6 

POWER button 

7 

EDC button 

8 

DSC button 

9 

Steering column switch cluster 

10 

Multi audio system controller/Car 
Communication Computer 

11 

Central Information Display 

12 

Instrument cluster 

13 

Footwell module 

14 

Dynamic Stability Control 


M Performance Controls 

13 








































































































14 

M Performance Controls 


Servotronic 

The settings that can be selected for the Servotronic steering 
function are "Normal" and "Sport". Depending on the selection, the 
appropriate characteristic curve for power assisted steering is 
active. 

This selection option is only available in the MDrive menu. Without 
MDrive, the customer has no option, and a fixed programmed 
speed dependent characteristic curve is used. 

"Key-Dependent Settings" Menu 

Under "M settings", the "Key-dependent settings" menu is also 
available as well as the MDrive menu. 

This allows key-specific settings for certain MDrive menu items. 

M engine dynamics control and EDC settings are currently possi¬ 
ble, which are assigned to the specific key used during the config¬ 
uration (configuration => ZV closing action => memorizing). 

Under the M engine dynamics control menu item, "Normal" or 
"Sport" can be selected. 

In the EDC menu item, the options "Comfort", "Normal" or "Sport" 
can be selected. 

Drivelogic Program Selection 

The Drivelogic controls and indicators in the E9x M3 with the M 
DCT transmission option are similar to the SMG II and SMG III vehi¬ 
cles. 

The Drivelogic program switch gives you the option of choosing 
between six driving programs in seguential mode and five driving 
programs in drive mode. 

The selected driving program is displayed as a bar chart in the 
instrument cluster. 


In seguential mode the switching speed is affected which has a 
direct effect on the shifting firmness. 


E9x M3 M-DCT transmission electronic shifter (M GWS) 

The sixth shift program can only be selected when the DSC 
function is de-activated. 

In drive mode the shift points and the shifting speed are affected, 
as a higher shift program means a higher gear changeover speed 
and thus a higher shifting speed. 

In addition to the Drivelogic program selection, the shift time is also 
dependent on the position of the accelerator pedal and how guickly 
it is operated. 

Note: For further information regarding the M-DCT trans¬ 
mission refer to the Drivetrain section of this training 
material. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Selector lever 

2 

Button to increase the 
Drivelogic program 

3 

Drivelogic program 
selector button 

4 

Button to reduce the 
Drivelogic program 











