Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

M Engines - S62B50 .2 

Objectives of The Module.2 

Purpose of The System.3 

Technical Data.4 

Components 

Engine Block.5 

Crankshaft and Bearings .5 

Connecting Rods and Bearings .6 

Pistons and Rings .7 

Oil System.8 

Crankcase Ventilation.10 

Cooling .10 

Cylinder Heads .11 

Valve Train.12 

Camshafts.12 

VANOS .15 

Intake Air System.22 

Fuel Supply.23 

Clutch.24 

Exhaust System.25 


Review Questions 


26 























M ENGINES 

Model: E39 M5, E52 Z8 
Engine: S62B50 

Production Date: 2000 MY (Starting with M5) to Present 

Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Identify camshaft markings and correct “timing”. 

• Explain the VANOS operation. 

• Identify piston markings for correct installation. 

• Explain the VANOS oil flow circuit. 

• Understand the VANOS oil pump operation. 

• Identify the intake air system components. 

• List the function of the Scavenge Oil Pumps and how they affect oil pan removal. 

• Identify the special tools used to perform the VANOS function test. 

• Describe where the fuel pressure is tested on the E39 M5 and what the nominal pres¬ 
sure is. 

• List what the flywheel mounted incremental wheel is monitored for. 


2 

M Engines - S62B50 




S62B50 Engine 

Purpose of The System 

The S62B50 engine is an eight cylinder “90° V arrangement” powerplant. This 4941 ccm 
displacement engine is used worldwide. The engine designation is: 

S 62 B 50 
/ \ 

Sport Engine Engine Designation Gasoline Powered Displacement in Liters 


The S62 engine design provides: 


1 . 

Everyday Driveability 

5. 

Economic Operation 

m 

Reduction in Weight of Engine Components 

6. 

Increased Output (to previous M5) 

a 

Enviromental Compatability 

7. 

High Performance 

a 

Greater Speed Range 

8. 

EDR (Electronic Throttle) 




The S62B50 is a 4-valve per cylinder dual VANOS naturally aspirated engine with high 
torque and high-rev concepts. High torque is developed by a large volume engine at low 
engine rpm and a long total gear ratio. High-rev is achieved with a small displacement 
“lightweight” (internal components) engine and short total gear ratio. This powertrain pro¬ 
vides the best of both worlds by using a 5 Liter 32 valve V8 configuration coupled to a 6 
speed manual transmission. 



3 

M Engines - S62B50 












Technical Data 


Engine Management 

MS S52 

Effective Displacement (CCM) Design / Valve Per Cylinder 

4941 90° V8 / 4 

Bore / Stroke (mm) 

94/89 

Maximum Engine RPM 

7000 

Power Output (hp) 

394 hp 

Weight-to-Power Ratio (kg per hp) 

4.23 / 4.5 

US Torque (Nm per rpm) 

500 @ 3800 

Compression Ratio 

11.0 : 1 

Fuel 

Premium Unleaded 

Valve Diameter 

Intake / Exhaust (mm) 

35 / 30.5 

Stem - Intake / Exhaust (mm) 

6.0 / 6.0 

Valve Lift 

Intake / Exhaust (mm) 

10.3/10.2 

Valve Clearance 

Automatic Hydraulic Compensation 

Camshaft Spread Angle 

Intake (degrees) 

74 - 134 

Exhaust (degrees) 

76 - 136 

US Emission Compliance 

TLEV 


HP 

S62 power £ 

360 
340 
320 
300 
280 
260 
240 
220 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 

800 1600 2400 3200 4000 4800 5600 6400 7200 

RPM 


NM 
500 

S62 torque 480 

460 
440 
420 
400 
380 
360 

800 1600 2400 3200 4000 4800 5600 6400 7200 

RPM 

4 

M Engines - S62B50 




























System Components 
Engine Block 


Cylinder Bank Numbering 
From Engine Front 


The S62 engine block is manufactured from Alusil as 
aluminum alloy pressure die-casting. The cylinder walls 
are finished by an etching process only. 

The water cooling passageways of the block incorpo¬ 
rate a connection in the “V” of the block for an oil/water 
heat exchanger. 

The bore of the block is 94 mm. This along with a 
stroke of 89 mm gives the S62 engine a displacement 
of 5 liters. There is 3 mm between the cylinder bores 
of the engine. The “bare” block weighs approximately 
71 lbs. (32 kg.) 



Crankshaft and Bearings: The crankshaft is 
forged steel with five main bearing journals (70 
mm diameter) and the thrust bearing on number 
five journal. 

The S62 bearings are identified by the “triple 
classification” system. The bearing shell thick¬ 
ness is marked by “notches” in the crankcase 
and paint markings on the counterweights of 
the crankshaft (refer to the Repair Instructions 
for details). 

Bearing Clearance: 

1. Main 0.025 - 0.050 mm 

2. Thrust (end play) 0.085 - 0.257 mm 



The main bearing caps are secured by four 
bolts each. The outer bolts are “splayed” 
(angled) out to the block adding greater 
strength and support. 



The adjustable hex head must be threaded in 
for installation and then “preloaded” to the block 
(refer to the Repair Instructions for details). 


5 

M Engines - S62B50 









The thrust bearing (#5) is constructed of two 
radial shells and four shims (example shown on 
the right). 

The shim tab must align with the notch in the 
bearing cap. 

Refer to the Repair Instructions for details on 
installing the shims in the engine block. 

The torsional vibration damper is specifically 
designed for the higher engine rpm. 

The damper is secured by 4 “stretch” bolts (#2 
in the diagram, one time use only) which must 
be angle torqued (refer to Repair Instructions 
and Technical Data). 

Note the installation location for the crankshaft 
postion locating special tool (arrow). 



Connecting Rods and Bearings: The S62 

uses reinforced forged steel “cracked” connect¬ 
ing rods with a 53 mm journal diameter. 

The “cracked” connecting rod refers to the cap 
which is split off leaving rough surfaces on both 
the cap and the rod. 



Centering of the cap on the rod is carried out through 
the structure of the split which eliminates the alignment 
sleeves. Pairing codes are stamped into the rod to 
ensure proper installation of the cap. 

The S62 connecting rods are weight-optimized (+/- 4 
grams). Only one set of connecting rods (the same 
weight class) is available to maintain balance. 

The connecting rod bolts are “stretch” type (one time 
use only) which must be angle torqued (refer to Repair 
Instuctions and Technical Data). 



11410000.bmp 


6 

M Engines - S62B50 






A Special Tool (ring compressor) is required to install 
the pistons. 


The pistons are cooled by oil spray nozzles that are 
bolted into the crankcase. 

The nozzles are “tapped” into the main oil gallery and 
delivers a constant oil spray to the underside of the pis¬ 
tons. 


Notes: 


















Engine Oil System 


The oil supply system of the S62B50 engine is specifically designed for the M5 and Z8. Due 
to the sport nature and the ability for high speed cornering (transverse acceleration) of up 
to 1.2g, the engine oil could be forced (and trapped) into the outer edge of the cylinder head 
and the rear area of the oil sump. 


The main oil pump function is to supply the 
engine with the required volume of oil for all of 
the lubrication needs. 

To prevent oil starvation from occurring during 
these driving situations, two additional scav¬ 
enging oil pumps are installed within the main oil 
pump housing (integral unit). 

The two additional pumps only supply the oil 
sump with the scavenged oil. 

Each additional oil pump incorporates a sole¬ 
noid changeover valve that is connected to two 
scavenging tubes routed to the rear section of 
the oil pan and the outer edge of the cylinder 
head. 

The scavenging tubes in the oil pan crossover 
so that the right side pump draws from the rear 
left side of the pan and the left pump from the 
right side of the pan. 

The solenoid changeover valves must be 
removed before attempting to remove the oil 
pan. The valves insert directly into the scavenge 
pump housing through the oil pan. 

The upper oil pan for the Z8 is been modified 

due to the engine and crossmember “clear¬ 
ance” relationship. 

The upper oil pan is contoured around the oil 
pump drive at the front of the engine (arrow). 



8 

M Engines - S62B50 




Scavenge Oil Pump(s) Operation: While dri¬ 
ving straight ahead, the two oil pumps draw oil 
from the rear of the oil pan to supply the main oil 
pump pick up. 

The solenoids are de-activated in this situation. 



When cornering at forces > 0.9g, one solenoid 
will be activated by the ECM to draw oil from the 
cylinder head while the second solenoid will 
continue to draw oil from the rear of the pan. 

The ECM receives the signal from the DSC 
Control Module (based on cornering G-force) 
over the CAN Bus line. 



Oil Cooling: The S62 engine is equipped with 
an oil-to-coolant heat exchanger. It is mounted 
in the “V” of the block and serves to heat the oil 
during engine warm up and cool the oil during 
normal driving. Oil and coolant passageways 
are cast into the block. Formed “O” rings are 
used to seal the the heat exchanger. The 
coolant return is through external pipes back to 
the thermostat housing. 



A differential pressure control valve is integrated 
into the heat exchanger on the oil side. The 
valve opens an oil bypass in the event that the 
exchanger should become clogged or at very 
low start temperatures. This ensures that the 
engine will receive sufficient lubrication under all 
driving conditions. 



9 

M Engines - S62B50 


Crankcase Ventilation 


The crankcase blow-by vapors are “purged” by 
intake manifold vacuum. The blow-by vapors 
flow into the intake through two cyclone sepa¬ 
rators. 

The separators are mounted at the left and right 
sides of the intake manifold. The oil conden¬ 
sates are separated and flow directly back to 
the oil sump through feed/return hoses into the 
front timing case covers. 

The crankcase ventilation system is completely 
sealed. Care must be taken when reinstalling 
the cyclone separators in the intake manifold to 
ensure that the radial seal is fully seated. 

If oil collects in the intake manifold, drainage is 
provided from two points at the back of the 
intake manifold lower plenum. 

The drainage points “tee” into an integral return 
passage cast in the intake manifold base as 
shown. An outlet fitting at the front of the mani¬ 
fold connects to a drain hose that allows the oil 
to drain back to the crankcase. 



Engine Cooling 


The S62 coolant flows from the water pump into the block. From here it passes through the 
heat exchanger and cylinder heads. The coolant cross flows through the cylinder heads. 

The coolant returns from the heat exchanger and two return 
pipes from the cylinder heads back into the thermostat hous¬ 
ing. Vehicle heating is also taken from the coolant return pipes 
in the “V” of the block and returns back into the water pump 
housing. 

The S62 engine uses a conventionally heated thermostat (2) 
that opens at 79 ° C and is mounted on top of the waterpump 
housing. 



10 

M Engines - S62B50 



Cylinder Heads 


The S62 features aluminum cross- 
flow cylinder heads designed as 
single components that house the 
camshafts and valve train. 

The four valve (per-cylinder) head 
is a single piece construction. 

The camshaft bearing journal caps 
are machined with the cylinder 
head and are marked intake/ 
exhaust and numbered for loca¬ 
tion. 



HVA (hydraulic compensators) are used to actu¬ 
ate the valves. Valve adjustment is not required. 

The cylinder head uses a cross flow coolant 
design. The coolant enters from the block on the 
exhaust side and exits through three openings 
between the cylinders on the intake side. 

The coolant returns through an external water 
manifold (1) on each cylinder head to the ther¬ 
mostat housing. 



The spark plugs are centrally located in the com¬ 
bustion area for the most effective power and 
reduced emission outputs. 

Refer to the Repair Instructions using the Special 
Tools for cylinder head pressure testing. 

The cylinder head gasket is a steel version. 


Note: Cylinder head machining is not permitted. 



11 

M Engines - S62B50 








Valve Train 

Camshaft Primary Drive: Primary drive is pro¬ 
vided by a double-roller chain from the crank¬ 
shaft to the intake camshafts on both banks. 

The chain is guided by a centrally positioned V- 
shape deflection rail. Additionally, a straight rail 
is used on cylinder bank 5-8 and a curved 
chain tensioner rail with a hydraulic “self adjust¬ 
ing” tensioner on cylinder bank 1-4. 


Camshaft Secondary Drive: Secondary drive 
is from the intake camshaft to the exhaust cam¬ 
shaft by a single roller chain (arrow). The chain 
is tensioned by a hydro-mechanical “self ad¬ 
justing” tensioner (between the sprockets). 

The oil supply for the chain tensioner also sup¬ 
plies the VANOS hydraulic units through a pres¬ 
sure control valve. 


Camshafts: The four S62 cast iron overhead 
camshafts are hollow and are strengthened by 
heat treating the journals and cam lobes. 

Each camshaft is supported by five bearings 
that are marked intake/exhaust and numbered 
for location. 

The camshafts feature recesses that allow the 
cylinder head bolts to be removed without 
removing the shafts (head bolts 1 through 10 
shown on the right). 

The camshafts are not interchangeable, there¬ 
fore they should be marked before disassem¬ 
bly. 





12 

M Engines - S62B50 





For installation and timing procedures, the 
camshafts are held in position by locking pins 
(Special Tools) that are inserted into the front 
camshaft bearing caps on both cylinder heads 
(as shown on the right). 

Using an open end wrench to turn camshafts will 
allow the locking pins to be inserted with ease. 
Refer to the Repair Instructions for details on 
camshaft removal, installation and timing. 


Caution: Remove locking pins before rotating 
camshafts! 


When performing camshaft timing, a visual 
“sight” is provided on the front cam journal sup¬ 
port cap and in the camshaft journal (for both 
intake and exhaust). 

The two grooves should line up to verify correct 
timing. 



An impulse wheel is mounted on the end of each 
camshaft for position detection (VANOS opera¬ 
tion). The impulse wheels are secured by a 
removeable bolt (1). 


The intake camshaft impulse wheels have 6 lugs 
and the exhaust camshaft impulse wheels have 
7 lugs (including one large lug). 



13 

M Engines - S62B50 




Valves and Valve Springs: The intake and 
exhaust valves are lightweight in design to 
reduce reciprocating mass. The valve diameter 
is: 

1. Intake 35 mm 

2. Exhaust 30.5 mm 

3. Stem-Intake / Exhaust 6.0 mm 

The S62 valves use single conical (tapered) 
valve springs and HVAs (hydraulic compen¬ 
sators) to actuate the valves. Valve adjustment 
is not required. 



The springs are marked for correct installation due to the “cone” shape (paint stripes fac¬ 
ing down towards cylinder head). 


Notes: 



14 

M Engines - S62B50 




VANOS 


Performance, torque, idle characteristics and exhaust emissions reduction are improved by 
variable camshaft timing (VANOS). The S62 engine uses a double VANOS system for valve 
timing on both the intake and exhaust camshafts. 



The S62 uses a high pressure (100 Bar) control system that ensures quick and reliable 
adjustments of the camshafts to meet the high performance requirements of the M 
Engines. The VANOS units are mounted directly on the front of the cylinder heads. 

Each VANOS unit contains: 



• High pressure radial oil pump (driven by the 
intake Camshaft) 

• Two inlet solenoids 

• Two outlet solenoids 

• Two adjustment pistons 

• Two hydraulically actuated adjustment shafts 


Two solenoids are required for each adjusting piston circuit, one for advancing and one for 
retarding the camshaft timing. The solenoids are controlled by the ECM. 


15 

M Engines - S62B50 






The adjustment shafts contain two sets of 
splines that engage with: 


1 . 

Camshaft Sleeves (Straight Splines) 

2. 

Chain Driven Sprocket (Helical Splines) 


The adjustment shafts have a total stroke of 25 
mm. 



The camshaft sleeves are bolted to the end of 
the camshafts and engage with the straight 
spline of the adjustment shaft shown above. 



The chain driven sprocket and spacer sleeve 
assembly is shown to the right (one assembly 
per camshaft). The sprocket engages with the 
helical splines of the adjustment shaft shown 
above. 

The intake camshaft sprocket assembly has two 
drive “lugs” that must be aligned with the radial 
piston oil pump during installation. 



16 

M Engines - S62B50 






M VA NOS 





VANOS mechanical operation is dependent on oil pressure applied to position the control 
pistons. The double VANOS camshafts are infinitely adjustable within the mechanical trav¬ 
el limits of the drive gears. 

When oil pressure is applied to the control piston, the piston moves causing the splined 
adjustment shaft to move. The straight splines slide within the camshaft sleeve. The helical 
splines rotate the camshaft drive sprocket changing the position in relation to the camshaft 
position which advances/retards the camshaft timing. 


The total adjustment range of the camshafts is 60° (as referenced to the crankshaft). 


The “default” mechanical stop position without VANOS influence is: 


Intake Camshaft = Retarded 
Exhaust Camshaft = Advance 


17 

M Engines - S62B50 






Oil is supplied from the main gallery through the 
front of cylinder head (arrow) to the inlet pres¬ 
sure reducing valve. 


Pressure Reducing Valve: The pressure 
reducing valve supplies oil to the radial piston 
high pressure oil pump. It is located between 
the cylinder head and the VANOS unit. 



The valve ensures the oil pressure supply to the 
VANOS pump is 0.5 Bar regardless of the vary¬ 
ing pressure from the main oil pressure gallery. 
The pressure reducing valve is pressed into the 
VANOS unit and secured by an “o-ring”. 


100 Bar Pressure Regulating Valve: The 100 

Bar pressure regulating valve regulates the pres¬ 
sure produced by the radial piston high pressure 
oil pumps. 



The 100 Bar pressure regulating valve is mount¬ 
ed in the center of the cylinder block “V” on the 
thermostat housing. 

The valve ensures that the oil pressure for 
VANOS operation is maintained at 100 bar. One 
pressure regulator is used for both cylinder 
banks. 

Note: The 100 Bar pressure regulating valve is 
not adjustable. 



18 

M Engines - S62B50 





VANOS Accumulator: The VANOS accumulator 
ensures that there is a sufficient volume of oil under 
pressure to adjust the camshafts under all engine oper¬ 
ating conditions. 

The accumulator is Nitrogen charged and is located on 
the front of the 5 - 8 bank of the engine. It is connected 
to the VANOS oil pressure circuit by a high pressure 
line. 

VANOS Accumulator with Electrical Shutoff Valve: 

The VANOS accumulator with an electrical shutoff valve 
was phased into production on 2001 MY S62 engines. 

This production change addresses the customer com¬ 
plaint of a rattling noise (from the VANOS units) in the 
first few seconds after starting the engine. The VANOS 
hydraulics can cause rattling noises after the engine 
start due to the varying torque of the camshaft before 
sufficient VANOS oil pressure has built up. 

When the engine is stopped, the oil runs out of the 
high-pressure chamber in the adjustment cylinder. This 
can cause the VANOS adjustment piston to move freely 
against the housing during startup. 

The shutoff valve prevents this because it will close (without electrical power) to reserve a 
volume of oil under pressure in the accumulator when the igniton is switched off. Upon the 
next engine start, the valve will be opened by the ECM allowing the stored accumulator 
release to “prime” the VANOS assemblies with pressurized oil. 

This noise has no effect on the engine's power output or durability. 

The affected vehicles are: Manufacturing period: 

• E39 (M5), E52 (Z8) • From the start of series production up to November 2000 

In case of customer complaint on vehicles produced before 12/2000, Refer to the Service 
Information Bulletin. A shutoff valve may be retrofitted to the VANOS accumulator. 

Note: There are two different retrofit kits depending on the vehicle production date. 

• Retrofitting on vehicles from start of series production until August 2000. 

• Retrofitting on vehicles from September 2000 until November 2000. 



19 

M Engines - S62B50 



Pressure 



VANOS system hydraulic operation: 

• When the engine starts, oil from the main engine oil pump is fed under pressure to the 
pressure reducing valves. 

• The oil pressure is dropped to approximately 0.5 Bar and fed to the radial piston high 
pressure oil pumps. 

• The pumps are driven by the intake camshafts and the 100 bar pressure is built up by 
the pressure regulating valve. The volume of pressurized oil is stored in the accumulator 
supplying both adjustment pistons. Both pistons are held in the default position by the 
high pressure oil. 

• At the same time the high pressure oil is available at the inlet solenoids of both adjust¬ 
ment pistons. 


20 

M Engines - S62B50 
















• VANOS adjustment is carried out by the ECM pulsing the inlet and outlet solenoids to 
allow pressurized oil to the back side of the adjustment pistons. The surface area on this 
side of the piston is larger so that the oil pressure is greater and the adjustment piston 
will move causing the valve timing to change. 

• The piston is connected to the adjustment shaft. As the piston moves, the shaft turns 
the helical splines varying the camshaft sprocket position in relation to the camshafts. 

From 12/00 Production Date 

• When the ignition is switched “off” the shutoff valve will close (without electrical power) to 
reserve a volume of oil under pressure in the accumulator. Upon the next engine start, 
the valve will be opened by the ECM allowing the stored accumulator release to “prime” 
the VANOS assemblies with pressurized oil. 


CAUTION! 

• The VANOS system is under high pressure (100 Bar). 

• The VANOS accumulator stores pressurized oil, do not energize the Shutoff Valve when 
the oil circuit (lines) is open! 

• Consult the Repair Instructions before performing any repairs. 


Workshop Hints 

The VANOS function test can be performed by 
using Special Tools: 

#90 88 6 126 411 
#90 88 6 126 050 

Regulated Compressed Air (2-8 bar) 

Refer to the Repair Instructions for the VANOS 
function test procedures. 



21 

M Engines - S62B50 



Intake Air Plenum: The large intake air plenum is designed for the maximum volume 
required for the S62 engine. Inside the intake plenum, each throttle valve has its own air 
funnel which is bolted to the individual throttle housing. 

The air funnel positions are defined by the 
shape of the plenum. The funnels for cylinders 
1 and 5 face rearward and the remaining fun¬ 
nels face inward. 

The lower plenum is sealed to the upper cover 
by a perimeter gasket and four “o-rings” on the 
center support towers. 

Caution: Remove attaching nuts and store 
away from intake plenum before lifting funnels 
from the throttle housings so they do not fall 
into the throttle housings! 



Intake Air System: The S62 engine uses eight individual throttle housings that are bolted 
directly to the cylinder heads. To ensure smooth and stable engine operation all eight throt¬ 
tles must be synchronized for an even distribution of the intake air. 



One bank of four shown 


Refer to the Repair Instructions for the procedure to adjust and synchronize the throttle 
housings. 


22 

M Engines - S62B50 




Electronic Throttle Motor (EDR): All eight 
throttles are activated by one electric throttle 
motor (EDR). 

The EDR motor is mounted in the “V” of the 
block and controls the throttles through two 
linkages. The ECM controls the EDR to open 
and close the throttle valves. 

The throttle valves are fitted with mechanical 
return springs to close them when the EDR is 
not energized. 

Idle Speed Actuator: A separate idle speed 
actuator (ZWD 5) is used to supply the idle air to 
all cylinders. The actuator supplies air to the 
base of the throttle housings which bypasses 
the throttle valves (plates) to maintain engine 
idle speed. 

The idle speed actuator is mounted in the “V” of 
the block and is connected to the throttle valves 
through large air pipes linked between each 
throttle housing. 



The fuel exits the fuel pressure regulator supply¬ 
ing even fuel distribution to all fuel injectors due 
to a “T” connection feeding both fuel rails. 

The fuel return line is located on the filter/regu¬ 
lator assembly which directs the unused fuel 
back to the fuel tank. The fuel tank hydrocar¬ 
bons are reduced by returning the fuel from this 
point instead of from the fuel rail. 



Fuel Supply: The fuel is supplied through a Non Return Fuel Rail System. This system is 
used on the S62 for TLEV compliancy. The fuel supply pressure is controlled by the 5 Bar 
fuel pressure regulator integrated in the fuel filter assembly (pressure test fitting at this 
point). The E39 M5 fuel filter assembly is located under the left front floor area (next to the 
frame rail). 


23 

M Engines - S62B50 





The Non Return Fuel Rails are secured to the 
throttle housings by two bolts (for each shown 
to the right #1). 

The fuel rails provide even distribution and a vol¬ 
ume of fuel for the injectors. 


Clutch Assembly: The S62 clutch assembly is 
specially designed to transfer the high torque to 
the driveline and dampen vibrations throughout 
the rpm range. 

The clutch assembly consists of: 

Weight Optimized Dampened Dual-Mass Flywheel 

Diaphragm Type Self Adjusting Pressure Plate and 
Drive Disk 


The incremental wheel is mounted to the fly¬ 
wheel for the engine speed, reference and Mis¬ 
fire Detection. The self adjusting clutch (SAC) 
has lower release forces for easier clutch oper¬ 
ation (less pedal effort required). 



Procedures for checking and replacing the self adjustment clutch including the Special 
Tools are found in the Repair Instructions. 


Exhaust System: The exhaust manifolds are stainless steel with an air gap insulation that 
allows the converters to warm up rapidly and reach their operating temperature. 


Two metal monolith catalytic converters are 
used with pre and post catalyst oxygen sensors 
for OBD II compliance. 

The left side catalyst contains an Exhaust Gas 
Temperature Sensor on vehicles produced up 
to 9/2000. Vehicles produced >9/2000 do not 
have this sensor. Refer to the Service Infor¬ 
mation Bulletin on modifying early production- 
vehicles. 



24 

M Engines - S62B50 








The exhaust is combined in the one piece cen¬ 
tral silencer with two outlet openings at the rear 
which lead to the two main silencers. 


Main Silencers: Four main silencers with indi¬ 
vidual outlets are used on the M5 to comply 
with international noise emission regulations. 



Due to the positioning and space requirements 
for the silencers, the floor pan of the luggage 
compartment is redesigned and the spare 
wheel has been eliminated. 

The battery is mounted in the luggage compart¬ 
ment floor between the rear silencers as shown 
on the right. 

The Z8 uses two rear silencers with individual 
outlets 




















































Review Questions 


1. Why does the valve clearance not have to be adjusted on the S62? 


2. The flywheel mounted incremental wheel on the S62 provides: 


3. What does the term “cracked” connecting rod mean? 


4. What is the function of the Scavenge Oil Pumps on the S62 and how do they affect oil 
pan removal? ._ 


5. What special tools are used to perform the VANOS function test? 

# _ # _ 

6. When installing the camshafts, the journal caps should be installed based on what 
markings? 


7. What is the purpose of the VANOS Accumulator with an Electrical Shutoff Valve? 


8. What must be “aligned” with the radial piston high pressure oil pumps when installing 

the VANOS units? __ 

9. Where is the fuel pressure tested on the E39 M5 and what is the nominal pressure? 

_ _Bar 


10. What sensor was deleted from S62 equipped vehicles produced after 9/2000? 


26 

M Engines - S62B50 



