Table of Contents 


Engine Diagnosis 


Subject 


Page 


Engine Diagnosis . 

Compression Testing. 

Cylinder Leakage Testing. 

Hints on Cylinder Leakage Testing ... 
Cylinder Arrangement and Firing Order 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 04/11 


CO lo CD h- CO 








Engine Diagnosis 

Model: All 

Production: All 

IBIICTIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the Operation of New Generation Engines 

• Utilize BMW Diagnostic Eguipmentto Diagnose Engine Related Complaints 

• Understand Engine Diagnosis Using Basic Hand Tools 


2 

Engine Diagnosis 


Engine Diagnosis 


When attempting to diagnose driveability complaints, always consider the basics. 
Regardless of the level of technology employed on an engine, it still needs a few basic 
things to occur in order to run properly. Whether the engine employs the latest technol¬ 
ogy or not, always refer to the basic principles first. 

Any engine using four-cycle spark-ignition (Otto cycle) principles must meet the 
same fundamental conditions to run properly. Most engine related driveability problems 
fall into a few basic categories: 

• No Start/No Crank 

• Extending cranking before engine start 

• Rough Running Cold Idle 

• Rough Running Warm Idle 

• Rough Running Under Load 

• Lack of Power 

• Check Engine Light (MIL) 



N63 engine cut-away 


3 

Engine Diagnosis 






When referring to engine basics, all engines need fuel, air and spark to run. However, in 
order for a spark-ignition engine to run properly, a few things must be taken into consider¬ 
ation. The fuel, air, spark principle can be broken down further into the following cate¬ 
gories: 

• Sufficient engine compression with a leak-free combustion chamber. 

• Sufficient amount of ignition voltage (spark) at the correct time. 

• Proper fuel pressure and volume. 

• Properly functioning fuel injection system (Engine management). 

• Properly functioning air management system (Electronic throttle systems). 

• Correct valve timing (VVT and VANOS). 


VALVETRONIC 







ti 


4 

Engine Diagnosis 


















Compression Testing 

In order for an engine to run smoothly and efficiently, the combustion chamber must be 
free of leakage. An engine with low compression in one or more cylinders is inefficient 
and will run rough or lack in performance. Low compression may or may not cause the 
MIL to illuminate. 

Low compression can be caused by the following: 

• Leaking valves caused by burned valves or seats. The valve guide can also be worn 
causing the valve not to seat properly. Valves can also be bent from piston contact 
(from over-rev). 

• Piston Rings which can be worn from high mileage or poor maintenance. Also, the 
rings can be damaged from foreign material or improper installation. 

• Cracks in cylinder head or engine block. Cracks can be caused by overheating 
resulting in misfires or rough running. 

• Defective cylinder head gasket. The cylinder head gasket can fail due to overheating 
which can cause cylinder leakage resulting in misfire, low compression and rough 
running. 

• Bent connecting rod. A connecting rod can be bent from a defective fuel injector or 
water ingress into the combustion chamber causing hydrostatic lock. 

Compression testing can be performed using a conventional compression gauge. There 
are some preliminary tasks and safety precautions that must be carried out before starting 
the compression test: 

• Remove the fuel pump fuse and or relay, start the vehicle and allow vehicle to stall 
out on residual fuel. 

• Disable ignition by unplugging all ignition coils and remove ALL sparkplugs. 

• Connect battery charger to vehicle. 

• Ensure that the throttle is wide open during cranking (see special note for 
VALVETRONIC eguipped vehicles). 

• Crank engine until compression gauge stops increasing. Be sure to crank engine 
egually between cylinders. 

• Continue compression test on ALL cylinders so comparisons can be done. 

• Record readings 

• If necessary, re-check cylinders with suspect readings. 

• If some cylinder readings come up low, add a few drops of oil and re-check. 

This can differentiate between valves/rings. 


5 

Engine Diagnosis 




Cylinder Leakage Testing 

Once a problem cylinder is detected via a compression test or by other means, a cylinder 
leakage test is used to pinpoint the problem area. 

The leakage test uses an air pressure gauge and compressed air to indicate the percent¬ 
age of air loss. By listening and observing at key points, the problem can be narrowed 
down before the engine is disassembled. 

The first step is to bring the piston to TDC (compression stroke). Then compressed air is 
introduced into the cylinder using the cylinder leakage tester. Be sure the engine does 
NOT rotate, if the engine rotates, the engine was not at true TDC. 

Check the gauge on the tester, it should read in percentage of leakage. Check the 
engine specification for permissible leakdown. A general rule of thumb is 15% or 
less for a good cylinder. However, some engine have a tighter tolerance. 

Most BMW engines should be at 8% or less. 


Example of a leaking valve 


□ C 

□ ■ 

V \ c 

If any cylinder shows excessive leakdown, check for leakage by listening or observing the 
following points: 

• Listen for air (hissing) at the tailpipe. This would indicate leakage at the exhaust 
valves on that cylinder. 

• Listen for air (hissing) at the throttle. This would indicate leakage at the intake valves 
on that cylinder. (Be sure throttle is wide open and listen at throttle opening) 

• Open the oil cap and listen for air. This would indicate air leakage into the crankcase. 
This would be piston rings or cylinder bore concerns. 

• Observe the coolant reservoir and or remove the radiator cap. Bubbles in the 
coolant would most likely indicate head gasket leakage or cracked block/head. 



6 

Engine Diagnosis 

























Hints on Cylinder Leakage Testing 


When performing cylinder leakage tests, the following tips might be helpful: 

• Remove all spark plugs to allow easier rotation of the engine. (If this test is done 
after a compression test, the plugs should already be out). 

• Perform the leakage test on all cylinders, not just the problem cylinder. This would 
indicate any other problems which can be rectified. This eliminates any repeat 
repairs and wasted diagnostic time. 

• Perform the leakage test in cylinder firing order starting with cylinder #1. 

It takes two revolutions of the engine to complete the leakage test. 

• Start at cylinder #1 and rotate the engine to the next cylinder in the firing order. 
Divide the number of cylinders into 720, the result is the number of degrees that 
each cylinder fires. For example, if you divide a 6 cylinder into 720, this eguals 120 
degrees. If you start at cylinder 1 and rotate the engine 120 degrees in the direction 
of rotation, you can check the next cylinder in the firing order. 

• This process eliminates the need to rotate the engine an excessive amount. 



Vifiwfrnm Crank PijIIpv 


Engine Diagnosis 




Firing Order 


6-Cylinder 


Cylinder Arrangement and 

4-Cylinder 



Ml 0, M42, M44, SI4, N20 

Firing Order 1-3-4-2 



M20, M30, M50 (TU), M52 (TU), M54, N52, 
N52KP, N51, N54, N55, S38, S52, S54 

Firing Order 1 -5-3-6-2-4 


8-Cylinder 


12-Cylinder 



M60, M62, M62TU, N62, N62TU, 

N63,S63, S65 

Firing Order 1-5-4-8-6-3-7-2 



M70, M73, M73TU, N73, S70, N74 

Firing Order 1 -7-5-11-3-9-6-12-2-8-4-10 


8 

Engine Diagnosis 






















