Table of Contents 


4th Generation M3 Body 

Subject Page 

Bodyshell.3 

Additional Reinforcements.5 

Exterior Body.7 

Hood.8 

Fenders .8 

Roof .9 

Side Sills .9 

Exterior Rear View Mirrors .10 

Tailgate .11 

Wheel Well Covers .11 

Front End Module.12 

Headlight Cleaning System (SWR).13 

Rear End Module.14 

Sound/Thermal Insulating .15 

Other Underbody Paneling.16 

Interior Body .17 

Luggage Compartment .17 

Seats .17 


Initial Print Date: 1/08 Revision Date: 




















4th Generation M3 Body 

Model: E90, E92 
Production: 2/2008 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the changes made to the M3 when compared with the series E92 


2 

4th Generation M3 Body 






Bodyshell 


Due to changes to the wheel arch and the carbon roof, the bodyshell components 
shown in blue have a different part number to the series model E92. 



E92 M3 bodyshell components, view from above 



E92 M3 bodyshell components, view from below 


3 

4th Generation M3 Body 






New body side panels which are 20mm wider each side over the flared rear wheel arches 
are typical of the ’M’ design. 

To ensure the necessary M3 wheel clearance at the rear wheel arch, the side frame 
wheel arch has been extended by approximately 20 mm, and the 180° joining lip edge 
inside the wheel arch has been rolled upwards to further increase the wheel clearance 
in the wheel housing. 



E92 M3 Rear wheel arc 


4 

4th Generation M3 Body 





Additional Reinforcements 



E92 M3 Overview of additional bolted-on reinforcements 


The E92 M3 is equipped with a v-shaped reinforcement brace in the engine compart¬ 
ment, known as the dome strut, which consists of five separate components. It is secured 
to the suspension strut dome and screwed centrally to the middle of the bulkhead. 



E92 M3 Dome strut 


5 

4th Generation M3 Body 





The E92 M3, just like the E46 M3, is equipped with a reinforcement plate, known as 
the thrust panel, made from aluminum alloy. 

The thrust panel primarily increases the torsional strength while also acting as a lower 
motor cover and oil pan protection. The thrust panel is fitted to the axle carrier with six 
bolts from below, and has two openings for changing the oil. 



E92 M3 thrust panel 


The V-shaped braces used in the rear underbody area of the series production E92 
have been strengthened and adapted. 

M3 - Permanently welded to the tension strut and screwed to the body with the 
transmission tunnel bridge 

Series E92 - they are screwed to the tension strut and welded to the bridge 

The bridge has been strengthened and adapted. In the M3, it is also used to mount 
the exhaust line. 



E92 M3 Rear axle braces and transmission tunnel bridge 


6 

4th Generation M3 Body 


























Exterior Body 


View of M3-specific external body components 



The doors and the tailgate are taken from the series-model E92. All other external body 
components are new (shown in blue). 


7 

4th Generation M3 Body 




Hood 


New "Powerdome" aluminum hood lid with air apertures. The aperture on the left when 
viewed in the direction of travel is used for incoming engine air, and the right-hand aper¬ 
ture offers optical symmetry. 



Power Dome aluminum hood lid 


Fenders 

An advanced plastic material is used for the front side panels, which are wider than those 
used on the series E92. The side panels include the model-specific "M side gills" with 
integrated side indicators and M3 emblem. 



Front fender (side panel) 


8 

4th Generation M3 Body 



Roof 


The roof on the E92 M3 is manufactured 
from carbon fiber. This has reduced the overall 
vehicle mass on the upper level of the car by 
approximately 5 kg, therefore considerably 
lowering the center of gravity. 

A roof rack system can be assembled on the 
E92 M3 with carbon fiber roof. The roof has 
specific inserts for roof luggage rack brackets. 

The repair procedures and options are similar 
to or the same as the M6. 

If the sunroof option is selected, a steel roof 
similar to the series model E92 is fitted. 



E92 M3 Carbon roof 


Side Sills 

The side sills are more highly accentuated, in accordance with the M design criteria. 



9 

4th Generation M3 Body 










Exterior RearView Mirrors 

The ’M’ designed exterior door mirrors have an optimized airflow design. The mirror 
surface area is larger to comply with future legislation. The mirror base mounting has 
been adapted to suit the new mirror unit. 

The functions of the outside mirrors are the same as the series production E92. Driver 
and passenger mirrors are electrically heated and adjusted. 

The cover cap of the exterior mirror housing is painted in the body color. 



10 

4th Generation M3 Body 



Tailgate 

The tailgate is taken from the series production E92. The rear spoiler (Gurney) is attached 
as a standard feature on the E92 M3. 



Tailgate and spoiler (Gurney) 


Wheel Well Covers 




The new M3 is fitted with larger wheel housing covers that accommodate the larger 
wheels and flared wheel arches. The front wheel housing cover has been adapted 
specifically to meet the M3 requirements. 


Front wheel housing cover 


Rear wheel housing cover 


11 

4th Generation M3 Body 



Front End Module 



Bumper 

bracket 


Shock 

absorber 

foam 


Bumper trim 


Front end module 


The front end module has a new single piece M-specific thermoplastic bumper trim and 
is fitted to a reinforced lightweight plastic bracket. 



Plastic bumper brackets 


12 

4th Generation M3 Body 










Front bumper trim 



The bumper trim is color coded to the car. 

The front M3 bumper has apertures for the kidney grill, engine air inlet, PDC ultrasonic 
sensors (optional), the headlight-cleaning system and the mounting for the towing eye. 

Front bi-xenon headlamp units are identical to the series E92. The M3 front bumper over¬ 
hang is longer than that of the series E92. 

Headlight Cleaning System (SWR) 

The container for the M3 headlight cleaning system is new. The design has been 
changed from the series E92 in order to provide the necessary space for installing the M3 
side gills with integrated indicators in the M style. The filler neck and the line for the head¬ 
light cleaning system are new, together with the fixed washer nozzles on the bumper trim. 

The wiring harness for the headlight cleaning system has been adapted accordingly. 



Headlight cleaning system 


13 

4th Generation M3 Body 








































Rear End Module 



The rear end module also features a new, single-piece bumper trim in the M style made 
from a special thermoplast material. The bracket is also made from reinforced lightweight 
plastic. 

The module has apertures for the bumper grid, PDC ultrasonic sensors (optional) and the 
mounting for the towing hook. 



Rear bumper trim 


14 

4th Generation M3 Body 











Sound/Thermal Insulating 

New sound insulation and thermal insulation covers have been installed. 

The sound-insulating mats are attached in the vehicle interior to the bulkhead and trans¬ 
mission tunnel, and the thermal insulation is mounted in the underbody area of the 
exhaust system and the engine. 



Sound insulating mat and thermal insulation 


15 

4th Generation M3 Body 


Other Underbody Paneling 

The underbody panels have been optimized to ensure the best possible vehicle aerody¬ 
namics and the maximum possible cooling capacity for the driveline components. 



Underbody Paneling 


16 

4th Generation M3 Body 


Interior Body 


Luggage Compartment 


The M3 floor insert in the luggage compartment 
has been modified to accommodate the M 
Mobility System. 



M Mobility System 


The front head restraints feature the M logo, as in the E6x M5. 

The front seat backrests have been revised. The seat upholstery is the same as that 
used on the E92 series-model sport seat. 

The frame with rear seat bench with throughloading capability has enabled further 
weight savings. This is achieved through the use of lighter materials, which are 
processed using a special method for seat construction in a sandwich design (1). 




Rear seat bench 


Sectional view of the frame 
of a rear seat back (1) 


17 

4th Generation M3 Body 





