Table of Contents 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

M3 Concept .3 

S65B4000 Engine .4 

Crankshaft.4 

Connecting Rods.4 

Camshaft Drive.4 

VANOS.5 

MSS60 Engine Control System .6 

Ion Current Combustion Monitoring .6 

Cooling System .7 

Fan Operation .7 

Fan Self-diagnosis and Fault Signal .7 

Drivetrain.8 

Manual Transmission GS6-53BZ .8 

Clutch.8 

Propeller Shaft .9 

Final Drive .9 

Chassis and Suspension .10 

Swivel Bearing .10 


Initial Print Date: 1/08 Revision Date: 





















4th Generation M3 Service Information 


Model: E90, E92 
Production: 2/2008 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 


• Understand some specific procedures that must be taken into 
consideration when servicing the M3. 


2 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 





Introduction 


M3 Concept 

A maximum torque of 400 Newton meters at 3,900 rpm is reached. Approx. 85 percent 
(340 Nm) can be utilized beyond the enormous engine speed range of 6,500 rpm. 

The S65B40 attains 8,400 rpm, and therefore a value that was previously only reserved 
for racing car engines or exotic custom vehicles. 

For safety reasons, due to the engine dynamics when the vehicle is stationary (i.e. with¬ 
out a road-speed signal), it is already down-controlled at 7,000 rpm to prevent the engine 
speed from increasing into an impermissible range. 



3 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 













S65B4000 Engine 


Crankshaft 

The identification marking of the bearing shells is engraved on the crankcase and on 
the first crank web. 

Connecting Rods 

The large connecting rod eye is asymmetrically ground to reduce the length of the 
engine. This means that the installation is direction-specific. 

For the workshop, bearing shells are available in a repair stage (for more information, 
see the service documentation). 

Camshaft Drive 

The VANOS adjustment units are an integral component of the valve control and are 
mounted on the relevant camshaft by a central bolt. 

The central bolts of the inlet and exhaust side have a CCW thread, please refer to the 
repair instructions. 



4 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 







VANOS 


The compact double VANOS system fitted to the S65 engine operates at normal oil 
pressure, unlike the S85 engine (which uses high oil pressure). The low-pressure system 
means that the high-pressure pump and additional pressure lines and reservoir are 
unnecessary. 

The setting angle of the inlet camshaft is 58° in relation to the crankshaft. The exhaust 
camshaft has a setting angle of 48°. As in the S85 engine, this VANOS also reaches an 
adjustment rate of 360° camshaft per second. 

The service instructions should be followed exactly. The VANOS adjustment unit must 
not be disassembled. 



5 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 







MSS60 Engine Control System 


Ion Current Combustion Monitoring 

In the S65, the ion current electronic system is integrated into each ignition coil and 
the ion current control devices are not reguired. 

For the purposes of smoothing the voltage and electromagnetic compatibility, an 
"ignition suppression capacitor" is installed in the wiring harness of each cylinder bank 
(in the S85 this is in the ion current control device). This is electrically connected using 
terminal 87 and the vehicle earth. 

If the ignition suppression capacitor is defective, this can lead to faults in the communi¬ 
cations and/or audio electronics when the engine is running. 

For design reasons, the firing order 1-5-4-8-7-2-6-3 is used in the S65, instead of the 
firing order 1-5-4-8-6-3-7-2 more commonly employed in BMWV8 engines. 



6 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 










Cooling System 


Fan Operation 

The adjusted fan speed increases in a linear fashion as the cycle ratio increases. 

The rated speed (nNom) in the M3 is the same as the maximum number of 
revolutions (2,400 rpm). 

The engine speed of the M3 is controlled in a linear relationship with the cycle ratio 
(10-91 %), starting with 800 rpm (1/3 of nNom) up to 2,400 rpm. 

In the E6x M5/M6 (600 W fan), from a 92% to 95% cycle ratio, an additional unregulated 
increase in engine speed to at least 2,700 rpm (nrmax) is realized. 

Fan Self-diagnosis and Fault Signal 

A fault message is issued with a delay of approximately one minute, since the electronic 
fan system first executes a triple internal test cycle. 



7 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 



Drivetrain 


Manual Transmission GS6-53BZ 

The gear oil is replaced and the screw oil filter is checked or cleaned during the running- 
in inspection, and later according to service specifications (estimated after every third 
engine oil change). 

For fault symptoms with engine speed limitation, the gear oil temperature should also be 
considered as a possible cause. 

Clutch 

The clutch and the dual-mass flywheel are permanently connected and are balanced as 
a single unit. They can only be replaced in a set. 



8 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 





Propeller Shaft 

The center bearing can be mounted in two directions. It is important that the bearing is 
mounted with the word "TOP" facing the body. 

Final Drive 

Due to their function, the shafts of the right and left stub axles in the final drive have 
different lengths. In an idle state, this results in a noticeable different vertical clearance 
of both flanges, which is a feature of the design. 

This does not affect the function and is not a cause for complaint. 

This uneven clearance applies for all models with fully variable M slip differential and 
may affect either the right or the left flange, depending on the version and model. 



9 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 


Chassis and Suspension 

Swivel Bearing 

Spring strut connection to the wheel carrier: 

During assembly, the M3 spring strut is pulled into the lower cone using a new special 
tool. 

Follow the new installation and removal process according to the service repair manual. 


41 • ^ 



10 

4th Generation M3 Service Information 




