Table of Contents 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

Subject Page 

BMW Diesel Technology.9 

Why did the diesels disappear from the US Market? .10 

Customer Perception .10 

Summary.10 

Why are diesels making a comeback in the US?.11 

Efficient Dynamics .12 

New Diesel Engine.14 

Engine Specifications.14 

Diesel Fundamental Principles.16 

Diesel Engine to Gasoline Engine Comparison .17 

Combustion Cycle Comparison.18 

Diesel Combustion Cycle.19 

Diesel Fuel Properties .20 

Diesel Fuel .20 

Diesel Fuel Types.21 

Winter Fuel .22 

Cetane Rating .22 

Cold Weather Properties .23 

Cloud Point.23 

Pour Point .23 

Cold Filter Plugging Point (CFPP) .24 

Cold Climate Measures .24 

Diesel Fuel Additives.24 

Dyes.24 

Microbes .25 


Initial Print Date: 01/08 


Revision Date: 05/08 




























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Sulfur Content .25 

Lubricity.26 

Grades .26 

Off Road Use .26 

Flash Point and Auto-ignition .27 

Fuel Mixing .27 

Diesel Oil.28 

Engine Mechanical.40 

Engine Construction Comparison .41 

Pistons, Crankshaft and Connecting Rods.42 

Piston - Diesel Engine .42 

Piston - Gasoline Engine .42 

Cylinder Head and Valvetrain.44 

Camshafts.45 

Lubrication System.46 

From Oil Pan to Oil Pump .47 

Oil Pump .48 

Functional Principle .48 

Pressure Relief Valve .49 

Oil Filtering .50 

Non-return Valve.50 

Filter Bypass Valve .50 

Heat Exchanger Bypass Valve .50 

Engine Oil Cooling.51 

Oil-to-air Heat Exchanger .51 

Oil-to-coolant Heat Exchanger.51 

Oil Spray Nozzles.51 

Intake System Overview .53 































Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Diesel Engine Management.70 

Engine Control Module (DDE) .71 

DDE l-P-0 Chart (Typical) .72 

Sensors and Actuators .74 

Sensors .74 

Actuators.74 

Switches .74 

Relays.74 

Interfaces.74 

Electro-pneumatic Pressure Converter (EPDW) .74 

Electric Changeover Valve (EUV) .74 

Diesel Fuel Systems.76 

Distributor Type Diesel Injection .77 

Common Rail Fuel Injection .78 

Common Rail System Components.79 

High Pressure Fuel Pump .79 

Functional Principle.80 

Two-actuator Concept .81 

Advantages.81 

Rail Pressure Sensor.82 

Pressure Control Valve .82 

Accumulator (Fuel Rail).82 

High Pressure Fuel Lines.82 

Fuel Injectors.83 

Piezo-Electric Principles.84 

Piezo Technology .84 





























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Fuel Injector Operation .85 

Leakage Oil.85 

Low Pressure System .86 

Function.86 

Fuel Supply System Overview.87 

EKP Control Module.88 

Fuel Filter Heater.89 

Functional Principle.89 

Diesel Air Management.92 

Air Intake System .92 

Air Intake System Overview.93 

Intake Silencer/Air Filter.94 

M57D30T2 Engine.94 

Unfiltered Air Duct.94 

Intercooler.95 

Throttle Valve.96 

Swirl Flaps .97 

Swirl Flap Operation .97 

Effects of Swirl Flap Malfunctions .97 

Hot-film Air Mass Meter (HFM 6.4).98 

Functional Principle.98 

Measurement Method .98 

Charge Air Temperature Sensor .100 

Boost Pressure Sensor.100 

Vacuum System .101 

Vacuum Pump .102 





























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Non-return Valve .103 

Non-return Valve, Brake Booster .103 

Vacuum Distributor.104 

Vacuum Reservoir.104 

Electro-pneumatic Pressure Converter (EPDW).105 

Electric Changeover Valve.106 

Exhaust Turbocharger .108 

Twin Turbocharging.108 

High Pressure Stage.109 

Low Pressure Stage .109 

Turbine Control Valve .109 

Compressor Bypass Valve.109 

Wastegate.109 

Two-Stage Turbocharging Function .110 

Turbine Control Valve .110 

Compressor Bypass Valve.110 

Wastegate.110 

Lower Engine Speed Range (up to 1500 rpm).Ill 

Medium Engine Speed Range (from 1500 to 3250 rpm).Ill 

Upper Engine Speed Range (from 3250 to 4200 rpm).112 

Nominal Engine Speed Range (as from 4200 rpm).112 

Diesel Emission Controls.114 

Combustion By-products .115 

Hydrocarbons (HC) .115 

Effects of HC Emissions .115 

Carbon Monoxide .116 





























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Effects of CO Emissions .116 

Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx).117 

Effects of NOx Emissions.117 

Particulate Matter .118 

Carbon Dioxide.119 

Diesel Emission Control Systems.120 

Engine Measures to Reduce Emissions .121 

Injection Strategy.122 

Multiple Injection.122 

Charge Air Cooling .123 

Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR) .123 

EGR Control.124 

EGR Cooling.124 

Exhaust After-treatment .125 

Diesel Oxidation Catalyst (DOC).125 

Reduction of Unwanted Emissions .126 

Diesel Particulate Filter.126 

Function of the DPF.126 

Filter Regeneration .127 

Sensors - Exhaust System.128 

Exhaust Temperature Sensor .128 

Version with Two Exhaust Temperature Sensors .128 

Exhaust System with One Exhaust Temperature Sensor .128 

Oxygen Sensor .129 

Exhaust System Layout (Typical) .130 

Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) .131 

Diesel Exhaust Fluid .131 






























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Diesel Auxiliary Systems.132 

Glow Plug System .132 

Glow Plug System Function .133 

Diesel Starter.134 

Vibration Reduction .135 

Engine Mount Control .135 

Engine Mount Function .135 










8 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

Model: All with Diesel Engine 
Production: From Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 



• Understand fundamental diesel principles 

• Understand the fundamental differences between gasoline and diesel engines 

• Understand the reguired service procedures on diesel engines 

• Understand diesel fuel injection and engine management systems 

• Understand diesel exhaust emissions and emission control systems 





BMW Diesel Technology 


For the first time since 1986, BMW will have a “Diesel powered” 
vehicle in U.S. market. The previous diesel engine in use was the 
M21D24. The M21 was only available in the 524td (E28). 

This engine featured state of the art technology which included 
turbocharging and the latest Bosch diesel fuel injection. At the 
time, the M21 was considered to be one of the best performing 
turbo diesel engines in the world. 



However, diesel engines were not widely accepted in the U.S. 
market. This was due to the relatively cheap prices of gasoline 
and the negative perceptions associated with diesel engines. 

Most of the available diesel engines available in the market at the 
time were not very appealing to the average customer. Engine 
noise, fuel and exhaust odors along with soot emissions con¬ 
tributed to a negative image of diesel engines. Also, diesel 
engines were somewhat sluggish as compared to their gasoline 
fueled counterparts. 

One of the positive attributes of diesel engines was fuel economy 
and overall efficiency. This was one area in which the diesel 
engine excelled. 


Even with all of the positive aspects of diesel ownership 
evident, most customers did not widely embrace the diesel 
experience. As a result, the 524td was discontinued in 1986. 

However, since 1986, BMW continued to refine and develop 
diesel engines for other markets. The high price of available fuel 
in other countries drove customers to diesels at a higher rate than 
in the U.S. market. 

To meet the demand for diesel engines, BMW improved on the 
6-cylinder diesel engine. In addition to the 6-cylinder, 4 and 8 
cylinder diesels were developed for other markets. 

Over the last 20 years, BMW has continued to improve on the 
diesel engine and reduce the “undesirable” aspects of diesel 
ownership. Power output has been increased, while reducing 
noise and emissions. In European markets, diesel vehicles now 
account for more than 50% of newly registered vehicles. Sales of 
BMW diesel vehicles account for more than 60% of new vehicle 
purchases in the European markets. 

In the fall of 2008, BMW will re-introduce diesel vehicles to the US 
market in the form of a 6-cylinder, twin turbo engine featuring the 
latest in common rail fuel injection technology. 

The new engine will be referred to as the M57TU2 TOR The new 
6-cylinder diesel engine from BMW will offer the same high level 
of performance that is expected from BMW drivers. 

In short, the new diesel vehicles will fit well into the concept of 
“Efficient Dynamics”. This concept ensures the highest reduction 
in CO 2 emissions without a compromise in performance. 

The new diesel BMW’s offer two features which, together, are not 
usually associated with diesel engines or spoken in the same 
sentence - Performance and Efficiency. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

9 





10 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Why did the diesels disappear from the US Market? 

In the US market, diesel vehicles have not had much success over 
the last 20 years. Most of this is due to customer perception and 
the relatively low cost of gasoline. 

Although many people feel that the price of gasoline is high in the 
US, other parts of the world pay much higher prices due to the 
additional taxes. In comparison, fuel prices in Europe are twice as 
high as in the US. This accounts for the difference in the overall 
acceptance of diesel between the US and European markets. 


Customer Perception 

More than 20 years ago, the diesel vehicles available in the US 
market did not have the advantages of today's technology. By the 
time BMW brought the 524td to the US, the diesel market had 
already declined due to the less than desirable aspects of some of 
the competitive products available at the time. 

Much of the negative perception of diesel vehicles centered around 
the odors from the exhaust and fuel itself. Also, diesel exhaust 
contained a high amount of soot which contributed to the dirty 
image of diesel vehicles. 


In the early 1980’s the price of gasoline was increasing, but was 
not enough of a motivating factor to convert customers to diesel 
vehicles in sufficient numbers. Diesel engines did not offer enough 
of an alternative to gasoline engines because they did not perform 
as well. They were sluggish and did not deliver much in the way of 
dynamic performance. 



U.S. Average Price 
for Diesel Fuel 
(summer 2007) 



European Average 
Price for Diesel Fuel 
(summer 2007) 


The combustion process in early diesel engines was abrupt and 
created a lot of additional engine noise as well. This noise gave the 
diesel passenger car more of a “truck-like” impression to potential 
customers. 

Summary 

The absence of diesel powered passenger cars in the US can be 
summed up in the following areas: 

• Engine noise 

• Exhaust odors 

• Dirty, soot emissions excessive 

• Fuel smell 

• Low power, lack of performance, sluggish 

• Cold starting performance 

• High emissions of NOx 

The above mentioned issues on the diesel engine have been 
resolved with the advancements in engine, emissions and fuel 
injection technology. In the subsequent pages, the latest diesel 
technology will be reviewed and explained in more detail. 







































Why are diesels making a comeback in the US? 

Given the current global concerns, BMW diesel engines are a 
logical choice for customers looking for economy and performance. 
There are other alternatively fueled vehicles on the market today, 
but BMW offers a true “premium” experience with the diesel 
engine. 

Everyday, the news is filled with articles on global warming and the 
need fora reduction in CO 2 emissions. There are continuing 
discussions on the need to reduce our dependence on foreign oil 
and to look for alternatives. 



BMW is offering alternatives in the form of Hydrogen power, future 
Hybrid technology and now “Diesel Power” for the Ultimate Driving 
Machine. 


The lack of available diesel vehicles in the US has only served to 
keep interest at a minimum. 

Today, more and more customers are becoming aware of diesels 
and the potential benefits of ownership. BMW offers all of these 
benefits with the addition of performance and the usual value that 
customers expect. 

The new BMW engines benefit from the latest “common rail” fuel 
injection systems. These systems are high pressure, precision 
injection systems which are capable of having multiple injection 
events. These systems contribute to the increased performance 
and reduction of emissions. 

As compared to the M21 engine from 1983, the latest BMW diesel 
vehicles have improved in the following areas: 

• Engine noise has been reduced by engine design and fuel 
injection strategy. Additional engine soundproofing also 
contributes to the reduction in noise. 

• Particulate emissions have also been reduced by 99% as 
compared to the M21 engine. This was accomplished by 
injection strategy and by the new diesel particulate filter (DPF). 

• Fuel consumption has been reduced by 20%. 

• Torque output has been increased by 160% through the use 
of the innovative twin-turbocharger design. 

• Horsepower has been increased by more than 135%. 

• NOx is further reduced by the diesel oxidation catalyst, EGR 
valve and by the new SCR system. 


In the last 20 years, BMW has developed “cutting edge” diesel 
engines which have gone relatively unnoticed in the US market. 
This is due, primarily, to the perception of the customer. 

Past negative experiences or a lack of overall diesel knowledge 
have kept customers from experiencing diesel technology. 


• Other engine modifications also contribute greatly to the 
modern BMW diesel engine. 

In short, it’s time to bring the diesel back. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

11 



12 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Efficient Dynamics 

Today, much of the focus from the automotive industry centers 
around fuel efficiency and concern for the environment through the 
reduction in CO 2 output. Usually, the words “efficient” and 
“dynamic” are not usually adjectives used to describe the same 
vehicle. However, this is not the case when describing vehicles 
from BMW. 



Many of our customers are familiar with our most famous tag line 
“The Ultimate Driving Machine” and they won’t settle for anything 
less. It is a huge challenge to not only meet performance expecta¬ 
tions, but to maintain overall efficiency and environmental responsi¬ 
bility. 

BMW has been able to meet and exceed these goals through the 
latest innovations in engine technology. Systems such as VANOS, 
Valvetronic, lightweight engine construction and the latest in engine 
management have contributed to increasing performance while 
improving fuel economy. 


One of the first vehicles to be associated with the “Efficient 
Dynamics strategy was the BMW Hydrogen 7. This vehicle is also 
the flagship for BMW’s “Clean Energy” concepts. The new BMW 
Hydrogen 7-series is “bivalent” which means it can be run on both 
gasoline and hydrogen. 

The “Hydrogen 7” has a V-12 internal combustion engine which 
takes advantage of one of the most plentiful and “eco-friendly” 
resources on Earth - Hydrogen. Using hydrogen as an automotive 
fuel is not an entirely new concept for BMW. These ideas have 
been in development by BMW since the 1970’s. 

It’s important to note, that the new Hydrogen 7 is not only a 
concept vehicle, but is a production vehicle which is currently for 
sale. Although it is not currently available in the US, is being tested 
here and will be for sale in other markets. 




BMW’s dedication to Efficient Dynamics does not rest on a single 
vehicle, but rather is evident on many other new products and 
technologies. 

For example, BMW gasoline engines have had many fuel saving 
innovations for many years. Recently, Valvetronic technology has 
allowed BMW vehicles to gain “best-in-class” fuel economy across 
the model line. 



Some of the other engine innovations include high-precision direct 
fuel injection for gasoline engines. The HPI system allows the N54 
engine to maintain maximum performance and astounding fuel 
economy in a 300 hp engine. 


To complement all of the engine technology currently in use, BMW 
will be adding diesel powered BMW’s to the model line by the end 
of 2008. Besides the obvious fuel saving advantages of diesel 
engines, there are many performance related aspects of this new 
technology. 

The new 335d for the U.S. market is expected to accelerate from 
0-62 mph in 6.2 seconds while achieving a fuel economy of 23/36 
mpg (city/highway provisional data). The same engine in the X5 
can accelerate to 62 mph in 7.2 seconds while offering fuel econo¬ 
my figures of 19/26 mpg (city/highway provisional data). 

With its carbon emissions down 10% - 20% from comparable 
gasoline vehicles, and near-elimination of both smoke and NOx 
emissions, BMW Advanced Diesels will be every bit as clean as 
CARB-legal gasoline engines when they are introduced in the US 
in 2008. 



Both diesel and gasoline engines from BMW have taken home the 
prestigious “International Engine of the Year Award” several times. 
Now, one of these award-winning diesel engines will be available 
in 2009 models. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

13 




















14 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


New Diesel Engine 

Some of the features on the M57TU2 TOP include: 

• A horsepower rating of 265 hp 

• 425 Ib-ft (580 Nm) of torque 

• 3rd Generation common rail fuel injection (1600 bar) with 
Direct Injection 

• Piezo-electric injectors 

• Two-stage turbocharging with intercooler 

• Lightweight aluminum alloy crankcase 

• Particulate filter (DPF) 

• EGR system with EGR cooler 

• Diesel Oxidation Catalyst 

• Digital Diesel Electronic (DDE) 

• Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) System 

In addition to the features listed above, the new 6-cylinder diesel 
includes fuel heating system and a new “fast start” glow plug 
system to ensure optimum cold weather starting. 

Note: In accordance with the current engine numbering 
system, the M57TU2 TOP engine will be known 
officially as the M57D30T2. 


Engine Specifications 



M57TU2 TOP/M57D30T2 

Number of Cylinders 

6 

Bore 

84 

Stroke 

90 

Displacement 

2993 cm3 

Compression Ratio 

16.5:1 

Compression pressure 

>12 bar 

Maximum RPM 

5250 

Maximum continuous RPM 

4400 























Classroom Exercise - Facts and Figures 

Discuss the topics listed amongst yourselves. Circle True or False next to the statements below. 


Your instructor will assist you in your discussions. 

1. Diesel fuel costs less to refine from crude oil than gasoline True 

2. Gasoline is more heavily taxed than diesel fuel True 

3. Diesel fuel has more carbon content per gallon than gasoline True 

4. Glow plugs on BMW diesel engines are only used for cold starting True 

5. Diesel fuel is more volatile than gasoline True 

6. Hybrids are more efficient than diesels in all driving situations ( e.g. Highway/City) True 

7. BMW allows the use of bio-diesel fuel (such as B10, B20 etc.) True 

8. Adding gasoline to a diesel fuel tank is acceptable in small amounts True 

9. Diesel engines operate best at Lambda values of 1.0 True 

10. Sulfur provides the necessary lubrication qualities found in diesel fuel True 

11. Diesels produce more untreated NOx that gasoline engines True 

12. The new generation of BMW diesel vehicles will be sold in all 50 states True 


False 

False 

False 

False 

False 

False 

False 

False 

False 

False 

False 

False 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

15 




16 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Diesel Fundamental Principles 


First and foremost, a diesel engine operates on the “compression 
ignition” principle. A compression ignition engine begins the 
combustion cycle without the need for an external ignition system. 

What makes a diesel engine attractive to potential customers is 
that it is much more efficient than a gasoline engine. This is due 
to several factors: 

• Diesel engines run at a much higher compression ratio 

• The energy density of diesel fuel is much higher than an 
equivalent amount of gasoline 

• Overall, diesel engines are more thermally efficient than 
gasoline engines 

• Diesel engines are run very lean (with excess air) 

• Diesel engines operate with the throttle in the open position 
which reduces pumping losses 

In order to ignite fuel without a spark, the compression ratio must 
be relatively high. The compression ratio on most gasoline 
engines ranges from 8:1 up to as high as 12:1. On the other 
hand, compression ratios on diesel engines range from 16:1 up to 
about 22:1 for most passenger car engines. 

A direct benefit of a higher compression ratio is increased thermal 
efficiency. In comparison to a gasoline engine of comparable 
displacement, modern diesel engines generate more cylinder 
pressure during the compression phase. The average “mean 
cylinder pressure” value of a turbocharged diesel engine is from 
8 to 22 bar, while a comparable turbocharged gasoline engine is 
only about 11 to 15 bar. 


A higher mean pressure value in combination with the higher 
energy density of diesel fuel translates to more pressure during 
combustion. This higher combustion pressure is responsible for 
much higher output torque. This additional torque is available at a 
relatively low RPM as compared to a gasoline engine. 

The load control of a diesel engine is not carried out by regulating 
the amount of air as on a gasoline engine. Rather, the diesel 
engine is “throttled” by the amount of fuel injected. This type of 
load control means that the throttle butterfly is mostly open during 
all engine phases. 

Since the throttle is always open, there is always more than 
enough oxygen available to burn all of the fuel injected. This 
allows then engine to operate in a very lean state which also 
contributes to increased efficiency of the diesel engine. 

In comparison, gasoline engines must run at a lambda value as 
close to 1 as possible. A diesel engine can operate at lambda 
level of 1 to 2 under load and up to 10 when at idle or under low 
load conditions. 

An added benefit of having the throttle open during most phases 
of engine operation is the reduction of pumping losses. This has 
the same beneficial effect that Valvetronic has on a gasoline 
engine. 

In summary, early diesel engine designs were already much more 
efficient than the prevailing gasoline engine technology. However, 
fairly recent developments in engine and fuel injection technology 
have contributed to major advances in the success of the diesel 
engine. 

In particular, modern BMW “Performance Diesel” engines provide 
the added bonus of economy anc/ performance. The already 
proven diesel engine has been enhanced and optimized to fulfill 
the brand promise of “The Ultimate Driving Machine”. 




Diesel Engine to Gasoline Engine Comparison 

In order for the diesel engine to start it’s combustion cycle, fuel must be ignited by the heat of compression. The fuel used must be able 
to spontaneously ignite (without the help of a spark from an external ignition source). So, the fuel required for a diesel engine must have 
special properties to be compatible with proper engine operation. The best way to illustrate this is to compare both engines and the fuel 
used. 


The following is a comparison of a gasoline engine as compared to a diesel engine: 


Specification 

Gasoline Engine (Otto) 

Diesel Engine 

Ignition Type 

Spark Ignition 

Compression Ignition 

Compression Ratio 

Between 8:1 and 12:1 

Between 16:1 and 22:1 

Efficiency 

25-30% 

36-45% 

Maximum Engine Speed 

7000-8250 RPM 

up to 5250 RPM 

Exhaust Temperature 
(under full load) 

700-1200 Degrees Celsius 

300-900 Degree Celsius 

Fuel Type 

Gasoline 

(Octane rating = resistance to knock) 

Diesel 

(Cetane rating = ability to ignite) 

Fuel Density 

0.74 - 0.77 

0.82 - 0.85 

Flash Point 

-47 Degrees Celsius 
(-52.6 Degrees Fahrenheit) 

55 Degrees Celsius 
(131 Degrees Fahrenheit) 

Ignition Temperature 

550 Degrees Celsius 
(1022 Degrees Fahrenheit) 

350 Degrees Celsius 
(662 Degrees Fahrenheit) 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

17 



































18 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Combustion Cycle Comparison 

Much like a gasoline engine, the diesel engine uses the 4-stroke cycle. The familiar seguence of; Intake > Compression > Power and 
Exhaust is much the same on a diesel engine. The difference is mostly in how the fuel is ignited and when fuel is introduced into the 
combustion chamber. 

The other area in which diesel engines differ is in the compression ratio. The typical gasoline engine has compression ratios of between 
8:1 up to about 12:1. On the other hand, diesel engines have a typical compression ratio of between 16:1 and 22:1. The higher 
compression ratio is required to sufficiently compress the air charge and raise the temperature to the ignition point. 

The illustrations below show the sequence of the combustion cycle on a conventional gasoline engine with “manifold injection”. 



Intake Stroke 
Gasoline Engine 

A low pressure area is created as 
the piston moves downward in 
the cylinder bore. 

As the intake valve opens, a 
mixture of air and fuel is allowed 
to enter the cylinder to fill the 
void created by the low pressure 
area. 

Note: 

A gasoline direct injection engine 
would only induct air during this 
period. 



Compression Stroke 
Gasoline Engine 

As the piston moves up in the 
cylinder, both valves are closed. 

The mixture of air and fuel is 
compressed to a specific ratio. 


Note: 

A gasoline direct injection engine 
would only compress air during 
this period. 



Power Stroke 
Gasoline Engine 

The compressed air and fuel 
mixture is ignited by a spark from 
the ignition system. 

The piston is forced down in the 
cylinder by the expanding gases. 
This creates the necessary force 
to drive the crankshaft. 


Note: 

A gasoline direct injection engine 
would inject fuel and ignite it with 
a spark during this period. 



Exhaust Stroke 
Gasoline Engine 

The exhaust valve opens as the 
piston moves up in the cylinder 
which expels the spent gases 
formed during the combustion 
process. 


Note: 

A gasoline direct injection engine 
would operate the same during 
this period. 































Diesel Combustion Cycle 

In the example above, the combustion cycle on the gasoline engine was discussed. In contrast, the sequence below outlines the 
combustion cycle on the diesel engine. This will help in the understanding of the diesel/gasoline engine comparison. 



Intake Stroke 
Diesel Engine 

A low pressure area is created as 
the piston moves downward in 
the cylinder bore. 

As the intake valve opens, air is 
allowed to enter the cylinder to fill 
the void created by the low 
pressure area. 


Note: 

The recess in the piston and the 
design of the intake manifold 
assist in creating a “swirl effect” 
for the incoming air. 



Compression Stroke 
Diesel Engine 

As the piston moves up in the 
cylinder, both valves are closed. 


The air is compressed to a high 
ratio and therefore heated to a 
high temperature in preparation 
for the incoming fuel. 



Power Stroke 
Diesel Engine 

Just before the piston reaches 
TDC, fuel is injected at high 
pressure directly into the com¬ 
bustion chamber. 


The fuel spontaneously ignites 
and pushes the piston down in 
the cylinder. 



Exhaust Stroke 
Diesel Engine 

The exhaust valve opens as the 
piston moves up in the cylinder 
which expels the spent gases 
formed during the combustion 
process. 


This creates the necessary force 
to drive the crankshaft. 


Note: 

Only air is compressed during 
this period. 


Note: 

Fuel is injected fora longer time 
during this period. This feature 
contributes to the additional 
torque generated by a diesel 
engine. 


Note: 

Due to the higher thermal 
efficiency of a diesel engine, the 
exhaust temperature is lower as 
compared to a gasoline engine. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

19 





































































20 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Diesel Fuel Properties 

Before discussing diesel fuel injection or fuel systems, it is necessary to explain the properties of diesel fuel and how it differs from 
gasoline. Although both fuels are distilled from crude oil, they each have their own uses and applications and should never be 
interchanged. 


Gasoline 

The BTU value for gasoline 
is approximately 125,000 
BTU per gallon 




Diesel Fuel 

The BTU value for diesel fuel 
is approximately 147,000 
BTU per gallon 


Diesel Fuel 

As with gasoline, diesel fuel is a by-product of the distillation of crude oil. Diesel fuel is a hydrocarbon with different chemical properties 
than gasoline. Diesel fuel is part of the “middle distillates” derived from crude oil. This means that diesel fuel is “heavier” than gasoline 
but “lighter” than oil used for lubrication (i.e. motor oil). There are numerous advantages to diesel engines, due to the properties of the fuel 
used. Some of these advantages include: 


• Thermal Efficiency - Diesel fuel produces more power than gasoline. In other words, Diesel fuel has a higher energy content. 

One gallon of gasoline contains about 125,000 BTU of heat energy. In comparison, one gallon of diesel fuel contains about 147,000 
BTU. This advantage in thermal efficiency, adds up to increased fuel economy. 

• Increased Durability - Due to the lubricant properties of diesel fuel, piston ring life is greatly increased. Gasoline has more of a 
detergent quality which tends to decrease piston ring life. It is not uncommon for light duty diesel passenger vehicles to have an 
engine which lasts more than 200,000 miles. 

• Improved Emissions - Diesel fuel contains more carbon atoms per gallon and therefore will emit more CO 2 per gallon. However, the 
increased efficiency of a diesel engine allows for an overall reduction in CO 2 (per mile). In comparison, diesel engines are run leaner 
(with excess air), and produce lower levels of HC, CO and CO 2 . The lower volatility of diesel fuel, allows for less evaporative emissions 
overall. The only area where diesel engines do not excel are in NOx and Particulate Matter (PM). But, new technology allows diesel 
engines to comply with prevailing emission standards. 
















Diesel Fuel Types 

The term “diesel fuel” is a generic term, it refers to any fuel for a compression ignition engine. As mentioned before diesel fuel is derived 
from the “middle distillates” of crude oil. There are other similar products in this range such as kerosene, jet fuel and home heating oil just 
to name a few. However, each of these products is designed for a specific application. In theory, these additional products may work in a 
diesel application, but it is not recommended. Diesel fuel has specific properties which are designed to offer the best reliability, the best 
fuel economy and the highest compatibility with engine and fuel system components. 

As far as passenger cars are concerned, there are two main types of diesel fuel. These are Grade 1 and Grade 2. Usually referred to as 
Diesel Fuel #1 and Diesel Fuel #2. Mostly, Grade 2 is used for passenger cars and is the most widely available. 




The difference between diesel fuel #1 and #2 is addressed in the following: 

• Diesel #1 has about 95% of the BTU content as #2 diesel. 

• Diesel #1 has a lower viscosity and provides less lubrication to the fuel system components such as the fuel pump and injectors, 

• Diesel #1 has a lower waxing point than #2 and will perform better a low ambient temperatures. 

• Diesel #1 usually has a slightly lower Cetane rating than #2, but is above the minimum rating of 40. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

21 
























22 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Winter Fuel 

Petroleum companies generally offer “winter” and “summer” grade fuels on a seasonal basis. Winter fuel is created by blending a specific 
amount of #1 Diesel fuel to a guantity of #2 Diesel fuel. This lowers the freezing (waxing) point to prevent fuel filters from 
clogging or the fuel from causing any cold weather starting problems. 

In the heavy trucking industry, there have been some other methods to “winterize” diesel fuel. Some of these methods include adding 
kerosene or other fuels to improve cold weather starting ability. However, this is not recommended for passenger cars and may, in fact, 
cause engine or fuel system damage. Therefore, the only recommended method is to purchase diesel fuel from a reputable retailer 


Cetane Rating 

When rating gasoline, the term “octane” has been used to refer to the anti-knock guality of a fuel. Octane rating refers to the resistance to 
prematurely ignite under pressure. When the octane number is higher, the fuel is more resistant to pre-ignition and therefore engine 
knock. Therefore, a higher octane number is more desirable. For example, today’s octane ratings range from 87 to 93 for commercially 
available passenger cars. 


In Diesel applications, the term “cetane” is used to rate fuel quality. However, the desired fuel quality goals are different for diesel. 

The cetane rating of diesel fuel refers rather to the “ease of ignition”. After all, a diesel engine is a “compression ignition” engine and 
therefore, it is more important for diesel fuel to combust easily under pressure. Cetane ratings are in in a range of 0 to 100. 100 is an 
indicator of pure Cetane (n-hexadecane), or the most combustible. Most commercially available diesel fuel has a cetane rating of about 
45. A rating of 40 is usually considered to be the absolute minimum rating for today’s passenger vehicles. Newer BMW vehicles will 
require a Cetane rating of 51. Always check the owner’s manual to see the minimum fuel requirements and the recommended cetane 
number. A higher cetane rating also contributes to better starting especially in cold weather. When possible, it is always better to use fuel 
with a higher cetane rating. Also, a higher cetane number equates to a reduction in NOx and particulate matter emissions. 




































Cold Weather Properties 

As with all fuels distilled from crude oil, there is a presence of paraf¬ 
fin wax. This wax 

content depends of the type of fuel. Since diesel fuel is a “middle 
distillate” of crude oil, there are more paraffin compounds present. 
These waxy compounds flow well at normal ambient temperatures. 
However, in cold operating temperatures, these compounds begin 
to solidify and can restrict fuel flow resulting in difficult starting. 

Cloud Point 

The cloud point is the temperature at which the fuel will start to 
solidify. The paraffin compounds begin to crystallize and the fuel 
becomes cloudy. The ability of the fuel to flow is impeded, but is 
still able to move through the system. The cloud point of #2 Diesel 
fuel is about 20 degrees Fahrenheit (-7 degrees C). 






Pour Point 

Pour point is the temperature in which the fuel will no longer flow. 
It is usually 6 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit below the cloud point. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

23 




































24 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


■ Cold Filter Plugging Point (CFPP) 

Diesel fuel is a hydrocarbon which contains paraffin waxes. At 
warm temperatures, these waxes will flow easily through the fuel 
system. However, at low ambient temperatures, these waxes will 
tend to solidify. This situation causes the fuel to start to solidify. 
Due to the paraffin content in middle distillate's like diesel fuel, is is 
possible during cold temperatures for the fuel to solidify. The 
CFPP is about -4 degrees F (-20 degrees C). 



Fuel “IN” Fuel “OUT” 


Cold Climate Measures 

Most, if not all, modern vehicles equipped with diesel engines 
employ measures to heat the fuel and reduce the possibility of wax 
formation a.k.a gel. The measures include a heated fuel filter and 
glow plugs. These systems will be discussed in subsequent train¬ 
ing modules. 

Diesel Fuel Additives 

When diesel fuel is refined, numerous additives are used to 
improve the qualities of the fuel. These additives can be intro¬ 
duced at the refinery level or at the distribution level. One such 
additive is an “Anti-foaming” agent which helps when refueling the 
vehicle by reducing the foam buildup when the fuel is aerated. 


Detergents are added to allow the diesel fuel to assist in the clean¬ 
ing of engine and fuel system components. These detergent com¬ 
bat the possibility of sediment or “gum” buildup which can be 
detrimental to the fuel system. Modem high pressure diesel fuel 
injection systems are sensitive to any dirt or varnish buildup. 

California requires the use of low aromatic diesel fuel. Additives are 
used in this case to lower the aromatic quality of the fuel. In the 
future, some other states may require the use of “low aromatic” 
diesel fuel. 

Some additional additives include: 

• Cetane number improvers 

• Smoke suppressants 

• Low temperature operability additives 

• Biocides (to prevent growth of microbes in the fuel) 

• Corrosion inhibitors 

• Dyes (for identification) 

• Lubricity additives 

Dyes 

Dyes are added to diesel fuel for identification. There are two pri¬ 
mary reasons that fuel needs to be identified. The IRS requires 
diesel fuel to be identified for tax purposes and the EPA requires 
fuel to be identified for fuel quality (i.e sulfur content). 

To comply with the tax code, fuel is usually dyed red for agricultural 
use. The fuel used for farm equipment is not as heavily taxed as 
that which is used for “over-the-road vehicles. Using “red-diesel” 
in a passenger car or truck is a violation of the tax code and there¬ 
fore should not be used. 

The so-called “red diesel” fuel is also dyed to show visible evi¬ 
dence of “high-sulfur”fuel. 











Starting in 2007, the diesel fuel used in new cars is supposed to be 
“ULSD” or Ultra-low Sulfur Diesel. The EPA requires a specific 
quantity of red dye to be used in any fuel which is not of the ULSD 
variety. 

The sulfur content of this fuel has been drastically reduced to help 
modern vehicles meet emission requirements. Therefore, “red 
diesel” should not be used in any “over-the-road” vehicle. 

Microbes 

When fuel is refined, the high temperatures achieved during this 
process will “sterilize” the fuel. However, after the fuel has cooled, 
it is possible for microorganisms to grow. 

This is possible because there is usually some water present is 
diesel fuel which comes from condensation and during the trans¬ 
fer/distribution phases. 

The microbes feed on the interface between the water and fuel. 
These colonies can thrive in the absence of light. Some microbes 
are also anaerobic, which means they can survive in the absence of 
oxygen as well. 

These microbes can multiply into colonies which can become large 
enough to clog fuel system components. The best way to combat 
these organisms is to keep the fuel as clean as possible and 
reduce or eliminate the presence of water. 

Diesel fuel distributors use biocides to attack the microbes and 
reduce their numbers. 


Sulfur Content 

Sulfur is a naturally occurring element found in crude oil. Through 
the refining process various sulfur compounds occur and are pres¬ 
ent in the final product. Up until 1985, not much attention was 
paid to the sulfur content in diesel fuel. 

The presence of sulfur in diesel fuel contributes to unwanted soot 
and particulate emissions which are present is diesel exhaust. So, 
beginning in 1985, the EPA and CARB began with regulations on 
the sulfur content of diesel fuel. This led to the use of low sulfur 
diesel fuel. 

Up until 2007, diesel fuel regulations required the use of “Low 
Sulfur Diesel” or LSD. The sulfur content of LSD is 500 parts per 
million. LSD fuel was compatible with the diesel technology at that 
time, but there was still substantial particulate matter emissions 
(PM). 

For the 2007 model year, the EPA has mandated the use of Ultra 
Low Sulfur Diesel fuel or ULSD. This new fuel represents a 97% 
decrease in sulfur content. The maximum sulfur content in ULSD 
is 15 ppm. As a comparison, this amounts to about 1 ounce of 
sulfur for an entire tanker truck of diesel fuel. 

One of the reason that ULSD fuel is needed is to be compatible 
with the latest generation of “clean diesel” vehicles. These vehi¬ 
cles include a Diesel Particle Filter (DPF) which is used in the 
exhaust system to trap and reduce particulate emissions. The use 
of ULSD assists greatly in the reduction of particulate matter emis¬ 
sion. 

Using LSD fuel in a vehicle which requires ULSD can damage the 
DPF and result in unwanted emission levels and unnecessary com¬ 
ponent damage. So, only ULSD fuel should be used especially on 
vehicles equipped with a DPF. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

25 



26 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


- 1 

ULTRA-LOW SULFUR 

HIGHWAY DIESEL FUEL 

(15 ppm Sulfur Maximum) 

\ / 

r 

LOW SULFUR 
HIGHWAY DIESEL FUEL 

(500 ppm Sulfur Maximum) 

Required for use in all model year 
2007 and later highway diesel 
vehicles and engines. 

Recommended for use in all diesel 
vehicles and engines. 


WARNING 

Federal law prohibits use in model 
year 2007 and later highway 
vehicles and engines. 

Its use may damage these vehicles 
and engines. 


When refueling a vehicle which requires ULSD, be sure to check 
the label located on the pump. This label should be in a conspicu¬ 
ous location. Above, is an example of the correct label for ULSD 
fuel on the left. The right is an example of LSD fuel (pre-2007). 

By December of 2010, all gas stations are required to be in compli¬ 
ance with the ULSD requirements. As of 12/10, LSD fuel will no 
longer be available for highway use. 

Vehicles which require LSD will be able to run on ULSD without 
any modifications. The ULSD fuel meets all lubricity requirements 
for vehicles made prior to 2007. 

Lubricity 

One of the qualities of diesel fuel is that is provides the needed 
lubrication for engine and fuel system components. By nature, 
diesel fuel is very oily and is more viscous (thicker) than gasoline. 
This is why diesel fuel is sometimes referred to as fuel oil. 


With LSD fuel and the new ULSD, additives are used to enhance 
the lubricity of the fuel. So, older vehicles will be able to ULSD 
without any modifications or concerns. 

Grades 

ULSD fuel will be available for both Diesel #1 and Diesel #2 
grades. 


Off Road Use 

Currently, ULSD is not required for “off-highway” use. This 
includes agricultural equipment, locomotive and marine use. 
ULSD will not be required on these applications until 2010. 
Until that time, LSD fuel with 500 ppm sulfur will be available 
(see label below). 



NON-HIGHWAY 
DIESEL FUEL 

(May Exceed 500 ppm Sulfur) 


WARNING 

Federal law prohibits use in 
highway vehicles or engines. 




Its use may damage these vehicles 

and engines. 

D 


Some components such as the injectors and high pressure pump 
will not function properly without lubrication. The presence of 
sulfur and sulfur compounds contribute to the overall lubrication 
qualities of the fuel. 
























Flash Point and Auto-ignition 

The flash point of a fuel represents the lowest temperature as to 
which it will be able to be ignited. Gasoline and diesel fuel have 
different properties, and therefore different flash points. 

A gasoline engine or “spark ignition” engine needs a fuel which 
can be ignited by a spark, but will not “self-ignite” under the heat of 
compression. Gasoline which has a lower flash point that diesel 
fuel can be ignited easier with a outside source of ignition i.e. spark 
or open flame. The flash point of gasoline is at about -43 degrees 
Celsius (-45 F) which works well in a gasoline engine, but not in a 
diesel. A low flash point also makes gasoline more dangerous to 
handle. 

Gasoline, however, has a higher auto-ignition temperature which 
helps the fuel resist self ignition in a gasoline engine. The auto¬ 
ignition temperature of gasoline is about 256 degrees C or 475 
degrees Fahrenheit. 

Diesel fuel has a much higher flash point of about 52 degrees C or 
above. This flash point varies between fuel types i.e. #1 or #2 
diesel. In contrast, the auto-ignition temperature of diesel fuel is 
210 degrees C or 410 degrees Fahrenheit. This particular quality 
of diesel fuel is compatible with a “compression ignition” engine. 


Fuel Mixing 

Among the other attributes of automotive fuels, flash point and 
auto-ignition temperature are perhaps the primary reasons why 
these fuels should never be mixed. Mixing gasoline into diesel fuel 
will lower the flash point rendering the fuel unsafe to handle. Also, 
the flash point and auto-ignition temperature of gasoline would 
adversely affect a diesel engine, even to the extent of engine dam¬ 
age. 

With regards to a diesel engine, it is also important to be aware that 
gasoline has little in the way of lubrication properties sufficient for 
diesel fuel system components. This is of a particular concern to 
the high pressure fuel pump which can be damaged when gasoline 
is introduced into the fuel system. 

The inverse is also true when fueling a gasoline powered vehicle 
incorrectly with diesel fuel. Irreparable engine damage can result 
costing thousands of dollars. 



In Diesel Engines 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

27 



Diesel Oil 


28 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


In addition to the fuel used to run a diesel engine, there are also 
considerations which must be taken into account regarding the 
lubricating oil in a diesel engine. Since the combustion chamber 
temperature of a diesel engine is higher than a gasoline engine, the 
oil temperature is also higher. So, engine oils used in diesel 
engines must be able to withstand the higher temperature demand. 

In addition to the already high service demand on diesel engine oil, 
BMW diesel engines are turbocharged which further increases the 
demands on the engine oil. 

In the U.S., lubricating oils are rated through the American 
Petroleum Institute (API). Engines, whether gasoline or diesel pow¬ 
ered, each have their own classification as far as lubricating oils are 
concerned. 

The lubricating oil used in current diesel engines must conform 
with regulations regarding sulfur content. 

For the correct motor oil for diesel engines, always refer to the 
proper owner’s manual or the “Operating Fluids Specifications 
Manual” which can be found in BMWTIS. 






Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

29 



30 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 


You will notice that your classroom is set up with various “Information Stations”. The following workshop 
exercises pertain to these stations. Proceed to the station which pertains to the topics listed below. 

Information Station 1 (Mechanical): 

Compare the two pistons, note the differences and answer the following questions. 

1. As compared to the piston on the gasoline engine, the diesel piston is: (Circle all that apply) 

Heavier Lighter Larger Smaller 

2. In the following exercise, circle the TRUE statements regarding the pistons on a diesel engine: 

(Cross out false statements) 

A. The first piston ring land on a diesel engine is relatively close to the piston crown 

B. The piston skirt on a diesel engine is deeper than the skirt on a gasoline engine 

C. On a diesel engine, the piston pin is tapered for weight savings 

D. The piston pin has a bushing in the connecting rod, but not in the piston (TOP engine). 

E. The diesel piston contains a major portion of the combustion chamber 

F. The diesel piston is made from cast iron to withstand high temperatures 

Compare the two connecting rods, note the differences and answer the following questions. 

3. Circle the TRUE statements regarding the connecting rods on a diesel engine: 

A. The diesel connecting rod has a bushing in the “small end” 

B. The “small end” of the diesel connecting rod is tapered for weight reduction 

C. The big end of the connecting rod uses dowel pins for alignment 

D. The diesel connecting rod is made from forged steel 

E. The diesel connecting rod is lighter than a connecting rod on a gasoline engine 





Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 


Examine the connecting rod bearings and answer the following questions: 

4. Circle the TRUE statements regarding connecting rod bearings on a diesel engine: 

A. The sputter bearing is comprised of 3 layers 

B. The sputter bearing should be installed in the connecting rod bearing cap 

C. The sputter bearing has a soft layer to absorb dirt particles 

D. The sputter bearing is marked with an “S” on the back of the bearing shell 
Examine the crankcase information and answer the following question: 

5. Circle the TRUE statements regarding crankcase on a diesel engine: 

A. The diesel crankcase has an “open deck” design 

B. The diesel crankcase uses a “bedplate” for added rigidity in the bottom end 

C. The diesel crankcase is made from aluminum and has cast iron cylinder liners 

D. The main bearing caps on a diesel engine are located using dowel pins for precise alignment 
Examine the cylinder head and valvetrain components and answer the following question: 

6. Circle the TRUE statements regarding cylinder head and valetrain components on a diesel engine: 

A. The intake and exhaust valves on a diesel engine are all the same diameter 

B. The major portion of the combustion chamber is located in the cylinder head 

C. The exhaust valves are sodium filled on a diesel engine 

D. The camshafts are manufactured from cast iron on a diesel engine 

E. The exhaust camshaft is driven via a gear-to-gear connection with the intake camshaft 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

31 




32 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 


Information Station 2 (Fuel System): 

Examine the fuel system components and use the poster to determine fuel system operation. 

Answer the following questions: 

1. Which of the following methods is used to drive the high pressure pump on the M57TU2 TOP? 

(Circle the correct answer) 

A. Via a direct connection to the exhaust camshaft 

B. Via a sprocket connection to the timing chain 

C. Via a lobe on the intake camshaft 

D. Via a tandem to the vacuum pump 

2. Which of the following statements is WOTtrue regarding the low pressure fuel system on the diesel engine (M57)? 
(Circle the correct answer) 

A. The fuel filter is heated to assist in cold starting 

B. The EKP module controls the fuel pump based only on load-based “demand” information from the DDE 

C. The low pressure fuel pump is located in the fuel tank 

D. The EKP module is connected to the PT-CAN 

3. Which of the following statements is WOTtrue regarding the common rail system? 

(Circle the correct answer) 

A. The high pressure pump is a 3-piston radial type pump 

B. The fuel injectors are “piezo-electric”. 

C. The injectors are identical in operation to those on the N54 (gasoline) engine 

D. The high pressure fuel pump is lubricated by pressurized engine oil 

E. Fuel pressure on the common rail system is 200 bar 




Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 


Information Station 2 (Fuel System): 

4. Review the statements (A-L) below and circle all of the TRUE statements regarding the the properties of diesel fuel? 
(Circle the correct answer) 

A. Diesel fuel has more “carbon content” than gasoline 

B. Diesel fuel #1 is more commonly used in moderate climates 

C. The Cetane rating of diesel fuel refers to the ease of ignition 

D. Diesel fuel and gasoline can be mixed in small amounts without any concerns 

E. Diesel fuel is more volatile than gasoline 

F. Diesel fuel contains more sulfur than gasoline 

G. ULSD diesel fuel contains less than 15 ppm of sulfur 

H. Diesel fuel (when combusted) will emit more CO 2 per mile than gasoline 

I. Bio-diesel fuel is currently not approved for use in BMW diesel vehicles 

J. BMW diesel engines will only run of diesel fuel which has a Cetane rating of 80 or higher 

K. Diesel fuel evaporates at a higher rate than gasoline 

L. Diesel fuel is less expensive to refine than gasoline 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

33 




34 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 


Information Station 3 (Combustion Process): 

Using the diesel demonstrator, place a small piece of cotton in the tube and press down rapidly on plunger. 
Take note to see if any combustion takes place. 


1. Did combustion take place? (why or why not?) 


Try spreading the cotton apart and re-try. 

2. Did combustion takes place this time? 


3. Based on your results, how does the presence (or lack of) oxygen affect combustion? 


4. How does the shape and size of the cotton affect combustion? How does this relate to actual combustion in a diesel engine? 


5. Which of the following statements are WOTtrue regarding the diesel combustion process? 

A. The fuel mixture on a diesel engine is formed externally 

B. Diesel engines operate most efficiently at a Lambda value of less than 1 

C. The fuel mixture on diesel engines is considered to be “homogeneous” 

D. Fuel is injected into a diesel engine just before the end of the compression stroke 




Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 

_I 

Information Station 4 (Air Management): 

1. Which of the following statement is WOTtrue regarding the throttle valve on a diesel engine? 

A. BMW diesel engines do not have a throttle valve 

B. The throttle on BMW diesel engines is used to control engine load 

C. The throttle is used to control shudder on engine shut down 

D. The throttle is used to prevent engine over-rev from excessive oil consumption 

2. The swirl flaps on the M57 engine are closed: (Circle the correct answer) 

A. All of the time 

B. Only at low RPM/load conditions 

C. Only at high RPM/load conditions 

D. Only during engine shutdown 

E. to reduce engine noise 

3. The swirl flaps are located: 

A. In the exhaust system 

B. In the intake manifold 

C. In the air filter housing 

D. In the cylinder head 

E. In the throttle housing 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

35 




36 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 


Information Station 5 (Auxiliary Systems): 

1. Circle all TRUE statements regarding glow plugs: (Circle all that apply) 

A. Glowplugs provide heat in the combustion chamber at low ambient temperatures 

B. Glow plugs are not activated during engine operation (engine running) 

C. Glow plugs reduce engine noise 

D. Glow plugs contribute to a reduction in exhaust emissions 

E. Glow plugs must be changed every 20,000 miles 

F. Modern BMW glow plug circuits are wired in series 

G. Glow plug circuits are individually diagnoseable 


2. Fast start glowplugs: (Circle all correct statements) 

A. Operate on a PWM control circuit 

B. Operate on a high voltage (12 volts) 

C. Operate on a low voltage (5.3 to 7.8 volts) 

D. Have low internal resistance 

E. Have high internal resistance 


3. The vacuum controlled motor mounts are actuated (supplied with vacuum): 
(Circle all correct statements) 

A. Above 900 RPM 

B. Below 60 km/h 

C. At idle 

D. All the time 




Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 


Information Station 6 (Emission Controls): 

1. The DPF controls the output of: 

A. HC 

B. CO 

C. PM (soot) 

D. NOx 

E. C0 2 

2. Which of the following exhaust gas constituents is of most concern on a diesel engine? 

A. HC 

B. CO 

C. PM 

D. NOx 

3. Which of the following sensors is NOT used on a diesel engine management system? 

A. Exhaust gas temperature sensor 

B. Exhaust gas pressure sensor 

C. Post-catalyst oxygen sensor 

D. Air charge temperature sensor 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

37 




38 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 

Information Station 6 (Emission Controls): 

4. Which two components are installed in the same housing on current BMW diesel vehicles? 

A. DOC and DPF 

B. SCR and DOC 

C. DPF and SCR 

D. EGR and DOC 

E. DPF and EGR 

5. The SCR system uses a urea compound which breaks down into_ when entering the SCR catalyst? 

A. NH 3 

B. NO 

C. 0 2 

D. C0 2 

E. N 2 

6. Which of the following components is used to monitor EGR performance (flow)? 

A. Exhaust gas temperature sensor 

B. Exhaust gas temperature sensor 

C. Air charge temperature sensor 

D. Hot-film air mass meter 

E. Air charge pressure sensor 




mT Lli 


Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Fundamentals 


Information Station 6 (Emission Controls): 

7. Which of the following will occur in order to initiate DPF regeneration? 

A. Pre-injection events 

B. Post injection events 

C. The throttle is held wide-open 

D. The swirl flaps are closed 

8. Swirl flaps are used to lower NOx: 

A. At high RPM 

B. At low RPM 

C. On deceleration 

D. Swirl flaps do not influence NOx 

9. At idle, diesel engine operate at a Lambda value of: 

A. .85 

B. 1.0 

C. 1.15 

D. Over 2.0 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

39 




40 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Engine Mechanical 


In the early stages of diesel engine development, most if not all 
were used in stationary applications for power generation, pump¬ 
ing or to provide motive power for large ships. The engines were 
heavy and impractical for use in ground transportation. During the 
early part of the 20th century, diesels were gradually downsized 
and improved to make mobile applications possible. 

Although diesel engines were always more mechanically and 
thermally efficient than gasoline engines, the early designs were 
heavy and took up a lot of space. So, much of the early develop¬ 
ment of “mobile” diesel engines centered around heavy trucks. 

By the time diesel engines were adapted to automobiles in the 
1930’s, the engine size was reduced and lightened considerably. 
But, this weight reduction was still not enough to make the diesel 
engine a great performer. 

Most of the early automotive diesel engines were using cast iron 
cylinder blocks and cylinder heads. The fuel efficiency that was 
gained from the use of diesel engines was somewhat offset by the 
heavier engine designs. As a result, performance suffered and 
the overall opinion of diesel engines was that they were slow and 
sluggish. 

BMW did not start to develop a diesel engine until the late 1970’s 
when fuel prices were on the incline and the environment was 
becoming a concern. The sluggish performance of early diesel 
engines did not fit into the “sporty” driving style of BMW cus¬ 
tomers. Over the years, other vehicle manufacturers designed 
diesel engines and marketed diesel powered vehicles, but most 
were not considered sporty or high-performance in any way. 

Therefore, BMW needed to develop a diesel engine that was a 
“real” alternative to the gasoline engine. Anything less would not 
fit into the image of the “Ultimate Driving Machine”. 



The development of the M21 engine was preceded by an experi¬ 
mental diesel engine known internally as the Ml 05 which was ini¬ 
tially developed in 1978. The production version of the first BMW 
diesel engine (M21) would be introduced in 1983. 

Early BMW diesel engines utilized cast iron for crankcase 
construction. This was due to to the high combustion chamber 
pressures generated in the diesel combustion cycle. 

The latest diesel engines from BMW take advantage of advance¬ 
ments in aluminum casting technology. This allows the current 
and future diesel engines to be lighter without compromising 
strength. Some of the other areas which are different in diesel 
engines extend to many of the internal engine components. 

These areas include pistons, crankshaft, connecting rods, cylinder 
head and valvetrain. These components are generally stronger 
and are constructed of different materials as compared to their 
counterparts on gasoline engines. 











Engine Construction Comparison 


In order to be compatible with the higher combustion pressures and torque output in a diesel engine, the crankcase must be stronger and 
more robust than a gasoline engine. Early BMW diesel engines used a cast iron crankcase, but current advances in aluminum casting 
technology have allowed the use of lightweight alloy cylinder blocks for diesel applications. The new M57 aluminum crankcase saves 
20 kg over the cast iron version. 

One of the first engines to use this technology was the M57TU2 (6-cylinder) and later the M67TU (8-cylinder). Both of these engines 
were introduced for the 2005 model year (in non-US markets). The aluminum crankcase has externally cast ribs in addition to stronger 
aluminum alloy to ensure optimum block rigidity. 


The graphics shown below are an illustration of the differences between the crankcase on a diesel engine as compared to a crankcase 
used on a gasoline engine. Note the additional cast ribs on the diesel crankcase which contributes to the needed rigidity. Block rigidity is 
further optimized by the closed deck design as compared to the open deck on the N54/N52 engine. 



Crankcase for diesel engine (M57TU2 aluminum) 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

41 


Crankcase for gasoline engine (N54 aluminum) 


42 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Pistons, Crankshaft and Connecting Rods 

One of the major differences between gasoline and diesel engines is in the pistons. The pistons on a diesel engine are subjected to very 
high pressures and therefore must be considerably stronger. On the diesel piston, a portion of the combustion chamber is in the crown. 


Piston, diesel engine - typical 


Piston, gasoline engine - typical 




Piston - Diesel Engine 

As can be seen from the above graphic, the diesel piston is more 
robust. The piston crown and skirt are noticeably thicker. As far as 
material is concerned, a stronger aluminum alloy is used. The area 
between the piston crown and the first ring land (fire land) is much 
larger than that used on a gasoline engine. 

The piston crown itself is unique and features minimal valve reliefs 
and a large recess. This recess is used to accommodate the injec¬ 
tor spray pattern and assist in mixture formation. The piston pin is 
also larger and features a bushing in the piston pin boss. 

An oil cooling passage in the piston allows for a jet of pressurized 
oil to completely encompass the underside of the piston to keep it 
piston crown cool. The increases piston and ring life while helping 
to lower NOx- 


Piston - Gasoline Engine 

This gasoline piston above reflects the type used on a conventional 
gasoline engine. The piston skirt as compared to the diesel piston 
is quite thin. The design goals on a gasoline piston include making 
a strong but lightweight unit which is also “friction optimized”. 

The valve reliefs are more pronounced to accommodate additional 
valve lift. The piston pin is smaller and tapered to save weight 
without compromising strength. 




In order to contain the additional forces generated in the diesel combustion cycle, the crankshaft is made from forged steel, cast iron 
crankshafts are not used. In some cases, the crankshaft journal diameters are slightly larger as well. This is dependent upon the engine 
version. 

The connecting rods must also be stronger to accommodate the additional forces from the combustion process. To accomplish this, the 
rods made from forged steel and are significantly thicker in the beam area and have a larger piston pin. 



Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

43 

















44 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Cylinder Head and Valvetrain 

The cylinder head on a diesel engine differs in several ways as 
compared to a cylinder head on a gasoline engine. Obviously there 
are no accommodations for spark plugs, but rather glow plugs are 
centrally located in the combustion chamber. 

The fuel injector is also located centrally in the combustion 
chamber adjacent to the glow plug. 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

2-Valve arrangement (i.e. M21) 

B 

4-valve arrangement (i.e. M57) 

1 

Combustion chamber (surface/ceiling) 

2 

Valves 

3 

Injection port (swirl chamber/glow plug integrated) 

4 

Glow plug 

5 

Injector (direct injection) 


The angle of the valves on a BMW diesel engine are also slightly 
different as compared to a gasoline engine. Gasoline engines 
depend upon the optimization of intake airflow to meet volumetric 
efficiency requirements. So, BMW gasoline engines depend upon 
the design of the intake and cylinder head to achieve these goals. 

On the other hand, diesel engines are already efficient in this area 
due to the fact that the throttle is open most of the time. This 
reduces pumping losses and improves airflow with out the use of 
special designs. When comparing the cross-sectional views of the 
two cylinder heads below, notice the angle of the valves. The 
gasoline engines utilizes a more extreme angle between the intake 
and exhaust valves to improve flow and help form the shape of the 
combustion chamber. The diesel engine has a valve layout that is 
much less extreme and the combustion chamber is relatively 
non-existent. 



Cylinder head cross section Cylinder head cross section 

Gasoline Engine Diesel Engine 






















It is also important to note that the intake and exhaust valves on 
gasoline engines are of different sizes, with the intake valves being 
larger than the exhaust valves. 

The N54 engine, for example, has intake valves which are 31.5 mm 
and exhaust valves of 28 mm diameter. Some of the earlier diesel 
engines have had valves which are the same size. The M57TU1 
TOR which is not a US version engine, has a valve diameter of 25.9 
mm for all valves, both intake and exhaust. However, the M57TU2 
TOP (M57D30T2) uses only a slightly larger intake valve of 27.4 
millimeters. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Intake valves (27.4 mm) 

2 

Injector (direct injection) 

3 

Glow plug 

4 

Exhaust valves (25.9 mm) 


Camshafts 


The camshafts on the M57 are a composite design for weight 
savings. This process is referred to as the “Presta” process which 
uses a steel tube for the camshaft. The tube is rolled to create a 
“knurled” area around it’s circumference. 


The lobes have splines which interfere with the knurling on the 
camshaft tube. The lobes are pressed on and locked to the 
camshaft in the specified positions. 


This process provides strength with a considerable reduction in weight. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Camshaft lobe 

2 

Roller for Presta process 

3 

Camshaft (steel tube) 

4 

Camshaft lobe (locked on to steel tube) 

5 

“Knurling” on camshaft 

6 

Internal splines on camshaft lobe 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

45 




























46 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Lubrication System 


The oil circuit serves the purpose of supplying with oil all points in the engine requiring lubrication and cooling. As with all BMW engines, 
the diesel engine is equipped with a forced feed lubrication system. The oil drawn in by the oil pump from the oil pan via an intake pipe 
flows through the full-flow oil filter and then passes into the main oil gallery or channel which normally runs parallel to the crankshaft in the 
engine block. 


Branch galleries lead to the main bearings of the crankshaft. The crankshaft has corresponding holes to feed oil from the main bearings to 
the crankpins and connecting rod journals. Part of the oil is branched off from the main oil gallery and fed to the corresponding lubrication 
points in the cylinder head. The following system overview uses the M57 engine as an example to demonstrate the general layout of the 
oil circuit. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Camshaft bearing 

2 

HVA 

3 

Oil dipstick 

4 

Oil filter 

5 

Chain tensioner 

6 

Main oil gallery 

7 

Oil supply, exhaust turbocharger 

8 

Unfiltered oil gallery 

9 

Oil pump 

10 

Oil pan 

11 

Intake pipe with screen 

12 

Channel for oil spray nozzles 

13 

Crankshaft bearing 

14 

Oil spray nozzle 









































From Oil Pan to Oil Pump 

The oil pump (3) draws in oil from the oil pan (6) via the intake pipe with oil screen (5). The intake pipe is positioned such that the intake 
opening is above the oil level (4) under all operating conditions. An oil screen is integrated in the intake pipe in order to keep coarse dirt 
particles away from the oil pump. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Oil filter 

2 

Unfiltered oil gallery 

3 

Oil pump 

4 

Oil level 

5 

Intake pipe with oil screen 

6 

Oil pan 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

47 

























48 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Oil Pump 

Different types of oil pump are used on BMW engines. On the cur¬ 
rent diesel engines, a rotor type pump is used. 


M57 Oil Pump - Pressure relief valve closed 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

External gearwheel 

2 

Pressurized oil 

3 

Pressure chamber 

4 

Internal gearwheel 

5 

Driveshaft 

6 

Intake chamber 

7 

Oil intake 



V -V t) 


Functional Principle 

The oil is drawn in by the rotor oil pump and delivered to the pres¬ 
sure side. The oil flows via the oil gallery (6) to the oil filter and then 
into the main oil gallery. The oil flows back into the oil pump hous¬ 
ing via a filtered oil gallery (5) where it is used, for example, to sup¬ 
ply the oil spray nozzles for piston cooling. 

The control chamber of the pressure relief valve is connected to 
this filtered oil gallery (5) by means of a hole (4). Consequently, the 
system pressure in the oil circuit is also applied in the control 
chamber. 

The control piston (2) which is actuated by compression spring (1) 
forms the limit on one side of the control chamber. The spring 
force of the compression spring (1) determines the opening pres¬ 
sure of the pressure relief valve. 





Index 

Explanation 

1 

Compression spring 

2 

Control piston 

3 

Oil intake 

4 

Hole 

5 

Filtered oil gallery 

6 

Oil gallery to oil filter 


The control piston (2) is moved against the spring force when the 
system pressure in the oil circuit, i.e. also in the control chamber, 
increases. The special shape of the control piston (2) opens up a 
connection from the pressure side of the rotor oil pump to 
the intake. 



































M57 Oil Pump - Pressure relief valve open 




The oil circuit is short-circuited. Determined by the pressure con¬ 
ditions, a certain quantity of oil consequently flows off from the 
pressure side into the intake. The greater the control piston (2) is 
opened, the greater the amount of oil that flows off so that the 
system pressure drops. 


Since the control piston (2) is opened by the system pressure, 
equilibrium is established. In this way, a required maximum pres¬ 
sure in the system is now exceeded as it is determined by the force 
of the compression spring (1). 

There are two reasons for applying oil pressure to the pressure 
relief valve downstream of the oil filter: 

• The oil pressure actually in the system is applied and not the 
pressure between the oil pump and oil filter. If the oil filter were 
soiled, this pressure would be higher and the pressure relief 
valve would open before the maximum pressure were reached 
in the system. 

• The oil is calmed in the oil filter. Consequently, the pressure 
relief valve is not subjected to pressure peaks thus enabling 
more exact valve operation. 

Pressure Relief Valve 

The pressure relief valve protects against excessively high oil pres¬ 
sure, e.g. when starting the engine with the oil cold. In turn this 
function protects the oil pump, oil pump drive, oil filter and oil cool¬ 
er. 

The pressure relief valve is installed on the delivery side between 
the oil pump and oil filter. The pressure relief valve is arranged as 
close as possible downstream of the oil pump, often directly in the 
oil pump housing. 

The opening and control pressure depends on the respective type 
of engine and is between 3 bar and 5. Specifically, the control 
pressure on the M57TU2 is 4.0 bar. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

49 


















50 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Oil Filtering 

The purpose of the oil filter is to clean the oil and to prevent dirt 
particles from entering the oil circuit. BMW diesel engines use the 
full-flow oil filter which allows the entire volume of oil conveyed by 
the oil pump to pass through the filter before it is fed to the lubrica¬ 
tion points. 

From the oil pump, the oil is fed into the oil filter module and then 
to the cooling system corresponding to requirement and version. 

The oil filter module contains valves that fulfill various tasks, which 
include draining facility for filter change, filter bypass in the case of 
clogging and preventing the oil galleries running empty. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Filter bypass valve 

7 

Oil pressure switch 

2 

Oil filter cover 

8 

Heat exchanger bypass valve 

3 

Oil filter housing 

9 

Oil-to-coolant heat exchanger 

4 

Oil flow 

10 

Oil filter 

5 

Non-return valve 

11 

Oil flow via filter bypass valve 

6 

Oil drain opening 




The oil filter cover (2) is connected to the oil filter housing (3) by 
means of a long threaded stud. When the oil filter cover (2) is 
removed, the threaded stud releases an oil drain opening (6), via 
which the oil filter housing (3) can be emptied. 

Note: The seals for the threaded connection of the oil filter 
cover must always be replaced as part of the oil serv¬ 
ice procedure. The seals are supplied together with 
the genuine oil filter. The screw connection for the oil 
filter cover must be tightened to a specified torque, 
which is defined in TIS. 

Non-return Valve 

The oil pump pumps the oil into the oil filter (10). A non-return 
valve (5) prevents the oil filter (10) draining empty when the engine 
is not running. This function ensures the lubrication points are 
supplied with oil for engine start. The oil must overcome an open¬ 
ing pressure in the non-return valve (5) of 0.2 bar. Drained oil gal¬ 
leries can cause noise or even poor engine performance shortly 
after starting an engine that has been stationary for a longer period 
of time. 

Filter Bypass Valve 

The system features a filter bypass valve (11) for the purpose of 
maintaining the oil supply to the lubrication points even when the 
oil filter (10) is soiled. If the oil pressure increases because the oil 
filter (10) is clogged, the filter bypass valve (11) will open at an 
overpressure of 2.5 bar and the oil will flow (unfiltered) to the 
lubrication points. 

Heat Exchanger Bypass Valve 

The heat exchanger bypass valve (8) has the same function as the 
filter bypass valve (1). If the oil pressure increases because the oil- 
to-coolant heat exchanger (9) is clogged, the heat exchanger 
bypass valve (8) will open at a pressure of 2.3 bar, allowing the 
lubricating oil (not cooled) to flow to the lubrication points. 

















Engine Oil Cooling 

There is a risk on high-performance engines and engines subject 
to high thermal loads that the lubricating oil becomes too hot 
during vehicle operation. In this case, the viscosity decreases - the 
oil looses its lubricity and oil consumption increases. 

This results in deposits in the combustion chamber. The oil film 
can break down causing bearing and piston damage. These prob¬ 
lems can be avoided by the use of an engine oil cooler. 

These additional coolers are used if the thermal losses can no 
longer be dissipated over the surface of the oil pan or housing so 
that the permitted oil temperatures would be exceeded. Oil-to-air 
or oil-to-coolant heat exchangers are used for the purpose of cool¬ 
ing the oil. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

“Cooled” coolant 

3 

“Cooled” engine oil 

2 

“Hot” engine oil 

4 

Heated coolant 


Oil-to-air Heat Exchanger 

A conventional engine oil cooler is designed as an oil-to-air heat 
exchanger. This means the heat is given off from the oil to the 
ambient air with no further medium involved. The design of such 
an engine oil cooler is comparable to that of a coolant radiator. 

The oil flows through the engine oil cooler with its large surface 
area facilitating effective heat dissipation. 

Oil-to-coolant Heat Exchanger 

Oil-to-coolant heat exchangers are used in the engine oil and trans¬ 
mission fluid heat management system. They ensure the oil heats 
up rapidly while sufficiently cooling the oil. Engine oil and coolant 
counterflows through the oil-to-coolant heat exchanger on several 
planes, thus transferring heat from one fluid to the other. 

Oil Spray Nozzles 

Oil spray nozzles are used to feed oil for lubrication or cooling pur¬ 
poses to defined positions of moving parts that cannot be reached 
via oil galleries. 



Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

51 















52 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 


Using the training mockup (engine), proceed with engine disassembly using the following outline. Answer the subsequent review 
questions. Follow proper procedures and use repair instructions where necessary. 


Remove the intake manifold, disconnect necessary hoses and connections. Leave throttle and EGR attached to the intake mani¬ 
fold. Also, remove the EGR cooler. 

Are there any special tools required to remove the intake manifold? 


What service or diagnostic procedures might require the removal on the intake manifold? 


Describe the pathway for intake air. Is there anything different as compared to a gasoline engine? 


How are the swirl flaps actuated? 


When the swirl flaps are closed, which ports are blocked? 

Remove the glow plugs. 

Show and record special tools used for compression test. Explain when this would be necessary to perform. 





Intake System Overview 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Unfiltered air 

B 

Filtered air 

C 

Heated charge air 

D 

Cooled charge air 

1 

Unfiltered air snorkel 

2 

Intake air silencer 

3 

Hot-film air mass meter 

4 

Filtered air pipe 

5 

Exhaust turbocharger 

6 

Charge-air pipe 

7 

Intercooler 

8 

Charge-air pipe 

9 

Throttle assembly 

10 

Intake air manifold 

11 

Valve cover with swirl ports 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

53 































54 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 


Proceed with engine disassembly. Continue by removing the fuel lines and all injectors. Pay particular attention to the installation 
position of the fuel lines and fuel injectors hold down brackets. Lay parts aside neatly for later installation. 


Are there any special tools to remove the injectors and or leakage lines? (if so, please list them) 


What special tools are used to clean the injector bores? 


Demonstrate the proper use of the above tools. Have the instructor demonstrate if necessary. 


Note: Take note of the o-rings and copper washer which must be replaced after 
removing and re-installing the injector. 

Be aware that when servicing diesel fuel systems, absolute cleanliness 
must be observed. Cap or cover all fuel system openings. Also, use only 
“lint-free” cloths when cleaning any fuel system components. 

What is the purpose of the leakage lines? 



Intake airflows through the cylinder head cover on this engine. What is the purpose of this design? 






Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 


Continue by removing the crankcase vent valve from the cylinder head cover. Discuss the function and purpose of the crankcase 
vent valve with your instructor. 

Then remove the cylinder head cover and note position of bolts and studs. 

Remove the vacuum pump and set aside. 

How does the vacuum pump drive mechanism differ from most current 6-cylinder gasoline engines? 


Rotate the engine to the TDC position with # 7 cylinder on the 
compression stroke. Lock crankshaft with special tool. 

Check the adjustment of the intake and exhaust camshafts by 
using the special tools shown at the right. 

Check the timing marks on the back side of the intake and 
exhaust camshafts. 

If the adjustment is not correct, please make the necessary 
adjustments before removing the cylinder head. 



Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

55 










56 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 

Prepare to remove the cylinder head. Note that both camshafts must be removed first. Remove 1 bolt (1) on intake camshaft 
sprocket (1st picture below). It will not be accessible when engine is rotated. 

Make sure that the # 1 cylinder is at TDC on the compression stroke. Note the position of the camshaft lobes. (The camshafts are 
counter-rotating). Continue following the instructions while observing picture sequence below. 

Remove hex plug in timing case cover. 

Using a wrench on the hex portion of the exhaust camshaft, rotate counter-clockwise (crank lock tool removed) a few degrees. 
This will allow for retraction of the timing chain tensioner piston. 

Insert special tool 11 3340 into hydraulic chain tensioner and lock in place. 



What process is used to manufacture the camshafts? 

What is the benefit of this process?_ 

Why are there are no VANOS or Valvetronic systems on this engine? 




















Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 


\S_ 

Follow instructions and picture sequence below. 

Once the tensioner is locked, rotate the engine back to TDC and insert crankshaft locking tool. 

Now that the #1 cylinder is at TDC, remove the bolts holding the timing chain sprocket on the intake camshaft. 
Then, remove the bearing pins (bolts) for the timing chain guide rails. 

Remove the timing chain guide rail. 

Remove the timing chain sprocket from the intake camshaft. 



Once the timing chain sprocket is removed, continue by removing all of the camshaft journal caps. Start from the outside and work 
your way inside while turing bolts in small (1/2 turn) increments. Remove camshafts and set aside. 



Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

57 



























58 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 


Before proceeding with cylinder head removal. Remove exhaust manifold and turbochargers and set aside. 

Follow text and picture sequences below. 

Remove all rockers (followers) and HVA elements and lay out in proper order for re-installation. 

Remove hex (internal) bolts joining cylinder head to timing cover. (Be sure to remove hidden bolt as shown - 6 bolts in total) 
Remove head bolts in sequence from outside to inside (in sequence from 14 to 1). 



Warning: Before removing cylinder head, rotate engine counter clockwise approximately 45 degrees. This will ensure that none of 
the pistons are at TDC when re-installing cylinder head and camshafts. 


Note: Once the cylinder head is removed, set aside. Be careful not to lay the 
combustion chamber surface on the bench. The glow plugs extend 
below the deck surface and can be damaged. 























































Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 

While the cylinder head is removed, proceed with checking piston height. Follow text and picture sequence below. 

First, set the dial indicator to zero using the deck surface as a reference. 

With the piston at TDC, measure the piston height at the two points indicated. 

Take the highest of the two measurement points. Refer to chart to select correct head gasket. Fill in chart with your results. 




Piston Clearance 

Gasket Selection 

Less than 0.92 mm 

One Hole 

Between 0.92 and 1.03 

Two Hole 

Above 1.03 mm 

Three Hole 


Cylinder 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Highest 

Measurement 

Piston height 1 








Piston Height 2 









When would it be necessary to check piston height? 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

59 


























60 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 


Rotate engine 180 degrees (oil pan side - up), remove oil pan (sump). 
Once the oil pan is off, remove oil pump pickup tube and oil pump. 
What type of oil pump is used in this engine? 


How is the oil pump controlled? 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Compression spring 

2 

Control piston 

3 

Oil intake 

4 

Hole 

5 

Filtered oil gallery 

6 

Oil gallery to oil filter 




























Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 


Proceed by removing one piston and rod assembly. Use proper tools to protect crankshaft journals. 
Describe the type of connecting rod and the manufacturing process: 


Remove the connecting rod bearing shells from the connecting rod. Locate the shell which has an “S” stamped on it. 

What does the “S” designation indicate and where is it installed? 


Remove 1 main bearing cap and note “embossed” technique for alignment. 

Re-install main cap using proper procedures. 

Then, remove timing cover and note timing chain arrangement and arrangement of hydraulic tensioners. 
Is it possible to remove the high pressure fuel pump without removing the front timing cover ? (explain) 


Re-install piston and rod assembly using special tools. 

Re-install timing chain cover, oil pump and pickup. 

Rotate engine and prepare to re-install cylinder head. Do not install oil pan at this time. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

61 




62 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 

Inspect all dowel pins and install correct cylinder head gasket. 

Follow text and picture sequences below. 

Install head bolts and torque in sequence from inside to outside (in sequence from 1 to 14). 

(Note: Do not torque to maximum for training engine - only use jointing torque) 

Install hex (internal) bolts joining cylinder head to timing cover. (Be sure to install hidden bolt as shown - 6 bolts in total) 

Install all rockers (followers) and HVA elements in the same position from which they were removed. (Hint: used rockers and HVA 
elements should only be installed on the same camshaft lobe to prevent premature wear). 



Record cylinder torque specifications and sequence in the chart below: 



Step 1 

Step 2 

Step 3 

Step 4 

Jointing Torque 

Loosen 

Jointing Torque 

Final - Angle Torque 
























Once the camshafts are installed', set up special tool as shown and check axial play on the intake camshaft. (.02 to. 150mm) 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

63 


Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 

Once the cylinder head is installed, proceed with camshaft installation. Make sure the engine is rotated counter-clockwise about 
45 degrees to prevent valve to piston contact when installing camshafts. 

Follow text and picture sequences below. 

When installing intake and exhaust camshafts, be sure to align the camshaft lobes as shown (to the right when viewing from rear 
of engine) 

Align marks on camshafts as shown. Intake and exhaust camshaft markings must be meshed. 

Install bearing caps on camshafts and tighten from inside to outside in small increments. 
























64 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 


After the cylinder head and camshaft installation is complete, reinstall timing chain, chain guides and camshaft sprocket. 

Prepare to set and adjust camshaft timing. 

Lock engine at TDC using special tool. 

Loosen camshaft sprocket bolts. Note - 3rd camshaft sprocket bolt is not installed at this time. 

Install special tools and check (set if necessary) camshaft timing. Tighten camshaft sprocket bolts to proper torque. Rotate engine 
360 degrees and re-install 3rd sprocket bolt and tighten to specification. Rotate engine another 360 degrees and re-check timing. 



Re-install Cylinder head cover and tighten bolts in sequence from inside to outside. Use correct specification from TIS. In the field, 
be sure to use anaerobic sealer (Drei-bond) where shownfpicture 3 at point 1). 








































































Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 


\S 

Install all fuel injectors, fuel rail and fuel lines. Pay particular attention to the torque specification on the fuel system components. 
When working with the fuel system components, absolute cleanliness must be observed to avoid any fuel system malfunctions. 
Note the 7-digit codes on the fuel injectors. The injectors must be returned to the same cylinders from which they were removed. 
The injectors codes must be entered into the diagnostic system if replaced. 



Fill in the chart below with the correct torque specifications for the fuel injectors and lines: 


Note: The injector lines must not be over-tightened. The diameter of the fuel line can be reduced, resulting in a loss of 
power from the reduction in fuel flow. 




Torque 

Injector Hold down 
to valve cover 

Fuel line 
(Injector) 

Fuel line 

(on high pressure 
pump) 

Fuel line 

(Fuel rail/accumulator) 

Newton Meters 






Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

65 




















































66 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 

Re-install exhaust manifold/turbochargers. Tighten bolts to specification. 

Re-install glowplugs, EGR cooler and thermostat. Re-install vacuum pump. (Do not install intake manifold at this point) 

Rotate engine and install oil pan, tighten bolts to specification in sequence. 

Complete engine assembly by installing all engine accessories, vacuum lines and hoses. 

With the engine assembled, proceed with the removal of the high pressure fuel pump using the special tools. 

(This simulates removal in the vehicle). 

Follow text and picture sequence below: 

Remove intake manifold (should already be removed). 

Disconnect electrical plug at pump (1). 

Remove fuel feed line and return (2 and 3). 

Remove high pressure fuel line between pump and rail (4). Replace high pressure line. 

Open plug in timing cover. 

Remove nut (1) on timing gear sprocket. 

Install special tool as shown. 





























I 

Workshop Exercise - Diesel Engine Disassembly 

Install special tool (135191) with jack screw backed out. Threaded portion of tool should lock into sprocket. 
Remove the three nuts (1) holding fuel pump to crankcase. 

Tighten jack screw until high pressure pump is released from from sprocket. 

Note - pump shaft has keyway (woodruff key), be sure to take this into account during re-installation. 
Replace pump gasket if necessary. 



Reverse procedure to re-install high pressure pump. Be wary of keyway on fuel pump shaft. 
Once complete, re-install intake manifold and necessary accessories, lines and hoses. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

67 


































68 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


^ Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. Special tool 11 6 080 is used to: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. Remove the high pressure fuel pump 

B. Lock the crankshaft at TDC 

C. Align the camshafts for timing check 

D. Lock the hydraulic tensioner 

2. If your piston clearance is between 0.92 and 1.03 mm, you 
should use a head gasket with: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. No holes 

B. One hole 

C. Two holes 

D. Three holes 

3. The intake valves on a diesel engine are: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. sodium filled 

B. the same diameter as the exhaust valves 

C. larger than the exhaust valves 

D. not used on a diesel engine 


4. Which of the following BEST describes the manufacturing 
process of the camshafts on the M57D30T2 engine? 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. Hydroformed 

B. Cast iron 

C. Presta process 

D. Forged steel 

5. Which of the following statements is NOT true regarding the 
crankcase on the BMW diesel engine (M57D30T2)? 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. The cylinder bores are cast iron sleeves 

B. The deck surface is “closed” 

C. The crankcase is made from aluminum 

D. The block used a bedplate for rigidity 

6. The swirl flaps, when closed, block: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. The swirl port 

B. The EGR passage 

C. The tangential port 

D. The exhaust port 

E. The crankcase ventilation 




i Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

7. Which special tool is used to clean the injector bores on the 
diesel engine? 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. 002 530 

B. 13 0 590 

C. 13 5 190 

D. 13 5 210 

8. The torque specification for the fuel lines on the common 
rail system is: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. 11 Nm 

B. 17 Nm 

C. 19 Nm 

D. 23 Nm 

9. The axial play in the intake camshaft is: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. .01 to .05 mm 

B. .02 to .150 mm 

C. .03 to 0.25 mm 

D. .04 to 0.025 mm 


10. The torque angle tool for the cylinder heads is P/N: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. 00 9 120 

B. 00 2 150 

C. 00 1 100 

D. 00 5 600 

11. When installing and removing the cylinder head, it is advised 

to rotate the engine_to prevent valve 

to piston contact. 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. About 45 degrees counter clockwise from TDC 

B. About 90 degrees clockwise from TDC 

C. 180 degrees clockwise from TDC 

D. About 120 degrees counter-clockwise from TDC 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

69 




70 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Diesel Engine Management 


In comparison to the first BMW diesel engine, the M21D24, modern diesel technology has evolved considerably throughout the past 20 
years. The early engines were not “managed”, that is to say that there were only minimal electronic systems involved. The injectors 
were mechanical and there were no feedback systems in place such as O 2 sensors etc. 

Modern diesel engines have benefitted from the advances in current gasoline engine management technology. The Digital Motor 
Electronics (DME) systems have been adapted to the needs of the diesel engine in the form of Digital Diesel Electronics (DDE). 

DDE systems constitute many of the same components and systems as their gasoline powered “cousins”. Some of the familiar items 
include electronically controlled injectors, O 2 sensors as well as other common sensors including crankshaft and camshaft 
sensors. 

The main goals of DDE include the reduction of emissions and maximization of engine efficiency and fuel economy. Also, the ability to 
have more precise control of the injection process allows modern diesel engines to have reduced noise emissions. Engine noise has 
long been a negative aspect of diesel engines. 

The Digital Diesel Electronics (DDE) systems have gone through a progression of enhancement and improvements since the first DDE 
system was introduced on the M21 engine. 

The early development of DDE systems began with the M21D24 engine in 1987. The first generation of diesel engine management 
was referred to as DDE 1. Over the past 20 years of development, the DDE has seen numerous improvements in processing speed 
and computing power. 

These advancements have allowed for more precise control over the fuel injection system. This precise control has allowed for a signifi¬ 
cant reduction in emissions and a considerable improvement in fuel economy. Soot, smoke, NOx have all been reduced by 
optimizing the injection strategy. 

The current generation of DDE systems are referred to as DDE 6X. For example the M57TU1TOP engine for European markets uses 
DDE version 606 and 626. Other engines in use in European markets such as the latest 4-cylinder diesel take advantage of DDE7. 

For the purposes of this training module we will be referring to version DDE 6X. 




Engine Control Module (DDE) 

The ECM is the computational and switching center for the DDE 
system. Sensors installed on the engine and in the vehicle provide 
the input signals for the DDE. 

Actuators execute the commands of the DDE. The DDE calculates 
the necessary control signals for the actuators from the input sig¬ 
nals together with the computational models and characteristic 
maps stored in the DDE. 

DDE operation is guaranteed with a system voltage of between 6 V 
and 16 V. An ambient pressure sensor and a temperature sensor 
are integrated in the DDE. 

The ambient pressure sensor makes it possible for the density of 
the ambient air to be precisely determined - a variable that is used 
in numerous diagnostic functions. Furthermore, it is needed if the 
cylinder charge is being calculated from the substitute variables in 
the event of a hot-film air mass meter fault, for example. 

The temperature sensor measures the temperature inside the con¬ 
trol unit. If the temperature there increases to excessively high lev¬ 
els, the multiple injection, for example, is reduced in order to cool 
down the output stages a little and to maintain the temperature 
inside the control unit within a non-critical range. 




Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

71 























DDE l-P-0 Chart (Typical) 


72 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Typical DDE System 

DDE 606 
M57TU1TOP 
(Not for US Market) 














































































































Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Digital Diesel Electronics (DDE) 

22-27 

Fuel injectors 

2 

Ambient pressure sensor in control unit 

28 

Rail pressure sensor 

3 

Temperature sensor in control unit 

29 

Fuel temperature sensor 

4 

DDE Main relay 

30 

Exhaust gas temperature sensor 1 

5 

E-box fan 

31 

Exhaust gas temperature sensor 2 

6 

Starting relay with starter 

32 

Exhaust pressure sensor 

7 

Auxiliary heater 

33 

Intake air pressure sensor 

8-9 

Electric fan with fan control 

34 

Coolant temperature sensor 

10 

Throttle valve actuator 

35 

Boost pressure sensor 

11 

Camshaft position sensor 

36 

Crankshaft position sensor (KWG) 

12 

Hot-film Air Mass Meter 

37 

Oil pressure switch 

13 

Electric changeover valve (EUV) for engine mount control 

38 

Preheating control unit 

14 

Electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) for exhaust gas recirculation 

(EGR) 

39 

Oil level sensor (Tons or QLT) 

15 

Electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) for turbine control valve 

40 

Accelerator pedal module 

16 

Electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) for wastegate 

41 

Alternator 

17 

Electric changeover valve (EUV) for compressor bypass valve 

42 

Diagnosis line for fuel filter heating 

18 

Electric changeover valve (EUV) for swirl flaps 

43 

Car Access System 

19 

Rail pressure control valve 

44 

Brake light switch 

20 

Volume control valve 

45 

On-board diagnostics socket 

21 

Broadband oxygen sensor (LSU 4.9) 

46 

Ground connection 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

73 






















































































74 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Sensors and Actuators 

Sensors 

• Accelerator pedal module 

• Hot-film air mass meter (HFM) 

• Boost pressure sensor 

• Coolant temperature sensor 

• Fuel temperature sensor 

• Rail pressure sensor 

• Charge air temperature sensor 

• Camshaft position sensor (NWG) 

• Thermal oil level sensor (TONS) 

• Crankshaft position sensor (KWG) 

• Exhaust pressure sensor 

• Exhaust gas temperature sensor upstream of DOC 

• Exhaust gas temperature sensor upstream DPF 

• Oxygen sensor Bosch LSU 4.9 with constant characteristic 

Actuators 

• Fuel injectors 1 -6 

• Volume control valve 

• Pressure control valve 

• Electric changeover valve (EPDW) for exhaust gas recirculation 

• Electric changeover valve (EUV) for swirl flaps 

• Electric changeover valve (EUV) for engine mounts 

• E-box fan 


• Electric motor throttle valve actuator 

• Electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) for turbine 
control valve 

• Electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) for wastegate 

• Electric changeover valve (EUV) for compressor bypass valve 

Switches 

• Brake light switch/brake light test switch 

• Oil pressure switch 

• Clutch switch 

Relays 

• DDE main relay 

• Starter relay 

Interfaces 

• Bit-serial data interface BSD (alternator, preheating control 
unit) 

• PT-CAN 

Electro-pneumatic Pressure Converter (EPDW) 

(EPDW) apply vacuum to the diaphragm units of the turbine control 
valve and wastegate. The DDE uses a PWM signal (300 Hz) to 
actuate the EPDW. The nominal voltage is 12 V. 

Electric Changeover Valve (EUV) 

An electric changeover valve (EUV) applies vacuum to the 
diaphragm unit of the compressor bypass valve. The DDE controls 
the EUV. The nominal voltage is 12 V. 





Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

75 



76 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Diesel Fuel Systems 

There are two basic types of diesel injection methods used on BMW diesel engines. The early designs such as the M21 utilized the 
indirect injection (IDI) method (swirl chamber) which injects fuel into a pre-chamber rather than directly into the combustion chamber. 
Modern designs take advantage of direct injection (Dl) which, as the name suggests, injects fuel directly into the combustion chamber. 

Indirect injection (IDI) can be broken down further into two groups. The “pre-chamber” design and the “swirl” (or turbulence) chamber 
design. As far as BMW current BMW diesel vehicles are concerned, the direct injection arrangement on the diesel is only used with 
common rail injection systems. Common rail was first introduced into BMW production diesels on the M57 family engines for the 1999 
model year. 




“Pre-chamber” design (IDI) 


“Swirl-chamber” design (IDI) 


“Direct Injection” design (Dl) 


The indirect method of injection was very popular on early engine designs such as the M21. The IDI systems offered advantages in 
emissions and engine noise reduction. Today, direct injection designs have replaced the IDI systems. This is due to the advanced high 
pressure common rail systems currently available. With electronic controls and high pressure injection, the new common rail systems 
have paved the way for direct injection to offer up to 20% fuel savings over the earlier designs. 


Now, with Digital Diesel Electronics (DDE) from BMW, the latest common rail systems are capable of providing multiple injection events. 
There is now the possibility of “pre” and “post” injection events. The pre-injection phase allows for a significant reduction in engine 
noise as compared to the earlier IDI systems. 



















































































































Distributor Type Diesel Injection 


In order to understand how far diesel fuel injection technology has come, it is important to understand the fuel system which was used in 
the “early days” of BMW diesel development. The M21 engine used a mechanical injection system which had only minimal electronic 
intervention. The main method of engine control was the fuel pump which was a “distributor type”. This meant that the fuel pump was 
responsible for creating the high pressure needed as well as the injection timing and distribution of the pressurized fuel to each cylinder. 

Each of the fuel injectors on this system was mechanical, which means that the opening of the injector was pressure dependent. These 
injectors would open at a pressure of about 150 bar (2175 psi). This pressure was provided by the distributor injection pump at a specific 
time, this timing was crucial to engine operation. Much like the ignition timing on a “spark-ignition” engine, the timing of these events was 
vital to proper engine operation. 

On the M21, the distributor type pump was mechanically driven by the engine, via the timing belt. This pump needed to be adjusted 
mechanically to ensure proper timing of the fuel injection events. This engine was guite efficient for it’s time, however ever increasing 
emission legislation and fuel economy concerns drove the development of the future common rail injection systems. 



Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

77 




78 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Common Rail Fuel Injection 

The common rail fuel system is divided into two parts - the low 
pressure system and the high pressure system. The low pressure 
system is responsible for supplying the high pressure mechanical 
fuel pump. The low pressure portion of the fuel system will be 
discussed in the subseguent pages. 

The high pressure system is responsible for the fuel pressure 
generation reguired to supply the fuel injectors via the common rail. 

The latest common rail technology is capable of generating injec¬ 
tion pressures of more than 1600 bar (23,200 psi) and in some 
new systems up to 1800 bar (26,100 psi). The system is also 
capable of varying pressure as needed independently of injection 
timing and injection quantity. 

The use of electronically controlled fuel injectors allows for more 
precise control over exhaust emissions and noise characteristics. 
The engine noise or “clatter” which is usually associated with 
diesel engines is greatly reduced by the modern common rail injec¬ 
tion system. 

Common rail systems are referred to as “accumulator” systems 
due to the use of a fuel rail. The fuel rail stores pressurized fuel for 
use by the injectors. This type of system resembles a modern 
gasoline (direct) fuel injection system, but operates at considerably 
higher rail pressures. 

From the inception of common rail systems, enhancements have 
been made to improve performance and emission levels. Current 
BMW vehicles are using the “3rd Generation” of common rail sys¬ 
tems. These systems include such innovations as piezo-electric 
injectors, multiple injection phases and high-pressure CP3 (plus) 
pump. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

High-pressure fuel lines 
(cylinders 1, 3 and 5) 

6 

High pressure fuel line 
(pump to rail) 

2 

High-pressure fuel lines 
(cylinders 2, 4 and 6) 

7 

Rubber mount for fuel line 

3 

Fuel injectors 

8 

High-pressure fuel pump 
(CP 3.2 plus) w/volume control valve 

4 

Fuel rail (accumulator) 

9 

Pressure control valve 

5 

Rail pressure sensor 









Common Rail System Components 

High Pressure Fuel Pump 

The fuel pump used on common rail systems is a radial, piston 
type pump containing three pistons. The pump is mechanically 
driven via the engine timing chain. It is a volume controlled high 
pressure pump commonly known as the CP3.2+ (Bosch). 

The delivery volume for this design is 866 mm 3 , which is greater 
than the previous generation (CP 3.2). 





Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

79 





















80 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Functional Principle 

The electric fuel pump supplies fuel to the high pressure pump via 
the feed line (1). The high pressure pump consists of three pistons 
that are raised by a common triple cam (7). Springs press the pis¬ 
tons against the drive cam. 

Each cylinder of the high pressure pump features ball valves for fuel 
inlet and outlet. The volume of fuel calculated by the DDE flows via 
the volume control valve (2) into the cylinders of the high pressure 
pump. 

During the downward stroke of the pistons, the fuel flows from the 
volume control valve into the cylinders of the high pressure pump. 
Due to the downward movement of the pistons, the fuel is deliv¬ 
ered at high pressure into the rail (4). 

The drive cam is lubricated by the diesel fuel. For lubrication 
purposes, a quantity of the fuel flows from the feed (1) via throttle 
(9) and line (6) to the drive cam and from here into the return (5) of 
the high pressure pump. 

An overflow valve (3) is integrated in the high pressure pump. The 
fuel now released for delivery by the volume control valve flows via 
the overflow valve into the return of the high pressure pump. 

A small quantity of fuel can leak out of the closed volume control 
valve. To ensure this leakage fuel does not reach the main fuel 
delivery, it is routed via the zero delivery restrictor (8) into the return 
flow (5). 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Feed 

6 

Line for lubricating drive cam 
and leakage oil return 

2 

Volume control valve 

7 

Drive cam 

3 

Overflow valve 

8 

Zero delivery restrictor 

4 

High pressure connection to rail 

9 

Throttle (restriction) for drive cam 
lubrication 

5 

Return 












































































Two-actuator Concept 

In the first-generation common-rail system, rail pressure is 
controlled by a pressure control valve at the high-pressure pump. 
The CP always delivers fuel at the maximum rate, irrespective of 
the engine's operating condition. The fuel is heated on account of 
the high pressure produced by the pump running continuously at 
its maximum delivery rate. The fuel releases the energy gained in 
this way in the form of heat in a heat exchanger in the fuel return 
line. 

The two-actuator concept consists of a volumetric fuel control in 
the line in front of the CP 3.2 and a fuel pressure regulator 
downline from the pump, at the rail. 

Pressure in the rail is controlled by the pressure control valve only 
during starting and when the coolant temperature is below 19°C. 
Under these conditions volumetric fuel control is inactive. 

In all other operating ranges volumetric fuel control is implemented 
by the flow regulating valve at the high-pressure pump. Pressure 
control by the pressure control valve is inactive. 

The flow regulating valve on the intake side of the high pressure 
pump (CP 3.2 plus) is actuated by the DDE control unit. The flow 
regulating valve controls the pump delivery rate in such a way that 
only the volume of fuel actually required is supplied to the pump. 

The quantity of excess fuel diminishes accordingly, so significantly 
less heat is generated in the fuel system. 


There are many advantages deriving from volumetric fuel control: 

• Lower manufacturing costs, because there is no need for a 
fuel cooler 

• Improvements in efficiency and consumption because of the 
lower power requirement of the common-rail pump 

• Optimum combustion and low raw emissions 

The two-actuator concept therefore ensures an optimum fuel 
supply in all operating conditions. 

Advantages 

It can take up to 3-4 kW (4-5 HP) to drive the high pressure pump. 
This can result in a loss in fuel economy and engine power. 

By using the two-actuator method of fuel control, the power 
requirement of the high pressure pump can be reduced in the 
partial load range of the engine, thus achieving a reduction in fuel 
consumption of up to 6% depending on the operating point of 
the engine. 

The associated lower heating of the fuel in connection with 
pressure generation renders the fuel cooler in the engine compart¬ 
ment unnecessary. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

81 



82 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Rail Pressure Sensor 

The rail pressure sensor is located 
on the front of the fuel rail. 

It measures the current pressure in 
the rail and sends a voltage signal, 
corresponding to the applied 
pressure, to the DDE. 

The rail pressure sensor and the 
pressure control valve are adapted to 
the pressure ranges of the 3nd 
generation common rail system. 



Pressure Control Valve 

The pressure control valve is located 
at the rear of the rail. 

The purpose of the pressure control 
valve is to control the pressure in the 
rail while starting the engine and when 
the coolant temperature is below 
19°C. 



It is actuated by the DDE control unit. 
The pressure control valve is addition¬ 
ally actuated while coasting 
to facilitate rapid pressure reduction. 


Accumulator (Fuel Rail) 

The accumulator (fuel rail) is mounted on the cylinder head and 
carries the rail-pressure sensor and the pressure control valve. 

The fuel rail is designed to retain fuel at very high pressure and 
store the required fuel volume to dampen pressure fluctuations 
from the high pressure pump. 

This arrangement ensures that when the injectors open and close, 
the rail pressure remains constant. The fuel rail also provides 
connections for the high pressure lines to the injectors. 



High Pressure Fuel Lines 

The high pressure fuel lines provide the connection between fuel 
rail and fuel injectors as well as the connection between the high 
pressure pump and fuel rail. 

The lines must be able to withstand the high pressures and the 
continuous pressure pulses in the common rail system. 

It is essential to avoid over-torquing the lines, a loss of engine 
power could result from the reduction in fuel flow. 













Fuel Injectors 

The earlier common rail systems (1st and 2nd generation), used 
solenoid type fuel injectors. These injectors required as much as 
50 volts for operation. Solenoid type injectors do not have the nec¬ 
essary characteristics for the 3rd generation common rail systems. 

The third generation common rail system uses piezo-electric injec¬ 
tors. Conventional fuel injectors use an electromagnetic coil to 
actuate the injector. Piezo type injectors utilize a series of piezo 
elements to move the internal injector mechanism. 

The piezo-technology offers the following advantages: 

• Nozzle needle movement twice as fast 

• Switching times 5 times faster with very short dead time 

• More effective metering of multiple injection 

• High lift accuracy 

• Lower hydraulic and electrical power requirements 

• Compact design 

• Moved mass reduced by 75% 

• Weight reduced by 33% 

• Possible to increase rail pressure to 1800 bar. 

These advantages are reflected in distinct improvements regarding 
pollutant emissions, fuel consumption and acoustics. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Control chamber 

2 

Piezo element 

3 

Hydraulic return 

4 

Hydraulic inlet 

5 

Actuator module 

6 

Coupler module 

7 

Shift valve 

8 

Nozzle needle 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

83 























84 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Piezo-Electric Principles 

Up until now, the most familiar application of piezo technology in 
automobiles has been the knock sensor. The knock sensor (KS) 
consists of piezo electric crystals which generate a voltage when a 
force is exerted. When an engine knock occurs, the resulting vibra¬ 
tion acts upon the piezo crystals in the knock sensor. A voltage is 
generated and sent to the engine management to indicate the 
presence of engine knock. 

Taking what is known about knock sensors, the piezo injector uses 
the “inverse” method. When a voltage is applied to the piezo crys¬ 
tal, the crystal expands by a specified amount. By stacking the 
piezo elements, the required amount of movement can be 
obtained. 

The new fuel injector design uses a piezo-ceramic elements and 
an electro-mechanical converter. This “inverse piezoelectric effect” 
is now used to convert electrical signals into mechanical move¬ 
ment. 



Piezo Technology 

Some of the first discoveries in piezoelectric technology were 
as early as the 1880’s. Among the early pioneers in this area 
was Pierre and Jacques Curie. It was discovered that certain 
naturally occurring crystals (such as quartz and topaz) exhibited 
surfaces charges when subjected to external forces. 

Since then, there have been numerous advances in this area. 
Modern day applications of piezoelectric technology include 
microphones and phonographic needles. Various automotive 
applications include knock sensors, pressure sensors and 
acceleration sensors. 

Today, many present day sensors include man-made piezo 
electric materials such as piezo-ceramic and piezo-resistive 
materials. Most modern day vehicles utilize a variety of piezo¬ 
electric devices in one or more vehicle systems. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Piezo element with no voltage applied 

2 

Piezo element with no voltage applied 

3 

Piezo element (layers) with voltage applied 
















Fuel Injector Operation 

Circuited between the two elements is the coupler module, which 
functions as a hydraulic compensating element, e.g. to compen¬ 
sate for temperature-related length expansions. 

When the injector is controlled, the actuator module expands. This 
movement is transferred to the switch valve by the coupler module. 
When the switch valve opens, the pressure in the control chamber 
drops and the nozzle needle opens in exactly the same way as with 
the solenoid valve injector. 

The benefits of the PIEZO injector are that they offer a considerably 
faster control response, which results in greater metering accuracy. 

In addition, the PIEZO injector is smaller, lighter and has a lower 
power consumption. The M57D30T2 engine is equipped with 
PIEZO injectors that have been developed further still and are even 
more compact and lighter. 

Leakage Oil 

A certain amount of leakage oil occurs in the injectors due to the 
design of the system. On the one hand, this is fuel that flows away 
as a control volume when the switch valve or outlet restrictor 
opens. On the other hand, a certain amount of fuel is always 
forced past the switch valve or outlet restrictor as a result of the 
pressure in the injector. 



Leakage line with injector 


This volume flows into the leakage oil line that is connected to 
each injector. At this point, the systems in the upper and lower 
power class differ. 


In the lower power class, this leakage oil is directed into the return 
line back to the fuel tank. 


In the upper power class, the leakage oil is directed into the supply 
line to the high pressure pump. The reason for this is that the 
switch valve in the PIEZO injector needs a certain back pressure to 
work correctly. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

85 




86 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Low Pressure System 

As with current gasoline fuel injection systems, there is an electric 
fuel pump located in the fuel tank. The fuel pump supplies the 
needed low pressure fuel to feed the mechanical high-pressure 
pump. 

As with BMW gasoline engines, the fuel system on the vehicles 
equipped with diesel engines share much of the same “low pres¬ 
sure” system components. 

The fuel tank is equipped with two chambers and, on modern 
vehicles, is usually made from plastic. 

The electric fuel pump on the diesel engines is driven by the EKP 
module. The fuel supply system has two delivery units that are 
accommodated in the right and left fuel tank halves. 

The fuel pump (14) with pre-filter (11) is a part of the right-hand 
delivery unit. The swirl pot including a suction jet pump (10), a 
non-return valve and initial filling valve (12) as well as a fuel level 
sensor (9) complete this delivery unit. The fuel pump and swirl pot 
can only be replaced together. 

The suction jet pump (18), fuel level sensor (20) and two non¬ 
return valves (19 + 21) belong to the left-hand delivery unit. 

A line leads from the refuelling vent valve (28) to the fuel filler neck. 
The fuel supply system features two delivery units that are located 
in each of the two tank halves. 

Function 

The electric fuel pump (14) with intake screen (11) pumps the fuel 
via the right-hand delivery unit into the fuel filter (23) outside the 
fuel tank. 

The electric fuel pump is driven by the EKP module (7) with a 
pulse width-modulated signal. The EKP module receives the PWM 
instruction from the digital diesel electronics (DDE) (29). 


The DDE now uses the measured values of a near-engine pres¬ 
sure/temperature sensor (1) for the purpose of calculating the 
PWM instruction. The EKP is also pressure controlled depending 
on the pressure upstream of the high-pressure pump (2). 

In this way, the electric fuel pump is activated as required thus sav¬ 
ing fuel. The fuel filter (23) is heated and is connected to the DDE 
in the standard way by means of a diagnosis cable of the filter 
heater system. 

The high-pressure pump (2) produces the required pressure in the 
common rail system. Surplus fuel that is given off at the volume 
control valve in the high-pressure pump (2) and at the pressure 
control valve (5) is routed via a return line back into the fuel tank 
while the leakage oil (fuel) of the fuel injectors (6) flows back into 
the supply line to the engine (25). 

The fuel return (24) to the fuel tank is used to operate two suction 
jet pumps (10,18). The non-return valve (21) prevents the fuel 
return running empty and maintains a pressure of 30 mbar during 
operation to prevent bubbles forming in the return lines. 

The suction jet pump (18) on the left delivers fuel from the left- 
hand tank half to the swirl pot. The suction jet pump on the right 
fills the swirl pot from the right-hand tank half. 

At high fuel return rates, a pressure relief valve (8) ensures that 
excessively high pressure does not occur in the return line in that it 
opens at a pressure of 0.55 bar and allows the fuel to drain directly 
into the swirl pot. 

The drain-off control valve (19) prevents the swirl pot draining off 
into the left-hand tank half when the vehicle is parked at an incline. 
The valve opens when there is no pressure in the return line (16) 
allowing air to enter the line. The lines drain off so as to prevent the 
so called siphon effect. 




Fuel Supply System Overview 



fa 


■ ■ 

EKP 



Typical fuel system from E70 with diesel engine 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Pressure/temperature sensor 

16 

Return line 

2 

High pressure fuel pump 

17 

Feed line 

3 

Rail pressure sensor 

18 

Suction jet pump 

4 

Fuel rail (accumulator) 

19 

Drain off control valve 

5 

Pressure control valve 

20 

Fuel level sensor 

6 

Fuel injector 

21 

Non-return valve 

7 

EKP module 

22 

Fuel heater 

8 

Pressure relief valve 

23 

Fuel filter 

9 

Fuel level sensor 

24 

Return flow line from engine 

10 

Suction jet pump 

25 

Feed line to engine 

11 

Intake mesh filter 

26 

Engine air cleaner 

12 

Initial filling valve 

27 

Intake manifold 

13 

Swirl pot 

28 

Refuelling vent valve 

14 

Electric fuel pump 

29 

Digital Diesel Electronics (DDE) 

15 

Compensating line 




A line branches from the return (24) for the purpose of feeding the 
suction jet pump (18) in the left-hand tank half. This pump conveys 
fuel from the left-hand tank half via the compensation line (15) into 
the swirl pot. A non-return valve (21) from the suction jet pump 
(10) prevents the right-hand fuel tank emptying via the return line 
(16) when the vehicle is parked on a slope. 

In the event of the swirl pot being completely empty, the initial filling 
valve (12) ensures fuel enters the swirl pot while refuelling. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

87 













































































































































































88 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


EKP Control Module 

The fuel pump is controlled by the DDE via the EKP module. The 
EKP module operates in much the same way as the gasoline ver¬ 
sion does. As in the past, the EKP module stores the fuel mapping 
requirements through vehicle specific encoding. 


The EKP control module uses the mappings as the basis on which 
to calculate the total amount of fuel to be delivered from the follow¬ 
ing reference variables: 

• Amount of fuel required by the engine (as a request from the 
DDE control unit) 



(p 

)DME 


1J 



DDE 






Kl. 15 


2 J I 

6 

3 

EKP 

is “T" 


.CAS 


3 |W| 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

DDE Control Module 

2 

EKP Module 

3 

Fuel Pump 

4 

Car Access System 


• Amount of fuel needed to lubricate the high-pressure pump in 
the diesel fuel system (mapping in the EKP control unit). 

This results in a pulse-width modulated output voltage from the 
EKP control module. The output voltage of the EKP control mod¬ 
ule is the supply voltage for the electric fuel pump. The EKP control 
module controls the speed of the electric fuel pump via the supply 
voltage. The speed of the fuel pump is compared to the actual 
specification stored in the EKP control module controls the speed 
by comparing the actual speed with the specification. 

The current speed of the electric fuel pump is calculated as 
follows: 

The EKP control unit sends the current supply to the fuel pump 
(pulse-width modulated). This voltage is absorbed as a specific rip¬ 
ple due to the individual armature windings of the rotating electric 
motor. The ripple corresponds with the number of segments in the 
commutator (= corresponds with the number of armature windings 
in the electric motor). 

The number of waves produced per revolution is equal to the num¬ 
ber of existing commutator segments. 

This means that the EKP control unit can employ a patented 
procedure (= "Ripple Counter") as the basis for calculating the 
actual speed of the fuel pump using power consumption ripple. 




















Fuel Filter Heater 

The electric filter heater prevents paraffin separation in the diesel 
fuel in winter. The fuel filter with electric heater is secured in a 
crash-safe arrangement in the underbody. 

The filter heater is inserted in the fuel filter housing and secured 
with a clip to prevent it falling out. Simple replacement of the fuel 
filter is therefore possible. 





Functional Principle 

The fuel flows through the electric filter heater (380 W) into the 
filter element. 

The electric filter heater features an electronic control circuit with a 
pressure switch and a temperature sensor. The pressure switch 
and temperature sensor are positioned at the inlet to the fuel filter. 

The electric filter heater switches on under the following conditions 
depending on the fuel pressure and fuel temperature: 

• On exceeding a certain fuel pressure (in filter inlet) by cold, 
viscous fuel. 

• On exceeding a certain temperature value (below 2°C) of the 
diesel fuel. 

The electric heating element is powered via terminals 30. The 
heating element is activated (terminal 31) on the ground side 
directly by the integrated electronic control circuit. Voltage is sup¬ 
plied to the electronic control via terminal 15. 

The filter heater is normally not switched on during operation with 
winter diesel. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Electrical connection 

2 

Low pressure fuel inlet 

3 

Retaining clip 

4 

Fuel filter housing 

5 

Fuel outlet 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

89 























90 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. On the common rail system, the pressure control valve is 
used to control the fuel pressure when: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. When the coolant temperature is above 19 degrees 
Celsius and while decelerating 

B. When the coolant temperature is below 19 degrees 
Celsius and while starting 

C. When the engine is at WOT (VL) 

D. When the engine is at idle only 

2. The M57D30T2 engine uses DDE version: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. 2X 

B. 4X 

C. 6X 

D. 7X 


3. Which of the following types of actuator is used to control 
the EGR valve? 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. EPDW 

B. EUV 

C. KWG 

D. NWG 

4. M21 engine used the _method of injection. 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. Swirl chamber 

B. Pre-chamber 

C. Direct Injection 

D. Common Rail 

5. The High Pressure Pump is driven by the: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. Timing Chain 

B. Exhaust camshaft 

C. Intake camshaft 

D. Vacuum pump 




Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

6. The Volume control valve is located: 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. On the fuel rail 

B. On the high pressure pump 

C. In the fuel tank 

D. On the low pressure fuel line 

E. Behind the right front fender 

7. The “two-actuator” concept refers to which two actuators? 
Select the BEST possible answer 

A. Pressure control valve and EKP module 

B. Pressure control valve and volume control valve 

C. Volume control valve and EUV 

D. Volume control valve and Piezo injectors 

8. Cross out the components which would not be found in 
the fuel tank on the diesel fuel supply system? 

A. Siphon jet 

B. Fuel filter 

C. Fuel pressure regulator 

D. Electric fuel pump 

E. Refuelling vent valve 


9. Which of the following actuators is not found on the BMW 
diesel engine management systems (DDE)? 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. Purge valve 

B. E-box fan 

C. Volume control valve 

D. Pressure control valve 

E. EUV 

10. Which of the following BEST describes the high pressure 
fuel pump (CP3.2)? 

Select the BEST possible answer 

A. A 2-piston inline pump 

B. A vane type pump 

C. A 3-piston radial pump 

D. A 4-piston inline pump 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

91 




92 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Diesel Air Management 


Air Intake System 

In addition to reducing the intake noise, the air intake system 
ensures an optimum supply of fresh air to the combustion cham¬ 
ber. A wave of negative pressure acting against the direction of 
flow of the fresh air intake is created by the movement of the 
piston after opening the intake valve. 

The resulting pressure fluctuations are radiated in the form of 
sound via the mouth of the intake system. In addition, the pulsa¬ 
tion that occurs inside the air intake system causes the walls of 
the components to vibrate, thus also radiating noise. The air 
intake system is therefore optimized in such a way that no disturb¬ 
ing or annoying vibration can occur thus conforming to the noise 
emission limits applicable worldwide. 

The intake system can be divided into two sections. The intake 
snorkel, intercooler and, with exceptions, the intake silencer are 
specifically assigned to the vehicle and differ even in connection 
with the same type of engine due to the different characteristics of 
the vehicle models. 

The exhaust turbocharger and the intake system with swirl flaps, 
throttle valve and various sensors are assigned to the engine. 

Apart from the exhaust turbocharger and exhaust manifold, the 
exhaust system is designed vehicle-specific and differs depending 
on the type of vehicle and specification. 

The unfiltered air (A) that is drawn in reaches intake silencer (2) 
through the intake snorkel (not shown) and unfiltered air pipe (1). 

In the intake silencer, the unfiltered air is filtered to become filtered 
air (B). The filtered airflows via hot-film air mass meter (3) and 
filtered air pipe (4) to exhaust turbocharger (5). 


At the same time, blow-by gases are fed into the filtered air pipe 
through blow-by gas connection (11). In the exhaust turbocharger, 
the filtered air is compressed and thereby heated. 

The compressed, heated charge air (C) is conveyed in charge air 
pipe (6) to intercooler (7). From the intercooler, the now cooled 
charge air (D) flows via charge air pipe (8) past charge air tempera¬ 
ture sensor to throttle valve (9). Depending on the position of the 
throttle valve more or less cooled charge air (D) flows into intake 
manifold (10). 

The inlet for the recirculated exhaust gas also joins the intake 
manifold. 

Note: If the filtered air pipe downstream of the blow-by 
gas connection is heavily oiled, this could imply 
increased blow-by gas levels. The cause of this is 
usually a leak in the engine (e.g. crankshaft seal) 
or surplus air taken in through the vacuum lines. 

A consequential symptom would then be an oily 
exhaust turbocharger, which does not mean that 
there is a fault with the exhaust turbocharger itself. 




Air Intake System Overview 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Unfiltered air 

B 

Filtered air 

C 

Heated charge air 

D 

Cooled charge air 

1 

Unfiltered air snorkel 

2 

Intake air silencer 

3 

Hot-film air mass meter 

4 

Filtered air pipe 

5 

Exhaust turbocharger 

6 

Charge-air pipe 

7 

Intercooler 

8 

Charge-air pipe 

9 

Throttle assembly 

10 

Intake air manifold 

11 

Valve cover with swirl ports 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

93 





























94 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Intake Silencer/Air Filter 


Unfiltered Air Duct 


The intake silencer houses the filter element and is designed such 
that the filter element has as long a service life as possible. 

The larger the filter element, the longer the service life and also the 
greater the space requirement. 

The housing of the intake silencer is also designed to deform in the 
event of impact from above (pedestrian collision). This means that it 
compresses by several centimeters. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Filter element 

2 

Housing 

3 

Intake Silencer 


M57D30T2 Engine 

Due to space restrictions on twin turbo engines, the intake silencer 
is not fitted directly on the engine. In this case, the intake silencer 
is positioned laterally on the wheel well. 


The unfiltered air duct consists of the unfiltered air snorkel, pipe 
and the unfiltered air area of the intake silencer. The unfiltered air 
snorkel and pipe are designed with the crash safety of pedestrians 
in mind. This entails the use of especially soft materials and yield¬ 
ing connections. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Coarse mesh screen 

2 

Unfiltered air snorkel 

3 

Unfiltered air pipe 

4 

Unfiltered area of intake snorkel 

5 

Filter element 

6 

Filtered area of intake snorkel 


The M57D30T2 engine draws in the unfiltered air laterally behind 
the bumper ahead of the cooling module. The unfiltered air is rout¬ 
ed via coarse-mesh screen (1) via unfiltered air snorkel (2) and 
unfiltered air pipe (3) into the unfiltered air area of intake silencer 
(4). 

The coarse-mesh screen prevents large particles such as leaves 
from being drawn in. The unfiltered air snorkel in the M57 engine is 
designed as an unfiltered air intake shroud. This has a large surface 
area, but is exceptionally flat. The air is drawn in by the cooling 
module. 


The intake silencer reduces the intake noise and houses the filter 
element. 



























Intercooler 

The temperature of the air increases as the air is compressed in 
the exhaust turbocharger. This causes the air to expand. This effect 
undermines the benefits of the exhaust turbocharger because less 
oxygen can be delivered to the combustion chamber. 

The intercooler cools the compressed air, the air's density increas¬ 
es and thus more oxygen can be delivered to the combustion 
chamber. 

On BMW diesel engines, charge air is cooled exclusively by fresh 
air with an air-to-air heat exchanger. The charge air cooling rate 
greatly depends on the vehicle speed, temperature of the incoming 
fresh air and the design of the intercooler. 

The main purpose of turbocharging in a diesel engine is to boost 
output. Since more air is delivered to the combustion chamber as 
a consequence of "forced aspiration", it is also possible to have 
more fuel injected, which leads to high output yields. 

However, the air density and therefore the mass of oxygen that can 
be delivered to the combustion chamber is reduced because the 
air heats up, and thus expands, as it is compressed. 

The intercooler counteracts this effect because the cooling 
process increases the density of the compressed air, i.e. so too the 
oxygen content per volume. 

As a result, a larger volume of fuel-air mixture can be combusted 
and converted into mechanical energy. The intercooler is responsi¬ 
ble for reduced intake air temperatures compared to a vehicle with 
no intercooler. This means the power output can be additionally 
increased as a larger mass of air can be conveyed into the com¬ 
bustion chamber. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Heated charge air 

2 

Cooled charge air 

3 

Cooled fresh air 

4 

Heated fresh air 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

95 









96 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Throttle Valve 

A throttle valve is required in all diesel engines, including those 
equipped with a diesel particulate filter. By throttling the intake air, 
the throttle valve ensures that the elevated exhaust gas tempera¬ 
tures required for diesel particulate filter regeneration are achieved. 





Index 

Explanation 

1 

Throttle housing 

2 

EGR vacuum diaphragm 

3 

Throttle motor with feedback electronics 

4 

Incoming air 

5 

Charge air hose connection from intercooler 

6 

EGR connection 


The throttle valve is closed when the engine is shut down to avoid 
engine shudder. After the engine has stopped, the throttle valve is 
reopened. 

The throttle valve also serves the additional function of effectively 
preventing over-rewing of the engine. If the DDE detects over¬ 
revving without an increase in the injection volume, the throttle 
valve will close in order to limit the engine speed. 


This situation can occur as the result of combustible substances 
entering the combustion chamber. Substances may be engine oil 
from an exhaust turbocharger with bearing damage. This function 
can effectively prevent major damage to the engine. The throttle 
valve is located directly upstream of the intake manifold. 

The DDE calculates the position of the throttle valve from the posi¬ 
tion of the accelerator pedal and from the torque requirement of 
other control units. The DDE controls actuation of the throttle valve 
by means of a PWM signal with a pulse duty factor of 5 to 95%. 

To achieve optimum control of the throttle valve, its exact position 
must be recorded on a continual basis. The throttle valve position 
is monitored contactlessly in the throttle valve actuator by 2 Hall 
sensors. The sensors are supplied with a 5 V voltage and connect¬ 
ed to ground by the DDE. Two data lines guarantee redundant 
feedback of the throttle valve position to the DDE. 

The second signal is output as the inverse of the first. The DDE 
evaluates the plausibility of the signal through subtraction. 

The actuator motor for operating the throttle valve is designed as a 
DC motor. It is driven by the DDE on demand. An H-bridge is 
used for activation which makes it possible to drive the motor in the 
opposite direction. The H-bridge in the DDE is monitored by the 
diagnostics system. 

When no power is applied to the drive unit, the throttle valve is set, 
spring-loaded, to an emergency operation position. 

The throttle valve is required for regenerating the diesel particulate 
filter in order to increase the exhaust temperature by intervening in 
the air-fuel mixture. In addition, the throttle valve is closed when 
the engine is shut down in order to reduce shut-down shudder. 

The throttle valve also effectively prevents over-rewing of the 
engine. 











Swirl Flaps 

Swirl flaps ensure better swirl of the incoming air during the intake 
and compression cycles. This method of air control works in 
conjunction with the piston geometry to ensure more complete 
mixture formation. 

By controlling “swirl” within the combustion chamber, significant 
reductions in NOx and particulate emissions are possible. 

The adjustable swirl flaps are located in the tangential channels of 
the intake system and are opened and closed according to the 
operating status of the engine. 

On the M57TU engine, the swirl flaps are closed at low RPM and 
load conditions. This is a map-controlled function. To increase the 
swirl effect, swirl flaps are designed to close tightly on the M57TU 
engines. 

Swirl Flap Operation 

Swirl flap (4) closes tangential port (3) to achieve greater turbulence 
of the air via swirl port (2) in the combustion chamber at low engine 
speeds. With increasing engine speed, it opens to facilitate charg¬ 
ing through the tangential ports. 

The position is based on the driver's load choice, engine speed 
and the coolant temperature. 

The swirl flaps are varied by a linkage (1) that is operated by a DC 
motor or a vacuum unit (3). 

The pressure converter connects the vacuum unit with the vacuum 
supply by means of hoses. When activated by the DDE control 
module, the changeover valve switches vacuum to the vacuum unit. 
The vacuum unit actuates the control rod and the swirl flaps close. 
The control rod is up against the rear stop when the swirl flaps are 
open. 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Swirl Flaps - Open 

B 

Swirl Flaps - Closed 

1 

Linkage 

2 

Swirl Flap 

3 

Vacuum Diaphragm 

4 

Swirl Port 

5 

Tangential port 


Effects of Swirl Flap Malfunctions 

If the swirl flaps stick in open position: Deterioration in exhaust gas 
characteristics in lower speed ranges otherwise no effect. 

If the swirl flaps stick in closed position: Power loss of approxi¬ 
mately 10% at higher engine speeds. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

97 






























98 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Hot-film Air Mass Meter (HFM 6.4) 

The hot-film air mass meter HFM 6.4 is used together with DDE 
on the M57TU. The HFM 6.4 is designed for an air throughput 
rate of up to 640 kg air/h. 

The HFM 6.4 measures the air mass intake within very close toler¬ 
ances so as to permit precise control of the exhaust gas recircula¬ 
tion as well as optimum configuration of the smoke limit. This is 
important for complying with current and future emission limits. 



Functional Principle 

The principle design of the HFM 6.4 corresponds to that of the 
HFM 5 previously used. The hot-film air mass meter HFM 6.4 is 
powered with system voltage. 

A new feature is that the sensor signal is digitized already in the 
HFM 6.4. The digitized signal is transferred frequency-modulated 
to the DDE. 

In order to be able to compensate for the temperature influences, 
the air mass signal is referred to the changing temperature signal. 

The HFM 6 hot-film air mass meter is located downstream of the 
intake silencer and is fitted directly to its cover. The HFM measures 
the air mass taken in by the engine. This is used to record the 
actual air mass, which in turn is used to calculate the exhaust gas 
recirculation rate and the fuel limit volume. 

There is also an intake air temperature sensor located in the HFM 
housing. The temperature is evaluated by the HFM and sent to 
the DDE as a PWM signal. 

A pulse width of 22% equates to a temperature of -20°C and a 
pulse width of 63% equates to a temperature of 80°C. 

Measurement Method 

A labyrinth (6) makes sure that only the actual air mass is recorded. 
Thanks to the labyrinth, backflow and pulsation are not registered. 
In this way, the HFM determines the actual air mass irrespective of 
the air pressure and backflow. 

An electrically heated sensor measuring cell (7) protrudes into the 
airflow (4). The sensor measuring cell is always kept at a constant 
temperature. The airflow absorbs air from the measuring cell. The 
greater the mass airflow, the more energy is required to keep the 
temperature of the measuring cell constant. 





The evaluator electronics (3) digitizes the sensor signals. This digi¬ 
tized sensor signal is then transferred frequency-modulated to the 
DDE. In order to be able to compensate for temperature influ¬ 
ences, the air mass signal is referred to the variable temperature 
signal. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Electric connections 

2 

Measurement tube housing 

3 

Electronic evaluator 

4 

Mass airflow 

5 

Partial flow for measurement,exhaust 

6 

Labyrinth 

7 

Sensor measuring cell 

8 

Sensor housing 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Air mass signal 

B 

Air mass 

C 

Temperature signal 

1 

Air mass signal (A) as a function of air mass (B) and temperature signal (C) 

2 

The period duration of the air mass signal (A) decreases as the air mass (B) 
increases 

3 

The period duration of the air mass signal (A) is extended as the air mass (B) 
reduces 

4 

When the temperature increases (C) and air mass (B) remains constant, the 
period duration of the air mass signal (A) is extended in order to compensate 
for temperature influences 

5 

When air mass (B) increases, the period duration of the air mass signal 
decreases while taking the temperature signal (C) into account 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

99 





































































































100 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Charge Air Temperature Sensor 

The charge-air temperature sensor records the temperature of the 
compressed fresh air. It is located in the boost-pressure pipe, 
directly upstream of the throttle valve. 


The resistance changes in relation to temperature from about 75 k 
Ohms to 87 Ohms, corresponding to a temperature of -40°C to 
120°C. 

Boost Pressure Sensor 


The charge-air temperature is used as a substitute value for calcu¬ 
lating the air mass. This is used to check the plausibility of the 
value of the HFM. If the HFM fails, the substitute value is used to 
calculate the fuel flow measurement and the EGR rate. 



The DDE connects the intake temperature sensor to ground. 

A further connection is connected to a voltage divider circuit in 


the DDE. 


The intake temperature sensor contains a temperature-dependent 
resistor that protrudes into the flow of intake air and assumes the 
temperature of the intake air. 

The resistor has a negative temperature coefficient (NTC). This 
means that the resistance decreases as temperature increases. 

The resistor is part of a voltage divider circuit that receives a 5 V 
voltage from the DDE. The electrical voltage at the resistor is 
dependent on the air temperature. There is a table stored in the 
DDE that specifies the corresponding temperature for each voltage 
value; the table is therefore a solution to compensate for the non¬ 
linear relationship between voltage and temperature. 


The boost pressure sensor is required for boost pressure control. 
The boost pressure sensor monitors and controls the boost 
pressure in accordance with a characteristic map resident in the 
DDE. 

The boost pressure is also used for calculating the volume of fuel. 
The sensor is supplied with a 5 V voltage and connected to ground 
by the DDE. The information is sent to the DDE on a signal line. 

The evaluation signal fluctuates depending on the pressure. On 
the M57D30T2 engine, the measuring range from approximately 
0.1 - 0.74 V corresponds to an absolute pressure from 50 kPa 
(0.5 bar) to 330 kPa (3.3 bar). 






Vacuum System 

On the diesel engine, numerous Vacuum operated devices are 
used to control EGR, turbocharging and motor mounts. 

To simplify assignment, the vacuum lines from several valves to the 
vacuum units are marked in color. This color code is also used for 
the actual components. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Brake booster 

17 

Vacuum line, EPDW wastegate 

2 

Non-Return valve 

18 

Vacuum unit for wastegate 

3 

EUV Swirl flaps 

19 

Vacuum line, EUV engine mount 

4 

Vacuum unit for swirl flaps 

20 

Engine mount 

5 

Vacuum line, EUV engine mount 

21 

Vacuum reservoir 

6 

Vacuum line, engine mount 

22 

Vacuum unit, EPDW turbine control 

valve 

7 

Variable engine mount 

23 

Vacuum line, EPDW turbine control 

valve 

8 

Vacuum Distributor 

24 

Vacuum line, EUV compressor 
bypass valve 

9 

Vacuum unit for EGR valve 

25 

EUV compressor bypass valve 

10 

Vacuum line, EDPW wastegate 

26 

Vacuum line, EUV compressor 
bypass valve 

11 

Vacuum line, Vacuum reservoir 

27 

EPDW wastegate 

12 

Vacuum line brake booster 

28 

EPDW turbine control valve 

13 

Non-Return valve 

29 

EPDW EGR valve 

14 

Vacuum pump 

30 

EUV engine mount 

15 

Vacuum line, EUV compressor 
bypass valve 

31 

Vacuum line swirl flaps 

16 

Vacuum unit for compressor 
bypass valve 

32 

Vacuum line, EUV swirl flaps 


Component 

Color 

Wastegate 

Blue 

Compressor bypass valve 

Red 

Turbine control valve 

Black 

EGR Valve 

Blue 

Engine mount 

Black 

Swirl flaps 

White 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

101 


































































102 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Vacuum Pump 

The vacuum pump is driven by the exhaust camshaft that is 
connected to rotor (3) by means of a jaw clutch. While the engine is 
running, sliding blocks (1) run against housing cover (4). 


The engine oil lubrication system provides a seal to the two differ¬ 
ent chambers on both sides of slide valve (2). The air is drawn in via 
vacuum connection (5) on the right-hand side and delivered to the 
engine via non-return valve (7) on the left-hand side. 


© ® @ ® 



® © © 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Sliding block 

2 

Slide valve 

3 

Rotor 

4 

Housing cover 

5 

Vacuum connection 

6 

Housing 

7 

Non-return valve 


The vacuum pump has a volume of 0.15 liters. Evacuation of the 
vacuum system to a vacuum (negative pressure) of 500 mbar 
(absolute) (depending on type of engine) takes place in less than 5 
seconds at an engine speed of approximately 720 rpm. 

The volume to be evacuated amounts to approximately 4.2 liters. 


Vacuum pump 



























Non-return Valve 

The non-return valve prevents vacuum escaping via the vacuum 
pump when the engine is not running. 


Non-return Valve, Brake Booster 

The non-return valve prevents vacuum escaping from the brake 
booster when the engine is not running. 


Retaining ring (1) supports spring (6). The other end of the spring 
presses seal (5) against hole (3). The vacuum built up in the hole 
and in the vacuum system firmly sucks the seal onto the hole, 
ensuring no vacuum can escape via the vacuum pump. The seal is 
forced against the spring while the vacuum pump is in operation 
thus releasing the hole. 

Air can now be drawn in via the hole and openings (2) in the seal. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Retaining ring 

2 

Opening 

3 

Hole 

4 

Housing 

5 

Seal 

6 

Spring 


From the vacuum connection to vacuum pump (2), the air is drawn 
out of the brake booster via valve plate (1) above the brake booster 
vacuum connection. To prevent incorrect installation, direction 
arrows (3) indicate the direction of flow (4). 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Valve plate 

2 

Vacuum connection to vacuum pump 

3 

Direction arrow 

4 

Direction of flow 

5 

Vacuum connection, brake booster 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

103 






















































104 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Vacuum Distributor 

The task of the vacuum distributor is to distribute the vacuum via 
lines to various system. Different sized apertures (orifice) are built 
into the connections of the vacuum distributor. 

This makes sure that the majority of the vacuum is always available 
for power assisted braking. Unused connections are closed off with 
a rubber cap. 

A distributor with five connections is used on the M57D30T2 
engine. 



Vacuum Reservoir 

The vacuum reservoir retains a defined vacuum for the purpose of 
making available vacuum to meet temporary increases in vacuum 
requirements. 

For instance, on twin turbo engines this makes it possible to still 
control the turbine control valve and the compressor bypass valve 
in the event of the vacuum failing in the system. If this would not be 
possible, an immediate drop in engine output would be noticeable. 

A situation in which such a failure in the vacuum system may occur 
is when the brake booster requires large quantities of vacuum. 

For this purpose, the vacuum reservoir is equipped with a 
non-return valve that prevents the vacuum escaping in the direction 
of the brake booster. 

If it were not for this vacuum reservoir, the vacuum pump would 
have to be built much larger so as to make available sufficient 
vacuum to control the turbocharger assembly while the brake 
booster is operating at maximum. 

However, the capacity of such a pump would be fully utilized only 
very rarely. A vacuum reservoir therefore represents the most 
efficient option of covering maximum vacuum requirements. 


Connection 

Orifice Size 

Wastegate 

0.8 mm 

Compressor bypass/Turbine control valve 

0.8 mm 

EGR Valve 

0.8 mm 

Engine mount 

0.5 mm 

Swirl flaps 

0.5 mm 











































Electro-pneumatic Pressure Converter (EPDW) 

The Electro-pneumatic pressure converter is used for components 
that are activated infinitely variable with vacuum. The Electro¬ 
pneumatic pressure converter is able to mix the incoming vacuum 
with ambient air and set any required negative pressure (mixed 
pressure) between these two negative pressure levels. 

The resulting negative pressure is then used as the control variable 
for actuating pneumatic components. 

These components include: 

• Vacuum unit for EGR valve 

• Vacuum unit for turbine control valve 

• Vacuum unit for wastegate 

The vacuum (negative pressure) is applied at vacuum connection 
(1). The ambient pressure passes through filter element (3) into the 
valve. Vacuum connection outlet (2) may be marked in color (here 
blue) to prevent confusion with several components of the same 
type. 

The mixed pressure is made available via the vacuum outlet. 

The mixed pressure is used to set infinitely variable any position 
between "open" and "closed". 

The DDE actuates the Electro-pneumatic pressure converter pulse 
width modulated at approximately 300 Hz. The negative pressure 
at the vacuum outlet is infinitely variable depending on the pulse 
duty factor. 

The pulse duty factor may be between 0 and 100%. The Electro¬ 
pneumatic pressure converter is closed at a pulse duty factor of 
6% and ambient pressure is applied. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Vacuum connection 

2 

Vacuum outlet 

3 

Filter element 

4 

Electric plug connection 


The Electro-pneumatic pressure converter is fully open at a pulse 
duty factor of 98% and the maximum vacuum of the vacuum sys¬ 
tem is applied. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

105 














106 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Electric Changeover Valve 

The electric changeover valve is used for components that switch 
in two positions. The electric changeover valve makes it possible 
to switch either no vacuum or the maximum available vacuum from 
the vacuum connection (1) to vacuum outlet (2). 

In contrast to the Electro-pneumatic pressure converter, here no 
mixed pressure is set but rather the vacuum in the system is 
switched through to the vacuum unit. 

On the M57D30T2 engine, this electric changeover valve is used 
for the variable engine mounts and the compressor bypass valve. 

The electric changeover valve is actuated by the DDE. 



© © © 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Vacuum connection 

2 

Vacuum outlet 

3 

Electric plug connection 












Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

107 



108 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Exhaust Turbocharger 

The turbocharger is driven by the engine's exhaust gases. The hot, 
pressurized exhaust gases are directed through the turbine of the 
exhaust turbocharger, thus producing the drive force for the 
compressor. 



Index 

Explanation 

P 

Engine output 

t 

Response characteristic 


The intake air is pre-compressed so that a higher air mass enters 
the combustion chamber in the engine. In this way, it is possible to 
inject and combust a greater quantity of fuel, which increases the 
engine's power output and torque. 

The speeds of the turbine are between 100,000 rpm and 200,000 
rpm. The exhaust inlet temperature may be up to approximately 
900°C. 

The performance of a turbocharged engine can reach the levels 
achieved by a naturally aspirated engine with significantly more 
capacity. However, the boost effect can also be used in a small 
engine to achieve a certain output with comparatively reduced 
consumption. 


Twin Turbocharging 

Due to the operating principle as previously mentioned, the design 
of a turbocharger always involves a conflict of objectives. 

A small exhaust turbocharger responds quickly and provides ample 
torque at low engine speeds. However, its power output is limited 
as it quickly reaches the surge and choke line. Although it can 
generate high pressures, the volumetric flow is limited due to its 
size. 

A large exhaust turbocharger is capable of producing high power 
output levels at high engine speeds. However, it responds slug¬ 
gishly and is not capable of generating a high boost pressure at low 
engine speeds. 

The ideal solution would be to have two exhaust turbochargers. 
One small turbocharger for quick response and one large 
turbocharger for maximum output yield. 

Precisely this configuration has now been developed for BMW twin 
turbo diesel engines. Two series-connected exhaust turbochargers 
are used. 

A small turbocharger for the high pressure stage and a larger tur¬ 
bocharger for the low pressure stage. The two turbochargers do 
not have variable vanes. 

The two turbochargers can be variably combined providing an opti¬ 
mum for the entire operating range. This interplay is made possible 
by various flaps and valves. 

These are: 

• Turbine control valve (exhaust side) 

• Compressor bypass valve (air side) 

• Wastegate (exhaust side) 











t / (3 

Jr Tfc, Jr 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Exhaust manifold 

2 

Exhaust turbocharger - low pressure stage (large turbo) 

3 

Exhaust turbocharger - high pressure stage (small turbo) 

4 

Intake air inlet from air cleaner 

5 

Exhaust system connection 

6 

Outlet of compressed intake air to intercooler 

7 

Compressor bypass valve 

8 

Wastegate 

9 

Turbine control valve 


High Pressure Stage 

The high pressure stage is the smaller of the two exhaust 
turbochargers. This is designed as a so-called "integral manifold" 
as the housing for the exhaust turbocharger and the exhaust 
manifold are one single cast unit. The high pressure stage is not 
connected by a valve. The oil inlet and outlet provides the neces¬ 
sary lubrication of the bearing. 

Low Pressure Stage 

The large exhaust turbocharger houses the turbine control valve 
and wastegate. It is mounted on the exhaust manifold and is 
additionally supported against the crankcase. The low pressure 
stage also has a separate oil supply for the bearing. 

Turbine Control Valve 

The turbine control valve opens a bypass channel on the exhaust 
side to the low pressure stage (past the high pressure stage). 

It is operated pneumatically by a vacuum unit and can be variably 
adjusted. An Electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) 
applies vacuum to the vacuum unit. In development, the turbine 
control valve is referred to as the main control valve. 

Compressor Bypass Valve 

The compressor bypass valve controls the bypass of the high pres¬ 
sure stage on the air intake side. It is operated pneumatically by a 
vacuum unit. The compressor bypass valve is either fully opened 
or completely closed. An electric changeover valve (EUV) applies 
vacuum to the vacuum unit. 

Wastegate 

On reaching the nominal engine output, the wastegate opens to 
avoid high boost and turbine pressures. A part of the exhaust gas 
flows via the tailgate past the turbine of the low pressure stage. It is 
operated pneumatically by a vacuum unit. The wastegate can be 
variable adjusted. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

109 



































110 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Two-Stage Turbocharging Function 



Turbine Control Valve 

The turbine control valve (4) routes the exhaust gas through the 
bypass duct past the high pressure stage (2) to the low pressure 
stage (3). It is operated pneumatically by a diaphragm unit and can 
be variably adjusted. An Electro-pneumatic pressure converter 
(high speed EPDW) applies vacuum to the diaphragm unit. 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

M57TU1 -TOP engine 

10 

Hot-film air mass meter (HFM) 

2 

Exhaust turbocharger 
(high pressure stage) 

11 

Digital diesel electronics (DDE) 

3 

Exhaust turbocharger 
(low pressure stage) 

12 

Compressor bypass valve with 
electric changeover valve (EUV) 

4 

Turbine control valve with electrop¬ 
neumatic pressure converter (EPDW) 

13 

Intake air temperature sensor 

5 

Wastegate with electropneumatic 
pressure converter (EPDW) 

14 

Intercooler 

6 

Oxidation catalytic converter 

15 

Exhaust gas recirculation 
(EGR valve) 

7 

Diesel particle filter 

16 

Throttle valve 

8 

Rear silencer 

17 

EGR cooler 

9 

Intake silencer (AGD) with air cleaner 

18 

Boost pressure sensor 


Compressor Bypass Valve 

The compressor bypass valve (12) controls the bypass of the high 
pressure stage (2) on the air intake side. It is operated pneumati¬ 
cally by a diaphragm unit. The compressor bypass valve is either 
fully opened or completely closed. An electric changeover valve 
(EUV) applies vacuum to the diaphragm unit. 

Wastegate 

On reaching the nominal engine output, the wastegate (5) opens to 
avoid high boost and turbine pressures. 

A part of the exhaust gas flows via the tailgate past the turbine of 
the low pressure stage (3). It is operated pneumatically by a 
diaphragm unit. The wastegate can be variable adjusted. 

An Electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) applies 
vacuum to the diaphragm unit. 














































































Lower Engine Speed Range (up to 1500 rpm) 

The turbine wheels of the high pressure and low pressure stages 
(6+7) are driven by exhaust gas. The engine is supercharged pri¬ 
marily by the high pressure stage (7). 


Medium Engine Speed Range (from 1500 to 3250 rpm) 

The turbine control valve (2) opens continuously as the engine 
speed increases. Consequently, the flow of exhaust gas increas¬ 
ingly bypasses the turbine wheel of the high pressure stage (7). 

As the engine speed increases, the engine is supercharged more 
and more by the low pressure stage (6). 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

M57D30T2 Engine 

6 

Exhaust turbocharger - low pressure stage 

2 

Turbine control valve with electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) 

7 

Exhaust turbocharger - high pressure stage 

3 

Wastegate with electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) 

8 

Compressor bypass with electric changeover valve (EUV) 

4 

Exhaust gas to exhaust system 

9 

Intercooler 

5 

Fresh air from air cleaner 




Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

111 


























































112 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Upper Engine Speed Range (from 3250 to 4200 rpm) 

The turbine control valve (2) is completely open. The flow of 
exhaust gas largely bypasses the turbine wheel of the high 
pressure stage (7). The compressor bypass valve (8) is open. 
The engine is supercharged only by the low pressure stage (6). 



t * 


Nominal Engine Speed Range (as from 4200 rpm) 

The engine is supercharged by the low pressure stage (6). 

The wastegate (3) opens as the engine speed increases. A part 
of the exhaust gas therefore bypasses the turbine wheel of the 
low pressure stage, thus limiting the turbine speed. 



t a 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

M57D30T2 Engine 

6 

Exhaust turbocharger - low pressure stage 

2 

Turbine control valve with electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) 

7 

Exhaust turbocharger - high pressure stage 

3 

Wastegate with electro-pneumatic pressure converter (EPDW) 

8 

Compressor bypass with electric changeover valve (EUV) 

4 

Exhaust gas to exhaust system 

9 

Intercooler 

5 

Fresh air from air cleaner 














































































Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

113 



114 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Diesel Emission Controls 


In a diesel engine, power output is dependent upon the amount of 
diesel fuel injected. The engine is operated in a very lean mode 
with excess air. The available excess air provides enough oxygen 
for more complete combustion. This lean operation reduces the 
overall Hydrocarbon (HC) and Carbon Monoxide (CO) emissions 
as compared to a gasoline engine. However, due the higher 
combustion chamber temperatures, Oxides of Nitrogen (NO x ) 
are a major concern. 

Other concerns in a diesel engine include soot which is also 
known as Particulate Matter (PM). PM can be controlled in the 
engine or via exhaust after-treatment. 

Diesel engine emissions can be controlled in one of 2 ways. 

One method is via what is known as “in engine” measures which 
are accomplished by changes in engine design or by the diesel 
engine management systems. The engine management system 
can control emissions via the fuel injection strategy. 

Emissions which cannot be controlled via the engine or engine 
management are the responsibility of the “after-treatment” sys¬ 
tem. Some of the methods employed as after-treatment systems 
are diesel oxidation catalysts, particulate filters and the new 
Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) systems. 



Exhaust Gas Constituents before Exhaust Treatment 









Combustion By-products 

Exhaust gases are the by-product of a chemical reaction which 
occurs during the combustion process. Since diesel fuel is a 
hydrocarbon, the composition of the exhaust gas is similar to the 
exhaust gasses from a gasoline engine. However, these gasses are 
present in different percentages due to the lean operation of the 
diesel engine. 



Hydrocarbons (HC) 

Diesel fuel is a hydrocarbon, therefore any hydrocarbons that are 
present in the exhaust stream are considered unburned (or un¬ 
combusted). HC is a generic term for any chemical compound 
which unites Hydrogen (H) with Carbon (C). During combustion, 
new HC compounds are produced which are not initially present in 
the original fuel. 

The HC is produced when there is insufficient oxygen to support 
complete combustion or if there are cylinder misfires. HC emis¬ 
sions are also produced in the “cooler” parts of the combustion 
chamber such as the area around the piston rings. These “cool” 
areas tend to quench the flame front, resulting in “un-combusted” 
hydrocarbons. A cold engine also tends to allow fuel to condense 
on the cylinder wall which has the same “quenching” effect. 


Diesel engines do not produce a high level of HC, and most of the 
remaining HC after combustion is oxidized by the diesel oxidation 
catalyst (DOC). 

Effects of HC Emissions 

Hydrocarbon emissions are a component of ground level ozone 
which has become an issue in many cities across the US. As one 
of the primary building blocks of smog, ground level ozone is creat¬ 
ed by chemical reactions between HC and nitrogen oxides in the 
presence of sunlight. 

Ozone at ground level contributes to numerous health problems 
including lung damage and cardiovascular functions. Also, hydro¬ 
carbons are also considered toxic. 


aust Gas Flow 



Diesel Oxidation Catalyst 
(DOC) 



Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

115 























































116 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Carbon Monoxide 

Carbon Monoxide (CO) is formed when there is insufficient oxygen 
to support combustion. This condition results in partially burned 
fuel. During normal combustion, Carbon atoms combine with 
oxygen atoms to produce Carbon Dioxide (CO 2 ) and water vapor. 
When there is a lack of oxygen (or excess fuel) during combustion, 
Carbon Monoxide is formed. 

Carbon Monoxide is not usually a concern in modern “lean burn” 
diesel engines. Output of CO is minimal in a diesel engine and 
most of the residual CO is processed (oxidized) by the diesel oxida¬ 
tion catalyst. 


Effects of CO Emissions 

Carbon Monoxide is a colorless, odorless and tasteless gas which 
is poisonous to humans and other air breathing creatures. When 
inhaled, CO takes the place of oxygen in red blood cells. Red 
blood cells normally transport oxygen to all of the bodies tissues. 
When oxygen is substituted by CO in the bloodstream, a condition 
known as hypoxia occurs. This ultimately causes asphyxiation 
which can result in severe illness or death. Even in small amounts, 
CO can cause illness and headaches. 

In the environment, CO contributes to the “greenhouse” effect. 
Although CO is considered a primary pollutant today, it has always 
been present as a result of brush fires and volcanic activity. 












































Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx) 

NOx is an all-inclusive term for chemical compounds consisting of 
nitrogen (N) and oxygen (0). NOx consists of mostly NO (Nitric 
Oxide) and NO 2 (Nitrogen Dioxide). 

Since the ambient air contains both Nitrogen and Oxygen, NOx' s 
formed when these two elements combine in the heat of combus¬ 
tion. Nitrogen and Oxygen do not combine until the combustion 
chamber temperature exceeds 1100°C. 



More than 50% of NOx emissions are derived from mobile sources 
i.e cars, trucks and buses etc.. This includes “on-road” as well as 
“off-road” sources. 

NOx reduction can be addressed by engine management or by 
exhaust “after-treatment”. 

Effects of NOx Emissions 

NOx emissions , along with HC and sunlight, contribute to the for¬ 
mation of photochemical smog. Smog is attributable to numerous 
health issues and is classified by the E.RA. as major contributor to 
health issues including respiratory and heart related illnesses. 

NOx' s also responsible for the formation of ground level ozone, 
which is also a major irritant of the respiratory system. Ozone is of 
particular concern to those suffering from asthma. 

In the environment, both ozone and NOx are considered to of the 
major greenhouse gasses which contribute to global warming. 


One of the major factors in the formation of NOx' s the overall com¬ 
bustion chamber temperature. Diesel engines have inherent issues 
regarding the production of NOx- 

Due to the fact that diesel engines have a very high compression 
ratio, the combustion chamber temperatures are, of course, high as 
well. This in turn, initiates the optimal conditions for NOx forma¬ 
tion. Also, the lean mixtures in a diesel engine contribute to addi¬ 
tional available oxygen in the combustion chamber. This, in turn, is 
a factor in the higher combustion chamber temperatures. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

117 




























118 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Particulate Matter 

One area where diesels are less than desirable is in the area of par¬ 
ticulate matter emissions or “PM”. PM emissions are more com¬ 
monly referred to as soot. Although diesel engines emit less HC 
and CO, soot is derived from any unburned fuel. Sulfur is one of 
the origins of soot in diesel exhaust. The reduction of sulfur con¬ 
tent in the fuel is one way to reduce overall PM emissions. 

Particulate matter emissions are classified in two groups which are 
based on particle size. PM10 refers to those particulates which are 
less than or egual to 10 microns and PM2.5 has a particle size of 
2.5 microns or less. 



human hair 

5G-70um 


r mmy* Ttjm 5 £ £* 


*PM26 

Crannri4 Efthon particles nr[>anK: 
compound* rnelais. * 4 *. 

c 2.5 |LllTl .■YrnLTUivsf.y in Lhijrr«JlKf 


V PM to 

fiu&t. ptiMfrtf'i. fiV.jIc.J. hH«.- 
fjrin '.n irr.w} *-■ 


90 JJ rn r tfiemetef 

FfNE BEACH SAND 


Diesel exhaust consists of mostly the smaller (PM2.5) particles. 
Particulate matter is considered a harmful pollutant which con¬ 
tributes to respiratory problems. Therefore, PM emission should 
be controlled. 

PM emissions can be reduced in a number of ways. One of the 
first and most practical measures is to reduce the sulfur content in 
the fuel. As of 2007, the new ULSD fuel has a limit of 15 ppm 
sulfur. This represents a major reduction over the former 500 ppm 
limit. 

Engine design and engine management systems can greatly con¬ 
tribute to a reduction in PM emissions by ensuring the most effi¬ 
cient engine operation. Perhaps the most effective method of 
reducing PM emissions is found in the exhaust after-treatment 
systems. 

The diesel oxidation catalyst (DOC) has proven to be somewhat 
effective in breaking down the constituents of PM. However, the 
DOC is not enough to meet the current emission standards regard¬ 
ing particulate matter emissions. This is where the diesel particu¬ 
late filter (DPF) becomes an important element of overall PM 
reduction. 







Carbon Dioxide 

Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) is one of the constituents in the exhaust of 
any internal combustion engine. When an engine is running in its 
most efficient state, the major portion of the exhaust gas consists 
of carbon dioxide and water. As a matter of fact, it can be said that 
the efficiency of an engine can be measured by the CO 2 content in 
the exhaust. 


Carbon Dioxide Molecule 



Ironically, CO 2 is one of the major contributors to the theory of 
global warming. Although CO 2 is a natural, non-toxic component 
of the earth's atmosphere it is now present in a disproportionate 
amount. Scientists agree that this situation is now contributing to 
the warming of our global environment. It is also important to note 
that atmospheric CO 2 is not only the result of automobile emis¬ 
sions, but overall industrialization from sources such as manufac¬ 
turing, power generation and transportation sectors. 


Since CO 2 production in an internal combustion engine is a meas¬ 
ure of an engine’s overall efficiency, reducing CO 2 output is a chal¬ 
lenge. 

Since CO 2 output is directly proportional to the amount of fuel 
consumed, it would make sense to improve overall fuel economy. 
Currently, the best way to reduce CO 2 output is to improve the 
overall efficiency. 

Some of these new measures on BMW diesel vehicles include: 

• The addition of Electric Power Steering (EPS) which reduces 
the parasitic load of hydraulic (belt driven) power steering 

• The addition of an A/C compressor clutch 
(previous models omitted clutch) 

• Lightweight vehicle and engine construction 

• Tires with reduced rolling resistance (future) 

The items mentioned above are just a few of the measures to 
reduce CO 2 emissions. As part of BMW’s “Efficient Dynamics” 
concept, many new advances in “clean” diesel technology are on 
the horizon. 

When reducing CO 2 output by way of engine measures, the result¬ 
ing leaner operation results in increased NOx output. In the future 
these situations will be countered by Selective Catalytic Reduction 
(SCR). 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

119 


120 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Diesel Emission Control Systems 

Taking all of the positive aspects of diesel engines into considera¬ 
tion, perhaps the most challenging aspect of diesel engine design 
is the reduction of emissions. Diesel engines are much more effi¬ 
cient than gasoline engines, but have some inherent emission 
concerns due to the fuel used and the lean running strategy. 


o 3 h 2 o fckw sf 6 n 2 o ch 4 co 2 



Diesel engines have a high combustion chamber temperature 
which contributes to excessive NOx production. The high com¬ 
bustion chamber temperatures are due to the high energy content 
of diesel fuel and the lean mixture. The lean mixture does not have 
the same cooling effect of the “richer” mixture found in gasoline 
engines. 


Gasoline engines run at the “stoichiometric” ratio of 14.7 to 1 oth¬ 
erwise known as lambda = 1. Diesel engines have a variable 
air/fuel ratio which varies between a lambda value of 1.15 to 2.0. 
Under idle and no load conditions this could increase to a lambda 
value of 10. 

Particulate emissions are also a concern in diesel engines due to 
the sulfur content in the fuel used. Even though most new diesel 
vehicles will run on ULSD diesel, the PM emissions are still high 
enough to be a concern. So, measures must be taken to reduce 
the overall soot content in the exhaust. 

On diesel engines, the reduction of emissions can be classified 
into two major categories. 

The two categories include: 

• “In-engine” measures 

• Exhaust after-treatment 




































Engine Measures to Reduce Emissions 


The “in-engine” measures include design elements in the 
mechanical structure of the engine as well as engine management 
intervention. In order to reduce unwanted levels of emissions, the 
engine design should contribute to the best possible level of 
efficiency. 



For example, the shape of the combustion chamber has an effect 
on fuel mixing. The mixture can be influenced or “shaped’ by the 
piston design and the angle at which the fuel is injected. The 
intake manifold and intake ports can be designed to provide more 
air motion in the combustion chamber. This is referred to as the 
“swirl effect”. By providing this air movement via “swirl”, the air is 
better mixed with the atomized fuel and thus contributes to low¬ 
ered emissions. 

At low RPM the swirl in the combustion chamber lowers NOx val¬ 
ues in the lower RPM range. BMW engines take advantage of this 
by using an intake manifold with swirl flaps which can by controlled 
via the diesel engine management (DDE). 

If the swirl flaps stick open, low RPM emissions will be affected. If 
the swirl flaps stick closed, high RPM power will be noticeably 
reduced. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Exhaust ports 

5 

Intake valves 

2 

Exhaust valves 

6 

Intake (tangential) port 

3 

Swirl Port 

7 

Swirl flap 

4 

Fuel injector 

8 

Glow plug 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

121 


















































122 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Injection Strategy 

Besides mechanical methods, the engine management system 
can influence overall emission output. This strategy is carried out 
via the fuel injection system. Modern diesel fuel injection systems 
are very precise and use extremely high pressures to improve 
overall efficiency and emission levels. 



The injection system on a diesel engine functions, in some ways, 
much like an ignition system on a gasoline engine. In order to start 
combustion, it is necessary to inject fuel at the right time with refer¬ 
ence to the position of the piston. Just like an ignition system on a 
gasoline engine, the injector must inject fuel before top dead cen¬ 
ter (BTDC). 

The injection strategy can also be modified to inject fuel at different 
times (i.e. ATDC) and can have multiple injection events. Fuel can 
be injected ATDC to help the catalyst achieve operating tempera¬ 
ture earlier. The injection strategy can also be modified to 
assist in heating the DPF (DPF is discuss in the “Exhaust after- 
treatment” section of this workbook). 


For example, the start of injection can be between 2 and 4 degrees 
BTDC when there is no load present (such as during idle). Under 
full load conditions, the start of injection can be moved to 15 
degrees BTDC. 

However, starting the injection event too early can be counter 
productive. The early start of combustion can actually resist the 
movement of the piston and cause a loss of power and an increase 
in emissions. 

Multiple Injection 

The introduction of the third generation common rail facilitates finer 
distribution of the fuel injection per power stroke. Instead of inject¬ 
ing the fuel in two stages per power stroke (pre-injection for mini¬ 
mizing noise and main injection for developing power) as was previ¬ 
ously the case, the fuel is now injected in up to 3 stages. 

As a result, the engines run even more quietly and produce less 
nitrogen oxides and soot particles. 

The following factors enable triple injection: 

• Increased processing capacity of the DDE 

• Higher efficiency of the coils in the fuel injectors 


Operating Range 

M57 TU Injection Strategy 

Near Idle Speed 

2 pre-injections 

1 main-injection 

Partial Load 

1 pre-injection 

1 main-injection 

1 post-injection 

Full Load 

1 pre-injections 

1 main-injection 

Maximum Output 

1 main-injection 




































Charge Air Cooling 

More commonly known as intercooling, BMW turbo-diesel engines 
benefit from charge air cooling in several ways. Besides increasing 
charge air density, the intercooler also reduces NOx as an added 
benefit of the reduced charge air temperature. 

Usually, the intercooler is not associated as being an emission 
control device. But, due to the high combustion chamber tempera¬ 
ture in a diesel engine the intercooler is now providing an important 
function with regard to NOx reduction. 



Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR) 

BMW gasoline engines currently, do not use a more conventional 
“external” EGR system. EGR on BMW gasoline engines is consid¬ 
ered an “internal” system which is carried out via the variable 
camshaft control system (VANOS). 

The VANOS system modifies the camshaft timing to achieve a 
precise amount of valve overlap. The valve overlap allows a certain 
amount of EGR to occur, thus lowering NOx significantly. 


Mostly, gasoline engines respond to an EGR flow rate of about 5 to 
15%. BMW gasoline engines are able to benefit from the “internal” 
method of EGR due to engine design and the engine management 
strategies. 

In the case of diesel engines, which run in a constantly lean mode, 
the NOx content in the exhaust gas is much higher. Therefore, the 
“internal EGR” method is not able to sufficiently lower NOxto 
acceptable levels. So, BMW diesel engines employ an external 
EGR system to meet these needs. Diesel engines benefit from 
EGR rates as high as 50% under certain operating conditions. 

Unlike gasoline engines, diesels can introduce EGR at idle. This is 
due to the fact that the diesel has a mostly open throttle at idle. 

This helps reduce NOx idle which is when a diesel is most lean. 

The recirculated exhaust gas, which is mixed with the fresh air and 
acts as an inert gas, serves to achieve the following: 

• A lower oxygen and nitrogen concentration in the cylinder, 

• A reduction in the maximum combustion temperature of up to 
500°C. This effect is increased still further if the recirculated 
exhaust gases are cooled. 

The EGR valve is located in the throttle housing. Exhaust gas is 
ducted from the exhaust manifold to the throttle housing. There is 
a connection at the forward end of the manifold for this purpose. 
Connected here is the EGR valve, which controls the volume of 
recirculated exhaust gas. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

123 



124 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


EGR Control 

The EGR valve opens by applying vacuum at vacuum connection 
(9). The vacuum presses diaphragm (1) against spring (10) and the 
EGR valve head is lifted from blade-type sleeve (4). Exhaust gas 
(5) can now flow past the EGR valve head into the intake port. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Diaphragm 

2 

Intake air from throttle valve 

3 

EGR Valve head 

4 

Blade type sleeve 

5 

Incoming exhaust gas 

6 

Fresh air/Exhaust gas mixture 

7 

Guide sleeve 

8 

EGR housing 

9 

Vacuum connection 

10 

Spring 


The exhaust gas now mixes with the intake air from throttle valve (2) 
and is directed in the form of a fresh air-exhaust gas-air mixture (6) 
to the engine. The blade-type sleeve has the advantage that, 
when the EGR valve is closed, any deposits formed on the sleeve 
are removed by the blade shape, ensuring the EGR valve always 
closes reliably. In this way, a coking ring is prevented from forming 
on the surface of the valve seat. 

EGR Cooling 

The use of an EGR cooler increases the efficiency of exhaust gas 
recirculation. The cooled exhaust gas is able to draw off more ther¬ 
mal energy from the combustion and thus reduce the maximum 
combustion temperature. Actually, the “cooled” exhaust gas will 
allow a greater volume of exhaust gas to be recirculated. 

The EGR cooler is located in the forward end face of the cylinder 
head. It is supplied with coolant from the cooling system in the 
crankcase directly downstream of the coolant pump. The coolant 
flows through the EGR cooler and, in the process, around the pipes 
carrying the recirculated exhaust gas. Heat is transferred to the 
coolant. After passing through the EGR cooler, the coolant flows 
into the cylinder head. 




















Exhaust After-treatment 


Diesel Oxidation Catalyst (DOC) 

The DOC is responsible for specific functions in the after-treatment 
of diesel exhaust. It is mounted as close to the engine as possible 
for maximum effectiveness over the entire operating range of the 
engine. 

The functions are as follows: 

• Reduction in HC emissions 

• Reduction in CO emissions 

• Oxidation of NO into NO 2 

• Reduction of particle mass 

• To increase exhaust temperature for 
the regeneration phase of the DPF 

In most systems, Diesel Oxidation Catalysts (DOC’s) consist of a 
stainless steel canister that contains a honeycomb structure called 
a substrate or catalyst support. It contains no moving parts, only an 
interior surface coated with catalytic metals such as platinum or 
palladium. 

The DOC is mounted as close to the engine as possible to take 
advantage of available exhaust heat. 

The exhaust in a diesel engine does not contain high amounts of 
HC and CO, but these gasses must be converted into more harm¬ 
less gasses. 

Note: Newer diesel vehicles incorporate the DOC 
and the DPF in the same housing. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Exhaust gasses (pre-cat) 

5 

Exhaust pressure sensor 

2 

Exhaust gas temperature sensor 

6 

Pressure tube 

3 

Oxygen sensor 

7 

Exhaust gas 

4 

DOC housing 




Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

125 





















126 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Reduction of Unwanted Emissions 

The near-engine oxidation catalytic converter ensures the conver¬ 
sion of the following exhaust gas constituents across the entire 
operating range: 

• Carbon monoxide (CO) is converted into carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) 

• Hydrocarbons (HC) are converted into water (H 2 0) and carbon 
dioxide (C0 2 ) 

• Nitrogen monoxide (NO) is converted into nitrogen dioxide 
(N0 2 ) 

• Soot particles are also reduced in the DOC by about 15 to 
30% 



Soot particles flow through the oxidation catalytic converter un¬ 
impeded. The oxidation catalytic converter is additionally used to 
increase the temperature during regeneration of the diesel particu¬ 
late filter. The ceramic carrier (cordierite) features a platinum-based 
oxidation coating. 

The resulting N0 2 from the conversion process is also used down¬ 
stream in the particulate filter (DPF) and in the SCR system. 


Due to the high oxygen content of the exhaust gas, the oxidation 
catalytic converter starts to work at approximately 170°C. Above 
around 350°C, the particle emissions begin to increase again. 

Sulphates form due to the sulphur content of the fuel (sulphur-oxy¬ 
gen compounds). The use of ULSD fuel contributes to a reduction 
in overall particle formation. 

Diesel Particulate Filter 

In order to combat PM emissions, a diesel particulate filter was 
developed in order to store and then “burn off” accumulated soot. 
The filter element of the diesel particulate filter consists of a ceram¬ 
ic honeycomb made of heat-resistant silicon carbide. It is up to 
50% porous and has a platinum-based, catalytic coating. 

The DPF will trap and store soot in the channels in the honeycomb 
structure. At certain intervals, the DPF will go through a “regenera¬ 
tion phase” to burn off the residual soot. 

The high temperature generated by the exhaust heats the ceramic 
structure and allows the particles inside to break down (oxidize) into 
less harmful components. 

Function of the DPF 

The diesel particulate filter ensures the conversion of the following 
exhaust gas constituents: 

• G + 2 N0 2 —> C0 2 + 2 NO 

• C + 0 2 = > C0 2 

• 2 CO + 0 2 => 2 C0 2 

The coating of the catalyst helps to achieve a reduction in the soot 
ignition temperature and thus to guarantee good regeneration 
characteristics of the diesel particulate filter. 







































The exhaust gases flow out of the oxidation catalytic converter and 
into the inlet ducts of the diesel particulate filter. These are closed 
at their ends. Each inlet duct is surrounded by four exhaust ducts. 

The soot particles deposit on the platinum coating of the inlet 
ducts and remain there until they are combusted as a result of an 
increase in the exhaust temperature. 

The cleaned exhaust gas flows out of the exhaust ducts through 
the platinum-coated, porous filter walls. Soot is only converted 
during vehicle operation under certain conditions such as full throt¬ 
tle situations. However, the optimum conditions are not always 
present is sufficient time intervals to remove soot, so a filter regen¬ 
eration phase can be induced by the DDE periodically. 

Filter Regeneration 

The soot particles (carbon particles) that are deposited on the filter 
walls would eventually cause damage to the diesel particulate filter. 
The soot particles therefore need to be burnt off. This can happen 
when the exhaust temperature rises above the soot ignition 
temperature. This process occurs under certain vehicle operational 
situations or when the DDE initiates the process. This process is 
known as filter regeneration. The soot and carbon particles are 
converted to gaseous carbon dioxide (CO 2 ). 

Soot particles have a relatively high ignition temperature. So, the 
exhaust temperature must be raised in order to initiate a regenera¬ 
tion phase. The exhaust temperature is raised by “post injection” 
events. The DDE system triggers the injectors after initial 
combustion has taken place. This raises the exhaust temperature, 
which in turn burns off the accumulated soot particles. 

The DDE will initiate regeneration every 300 to 500 miles depend¬ 
ing on several factors. Mostly, the regeneration is transparent to 
the driver. There may be a light loss of power for a short period 
while the soot is burned off. 



& 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Exhaust gas from DOC with soot 
particles 

5 

Inlet channel 

2 

Exhaust gas temperature sensor 

6 

Outlet channel 

3 

Diesel particulate filter (DPF) 

7 

Cleaned exhaust gas without soot 
particles 

4 

End of filter element 




Note: Newer diesel vehicles incorporate the DOC and the 
DPF in the same housing. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

127 













128 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Sensors - Exhaust System 

Exhaust Temperature Sensor 

The DDE requires the exhaust temperature for controlling regener¬ 
ation of the diesel particulate filter. The exhaust temperature 
sensor is designed as an NTC resistor sensor (the resistance 
decreases as temperature increases). 

Version with Two Exhaust Temperature Sensors 

One exhaust temperature sensor is located upstream of the oxida¬ 
tion catalytic converter and the other upstream of the diesel partic¬ 
ulate filter. 


Temperature 

Resistance 

Voltage 

-40°C 

Approx 96 kOhms 

Approx. 4.95 V 

+/-40°C 

Approx 30 k Ohms 

Approx. 4.84 V 

+100°C 

Approx 2.79 k Ohms 

Approx. 3.68 V 

+ 800°C 

Approx. 31.7 k Ohms 

Approx. 0.15 V 


An exhaust temperature in excess of 240°C is required for regener¬ 
ating the filter. Initiating the filter generation procedure at tempera¬ 
tures below 240°C would produce white smoke caused by excess 
hydrocarbon (HC). 

The exhaust temperature sensor upstream of the oxidation catalytic 
converter ensures the regeneration procedure is only enabled at 
temperatures above 240°C. 

The exhaust temperature upstream of the diesel particulate filter is 
registered in order to control post-injection and therefore the 
exhaust temperature itself ahead of the diesel particulate filter. 

Depending on the type of vehicle, the exhaust temperature sensor 
upstream of the diesel particulate filter sets a temperature between 
580°C - 610°C based on the post-injection volume. 


Three different types of sensors are used in the exhaust system. 
These sensors detect the exhaust temperature, exhaust backpres¬ 
sure and exhaust composition (oxygen sensor). The location and 
number of exhaust temperature sensors vary depending on the 
type of vehicle. 

Exhaust System with One Exhaust Temperature Sensor 

In line with the introduction of the oxidation catalytic converter and 
the diesel particulate filter in one housing, only one exhaust 
temperature sensor upstream of the oxidation catalytic converter 
was used. 

The sensor upstream of the diesel particulate filter is replaced by a 
characteristic map in the DDE. Currently, however, a second 
exhaust temperature sensor is again used upstream of the diesel 
particulate filter as the characteristic map cannot provide the 
required degree of accuracy. 

Note: The electrical supply line must not be subjected to a 
pulling force of more than 80 N. Sensors that have 
been dropped must not be used again. 




Oxygen Sensor 

More stringent exhaust emission limits have rendered necessary 
more accurate control of the exhaust gasses. The mean guantity 
adaptation (MMA) makes it possible to comply with the specified 
limits with a corresponding safety margin. 

This is necessary as the emission limits must still be maintained 
despite component tolerances and operating influences. 


An injection volume averaged across all cylinders is calculated from 
the fuel-air ratio measured by the oxygen sensor and the air mass 
measured by the HFM. This value is compared with the injection 
volume specified by the DDE. 

If a discrepancy is detected, the fresh air mass is adapted to match 
the actual injection volume by correspondingly adjusting the EGR 
valve, thus establishing the correct fuel-air ratio. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

DDE 

2 

Oxygen Sensor 

3 

EGR Valve 


The MMA is not an "instantaneous" regulation but an adaptive 
learning process. In other words, the injection volume error is 
taught into an adaptive characteristic map that is permanently 
stored in the control unit. 

The MMA characteristic map must be reset with the aid of the 
BMW diagnosis system after replacing one of the following 
components: 

• Hot-film air mass meter 

• Fuel injector(s) 

• Rail-pressure sensor 

For optimum combustion, a diesel engine is operated with a fuel- 
air ratio of Lambda > 1, i.e. rich in oxygen. Lambda = 1 signifies a 
mixture of 1 kg fuel with 14.7 kg air. 

The oxygen sensor is located at the inlet to the shared housing of 
the diesel particulate filter (DPF) and oxidation catalytic converter. 

The oxygen sensor used on the M57D30T2 is the Bosch LSU 4.9 
broadband oxygen sensor. It is installed before the DPF and DOC. 


With mean quantity value adaptation the fuel/air ratio (lambda) is 
adjusted by corresponding adaptation of the exhaust gas 
recirculation. This feature compensates for any inaccuracies 
relating to manufacturing tolerances of the hot-film air mass meter 
or of the fuel injectors. 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

129 
































130 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Exhaust System Layout (Typical) 

The following illustration is a representation of a typical exhaust system on a diesel vehicle. The exhaust system shown does not have a 
DPF and DOC in the same housing. Future US production vehicles will have a DPF and DOC in the same housing. Also, the vehicles will 
have an SCR system, and the SCR catalyst will be located at position (9). 

© ® ® ® 



® © ® © ® ® 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Exhaust gas backpressure sensor 

6 

Diesel particulate filter (DPF) 

2 

Connecting pipe 

7 

Decoupling element 

3 

Oxygen sensor 

8 

Exhaust temperature sensor (or SCR injection nozzle) 

4 

Oxidation catalyst 

9 

Intermediate silencer (or SCR catalyst on new vehicles) 

5 

Exhaust gas temperature sensor 

10 

Rear silencer 

























Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) 

One of the latest methods to reduce NOx emissions is the use of 
the new Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) system. SCR sys¬ 
tems have been in use in the heavy trucking industry for a few 
years. Now, these systems have been adapted for use in passen¬ 
ger cars. 

The SCR system uses a special NOx reducing catalyst which 
works in conjunction with a special reducing agent. The reducing 
agent is injected into the exhaust during certain periods of engine 
operation to further reduce NOx emissions. 



The reducing agent is a urea compound in an aqueous solution. 
Urea is an organic compound consisting of carbon, nitrogen, oxy¬ 
gen and hydrogen, with the formula (Nh^CO. When introduced 
into the exhaust stream ahead of the SCR catalyst, a chemical 
reaction takes place. 

The urea solution breaks down when injected into the exhaust 
stream. The resulting reaction decomposes into ammonia (NH 3 ) 
and carbon dioxide (CO 2 ). These substances enter the SCR cata¬ 
lyst to create a further reaction. The nitrogen oxides and ammonia 
entering the SCR catalyst are reduced into harmless nitrogen 
and water. 


The SCR system consists of an on board system to store and 
inject the urea solution into the exhaust stream. The system works 
in conjunction with the DDE system to monitor NOx ' n the exhaust 
stream to inject the urea accordingly. 



Selective Catalyst 
Reduction (SCR) 


More information on the SCR system will be available in 
future training reference. 

Diesel Exhaust Fluid 

The diesel exhaust fluid is a urea based solution used as the reduc¬ 
ing agent in the SCR system. It consists of a highly purified urea 
solution (32.5%) with demineralized water (67.5%). 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

131 























132 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Diesel Auxiliary Systems 


As previously discussed, the combustion cycle of a diesel engine 
depends upon the heat of compression. However, when the 
ambient temperature is low, starting difficulties can occur due to 
several reasons. 

The areas affected include the diesel fuel itself and the tempera¬ 
ture of the combustion chamber. So, there are several systems in 
place to aid in cold weather starting. 

These systems include the fuel heating system and the glow plug 
system. Also, the starter is modified to create sufficient RPM 
during cranking. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Glow plugs 

2 

Glow plug control module (GSG) 


Glow Plug System 

The glow plug system consists of electrically powered heating 
devices called glow plugs. These plugs are installed in the cylin¬ 
der head with the tip of the plug extending into the combustion 
chamber. When starting the vehicle at low ambient temperatures, 
the glow plugs are energized and provide pre-heating for the com 
bustion chamber. 

This additional heat helps overcome the incoming cold air and 
improves the starting characteristics of the diesel engine. 







































Glow Plug System Function 

Modern glow plug systems have several new features in compari¬ 
son to the early cylinder pre-heating systems. These include: 

• Cylinder pre-heating - Cylinder pre-heating is based on 
time and temperature. 

At moderate temperatures, the pre-heating time is reduced. 

In contrast, the time is increased at the engine temperature 
decreases. This information is obtained from the DDE. 

The glow plug system also monitors additional parameters 
from the DDE such as engine speed and injection volume. 
This additional data is used to de-activate cylinder pre-heating 
when not needed. 

• After-heating - To reduce engine noise and emissions, the 
glow plugs can be used to maintain a constant even tempera¬ 
ture in the combustion chamber. This activation is dependent 
upon engine temperature and engine speed. 

Modern glow plug systems on BMW diesel engines consist of the 
following: 

• Glow plugs 

• Pre-heating control unit (on side of engine block) 

• DDE (DDE supplies information such as engine speed, 
coolant temperature and injection etc.) 

• Bi-directional data interface (BSD) from DDE to pre-heating 
control unit 



Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

133 




































































































































134 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


Diesel Starter 

Diesel engines have a much higher compression ratio than gasoline engines and therefore reguire more torque when cranking. Since 
diesel engines rely on the heat of compression to run, there must be sufficient cranking speed when starting. 

To provide sufficient torque, starters on BMW diesel engines are specially designed. The drive mechanism consists of a planetary gear 
set, to multiply torque in an efficient and compact manner. 






















Vibration Reduction 


Engine Mount Function 


Diesel engines have some inherent vibration concerns particularly 
during shutdown and startup phases. The engine mount control 
system provides a vacuum controlled motor mount system which 
can create a “hard” or “soft” setting based on engine and vehicle 
speed. 

The motor mounts are controlled via a vacuum solenoid which is 
electrically controlled by the DDE. 



Switching 

value 

Remarks 

Engine speed 

900 rpm 

Hysteresis (+ 50 rpm) 

Vehicle speed 

60 km/h 

Hysteresis (+ 5 km/h) 


Engine Mount Control 

The engine mount control 
function of DDE actuates the 
electric changeover valve 
(EUV) for the variable-damping 
engine mounts. 

The engine mount is set to 
the "soft" setting for engine 
starts. When the start phase 
times out the engine mount 
changeover takes place as a 
function of operating point 
and with an engine-speed-related hysteresis and a road speed- 
related hysteresis. 

The default position is the “hard” setting when no vacuum is pres¬ 
ent at the engine mounts. 

Aside from engine speed and road speed, coolant temperature can 
also modify the RPM parameters between 1100 and 1200 RPM. 

Activation of the damping-controlled hydraulic mounts by the DDE 
is based on the following parameters: 




Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

135 























136 

Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 


^ Classroom Exercise - Review Exercises 

1. Where is the glow plug control module (GSG) located on the M57TU2 TOP engine? 

A. Next to the JB 

B. In the E-box 

C. Under the intake manifold 

D. On the bulkhead next to the air filter housing 

E. In the left front wheel well 

2. How does the glow plug control module communicate with the DDE? 

A. via the BSD line 

B. via PT-CAN 

C. via LIN 

D. via D-Bus 

E. via Flex-ray 

3. On the SCR system, a urea solution is injected into the exhaust stream. When the urea solution 
enters the SCR catalyst, the resulting reaction break the urea into carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) and: 

A. H 2 S0 4 

B. NH 3 

C. NO x 

D. N 

E. 0 




Classroom Exercise - Review Exercises 

4. Which of the following components, when replaced, does not require the MMA 
characteristic map to be reset with the BMW diagnostic system? 

A. HFM 

B. Fuel injector 

C. Rail pressure sensor 

D. Oxygen sensor 

5. In the event of a swirl flap malfunction, what would be the possible symptom or complaint, 
when the swirl flaps are “stuck closed”? 

A. Lack of high RPM power 

B. Lack of low RPM power 

C. High NOx emissions at high RPM 

D. High NOx emissions at low RPM 


Introduction to Diesel Technology Workbook 

137 




