Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

N62B44 Engine .1 

Objectives of the Module .1 

Purpose of the System .2 

Technical Data.3 

Engine Views.5 

Components 

Fresh Air System .6 

- Air Routing.6 

- Throttle Valve .7 

- Intake Manifold.8 

- Crankcase Venting System.12 

Exhaust System.13 

- Exhaust Manifold with Catalytic Converter.13 

- Silencers.14 

- Secondary Air System.14 

Ancillary Components.16 

- Belt Drive.16 

- Alternator.17 

- Air Conditioning Compressor.19 

- Starter Motor.19 

- Power Steering Pump.19 

Cylinder Heads.20 

- Engine Covers.21 

- Valve Gear.22 

- Valvetronic.23 

- Bi-VANOS.29 

- Vacuum Pump.34 

- Chain Drive. 35 





























Subject 


Page 


Components 

Cooling System .38 

- Coolant Circuit.38 

- Water Pump .40 

- Map-Controlled Thermostat.42 

- Cooling Module.42 

- Radiator.43 

- Expansion Tank.43 

- Transmission Oil/Water Heat Exchanger.44 

- Electrically-Operated Fan.44 

- Viscous Coupling Fan.44 

Engine block. 45 

- Oil Sump.45 

- Crankcase.45 

- Crankshaft.46 

- Connecting Rods and Pistons.46 

- Flywheel.47 

- Vibration Damper.47 

Lubrication System.48 

- Oil Jets.48 

- Oil Check Valve.48 

- Oil Pump .49 

- Oil Filter. 51 

- Pressure Control. 51 

- Technical Data.52 


Review Questions 


53 



























N62 ENGINE 


Model: E65 - 745i / E66 - 745Li 
Engine: N62B44 

Production Date: 11/2001 - E65, 01/2002 - E66 


Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Describe the two stage oil supply. 

• Distinguish the difference between the left and right drive chain tensioning assem¬ 
blies. 

• Explain the Bi-VANOS operation. 

• Understand the function of the Variable intake manifold. 

• Explain the cooling circuit flow. 

• List what chamber A and chamber B is used for in the Bi-VANOS system. 

• Identify the Secondary air components. 

• Explain how the initial VANOS position is retained when oil pressure is not present. 

• List the proper drive belt removal procedure. 

• Describe the throttle valve functions. 

• Identify the N62B44 designation. 


1 

N62 Engine 





N62 Engine 

Purpose of The System 


The N62B44 engine is a completely new 
and is available as a B44 (4.4 liter). 

The development objectives were: 

• Reduction in fuel consumption 

• Reduction in emissions 

• Increased power 

• Improved torque and torque curve 

• Improved engine acoustics 


development from the NG (New Generation) series 

To achieve these objectives, enhancements 
were made in the following areas: 

• Engine mechanicals 

• Treatment of exhaust emissions 

• Valve timing 

• Engine management control 

• Intake air flow 


The most important features of 
the new N62 engine are: 

• 8 cylinders in a 90° V configu¬ 
ration 

• 2 four-valve cylinder heads 

• Light-alloy design 

• Newly-developed variable 
intake manifold 

• Valvetronic system 



43 - 02-01 


In conjunction with the Variable Intake Manifold, the Valvetronic system adapts the intake 
valve lift to ensure optimum cylinder filling. The throttle valve use is limited during engine 
operation to maintain a constant intake manifold vacuum. 

The N62 is the best engine in its class. At this time there is no other engine on the market 
which uses comparable technology. 


2 

N62 Engine 



Technical Data 


Engine 

N62B44 

Design 

8 Cylinder V 

V Angle 

90° 

Displacement (cm3) 

4,398 

Bore/Stroke (mm) 

92/82.7 

Cylinder Gap (mm) 

98 

Main Crankshaft Bearing Diameter (mm) 

70 

Output (kW) 

325 

at speed (rpm) 

6,100 

Torque (Nm) 

330 

at Speed (RPM) 

3,600 

Cut-off speed (RPM) 

6.500 

Compression Ratio 

10.0 

Valves / Cylinders 

4 

Intake Valve Diameter (mm) 

35 

Exhaust Valve Diameter (mm) 

29 

Intake Valve Lift (mm) 

0.3-9.85 

Exhaust Valve Lift (mm) 

9.7 

Cams Open Period (° crankshaft) 

282/254 

Engine Weight (kg) 

213 

Fuel 

91 Octane 

Firing Order 

1-5-4-8-6-3-7-2 

Knock Sensor 

Yes 

Variable Intake Manifold 

Yes 

Digital Motor Electronics 

ME 9.2 with Valvetronic Control Unit 

Complies with Exhaust Emission Regulations 

EU-3 


EU-4 


LEV 

Engine Length (mm) 

704 

Fuel Consumption Saving Compared with the M62 

14% 


3 

N62 Engine 





























300 

200 

230 

Shp) 

240 

220 

200 

100 

160 

140 

120 

100 

BO 

<60 

40 

20 

0 


in KW 


N62B44/M62B44 


Torque in Nm 


550 

530 
- 510 



--—- 270 

- 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - l 250 

1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 

Engine RPM 


42 - 02-02 
























































Engine Views 


1. Starter Motor 

2. Valvetronic Motor 

3. Evaporative Emission Valve 

4. VANOS Solenoid Valve 

5. Thermostat Housing 

6. Throttle Unit 

7. Vacuum Pump 



N62B44 Engine (Front View) 


42-02-03 


1. Camshaft Position Sensor 
Cylinder Bank 5-8 

2. Valvetronic Eccentric Shaft 
Position Sensor, Cylinder 
Bank 5-8 

3. Valvetronic Eccentric Shaft 
Position Sensor, Cylinder 
Bank 1-4 

4. Camshaft Position Sensor 
Cylinder Bank 1-4 

5. Secondary Air Non-return Valves 

6. Servomotor for Variable Intake 
Manifold 



N62B44 Engine (Rear View) 

42-02-04 


5 

N62 Engine 
















Fresh Air System 

Air Routing 

The intake air passes through the air intake duct to the air cleaner, through the throttle sec¬ 
tion into the variable intake manifold and on to the two cylinder head intake ducts. 

Increases in engine output and engine torque, as well as optimization of the engine torque 
curve, are largely dependent on an optimum engine volumetric efficiency over the entire 
engine speed range. 

Long and short intake paths contribute to good volumetric efficiency in the lower and upper 
speed ranges. Long air intake paths ensure optimum volumetric efficiency in the lower to 
middle speed ranges. This optimizes the torque curve and increases the torque. 

In order to optimize the power increase in the upper speed range, the engine requires short 
air intake paths for better cylinder filling. The air intake system has been completely rede- 
velopd in order to eliminate this inconsistency in terms of air intake path length. 


The air intake system consists of the following components: 


1. Air Intake Duct 

2. Air Cleaner Housing with Intake 
Air Silencer 

3. Intake Pipe with HFM (Hot-Film 
Air-Mass Flow Sensor) 

4. Secondary Air Valves 

5. Secondary Air Pump 



Air Intake System 


42-02-05 


6 

N62 Engine 




Throttle Valve 


The throttle valve on the N62 is not necessary for engine load control. This is carried out 
by the intake valves variable lift adjustment. 


• Throttle Valve Housing with Throttle Valve. 

• Throttle Valve Actuator 

• Two Throttle Valve Potentiometers 


42-02-25 

Throttle Valve 

The tasks of the throttle valve are: 

Starting the engine 

Airflow is controlled by the throttle valve during the starting procedure when the air temp¬ 
erature is between 20 °C and 60 °C, . 

If the engine is at operating temperature, it will be switched to non-throttle mode approx¬ 
imately 60 seconds after start up. In cold conditions however, the engine is started with 
the throttle valve fully opened because this has a positive effect on the starting characteris¬ 
tics. 

Ensuring a constant vacuum of 50 mbar in the intake manifold 

This vacuum is needed to exhaust the blow-by gases from the crankcase and the fuel 
vapors from the activated charcoal filter. 

The backup function 

If the Valvetronic system should fail, the throttle valve implements conventional load con¬ 
trol). 



7 

N62 Engine 


Intake Manifold 


The N62 engine is equipped with a Variable Intake Manifold making it possible to reach a 
generous torque curve even at low engine speeds, without incurring losses in engine out¬ 
put at higher speeds. It ensures that the engine exhibits optimum volumetric efficiency 
through the entire range of speeds. 

The new feature is the Variable Intake Manifold intake pipe length can be adjusted depend¬ 
ing on the engine speed to provide efficient cylinder filling and scavenging. This is deter¬ 
mined by the optimal matching of the intake pipe dimensions, the exhaust system and the 
valve timing. 


The intake manifold is located in the engine “V” and is mounted on the cylinder head intake 
ports. 



42-02-47 


Function 


In order to understand how engine speed relates to volumetric efficiency, the physical 
processes within the intake pipe must be taken into consideration. 

To ensure that there is good airflow to the engine cylinders, the intake pressure in front of 
the intake valve should ideally be high. This means that good airflow (high gas molecule 
density) in front of the intake valve is necessary. 


8 

N62 Engine 







This is only possible if the intake valve is closed 
and the mass inertia causes the intake air to 
flow in front of the closed intake valve. The air is 
compressed, the pressure and the air flow 
increase. 

Intake air flows in front of the closed intake 
valve. 

1. Closed intake valve 

2. Intake manifold 



As soon as the intake valve is opened, the pres¬ 
surized intake air flows into the cylinder, 
expands and draws the air molecules which fol¬ 
low into the cylinder. The suction waves form in 
the intake pipe (moving at sonic speed) in the 
opposite direction to the intake air. 


42-02-07 


These suction waves are reflected in the intake 
manifold and create pressure waves which then 
move once more at sonic speed in the direction 
of the intake valve. 

Movement of the intake air with the intake valve 
open. 

1. Pressure waves 

2. Air manifold 

3. Suction waves 



42-02-08 


The intake pipe is at the optimum length when the pressure waves are at the intake valve 
shortly before it is closed. The increase in pressure in front of the intake valve results in 
increased air flow to the cylinders once more. This process is described as recharge effect. 


The opening angle of the intake valve remains unchanged as the engine speed increases. 
The opening time, however, is reduced proportionately (with conventional, non-Valvetronic 
engines). 


Since the suction waves and pressure waves expand at sonic speed, the suction path 
length must be adapted depending on the engine speed to ensure that the tip of the pres¬ 
sure wave reaches the intake valve before it is closed. 


9 

N62 Engine 



































1. Intake Port 

2. Funnel 

3. Rotor 

4. Shaft 

5. Spur Gears 

6. Manifold Volume 



The Variable Intake Manifold 


Each cylinder has its own intake pipe (1) which is connected to the manifold volume (6) via 
a rotor (3). The rotors are supported by one shaft (4) per cylinder bank. 

The second shaft, from which the rotor for the opposite cylinder bank is adjusted, is turned 
by spur gears (5) in the opposite direction from the driven shaft. 

The intake air flows via the manifold volume through the funnel (2) and on to the cylinders. 
The intake path length is set as the rotor turns. 

The intake path length can be adjusted according to the engine speed. Adjustment from 
the long to short intake path begins at 3,500 rpm. If the engine speed increases, the intake 
path length is progressively reduced, up to 6,200 rpm. 


Notes: 


10 

N62 Engine 













The intake path length is determined by the fun¬ 
nel position. If the engine speed is less than 
3,500 rpm, the funnel is in the longer intake 
path length position. 

This means that the intake air must cover a 
longer path to reach the cylinders. 

• Intake manifold set to longer intake path. 


When an engine speed of 6,200 rpm is 
reached, the rotor is adjusted to the shorter 
intake path position. The intake path to the 
cylinders is now short. 

The funnel can be progressively adjusted to any 
point between the long/short intake path posi¬ 
tions. 

• Intake manifold set to short intake path. 



42-02-10 


The drive motor is controlled by the ECM and 
provides feedback about the funnel position via 
an integral potentiometer. 



Funnel adjustment is carried out by the drive unit, which is located on the rear of the intake 
manifold housing. The drive motor adjusts the drive shaft with funnels (cylinder bank 1-4). 
The second shaft with funnels for cylinder bank 5-8 is synchronously adjusted by the spur 


42-02-81 


11 

N62 Engine 




Crankcase Venting System 


The crankcase vapors (a result of combustion blow-by gasses) are led out of the crank¬ 
case and back into the combustion chamber via the intake manifold. The blow-by gasses 
contain droplets of oil which must be separated. The oil is returned to the sump while the 
blow-by gasses are led into the intake pipe for combustion. 

The engine performance is affected by the introduction of crankcase vapors into the com¬ 
bustion process, particularly in idle speed ranges. This influence is monitored by lambda 
regulation. 

The crankcase vapors are carried from the crankcase and into the cylinder head covers 
through labyrinth separators (one per cylinder head). The oil which accumulates on the 
walls of the labyrinth separators flows into the cylinder head via a siphon and from there 
back to the sump. 


1-4. Opening for Spark Plugs 

5. Pressure Control Valve 

6. Opening Valvetronic Motor 

7. Opening Valvetronic Sensor 
Connector 

8. Camshaft Sensor 



Cylinder Head Cover 


43-02-12 

The remaining vapors are passed to the engine for combustion via the pressure control 
valve (5) in the intake manifold. One labyrinth separator with a pressure control valve is inte¬ 
grated in each of the two cylinder head covers. 

The throttle valve is controlled so that there is always a 50 mbar vacuum in the intake man¬ 
ifold. The pressure control valve regulates the crankcase pressure to a low 0-30 mbar. 


12 

N62 Engine 


Exhaust System 


The exhaust system is completely redesigned for the N62B44 engine. It has been opti¬ 
mized in terms of cylinder filling, scavenging, sound level and rapid catalytic converter light- 




Exhaust System 


42-02-13 


1. Manifold with Integrated Catalytic Converter 

2. Broadband Planar Oxygen Sensors 

3. Secondary Oxygen Sensors 

4. Exhaust Pipe with Front Silencer 

5. Center Silencer 

6. Exhaust Gas Flap 

7. Rear Silencers 


Exhaust Manifold with Catalytic Converter 

Each cylinder bank is equipped with a four into two into one exhaust manifold. The mani¬ 
fold and the catalytic converter housing together form one component. A ceramic-bed pre- 
catalytic converter and a ceramic-bed main catalytic converter are arranged one behind the 
other in the catalytic converter housing. 

The mounting for the broadband planar oxygen sensors (Bosch LSU) and the secondary 
oxygen sensors is located in front of and behind the catalytic converter. 


13 

N62 Engine 
























Silencers 


• A 1.8 liter capacity front silencer has been fitted for each cylinder bank. 

• A single 5.8 liter center silencer is fitted downstream of the two front silencers. 

• The resonator type rear silencers have capacities of 12.6 and 16.6 liters. 

Exhaust Gas Flap 

The 12.6 liter rear silencer is fitted with an exhaust gas flap to keep noise to a minimum at 
engine idle speed and low rpm. The exhaust gas flap is opened allowing additional flow 
when: 

• The a transmission gear is engaged and 

• The engine speed is above 1,500 rpm 

A vacuum-controlled diaphragm (actuator mounted on the silencer) opens and closes the 
exhaust gas flap. The exhaust gas flap is closed with vacuum, and is sprung open by the 
actuator (when vacuum is not present). The procedure is carried out using a solenoid valve 
which is electrically controlled by the ECM. 

Secondary Air System 

Blowing additional air (secondary air) into the cylinder head exhaust ducts during the warm¬ 
up phase results in a thermal secondary combustion which results in a reduction of the 
non-combusted hydrocarbons (HC) and carbon monoxide (CO) in the exhaust gas. The 
energy generated during this process heats up the catalytic converter faster during the 
warm-up phase, and increases it’s conversion rate. 


1. Air Intake Duct 

2. Air Cleaner housing with Intake Air Silencer 

3. Intake Pipe with HFM (Hot-Film Air-Mass 
Sensor) 

4. Non-return Valves 

5. Secondary Air Pump 



43-02-05 


14 

N62 Engine 


Secondary Air System 



Secondary Air Pump (SLP) 


The electrically-operated secondary air pump is mounted to the vehicle body. The pump 
draws out filtered fresh air from the air cleaner housing during the warm-up phase and sup¬ 
plies it to the two secondary air Non-return Valves. 

Once the engine has been started, the secondary air pump is supplied with voltage by the 
ECM via the secondary air pump relay. It remains switched on until the engine has taken in 
a certain amount of air. 

The ON period may be a maximum of 90 seconds and it depends on the following engine 
operating conditions: 



• Coolant temperature (from -10 °C to approximately 60 °C) 

• Air temperature (NTC sensor in HFM) 

• Engine speed 


1. Cylinder Head Lead 

2. Non-return Valve (SLV) 

3. Secondary Air Pump Connection 


View From Rear of The Cylinder Head 


One non-return valve is mounted on each cylinder head (see also Engine Views). 

The non-return valves are opened by the pressure generated from the secondary air pump. 
The secondary air is led through a pipe to the secondary air ducts (integral in the cylinder 
heads) for distribution into the exhaust ports. 

The non-return valves are sprung closed when the secondary air pump is deactivated. This 
prevents exhaust vapors, pressure and condensation from flowing back into the secondary 
air pump. 


15 

N62 Engine 



Ancillary Components and Drive Belts 

Drive Belts 

The belt drive has two components and is subdivided into the main and A/C drives. Both 
belts are driven by the crankshaft pulley. 

A 4 rib belt is used to drive the air conditioning compressor and a 6 rib belt is used for the 
main drive. Each drive belt has a maintenance free tensioning unit with tensioning pulley 
and torsioner. 


1. Air Conditioning Compressor 

2. 4 Rib A/C Drive Belt 

3. Crankshaft Pulley 

4. Water Pump 

5. Tensioning Unit Main Drive Belt 

6. Alternator 

7. Deflection Pulley 

8. Power Steering Pump 

9. 6 Rib Drive Belt 

10. Tensioner Unit A/C Drive Belt 



To remove the drive belt: 

The tensioning pulley is pushed back using a 
Torx tool in the recess provided (1) and fixed in 
this position by inserting a locking pin as shown 
( 2 ). 


Ancillary Components and 

Drive Belts 42-02-15 



16 

N62 Engine 


42-02-16 


Alternator 


Due to the high power capacity of 180 A, the alternator is cooled by the engine's cooling 
system to enhance heat dissipation. The brushless Bosch alternator is installed in an alu¬ 
minum housing which is mounted to the engine block. The exterior alternator walls are sur¬ 
rounded with circulated engine coolant. The function and design of the alternator is the 
same as in the M62, with only minor modifications. The BSD interface (bit-serial data inter¬ 
face) for the ECM is new. 


1. Watertight Housing 

2. Rotor 

3. Stator 

4. Seal 


Alternator 42-02-17 



1. Coolant Return Flow 

2. Coolant Inlet Flow 


* Further details found in the cooling circuit 
section 



Alternator Coolant Flow 42-02-18 


Regulation 


The alternator communicates with the Engine Control Module (ECM) via the BSD (bit-seri¬ 
al data interface). The alternator conveys data such as model and manufacturer. This is 
necessary to allow the engine management system to adapt it’s calculations and specific 
control to the type of alternator fitted. 


17 

N62 Engine 







The ECM takes on the following functions: 

• Activation/deactivation of the alternator. 

• Informing the alternator regulator of the nominal voltage value to be set. 

• Controlling the alternator's response to load. 

• Diagnosing the data line between the alternator and the ECM. 

• Storing alternator fault codes. 

• Activating the charge indicator lamp in the instrument cluster. 

The connection with the ECM makes it possible to equalize the alternator load torque for 
nearly all operating conditions. This supports the engine idling speed control and the bat¬ 
tery load balance. In addition, the ECM receives information from the Power Module about 
the battery's calculated temperature and charge status. This means that alternator output 
can be adapted precisely to the temperature and load status of the battery which increas¬ 
es the battery service life. 

The charge indicator display strategy has not changed in comparison with the alternators 
currently in use. Regulating the alternator output is particularly important when activating 
Valvetronic operating motors. 

A temperature protection function is implemented in the voltage regulator. If the alternator 
overheats, the alternator voltage is reduced until an appropriate temperature has been 
reached. 

The ECM can recognize the following faults: 

• Mechanical faults such as blockages or belt drive failure. 

• Electrical faults such as exciter diode defects or over/under voltage caused by regula¬ 
tion defects. 

• Connection defects between the ECM and the alternator. 

Coil breaks and short-circuits cannot be recognized. The basic alternator function is in 
operation even if the BSD interface fails. 


18 

N62 Engine 


Note: The alternator regulator voltage is influenced by the ECM - BSD interface. The bat¬ 
tery charge voltage can therefore be up to 15.5 V, depending on the battery temperature. 
If a battery charge voltage of up to 15.5 V is measured, the regulator is not faulty. A high 
charge voltage indicates a low battery temperature. 


Air Conditioning Compressor 


The “clutch free” A/C compressor is manufac¬ 
tured by Denso. It functions continuously with 
the engine running. The compressor is a 7- 
cylinder swash plate type. The displacement 
can be reduced to less than 3% when air con¬ 
ditioning is not requested (no refrigerant is sup¬ 
plied to the refrigerant circuit). 

There is an internal compressor refrigerant cir¬ 
cuit to maintain lubrication. The IHKA electron¬ 
ics regulate the compressor output via an 
external control valve (1). 



42-02-19 


Starter Motor 

The starter motor is located on the right-hand 
side of the engine below the exhaust manifold, 
and is a compact planetary drive starter with a 
1.8 kW output. 


1. Starter motor with heat protective cover. 



Power Steering Pump 


42-02-03 


The power steering pump is a tandem radial piston pump on vehicles equipped with 
Dynamic Drive. A single vane pump is installed on vehicles without the Dynamic Drive. 

Further information about the power steering pump can be found in the Chassis Dynamics 
section. 


19 

N62 Engine 





Cylinder Heads 


The two N62 cylinder heads are a new development from BMW. They are fitted with the 
Valvetronic system. The secondary air ducts for subsequent exhaust gas treatment are 
integrated in the cylinder heads. The cylinder heads are cooled by the “cross-flow” princi¬ 
ple. 

The inlet camshaft and the Valvetronic eccentric shaft are jointly guided by a bridge sup¬ 
port. The cylinder heads are made from aluminum and are manufactured using gravity die¬ 
casting. The upper timing chain housing is now an integral part of the cylinder head. 



Cylinder Head 


43-02-20 


1. Cylinder Head for Cylinder Bank 1-4 

2. Cylinder Head for Cylinder Bank 5-8 

3. Upper Tinning Chain Guide with Oil Jet 

4. Mounting for VANOS Intake Solenoid 

5. Mounting for VANOS Outlet Solenoid 

6. Chain Tensioner Mount 


7. Mounting VANOS Intake Solenoid 

8. Mounting VANOS Outlet Solenoid 

9. Oil Pressure Switch 

10. Chain Tensioner Mount 

11. Upper Timing Chain Guide with Oil Jet 


20 

N62 Engine 










Engine Covers 

Each cylinder head has a plastic cover for the ignition coil cabling and top of the cylinder 
head. The covers “push fit” into rubber grommets on the cylinder head covers. 


A sound absorption cover for the top of the 
engine also covers the two Valvetronic motors. 
This cover is fixed to the intake manifold hous¬ 
ing using four bolts. 


1. Cylinder Head Top Cover 

2. Sound Absorption Engine Cover 



Engine Covers 


The cylinder head covers are made from plastic. The retaining sleeves for the ignition coils 
have molded-on gaskets. The sleeves must be replaced if any hardening or damage is vis¬ 
ible on the gaskets. The sleeves are inserted into the cylinder head through the cylinder 
head cover (nos. 1 through 4). 


1-4. Opening for Spark Plugs 

5. Pressure Control Valve 

6. Opening for Valvetronic Motor 

7. Opening for Valvetronic Sensor Connector 

8. Camshaft Sensors (Intake and Exhaust) 



7 6 5 

Cylinder Head Cover 


43-02-12 


Notes: 


21 

N62 Engine 

























Cylinder Head Gaskets 

The cylinder head gasket is a multi-layer steel 
gasket with a rubber coating. This type of gas¬ 
ket has previously been used on other engines. 

The B44 head gasket has a 6 mm hole in a flap 
on the outlet side of the cylinder head gasket. 

The cylinder head bolts for the N62 engine are 
Ml0x160 necked-down “stretch” bolts. 



Note: These bolts should always be replaced 
when repairs are performed. 


The lower part of the timing chain housing is 
bolted to the cylinder head using two M8x45 
bolts. 



Camshafts 


42-02-22 


The camshafts are made from chilled cast iron 
and are hollowed to reduce weight. The cam¬ 
shafts are weighted with counterbalances for 
equalizing imbalances in the valve gear. 


1. Camshaft sensor wheels (sintered metal) 


2. Thrust bearing area with oil ducts for the 
VANOS units 



42-02-24 


Notes: 


22 

N62 Engine 



















Valvetronic 


Over the entire speed and load range, the gasoline engine needs a combustible fuel-air 
mixture within the ideal ratio (Lambda = 1). The mixture quantity must be altered to vary the 
speed and output. This variation is effected by the throttle valve. The mixture, which falls 
within the narrow range of Lambda = 1, is formed outside the combustion chamber using 
the fuel injection system (external mixture formation). 

The mixture control is influenced by the throttle valve and is not optimal in all the different 
load ranges. This is particularly true in the idle to part-load ranges, since the throttle valve 
is only opened slightly in these ranges. The consequences are less than optimal cylinder 
filling, torque and increased fuel consumption. 

Technical measures were previously introduced; such as the optimization of air/fuel mixing, 
improved valve overlap, introduction of DISA and the steady improvement of mixture con¬ 
trol all depend on the throttle valve. This is where the new completely unique Valvetronic 
design comes in. 



The Valvetronic system simultaneously varies the valve opening time and the valve opening 
lift between 0.3 mm and 9.85 mm, according to engine speed and load. This means that 
the air/fuel mixture volume is controlled according to engine requirements. This type of mix¬ 
ture and volume control makes the typical throttle valve control unnecessary. 


23 

N62 Engine 





Physical considerations: 


On engines with throttle valve control, the throttle valve is slightly open in the idling and part¬ 
load ranges. This results in the formation of up to 500 mbar vacuum in the intake manifold, 
which prevents the engine from aspirating freely and in turn prevents optimum cylinder fill¬ 
ing. The Valvetronic system with an open throttle valve largely counteracts this disadvan¬ 
tage. The air-mass flow to the intake valves is unrestricted. The full ambient pressure is 
available directly at the intake valves for cylinder filling and scavenging. 

The Valvetronic system primarily controls the fill by adapting the valve opening time and the 
valve lift (short opening time/small valve lift = lower fill, and vice versa). During the valve 
opening phase the engine aspirates more freely via the intake valves even with small valve 
lifts vs. a throttle valve which is continuously blocked. 

The slower cylinder filling from the intake valves with partial lift results in more turbulence in 
the combustion chamber, thus faster and better mixture control and more efficient com¬ 
bustion. At lower engine speeds this effect is intensified by opening the intake valves later, 
after top dead center (ATDC) using VANOS. This increases vacuum in the combustion 
chamber which accelerates filling and turbulence when the intake valves are opened. 

In summary, the additional variability of the Valvetronic system results in optimization of 
cylinder filling and scavenging throughout the engine's entire operating range. This has a 
positive effect on output, torque and a decrease in fuel consumption and exhaust emis¬ 
sions. 


Features: 

• Valve lift adjustment 

• VANOS for intake and outlet 

• Variable intake manifold 

• Mixture control and ignition control 

• Other individual engine design measures 

This results in: 

• Improved engine idling 

• Improved engine torque 

• Improved engine torque curve 

• Fewer pollutant emissions 


The main benefits of these features are: 

• Improved cylinder filling with air/fuel mix¬ 
ture 

• Improved mixture control before the cylin¬ 
der inlet 

• Improved combustion procedure 


These benefits result in a clear improvement in performance and fuel consumption reduc¬ 
tion (14%) for the driver. 


24 

N62 Engine 





Principle of Operation 

The Valvetronic system is a combination of VANOS and valve lift adjustment. This combi¬ 
nation of abilities allows the ECM to control when the intake valves are opened and closed, 
and also the opening lift. The intake air flow is set by adjusting the valve lift while the throt¬ 
tle valve is fully opened. This improves cylinder filling still further and reduces fuel con¬ 
sumption. 


In addition, the following components belong to 
the Valvetronic system: 


• A Valvetronic motor for each cylinder head 


• A Valvetronic control module 


• A Valvetronic sensor for each cylinder head 



Each cylinder head in the N62 engine has a Valvetronic assembly. This Valvetronic assem¬ 
bly consists of a bridge support with eccentric shaft, intermediate levers with retaining 
springs, drag lever and the intake camshaft. 


-30 


The intake valve lift can be adjusted to anywhere between 0.3 mm and 9.85 mm. 

The cylinder heads are precision manufactured together to ensure precise flow rate and 
uniform distribution. The valve gear components on the intake side are precisely matched 
together to the tightest limits. 

The bridge support, lower eccentric shaft and inlet camshaft bearings are matched togeth¬ 
er in the cylinder head once it is assembled. If the bridge support or the lower bearings are 
damaged, the entire assembly must be replaced. 


Notes: 


25 

N62 Engines 









Valvetronic Motors 

One Valvetronic motor is located on top of each 
cylinder head towards the inside of the engine 
“V”. The motors are capable of traveling from 
minimum to maximum lift in 300 milli-seconds. 


1. Cylinder Head Cover, Cylinder Bank 1-4 

2. Valvetronic Motor for Eccentric Shaft Adjustment 



Valvetronic Motor 


Note: The Valvetronic motor must first be removed in order to remove the cylinder head 
cover. The eccentric shaft must be in the minimum lift position and the motor must be 
wound out from the eccentric shaft. The worm gear could otherwise be damaged when 
separating the worm shaft and the worm wheel as the eccentric shaft springs back (due to 
the torque compensation spring). 


If it is not possible to remove the motor, due to mechanical failure or sticking, the worm 
shaft can be moved using an Allen key to release the motor. A hole must be drilled in the 
rear plastic motor cover in order to access the motor shaft (worm shaft) using the Allen key. 
The motor can then no longer be used. 


The Valvetronic motor worm gear rotates the 
eccentric shaft clockwise or counterclockwise 
at a very quick rate (1). 

Due to the progressive “lobe” on the eccentric 
shaft, this rotation positions the intermediate 
lever (2) closer or further to the camshaft lobe. 



Notes: 


26 

N62 Engine 












Eccentric Shafts 



The eccentric shafts (one per cylinder head) are driven by the 
Valvetronic motors and are supported by four caged needle 
bearing assemblies for a smooth rotation. 

To assist in maintaining the set positions and counter the 
valve train torque, a torque compensation spring is mounted 
on the end of the shaft for tension. 

Magnets are fitted in the (removable) magnetic wheel at the 
end of the eccentric shaft. Together with the position sensor, 
the Valvetronic Control Module determines the exact shaft 
position. The eccentric shaft sensor is mounted through the 
cylinder head cover (one per cylinder head) at the back. 

The magnetic wheel is secured to the shaft by a bolt and is 
indexed by a tab (arrow) to prevent incorrect installation. 


43 - 02-32 



Intermediate Lever and Roller Finger 


43 - 02-38 


The intermediate lever is positioned further (minimum valve 
opening) or closer (maximum valve opening) to the camshaft 
by the the progressive “lobe” on the eccentric shaft as it is 
rotated. This offers a variable ratio effect for valve actuation. 
The roller finger is used to actuate the intake valve. 

The intermediate levers and roller fingers are matched (by 
classification) to ensure uniform valve lift. 

Note: When disassembling/assembling the valvetrain, the 
intermediate levers and roller fingers must be returned to the 
original positions to prevent uneven cylinder charging which 
can result in rough idle and engine performance complaints. 



43 - 02-33 


Refer to the Repair Instructions for tolerance numbers! 


27 

N62 Engine 









Valve Lift 

The Valvetronic motor worm gear rotates the eccen¬ 
tric shaft clockwise or counterclockwise at a very 
quick rate (1). 

Due to the progressive “lobe” on the eccentric shaft, 
this rotation positions the intermediate lever (2) closer 
or further to the camshaft lobe. 

As the camshaft is rotating (3), the cam lobe will pivot 
the intermediate lever (4) and the “heel” of the inter¬ 
mediate lever will depress the roller finger. A spring is 
located on each intermediate lever to maintain con¬ 
stant contact with the camshaft. 

The roller finger is cushioned by the HVA and will open 
the intake valve (5). 

The Valvetronic system varies the valve opening lift 
between 0.3 mm and 9.85 mm by rotating the eccen¬ 
tric shaft during engine operation to increase or 
decrease intake (flow) into the cylinder based on throt¬ 
tle request. 



* This is an assembly that affects all of the intake 
valves (per cylinder head) to work in unison. 


Notes: 


28 

N62 Engine 














Bi-VANOS (Variable Camshaft Adjustment) 


The N62 features compact infinitely variable vane-type VANOS for the intake and exhaust 
camshafts. The VANOS unit is easy to remove and install. The VANOS unit is designed as 
an integral component of the chain drive and is secured to the respective camshaft with a 
central bolt. The camshaft adjustment rate is 60° (as compared with the crankshaft). 


1. VANOS Unit Exhaust Side 

2. VANOS Central Bolt 

3. Spring Plate 

4. VANOS Unit Intake Side 

5. Toothed Chain Gear Teeth 



VANOS Units 43 - 02-39 

The VANOS unit gear teeth are visibly different to match the new toothed chain. The 
VANOS unit for the cylinders 1-4 exhaust shaft has mounting provisions for the vacuum 
pump drive. A spring plate is fitted between the VANOS unit and the vacuum pump drive 
to reduce wear (3). The VANOS units are labeled “In/Out” for intake and exhaust installa¬ 
tion positions. 

The VANOS units are supplied with oil via ports in the camshafts. The oil ports are located 
on the left and right of the thrust bearing. Depending on the individual VANOS adjustment 
direction, the VANOS is supplied with oil via either the rear oil ports (1 & 2) or the front oil 
ports (3 & 4). The oil moves through the camshaft to the VANOS units. 


1&2. Rear Oil Duct with Four Holes 
3&4. Front Oil Duct with Four Holes 
5. Front Oil Duct Outlets 
6&7. Hook Sealing Washer. 



VANOS Oil Ports 


29 

N62 Engine 



Camshaft Sensors 


The cam shaft sensors (Hall effect) are mounted through the cylinder head cover. There are 
two sensors per cylinder head to monitor the intake and exhaust camshaft positions. 


The sensors monitor the impulse wheels 
attached to the ends of the camshafts. 


1. Valvetronic Position Sensor 

2. Intake Camshaft Position Sensor 

3. Exhaust Camshaft Position Sensor 



Camshaft Sensors 


Solenoid Valves 


42 - 02-48 


The VANOS solenoid valves are mounted through the upper timing case front cover. There 
are two solenoids per cylinder head to control the oil flow to the camshaft ports for the 
intake and exhaust VANOS units. 


The 4/3 way proportional solenoid valve is acti¬ 
vated by the ECM to direct oil flow. The sole¬ 
noid valve is sealed to the front cover by a radi¬ 
al seal and secured by a retaining plate. 



42 - 02-42 


Notes: 


30 

N62 Engine 
















VANOS Sectional Views 



VANO’S Components 


1. Housing with Sprocket 

2. Front Plate 

3. Torsion Plate 

4. Lock Spring 

5. Retaining Plate for Lock Spring 

6. Spring Loaded Locking Pin 


7. Hub 

8. Black Plate 

9. Blade 

10. Spring 

11. Pressure Chamber A 

12. Pressure Chamber B 


Mechanical Layout: 

The figures above show a sectional view of one VANOS unit. The VANOS unit is secured 
by a central bolt through the hub (7) to the camshaft. The timing chain connects the crank¬ 
shaft with the housing of the unit. 

There is a recess in the hub in which the locking pin (6) engages without oil pressure 
(sprung). When the solenoid valve is activated to supply oil pressure to the VANOS unit, 
the locking pin is compressed and releases the VANOS for adjustment. 


The internal blades (9) are spring loaded (10) to provide a seal between the oil pressure 
chambers (11 and 12). The torsion spring (3) acts against the camshaft torque. 


31 

N62 Engine 




























Hydraulic Actuation: 

When oil pressure is applied to chamber A, the blades are forced away from the VANOS 
housing (counterclockwise). The blades are keyed into the hub which results in the hub 
position being rotated in relation to the housing (with sprocket). The hub is secured to the 
camshaft which changes the camshaft to sprocket relationship (timing). 

The example below shows the adjustment procedure together with the pressure progres¬ 
sion based on the VANOS unit for the exhaust camshafts. 




3 



43 - 02-45 



Hydraulic Actuation - Chamber A 


1. Front View of Vanos Unit 

5. 

2. Side View of Vanos Unit 

6 . 

3. Camshaft Oil Port (Chamber B) 

7. 

4. Solenoid Valve 



Engine Oil Pump 

Supplied Oil from Pump (Switched Through Solenoid) 
Supplied Oil Pressure (From Engine Oil Pump) 


During this adjustment chamber B is open (through the solenoid) to allow the oil to drain 
back through the cylinder head (internal reservoir). 


32 

N62 Engine 















When the solenoid valve switches over, oil pressure is applied to chamber B. This forces 
the blades (and hub) in a clockwise direction back to the initial position, again changing the 
camshaft timing. 

The example below shows the reset procedure together with the pressure progression 
based on the VANOS unit for the exhaust camshafts. 



Hydraulic Actuation - Chamber B 


42 - 02-44 


1. Front View of VANOS Unit 

2. Side View of VANOS Unit 

3. Camshaft Oil Port (Chamber B) 

4. Solenoid Valve 


5. Engine Oil Pump 

6. Oil Return (Switched through Solenoid) 

7. Supplied Oil Pressure (From Engine Oil Pump) 


During this adjustment chamber A is open (through the solenoid) to allow the oil to drain 
back through the cylinder head (internal reservoir). 


Notes: 


33 

N62 Engine 





















The chart below shows the VANOS unit camshaft adjustment possibilities. The valve lift 
adjustment has also been incorporated. 

The special feature of Valvetronic is that the air mass drawn in the cylinders can be easily 
determined by the valve lift and closing time. The air mass can then be limited, thus the 
term “load control”. 


With the help of VANOS, the valve closing point can be easily selected within a defined 
range. With valve lift control, the opening duration and cross section of the valve opening 
can also be easily selected within a defined range. 



1. Exhaust Valve Open 

2. Exhaust Valve Closed 

3. Intake Valve Open 

4. Intake Valve Closed 


Vacuum pump 


The N62 engine requires a vacuum pump for the vacuum 
assisted brake booster. With the throttle valve open while the 
car is being driven, additional vacuum is needed. 

The N62 vacuum pump has a second vacuum connection 
(small hose) for the exhaust flap adjustment. The vacuum 
pump is driven by cylinders 1-4 exhaust camshaft via the 
VANOS unit. The pump is lubricated through an oil gallery 
from the cylinder head. 



34 

N62 Engine 








































































Chain Drive 


The camshafts are driven by a toothed chain, one for each cylinder bank. The oil pump is 
driven by a separate roller chain. 



Chain Drive 


43 - 02-50 


1. Sensor wheels for the camshaft position sensor, cylinder bank 1-4 

2. Tensioner Rail, Cylinder 5-8 

3. Chain Tensioner, Cylinder Bank 5-8 

4. Sensor Wheel for the camshaft position sensor, cylinder bank 5-8 

5. Upper timing chain guide with integrated oil jet 

6. Guide rail 

7. Sprocket for Oil Pump Drive 

8. Timing case lower section 

9. Tensioning rail, cylinder bank 1-4 

10. Solenoid Valve, VANOS exhaust camshaft 

11. Solenoid Valve, VANOS intake camshaft 

12. Upper Timing Chain Cover 

13. Chain Tensioner, Cylinder Bank 1-4 

14. VANOS exhaust camshaft Bank 1-4 

15. Upper Timing Chain guide with integrated oil jet 

16. VANOS intake camshaft 1-4 


35 

N62 Engine 














Toothed Chain 


The camshafts are driven by the crankshaft 
using newly developed maintenance free 
toothed chains. 

The toothed chain gear wheels are located on 
the crankshaft and on the VANOS unit. Use of 
the new toothed chains (1) optimizes the drive 
chain rolling process and reduces noise. 



Crankshaft Sprocket 


42 - 02-51 


The crankshaft sprocket (3) has three sets of gear 
teeth: 


1. One roller chain gear wheel for the oil pump drive. 

2. Two toothed chain gear wheels for the camshaft drives. 

Note: The sprocket will also be fitted to a 12-cylinder 
engine variant which will be available in the future. 
Please observe the installation instructions and the rel¬ 
evant labels (V8 Front/Vi 2 Front) when installing the 
sprocket. 



1 


Chain Tensioner (cylinder bank 1-4) 


42 - 02-52 


A chain tensioner is mounted in the side of the cylinder 
head for each camshaft drive chain. There is a guide 
ball in the chain tensioner tip that moves in an arched 
groove in the tensioning rail. 

The tensioner seal must be replaced each time the 
tensioner is disassembled. The tensioners are the 
same for both the left and the right cylinder heads. 


1. Chain Tensioner 

2. Tensioning Rail 

3. Bearing Pin 



Chain Tensioner 


36 

N62 Engine 






















Tensioning Rail Bearing Pin 


The bearing pin for the cylinder bank 1-4 drive 
chain tensioning rail is hollowed. There is a ball 
(check) valve in the bearing pin. The valve 
opens at an oil pressure of 1 bar and allows 
engine oil to flow to the tensioning rail via a port 
( 1 ). 

1. Engine Oil Port to Tensioning Rail 

2. Ball (check) Valve 

3. Bearing Pin 

4. Sealing Rings for Sealing the Tensioning Rail 



Tensioning Rail Bearing Pin 


Chain Tensioner (cylinder bank 5-8) 

An oil jet has been fitted to lubricate the cylinder bank 
5-8 drive chain. There is a valve in the oil jet which 
opens at a pressure of 1 bar and supplies the drive 
chain with engine oil. 


1. Chain Tensioner 

2. Tensioning Rail 

3. Oil Jet 


Note: Refer to the Repair Instructions when using the 
Special Tools shown below to adjust the camshaft tim¬ 
ing. 



42 - 02-54 

Chain Tensioner 




42 - 02-79 


Fill 2314 

42 - 02-78 


37 

N62 Engine 







































Cooling System 


Coolant Circuit -14 Liter Coolant Capacity 



22 14 13 12 11 


Cooling System (Circuit Flow) 


42 - 02-56 


1. Cylinder Head Bank 5-8 

2. Coolant Supply (heater core) 

3. Water valve with electric water pump 

4. Cylinder Head Gasket 

5. Coolant Supply Line 

6. Cylinder Head Ventilation Lines 

7. Hole (crankcase venting system) 

8. Transmission oil lines 

9. Oil/water heater exchanger for automatic transmission 

10. Thermostat for transmission oil heat exchanger 

11. Alternator Housing 


12. Radiator 

13. Radiator Partition (low temp section) 

14. Temperature Sensor 

15. Water Pump 

16. Radiator Return Flow 

17. Radiator Ventilation Line 

18. Expansion Tank 

19. Thermostat 

20. Cylinder Head Bank 1-4 

21. Vehicle Heater 

22. Radiator (High Temperature Area) 


38 

N62 Engine 






































































































Coolant Circuit 


The coolant flow has been optimized allowing the engine to warm up as quickly as possi¬ 
ble after a cold start as well as even and sufficient engine cooling while the engine is run¬ 
ning. The cylinder heads are supplied with coolant in a cross-flow pattern. This ensures 
more even temperature distribution to all cylinders. The cooling system ventilation has been 
improved and is enhanced by using ventilation ports in the cylinder heads and in the radi¬ 
ator. The air in the cooling system accumulates in the expansion tank. When a pressure of 
2 bar is reached in the expansion tank, the air is bled out by the pressure relief valve in the 
reservoir cap. 

Note: The ventilation ports in the front of the cylinder heads provide quicker “self bleeding” 
during a routine coolant exchange. The complex cooling system and the small ventilation 
ports require that time should be allowed after the cooling system has been filled for the air 
to escape. 


Coolant flow in the Engine Block 

The coolant flows from the water pump through the feed pipe (1) in the engine's V and to 
the rear of the engine block. This area has a cast aluminum cover (see following illustration). 
From the rear of the engine, the coolant flows to the external cylinder walls and from there 
into the cylinder heads. 

The coolant then flows from the cylinder heads into the engine block V and through the 
return connection (3) to the thermostat housing. When the coolant is cold it flows from the 
thermostat (closed) directly into the water pump and back to the engine (recirculating for 
faster warm up). 

When the engine reaches operating tempera¬ 
ture (85 °C-110 °C), the thermostat opens the 
entire cooling circuit to include the radiator. 

1. Coolant from the water pump through the feed pipe 
to the rear of the engine. 

2. Coolant from the cylinder walls to the thermostat 
housing. 

3. Return connection to water pump/thermostat. 



42 - 02-57 

Engine Block Coolant Flow 


39 

N62 Engine 



The coolant flows to the rear of the engine block, from there through the side channels to 
the cylinder walls and then into the cylinder heads (lower left picture). The cast aluminum 
cover at the rear of the engine block (with sealing bead) is shown on the lower right. 



42 - 02-59 


Water Pump/Thermostat Housing 

The water pump is combined with the thermostat housing and is bolted to the timing case 
lower section. 


1. Map-controlled themostat (radiator cool return flow). 

2. Electrical connection for Thermostat Heating element. 

3. Thermostat Mixing Chamber 

4. Temperature Sensor (hot coolant from engine) 

5. Radiator in-flow (hot coolant from engine) 

6. Heat exchanger (transmission oil return flow) 

7. Leakage Chamber (evaporation space) 

8. Alternator in-flow (cool supply) 

9. Water Pump 

10. Expansion Tank Connection 



Water Pump / Thermostat Housing 


Caution during installation of the water pump: The impeller is made from reinforced plastic. 


40 

N62 Engine 




Leakage Restraint System in the Water Pump 

The water pump has a leakage restraint system for the functional leakage from the pump 
shaft piston ring type seal. The coolant which escapes through the pump shaft sliding ring 
seal usually accumulates and evaporates through a hold in the leakage chamber (evapora¬ 
tion area). 

If the sliding ring seal is faulty, the leakage chamber fills 
completely with coolant. Sliding ring seal leakages can 
be detected by monitoring the fluid level in the leakage 
chamber (inspection hole). 


1. Impeller 

2. Sliding Ring Seal 

3. Leakage Chamber / Evaporation Space 

4. Leakage Chamber Cover 

5. Delivery from the sliding ring seal to the leakage chamber 

6. Hub of pulley and viscous clutch 


Water Pump 

42 - 02-61 

Note: In the past, fully functional water pumps were often replaced because the functional 
sliding ring seal leakage which is necessary for water pump operation resulted in evapora¬ 
tion residues being left on the external walls of the water pump. 

The leakage restraint system has the advantage in that the coolant escaping from the slid¬ 
ing ring seal (normal, functional leakage) evaporates without a trace and cannot be mis¬ 
takenly identified as a water pump defect during visual inspections. 



Timing Chain Cover Lower Section 

The waterpump mounts to the lower section to 
channel coolant to the engine block. 


1. Coolant to Engine 

2. Rear Water Pump Housing in Lower Section 

3. Mount for Drive Belt Tensioner Pulley 

4. Crankshaft Radial Seal 

Timing Chain Cover Lower Section 

42 - 02-62 



41 

N62 Engine 










































Map-controlled Thermostat 


The map-controlled thermostat allows the engine to be cooled relevant to operating con¬ 
ditions. This reduces fuel consumption by approximately 1-6%. The electrical connections, 
the design and the map-controlled thermostat response have been enhanced. The map- 
controlled thermostat function is the same as previous engines (M62). 


1. Radiator Return Flow To Thermostat 

2. Connection for Thermostat Heating Element 

3. Temperature Sensor 

4. Radiator in-flow (hot coolant from engine) 


Maped-Controlled Thermostat 



Cooling Module 

The cooling module contains the following main cooling system components: 

• Cooling radiator 

• Air conditioning condenser 

• Transmission oil/water heat exchanger 

• Hydraulic fluid radiator 

• Engine oil radiator 

• Main electric fan 

• Fan shroud for viscous coupling fan 


All the components (with the exception of the transmission oil radiator) can be removed for 
repairs without disassembling any other coolant circuit. All connections have been fitted 
with the quick-release coupling which are used in current models. 


42 

N62 Engine 




Cooling Components 



1. Cooling Radiator 

2. Expansion Tank 

3. Water Pump 


4. Engine oil/air heat exchanger connection 
(hot countries only) 

5. Transmission oil/coolant heat exchanger 


Cooling Radiator 

The radiator is made from aluminum and is divided into a high-temperature section and a 
low-temperature section by a partition wall (see coolant circuit diagram). The coolant first 
flows into the high-temperature section and then back to the engine, cooled. 

Some of the coolant flows through an opening in the radiator partition wall to the low-tem¬ 
perature section where it is cooled further. The coolant then flows from the low-tempera¬ 
ture section (when the OWT thermostat is open) into the oil/coolant heat exchanger. 


Coolant Expansion Tank 

The expansion tank is mounted on the right hand wheel housing (engine compartment). 
Note: The expansion tank should never be filled above the Max marking. Excess coolant is 
expelled by the pressure relief valve in the cap as it heats up. Avoid overfilling the expan¬ 
sion tank because the cooling circuit design ensures very good “self bleeding”. 


43 

N62 Engine 






Transmission Oil/Coolant Heat Exchanger 

The transmission oil/coolant heat exchanger ensures that the transmission oil is heated up 
quickly and also that it is appropriately cooled. When the engine is cold, the transmission 
oil/coolant heat exchanger thermostat switches into the engine's recirculated coolant cir¬ 
cuit. This allows the transmission oil to heat up as quickly as possible (with the engine 
coolant). 

When the return flow water temperature reaches 82 °C, the thermostat switches the trans¬ 
mission oil/coolant heat exchanger to the low-temperature coolant radiator circuit (refer to 
the cooling circuit diagram) to cool the transmission oil. 

Electrically Operated Fan 

The electric fan is integrated in the cooling module and is mounted directly in front of the 
radiator. The speed is regulated by the ECM. 

Viscous Coupling Fan 

The viscous coupling fan is driven by the water pump. The noise output and the perfor¬ 
mance of the fan coupling and the fan wheel have been optimized as compared with the 
E38M62. The viscous coupling fan is used as the final level of cooling and switches on at 
an air temperature of 92 °C. 


Notes: 


44 

N62 Engine 














Engine Block 


Oil Sump 


The oil sump consists of two parts. The upper section of the oil sump is made from cast 
aluminum and is sealed to the crankcase with a rubber-coated sheet steel gasket. This 
section of the oil sump has a cross shaped cut out oil filter element recess. The upper sec¬ 
tion of the oil sump is inter connected to the oil pump and is sealed with a sealing ring. The 
double panel (noise insulation) lower section of the oil sump is flanged to the upper section 
of the oil sump. 


1. Upper Section of The Oil Sump 

2. Oil Pump 

3. Oil Level / Condition Sensor 

4. Lower Section of The Oil Sump 

5. Oil Filter Housing 

6. Oil Drain Plug 




Crankcase Oil Sump Components 

42 - 03-65 

The crankcase has a one-piece “open deck” design and is made entirely from AluSil. The 
cylinder walls are hardened using a specific procedure (exposure honing). Exposure hon¬ 
ing involves treating the cylinders with a special “soft stripping”. This removes the aluminum 
from the cylinder surface and the hard silicone particles remain. 

Open Deck = Exposed cylinder coolant chamber 



1. Flow to engine “V” (return coolant collection area) 


42 - 03-66 

2. External cylinder bank wall 



45 

N62 Engine 









Crankshaft 


The N62 uses an inductively hardened cast-iron crankshaft. The crankshaft has five main 
bearings (familiar 4 bolt cast iron caps) and is hollowed around bearing journals 2, 3, and 
4 for weight reduction. The fifth bearing is also the “thrust” bearing. 


The crankshaft stroke for the B44 
is 82.7 mm. 


1. Crankshaft Sprocket 

2-4. Hollowed Area (Weight Reduction) 



Crankshaft 


Crankshaft Thrust Bearing 

The thrust bearing halves are multiple pieces that are assem¬ 
bled as one part for the the number five main bearing at the 
rear of the engine. The bearing thickness conforms to the 
familiar triple classification system (yellow - green - white). 



42 - 02-70 


Piston and Connecting Rod 


The reduced weight cast piston contains integrated 
valve reliefs in the piston crown. The pistons are made 
from high-temperature aluminum alloy equipped with 
three piston rings. 

• First piston ring groove = square ring 

• Second piston ring groove = taperface ring 

• Third piston ring groove = three-part oil control ring 

The forged steel connecting rod and cap is separated 
by the familiar “cracked” process. The connecting rod 
(large end) is angled at 30° allowing sufficient articula¬ 
tion in a very compact space. The pistons are cooled 
by oil jets spraying under the exhaust side of the pis¬ 
ton crown. 



42 - 03-70 


46 

N62 Engine 














Flywheel 

The lightweight flywheel is made from a laminated plate. The 
starter ring gear is also the increment wheel for engine speed 
and crankshaft positioning/misfire detection. 

The ring gear is riveted directly to the flexplate (6). The fly¬ 
wheel diameter is 320 mm. 



Vibration Damper 

The vibration damper is a torsional vibration absorber (axial 
design). The outer edge of the damper has a notch (1) to 
accept the locating tool when positioning the crankshaft for 
initial setting. 

The locating tool inserts into the raised mount in the front 
cover (2). Refer to the Repair Instructions for the proper 
engine timing procedure. 



Engine Mounting 

The engine is secured by two hydraulic damping mounts that are located on the front axle 
carrier (structure and function are the same as the E38/M62). 


Notes: 


47 

N62 Engine 


















Lubrication System 


Crankcase with oil jets 


1. Oil Jet for Drive Chain Cylinder Bank 5-8 

2. Oil Jets for Piston Cooling 



Crankcase with Oil Jets 


42 - 02-71 

The engine oil is supplied by the oil pump to the lubrication points in the engine block and 
is pumped into the cylinder heads. The following components in the crankcase and cylin¬ 
der head are supplied with engine oil: 


Crankcase 

• Crankshaft bearings 

• Oil jets for piston cooling 

• Oil jet for the drive chain (bank 5-8) 

• Tensioning rail for drive chain (bank 1 -4) 


Cylinder head 

• Chain tensioner 

• Guide rail on cylinder head 

• Hydraulic valve adjustment elements (HVA) 

• VANOS supply 

• Camshaft bearings 

• Overhead oil tubes for the valve gear 


Oil Check Valves 


Three oil check valves are inserted into each cylinder head from the outside. This prevents 
the engine oil from draining out of the cylinder head and the VANOS units. 


The check valves are accessible from the out¬ 
side, therefore; cylinder head removal is not 
necessary when changing the check valves. 


1. Oil Check Valve for VANOS Intake 

2. Oil Check Valve for VANOS Exhaust 

3. Oil Check Valve for Cylinder Head Oil Supply 



42 - 02-72 


48 

N62 Engine 


Oil Check Valves 
























Note: The oil check valves are different in design and should 
not be mixed up on installation. 


Oil Pressure Switch 





42 - 02-73 


The oil pressure switch is located on the side in the bank 1-4 cylinder head. 


Oil Pump 

The oil pump is mounted at an angle to the crankshaft bearing cap and is driven by the 
crankshaft using a roller chain. The oil pump is a two-stage gear oil pump with two paral¬ 
lel switched gear clusters. 

1. Drive Shaft 

2. Mounting Points 

3. Oil Filter 

4. Pressure Relief Valve (over 15 Bar) 

5. Control Valve (Pump Stage/Pressure Control) 

6. Oil supply from the oil pump to the engine 

7. Oil pressure control tube from the engine to 
the control valve. 


42 - 02-75 

Oil Pump 

The two pair of gear clusters are stacked one 
behind the other and work in two stages. 


Stage two (both pump supply circuits) is only 
active in the lower engine speed range up to 
approx. 2,000 rpm to provide sufficient oil pres¬ 
sure for the VANOS at high oil temperatures. 

Stage two is deactivated hydraulically at a pres¬ 
sure of 2 bar. 




42 - 02-76 


49 

N62 Engine 






Oil Pressure Control 


1. Oil Pump Stage 1 

5. 

Sealing Plug 

2. Oil Pump Stage 2 

6 . 

Oil Pump Housing 

3. Pressure Control Valve Piston 

4. Pressure Control Valve Spring 

7. 

Oil Sump 


I, 



Oil pressure control valve in initial 
position, without pressure. 


Oil Pressure Control 


t 



Stage two = Both pump supply circuits 
activated with oil pressure less than 2 bar. 



Stage two deactivated = Oil pressure 
above 2 bar, pressure control valve 
opens channel for stage two to oil 
sump. 



i _ | 


Main pressure control = Oil pressure 
above 6 bar, pressure control valve opens 
channel for stage one (slightly) to oil sump 
relieving excessive pressure. 


50 

N62 Engine 

























































































Oil Filter 


The canister type oil filter (3) is located under the 
engine by the oil sump. The support for the oil 
filter is integrated in the rear oil pump cover. 

The oil filter housing (2 with o-ring) is threaded 
into the rear of the oil pump cover through an 
opening in the oil sump. 

A drain plug is integrated in the oil filter housing 
for draining the filter assembly before the hous¬ 
ing is removed (1 with o-ring). 



42 - 02-77 


The filter element support dome contains an over pressure relief valve. If the filter element 
is blocked, this valve bypasses unfiltered engine oil around the element to the supply lubri¬ 
cation to the engine. 


Pressure Control 

The oil pressure control valve in the oil pump has two functions: 

1. Deactivates stage two oil pump circuit above 2 bar. Stage two is only active in the 
lower speed range. This is to ensure that there is always sufficient oil pressure for 
the VANOS units even at high oil temperatures and low speeds. The oil pump power 
consumption is reduced by deactivating stage two. 

2. Monitoring the required oil pressure for the engine. The piston in the control valve is 
moved by a spring against the engine control pressure which is returning from the 
engine. This means that precise monitoring of the actual engine oil pressure is pos¬ 
sible. 

A separate pressure relief valve in the oil pump automatically opens at the maximum pres¬ 
sure of approximately 15 bar. This prevents damage in the oil pump especially at low oil 
temperatures. 


51 

N62 Engine 



Oil Cooling (if equipped) 

An oil cooler is used in hot countries. The oil cooler is located in front of the radiator above 
the A/C condenser. The engine oil flows from the oil pump through a channel in the 
crankcase to a connection on the generator support. The generator support has an oil ther¬ 
mostat. A wax element in the oil thermostat continuously opens the inflow to the oil cooler 
when the oil temperature is between 100 °C to 130 °C. 

Some of the engine oil always flows past the oil thermostat and through the engine with¬ 
out being cooled, even when the oil thermostat is fully open. This ensures a minimum 
amount of oil is supplied when the cooler is faulty. A modified generator support, without 
connections for the oil thermostat, is fitted to vehicles which do not have an oil cooler. 

Technical Data - Lubrication System 

The recommended oil is BMW High Performance 5W-30 Synthetic Oil 

* P/N 07 51 0 017 866 


Oil Capacity in Liters Explanation 


8.0 Filling Capacity for Service with Oil Filter Change 


Oil Pressure 

Explanation 

1.0 

Minimum Oil Pressure at 20°C 

4.0 - 8.0 Bar 

Maximum Oil Pressure at 20°C 


Oil Delivery Capaci ty Explanation 

9-12 I/M in 

At Idle Speed (700 rpm) at 20°C 

50-55 l/Min 

At Maximum Engine Speed (6500 rpm) and 20°C 


52 

N62 Engine 










Review Questions 

1. What is the function of the throttle valve? 

2. What are the conditions that will result in stage two oil supply? 

3. What does the term “cracked” connecting rod mean? 

4. What does the low temperature area refer to in the cooling system? 

5. What is the difference between the left and right drive chain tensioning assemblies? 


6. How is the funnel adjustment made on the 5-8 Variable intake manifold if only one 
actuating motor is used? 


7. What is minimum and maximum valve lift provided by the Valvetronic system? 


8. What is chamber A and chamber B used for in the Bi-VANOS system? 


9. What retains the initial VANOS sprocket to hub position when oil pressure is not pre¬ 
sent? 


10. How should the drive belt be removed? 


53 

N62 Engine 































