Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

ME 9.2 .2 

Objectives of the Module .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components .4 

Power Supply .8 

Principle of Operation.9 

Integrated Voltage Supply Module.10 

Engine Wiring Harness.11 

Air Management.12 

Variable Intake Manifold.14 

Valvetronic.15 

Principle of Operation.19 

Fuel Management .24 

Principle of Operation.31 
















ME 9.2 


Model: E65 - 745i / E66 - 745Li 

Production Date: 11/2001 - E65, 01/2002 - E66 

Manufacturer: Bosch 

Pin Connector: 134 Pins - 5 Modular Connectors 


Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Locate and describe the Integrated Voltage Supply Module. 

• Understand Valvetronic Positon Sensor operation. 

• Name the Component Location of the Fuel Supply System. 

• Describe how the Electric Fuel Pump is activated. 

• Identify the type of Ignition Coils used in the ignition system. 

• List where the Evaporative Emission Components are located. 

• Understand Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor operation. 

• Name the functions of the Oil Condition Sensor. 

• Explain the Comfort Start feature. 

• Demonstrate how to program and delete Cruise Control preset speeds. 

2 


ME 9.2 





ME 9.2 

Purpose of the System 

The ME 9.2 system manages the following functions: 




Emissions: 


Performance Controls: 

• Secondary Air Injection 


• Bi-VANOS 

• Pre and Post Catalyst Oxygen Sensing 


• Oil Condition 

• Oxygen Sensor Heating 


• Electric Cooling Fan 

• Misfire Detection 


• Alternator 

• Evaporative Purge Control/Leak Testing 


• E-Box Cooling Fan 

• Malfunction Indicator Light 


• Comfort Start 



• Cruise Control 


The basic engine management inputs, processes and outputs are not included in this mod¬ 
ule because they have not changed, refer to the ST055 Engine Electronics hand out for 
details. 


3 


ME 9.2 


































System Components 


ME 9.2 Engine Control Module - New Features: This Bosch engine management sys¬ 
tem is introduced for more stringent emission requirements as well as reducing fuel con¬ 
sumption and increasing driving performance. A flash EEPROM is used as the storage 
medium for the program data, fault code memory as well as the adaptation values. The 
ECM works in combination with the Valvetronic Control Module. Both Control Modules 
control the N62 engine: 

• ME 9.2 ECM - overall engine management 

• Valvetronic Control Module - intake valve lift 

The ECM (1) is located in the electronic box in 
the engine compartment together with the 
Valvetronic Control Module (2) and the Inte¬ 
grated Voltage Supply Module (3). 

The ECM controls an electric cooling fan in the 
base of the electronic box to draw in cool air 
from the passenger compartment. 



The 134 pin ME 9.2 ECM is man¬ 
ufactured by Bosch to BMW 
specifications. The ECM is the 
SKE (standard shell construction) 
housing and uses 5 modular con¬ 
nectors. 



For testing, use the Universal 
Adapter Set (break-out box) 
Special Tool: #90 88 6121 300 


X60001 X60002 X60003 X60004 X60005 

9-Pin 24-Pin 52-Pin 40-Pin 9-Pin 

42 - 04-22 


Starting with the ME 9.2 system, a Multichan¬ 
nel Adapter Tool is used in conjunction with 
the DISplus to perform the complete N62 
Engine Test (found under Service Functions). 

The Multichannel Adapter Tool is installed (in 
series) between the ECM and the engine har¬ 
ness connectors (1,3 and 5). In addition, the 
four cables of MFK2 plug into the adapter sur¬ 
face. 



4 


ME 9.2 




























ME 9.2 ECM Inputs - Processing - Outputs Section 1 


W 



IVM 


B+ 


KL 15 


KL15 "WAKEUP" 

KL50E 


CAS 


31 



MAP 

SENSOR 


AIRMASS 

SIGNAL 


SEW3R 

(4X) 


VARIABLE 
INTAKE MANIFOLD 
MOTOR 


VALVETRONIC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 


DMTL 


cT 


1ADIATOR OUTLET 
TEMPERATURE 
SENSOR 


*0 






* 

1 

khj»gcode j-|_n_n_n 


■ 50E 


CAS 




iRUISE CONTROL 


w 

LIGHT 

VCH 


DCS VEHICLE SPEED 




GENERAirnn 


ME 9.2 


POWER 

SUPPLY 


AIR 

MANAGEMENT 



FUEL 

MANAGEMENT 


IGNITION 

MANAGEMENT 


EMISSION 

MANAGEMENT 


PERFORMANCE 

MANAGEMENT 



CAS 



VARIABLE 
INTAKE MANIFOLD 
MOTOR 




VALVETRONIC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 







|1 VALVETRONIC 
MOTOR & VALVE 




f Py*l *IJECTORS 
(8X) 


ZGM 


. j SIM 


FUEL 

PUMP 



HEATED THERMOSTAT 


SECONDARY 
AIR PUMP 
RELAY 






TRANSMISSION 



v 

STARTER 


IVM 



DISplus 


ISO 9141 PROTOCd. 


42 - 04-23 


5 


ME 9.2 





























































































































































































Components 

The following list shows the new components of the ME 9.2 Engine Management Control: 


Sensors 

Accelerator Pedal 

Hot Film Air Mass Meter (HFM) 

Knock Sensor 1 

Knock Sensor 2 

Knock Sensor 3 

Knock Sensor 4 

Crankshaft Sensor 

Oxygen Sensor Post Catalytic Converter 1 

Oxygen Sensor Post Catalytic Converter 2 

Oxygen Sensor Pre Catalytic Converter 1 

Oxygen Sensor Pre Catalytic Converter 2 

Coolant Outlet Temperature Sensor 

Water Temperature Sensor 

Exhaust Camshaft Sensor 1 

Exhaust Camshaft Sensor 2 

Intake Camshaft Sensor 1 

Intake Camshaft Sensor 2 

Intake Manifold Pressure Sensor 

Oil Condition Sensor 

Barometric Pressure Sensor in the ECM (P2) 

Variable Intake Manifold Position Sensor 


Actuator 

Variable Intake Manifold 

Electronic Throttle Valve (EDK) 

Injector Valves 1 -8 

Electronic Fan 

Electronic Box Fan 

Secondary Air Pump 

Evaporator Emission Valve 

VANOS Exhaust Camshaft 1 

VANOS Intake Camshaft 1 

VANOS Exhaust Camshaft 2 

VANOS Intake Camshaft 2 

Valvetronic Control Module 

Ignition Coils 1 -8 

Map Controlled Thermostat 


42 - 04-24 


6 


ME 9.2 







































Components 

The following list shows the new components of the ME 9.2 Engine Management Control: 

Switch 

Starter Switch 

Relay 

ECM Relay 
Starter Motor Relay 
Secondary Air Pump Relay 
Valvetronic Relay 

Power Supply Relay to Ignition Coils 

Interface 

Car Can Bus High 
Car Can Bus Low 

Engine LoCAN High (Engine Local CAN) 

Engine LoCAN Low (Engine Local CAN) 


7 


ME 9.2 















Power Supply 

KL30 - Battery Voltage: B+ is the main supply of operating voltage to the ECM which is 
provided by the Power Module through the Integrated Voltage Supply Module (IVM). The 
IVM simply provides a splice point to provide B+ to the ECM. 





7 XG0092 


i;:;: * i 



12 XI866 
30DME 
OS 
RT'Vf 


A 71 

Poweron odul 



17 X60093 


a eaas 

Iritegriertee. Vereor- 

gurtgsmodur (IVM) 



4S 


XI0518 


A149 

Steuergerat Car Ac¬ 
cess 


XI0550 


U_HR 

15 

HTVBL 


E_U_30 

0.75 

RT 


15WCP 

0,35 

RT/GN 




M_ZDG 

2.6 

BR 


31E 
0.5 

BfVSW 


aiL 

1.5 

BR 


31L 

1.5 

BR 


X 64-54 


X 10012 



X 7517 


42 - 02-01 


42 - 02-01 

Power Supplies: The component power supplies (KL15 and ECM Relays) are fused to the 
ME 9.2 ECM and output components. The fuses and relays are housed in the Integrated 
Voltage Supply Module (IVM) located in the Electronic Box. The fuses are separately 
replaceable, the relays are integral in the IVM. 


KL15 - Ignition Switch Signal: When the ignition is switched “on” the ECM is informed 
from the CAS Module that the engine is about to be started via a “wakeup” call (15w) over 
the PT CAN line. The ECM also receives a “hardwire” KL15 input from the CAS Module. 
The ECM activates a ground circuit to the IVM to energize three relays providing operating 
power to the ECM and engine management components. KL15 “off” removes the ECM 
operating voltage and the KL15 signal from the PT CAN bus. 


KL50 E - Start Request Signal: The momentary start request is transmitted from the 
CAS Module to inform the ECM to activate the starter relay (in the IVM) and activate engine 
management components. 


Ground: Multiple ground paths are necessary to complete current flow through the ECM. 


8 

ME 9.2 Power Supply 
























































































































































Integrated Voltage Supply Module (IVM) 

The IVM contains integral relays, replaceable fuses and offers a convenient splice point for 
harness connections. The IVM serves as a central power supply for Engine Management 
(including Valvetronic), Electronic Transmission and DSC. This diagram is a partial repre¬ 
sentation of the IVM for Engine Electronics. 



9 

ME 9.2 Power Supply 


























































































































Principle of Operation 

When KL15 is switched “on” the ECM is ready for engine management. The ECM will acti¬ 
vate a ground path to energize the three Engine Control Module Relays in the IVM (see dia¬ 
gram on the previous page). 

• The 1st ECM Relay supplies operating voltage through a fuse (in the IVM) to the ECM. 

• The 2nd ECM Relay supplies operating voltage through a fuse (in the IVM) to the Fuel 
Injectors. 

• The 3rd ECM Relay supplies operating voltage through a fuse (in the IVM) to the 
Oxygen Sensors. 

The Ignition Coil Relay (4th relay) is energized by the CAS Module which supplies operat¬ 
ing voltage through a fuse (in the IVM) to the Ignition Coils. 

The IVM receives high amperage voltage supply 
from fuses FI 01 and FI 04 (100 Amp). The fuse 
junction is located on the right inner fender of 
the engine compartment (under the remote 
charging post). This supply is for the consumers 
that are controlled by the IVM internal relays. 

When KL15 is switched “off” the ECM operat¬ 
ing voltage is removed. The CAS Module will 
maintain voltage to the Ignition Coil Relay for a 
few seconds to maintain ignition coil activation 
(Emission Optimized - introduced in 2000 MY). 



Ground is required to complete the cur¬ 
rent path through the ECM. The ECM 
also: 

• Internally links a constant ground (1) 
to the engine sensors. 

• Switches ground (2) to activate 
components. 



10 

ME 9.2 Power Supply 











































Engine Wiring Harness 



Engine Wiring Harness 42 - 04-05 


1. Plug connectors to electronic box modules: ECM, Valvetronic and IVM 

2. Plug connectors to fuel injectors 

3. Valvetronic position sensor plug connector 

4. Camshaft position sensors plug connectors 

5. Plug connector to ignition coils 


Indirect Signals and Wiring 

There is no direct connection to the OBD diagnostic connector. The ECM is connected to 
the ZGM (central gateway module) via the PT-CAN bus. The OBD diagnostic connector is 
connected to the ZGM. 

The fuel pump relay is controlled by the ECM via the ZGM and ISIS (Integrated Safety and 
Information System) using the airbag control unit in the SBSR (right-hand side satellite B- 
pillar). This enables the fuel pump to be switched off in the event of an accident. 


There is no direct control for the air conditioning compressor. The A/C compressor is now 
controlled by the IHKA control module. The IHKA signals the ECM via the PT CAN bus and 
the ZGM. 


11 

ME 9.2 Power Supply 




Air Management 

Electronic Throttle Valve: The throttle valve on the N62 is not necessary for engine load 
control. This is carried out by the intake valve variable lift adjustment (Valvetronic). 



• Throttle valve housing with throttle valve 

• Throttle valve actuator 

• Two Throttle valve potentiometers 

• A return spring fitted to the throttle plate shaft 
that assists in reducing the throttle opening to 
a minimum present opening. 


Electronic Throttle Valve 42 - 02-25 

The ECM provides the operating voltage and ground to the Electronic Throttle Valve for 
opening and closing the throttle plate. 


5V 

Throttle Valve Position: The throttle plate position is 4 ' 5V 
monitored by two integral potentiometers providing DC 
voltage feedback signals to the ECM. 

Potentiometer signal 1 is the primary signal (closed 0.5V 
- full open 4.5V). 

Potentiometer signal 2 is used as a plausibility cross- 
check (closed 4.5V - full open 0.5V) through the total ov 
range of throttle plate movement. 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE WITHINTHE 



42 - 04-02 


Notes: 


12 

ME 9.2 Air Management 




















Accelerator Pedal Position (PWG): The 

accelerator pedal module provides two variable 
voltage signals to the ECM that represents 
accelerator pedal position and rate of move¬ 
ment. The ECM will activate the Valvetronic sys¬ 
tem. 

Dual Hall sensors are integral in the accelerator 
pedal module. The ECM compares the two val¬ 
ues for plausibility. 

The ECM provides voltage (5v) and ground for 
the Hall sensors. As the accelerator pedal is 
moved from rest to full throttle, the sensors pro¬ 
duce a variable voltage signal. 


• Hall sensor 1 (request) = 0.5 to 4.5 volts 

• Hall sensor 2 (plausibility) = 0.5 to 2.0 volts 


If the signals are not plausible, the ECM will use 
the lower of the two signals as the request 
input. The acceleration response will be slower 
and the maximum Valvetronic opening will be 
reduced. 



42 - 04-02 



Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM): The air vol¬ 
ume input signal is produced electronically by 
the HFM (1) which uses a heated metal film in 
the air flow stream. The HFM housing is mount¬ 
ed in the air inlet pipe between the air filter and 
the throttle valve. 

As air flows through the HFM, the film is cooled 
changing the resistance which affects current 
flow (voltage drop) through the circuit. The ECM 
monitors this change regulating the amount of 
fuel injected. 



42 - 04-04 


13 

ME 9.2 Air Management 
































































Air Temperature Signal: The HFM contains an integral air temperature sensor. This is a 
Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) type sensor. This signal is needed by the ECM to 
correct the air volume input for changes in the intake air temperature (air density) affecting 
the amount of fuel injected, ignition timing and Secondary Air Injection activation. 

The ECM provides the power supply to the sensor which decreases in resistance as the 
temperature rises and vice versa. The ECM monitors an applied voltage to the sensor that 
will vary as air temperature changes the resistance value. 


Variable Intake Manifold: In the N62 engine, 
the infinitely variable intake manifold is operated 
by turning the rotor in the intake manifold. 

Adjustments to the intake manifold are carried 
out by the ECM controlling a drive unit. The 
drive unit is mounted on the rear of the intake 
manifold. 

The drive unit consists of a 12 V DC electric 
motor with worm gears and an integral poten¬ 
tiometer for the intake manifold position feed¬ 
back. 



42 - 04-05 


The drive unit is equipped with a 5-pin connec¬ 
tor. If the drive unit fails, the system remains in 
its current position. The driver may notice a loss 
in power. 



42 - 04-06 


Notes: 


14 

ME 9.2 Air Management 












Valvetronic: The N62 Valvetronic control system simultaneously varies the valve opening 
time and the valve opening lift according to engine speed and load. The electrical structure 
of the fully variable valve lift adjustment consists of the following individual components: 

.Valvetronic Control - 

P 

• Valvetronic Control Module 

• ECM 

• ECM Main Relay (in the IVM) 

• Valvetronic Relay (in the IVM) 

• Two eccentric shaft adjustment motors 

• Two eccentric shaft position sensors 

• Two magnetic wheels on the eccentric shafts 


The Valvetronic control module adjusts the valve 
lift based on a request from the ECM. The 
Valvetronic control module (located in the E 
Box) adjusts the eccentric shaft motors by two 
internal power output stages. 

Faults in the Valvetronic system are detected by 
the Valvetronic control module and are transmit¬ 
ted via the LoCAN to the ECM where they are 
stored for diagnostics. 



1 


42 - 04-08 


Valvetronic Motors: Two DC motors (2) are fitted to adjust the two eccentric shafts. They 
are operated at a frequency of 16 kHz in order to make exact adjustments. In order to posi¬ 
tion the motors exactly, the polarity is briefly reversed once the target position has been 
reached (as identified by the ECM). This generates braking torque which immediately stops 
the motors. 


The eccentric shaft sensors continuously monitor the position 
of the Valvetronic assembly. The self-stopping of the motors 
and the worm gear drives prevents position changes when 
the system is deactivated. If automatic adjustment is not 
detected, the fault is recorded and the motors are moved 
back to the target position. 

The adjustment time required to move the motors from the 
minimum to the maximum valve lift is approximately 300 ms. 
The motors can peak up to 100 Amps during adjustment. 



15 

ME 9.2 Air Management 











Valvetronic Sensors: Each eccentric shaft is monitored by a magneto-resistive position 
sensor. The N62 engine has two sensor assemblies, one for each eccentric shaft. These 
sensors are very durable for the environment (inside the cylinder head) and cope well with 
vibrations and high temperatures. The sensor assembly consists of: 


• Measuring Sensor 

• Evaluation Sensor 

• Communication Electronics 


A magnetic wheel is mounted on the end of the 
eccentric shaft. The eccentric shaft sensor is 
mounted through the cylinder head cover at the 
back. 

Both sensors monitor the eccentric shaft rotation angle of 180°. The Valvetronic control 
module supplies the sensors with 5 volts and ground. 



v 42-04-10 

Eccentric Shaft Position Sensor 


1. Magnetoresistance element with resistance R (a) 

2. Lines of magnetic field 

3. Direction of rotation of magnetic field 

4. Current flow 1 


The magneto-resistive element consists of a fer¬ 
romagnetic layer. The resistance R is dependent 
on the angle (a) under the influence of a strong 
magnetic field. The magnetic field is generated 
by permanent magnets. 

The resistance of the magneto-resistive element (1) in the sensor is dependent on the direc¬ 
tion of the lines of the magnetic field (2) as influenced by the eccentric shaft magnetic 
wheel. The angle value signal of the measuring sensor is opposite to that of the evaluation 
sensor (opposing voltage values) during the rotation of the eccentric shaft. The Valvetronic 
control module constantly compares the values with each other. 



Magneto-Resistance Principle 

42-04-11 


16 

ME 9.2 Air Management 





The position data “message” is transmitted via a serial interface from the eccentric shaft 
sensors to the Valvetronic control module. Each of the two sensors requires three interfaces 
for data transfer: 

• CS (chip select - measuring sensor or evaluation sensor) 

• DAT (data transfer - of eccentric shaft position) 

• CLK (clock line - signals the sensor requesting an update) 

There is only one clock line, but it works inside the sensor assembly on both the measur¬ 
ing and evaluation sensor. The measuring sensor transmits the eccentric shaft positions to 
the Valvetronic control module at shorter intervals than the evaluation sensor. 

Once the exact position of the eccentric shaft has been recorded by the magneto-resistive 
bridge circuit, this value is stored in an internal register. The Valvetronic control module 
sends the command to the measuring sensor via the CS line to transmit or upload the data 
from the internal register to the output register. The Valvetronic control unit then sends the 
command to the output register via the CLK line to transfer the data. 

The data “message” from the measuring sensor is then issued on the DAT line, giving the 
exact position of the eccentric shaft (at a frequency of 250 kHz). The evaluation sensor 
works similarly but is only periodically checked for position (plausibility). 



42-04-41 


17 

ME 9.2 Air Management 















































Ambient Pressure: The ambient pressure sensor is located in the ECM (integral). This 
sensor enables continuous measurement of the air pressure. The signal is used in the ECM 
to calculate the altitude correction for the mixture formation and as a reference value for the 
intake manifold pressure. 

The voltage supply from the ECM is 5 V. The resistance of the sensor is dependent on pres¬ 
sure. The output voltage signal is processed by the ECM. 


Intake Manifold Pressure Sensor: The pressure sensor is located in the back of intake 
manifold (1 peizo-electric). The voltage supply from the ECM is 5 V. The varying resistance 
of the sensor is dependent on manifold pressure. The output voltage signal is processed 
by the ECM. The intake manifold pressure is calculated by the ECM and is compared with 


the ambient pressure (internally measured). 

An intake manifold vacuum of 50 mbar is 
required for the fuel tank evaporative purge 
function. 

This vacuum is set by the electronic throttle 
valve and monitoring with the intake manifold 
pressure sensor. 





42-04-06 


Notes: 


18 

ME 9.2 Air Management 





















Principle of Operation 


Air flow into the engine is regulated by the Valvetronic system controlling valve lift adjust¬ 
ment. The intake air flow is set by adjusting the valve lift while the throttle valve is fully 
opened. This further improves cylinder filling and reduces fuel consumption. All of the ECM 
monitoring, processing and output functions are a result of regulated air flow. 


The Accelerator Pedal Position is monitored by the ECM for pedal angle position and 
rate of movement. As the accelerator is moved, a rising voltage signal from the Hall sen¬ 
sors requests acceleration (and at what rate). 

The ECM will request the Valvetronic control module to increase the intake valve “lift”. As a 
result of the increased air flow, the ECM will increase the volume of fuel injected into the 
engine and advance the ignition timing. The “full throttle” position indicates maximum 
acceleration to the ECM, and in addition to the functions just mentioned, this will have an 
effect on the air conditioning compressor (covered in Performance Controls). 

As the accelerator pedal is released (integral springs), the decrease in voltage signals the 
ECM to activate fuel shut off if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). The Valvetronic con¬ 
trol module will decrease the valve lift to maintain idle speed. The ECM monitors the engine 
idle speed in addition to the accelerator pedal position and Valvetronic position. 

The pedal position sensor consists of two separate Hall sensors with different voltage char¬ 
acteristics and independent ground and voltage supply. Sensing of the accelerator pedal 
position is redundant. The pedal position sensor is monitored by checking each individual 
sensor channel and comparing the two pedal values. Monitoring is active as soon as the 
sensors receive their voltage supply (KL15). 


The Electronic Throttle valve is operated by the ECM (supplying voltage and ground) for 
opening and closing based on the accelerator pedal position, engine load and intake man¬ 
ifold vacuum. 

When the throttle valve is operated, the ECM monitors feedback potentiometers located on 
the actuator shaft for position/plausibility. These two sensors operate inversely (voltage val¬ 
ues) with throttle plate actuation. 


19 

ME 9.2 Air Management 


The tasks of the throttle valve are: 

Starting the engine 

During the starting procedure at a temperature between 20 °C and 60 °C, airflow is con¬ 
trolled by the throttle valve. 

If the engine is at operating temperature, it will be switched to non-throttle mode approx¬ 
imately 60 seconds after start up. In cold conditions, however, the engine is started with 
the throttle valve fully opened, which has a positive effect on the starting characteristics. 

Ensuring a constant vacuum of 50 mbar in the intake manifold 

This vacuum is needed to exhaust the blow-by gases from the crankcase and the fuel 
vapors from the activated charcoal filter. 

The backup running function 

If the Valvetronic system should fail, the throttle valve implements the engine's backup run¬ 
ning function (conventional load control). 


The Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM) varies voltage monitored by the ECM representing 
the measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by the ECM to determine the 
amount of fuel to be injected. 

The heated surface of the hot-film in the intake air stream is regulated by the ECM to a con¬ 
stant temperature of 180° above ambient air temperature. The incoming air cools the film 
and the ECM monitors the changing resistance which affects current flow through the cir¬ 
cuit. The hot-film does not require a “clean burn”, it is self cleaning due to the high operat¬ 
ing temperature for normal operation. 


The Air Temperature signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The vary¬ 
ing voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found in 
cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the amount 
of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on oxygen sensing ratio. 

The ignition timing is also affected by air temperature. If the intake air is hot the ECM retards 
the base ignition timing to reduce the risk of detonation. If the intake air is cooler, the base 
ignition timing will be advanced. The ECM uses this input as a determining factor for 
Secondary Air Injection activation (covered in the Emissions section), VANOS, Valvetronic, 
Knock adaptation and exhaust flap operation. 


20 

ME 9.2 Air Management 


The Valvetronic System is operational when activation of terminal 15 switches the ECM 
main relay to supply voltage. The Valvetronic module reduces the voltage supply to the 
internal electronics and the sensors (5 volts). The system carries out a pre-drive check. The 
relays (in the IVM) are activated after a delay (approx. 100 ms) which supplies the load cir¬ 
cuit for the Valvetronic motors. From this stage on, the ECM and the Valvetronic control 
module communicate via the LoCAN bus. 

The ECM determines the intake valve lift for starting based on engine and ambient tem¬ 
perature (large lift when cold, minimum lift when warm). The ECM also determines the 
intake valve lift based on the acceleration requested by the driver. The Valvetronic control 
module converts the ECM command by operating the motors until the actual value from 
the eccentric shaft position sensor corresponds with the target value. The Valvetronic con¬ 
trol module transmits the exact position of the eccentric shaft to the ECM via the LoCAN 
bus. When the Valvetronic module detects a fault, it is also transmitted on the LoCAN bus 
to the ECM for storage in fault memory. 


Fault 

Emergency Program 

Effect 

Sensor Faulty 

Activated 

Maximum Valve Lift 

LoCan 

Activated 

Maximum Valve Lift 

Valvetronic 

Activated 

Valve Lift Which is 
Currently set 

Operating Motor Fault 

Activated 

The Second Motor is 
Driven in Exactly the 
same position at the 
faulty motor 


A Redundant Position Control Hard Wire is between the ECM and the Valvetronic control 
module. Only two messages can be transmitted using this wire: 

• Test function 

• Maximum valve lift 


A signal with a frequency of 100 Hz is placed on this wire to transmit these two messages. 
The test function is carried out during the pre-drive check. The pulse width rate is 50%. 

• The maximum valve lift command is given if the LoCAN bus is faulty. In this case, the 
pulse width rate is 80%. 


21 

ME 9.2 Air Management 




• If there is a fault (backup running function) when running with maximum valve lift, the 
operating motors are supplied with 30% power. This drives the motors softly to the limit 
stop which prevents additional mechanical faults. The load control is now operated 
conventionally by using the throttle valve. 



42-04-13 


Valvetronic Block Diagram 


DME (ECM) 

K1 Valvetronic Relay (in IVM) 

K2 Valvetronic Relays (in IVM) 
Ml Valvetronic Motor Bank 1-4 


M2 Valvetronic Motor Bank 5-8 
V SG Valvetronic Control Unit 

51 Valvetronic Sensor Bank 1-4 

52 Valvetronic Sensor Bank 5-8 


The Bank Alignment function adjusts the distribution of load between the two cylinder 
banks. This alignment runs continuously during the engine operation to assure an equal 
load distribution to both cylinder banks. 

The values of the individual cylinders are determined by the load request and the crankshaft 
reference/rpm signal. The ECM compares these actual values with stored limit values. As 
soon as the values are recognized, the ECM increases the lift of the intake valves on each 
bank. 


22 

ME 9.2 Air Management 












































































After deletion of the adaptation values, the bank alignment is automatically performed by 
the ECM (or the DISplus can be used). The eccentric shafts are adjusted in steps (1 degree 
of rotation increments) until both bank outputs are equal. The following conditions must be 
present for the bank alignment: 

ECM 


• No load on the engine 

• Coolant Temperature > 85 degrees C 

• No Faults Present 

• All Auxiliary Consumers Switched Off 

• Minimum Valve Lift Detected 


If faults relative to bank alignment are present, the following should also be considered dur¬ 
ing diagnosis: 

Faults Related to Bank Alignment 

• Damaged Valves 

• Defective HVA Elements 

• Misfire - Related functions and components (injection, 

ignition, compression, etc.) 


The Valvetronic control module is assigned (programming) to the appropriate engine and 
ECM by the DISplus. 


The Idle Speed Control is also regulated by the Valvetronic system. Reduced valve lift when 
the engine is idling ensures that the engine receives the appropriate airflow. When the 
Valvetronic system is in use, the idle speed control and intake manifold vacuum is also reg¬ 
ulated using the electronic throttle valve. 

During the starting procedure at a temperature of between 20 °C and 60 °C, airflow is con¬ 
trolled by the throttle valve. If the engine is at operating temperature, it will be switched to 
non-throttle mode approximately 60 seconds after it is started up. 

At temperatures below 20 °C, the engine is started with the throttle valve fully opened using 
the Valvetronic for idle speed control (this has a positive effect on the starting characteris¬ 
tics). 

Note: If the idle speed control is faulty, the engine must be checked for vacuum leaks 
because leaking air has an immediate effect on idling (unmetered air leaks). 


23 

ME 9.2 Air Management 


Fuel Management 


Fuel Tank: The fuel tank is made of high density polyethylene (reduced weight) which is 
manufactured to meet safety requirements and is mounted over the rear axle. The tank 
capacity is 23.2 US gallons (88 liters) including a reserve capacity of 2.3 US gallons (10 
liters) for vehicles with the N62 engine. A “saddle” type tank is used which provides a tun¬ 
nel for the driveshaft but creates two separate low spots in the tank. A Syphon jet is 
required with this type of tank to transfer fuel from the left side, linked to the fuel return line. 
As fuel moves through the return, the siphon jet creates a low pressure (suction) to pick up 
fuel from the left side of the tank and transfer it to the right side at the fuel pick up. 

There must be no escape of fuel vapors when the tank is being filled and it must be possi¬ 
ble to fill the tank quickly and the fuel must not foam up. The fuel is prevented from foam¬ 
ing up when the tank is being filled because the tank filler pipe is located low down on the 
fuel tank. An anti-spitback flap is fitted on the fuel tank filler pipe as it enters the tank to pre¬ 
vent fuel from splashing back towards the pump nozzle during refuelling. The filler neck is 
designed so that the incoming fuel functions like a venturi tube during refuelling and also 
draws external air into the tank so that no fuel vapors can escape during this stage. 


24 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 













Fuel System 


1. Air cleaner 

2. Intake manifold 

3. Engine 

4. Exhaust system 

5. Oxygen sensor 

6. Evaporative emission valve (TEV) 

7. ECM 

8. Purge vapors 

9. Carbon Canister 

10. Fuel tank leak diagnostic module (DM TL) 

11. Roll-over valve 

12. Dust filter 

13. Service Ventilation 

14. Pressure test lead 

15. Fuel tank cap 


16. Service vent valve (float valve) 

17. Anti-spitback flap 

18. Surge chamber (fuel pump baffling) 

19. Electric fuel pump (EKP) 

20. Pressure relief valve 

21. Suction jet pumps 

22. Fuel Tank 

23. Outlet protection valve 

24. Refueling breather 

25. Fuel filter 

26. Fuel pressure regulator (3.5 bar) 

27. Injection rail 

28. Float valve 

29. Liquid/vapor expansion tank 

30. Filler vent valve 


25 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 



















































































Tank Ventilation: Optimum ventilation of the tank system ensures trouble free refuelling 
and that no vacuum can develop during this operation. 

The Ventilation System Consists of: 

• Two service vent valves (left/right 16) 

• Filling ventilation valve (30) 

• Hose to the fuel expansion tank (24) 

• Two rollover valves in the fuel expansion tank (11 +28) 

• Service vent hose (13) 

• Activated-carbon filter with hoses (9) 

• Dust filter (12) 


Tank Ventilation Components: 

• Service vent (16): The service vent valve (16) on the right side of the tank consists of 
a float which locks the ventilation while fuel is being admitted (ball valve). The service 
vent valve ensures that no fuel enters the ventilation pipe when the vehicle is on an 
incline. A simple ventilation connection piece is located in the left tank chamber. Both 
service vent valves ensure that no air pockets form in the lower portions of the tank. 

• Expansion tank (29): The task of the expansion tank is to receive fuel when the fuel 
tank is full and the vapors have expanded due to heat. 

• Rollover valve (11): The rollover valve is also a plastic ball valve. When the vehicle is 
in its usual position, the rollover valve is open allowing air to flow in and out. In the 
same way, fuel can flow via the filling vent valve (28) from the fuel tank into the expan¬ 
sion tank and from the expansion tank back into the fuel tank. In the event of an acci¬ 
dent in which the vehicle rolls over, the ball locks the expansion tank inlet and outlet 
openings and prevents fuel from escaping. 

• Dust filter (12): The dust filter prevents dust and small insects from entering the acti¬ 
vated carbon filter. 


Tank Ventilation Function 

During refuelling, the air escapes via the service ventilation in the expansion tank. Air mol¬ 
ecules in the tank have combined with hydrocarbon molecules. These must not escape 
into the atmosphere. The air containing hydrocarbon molecules is fed through the activat¬ 
ed carbon filter. This filters out the hydrocarbon molecules and stores them. 


26 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


The activated carbon filter is purged when the engine is running. This means that atmos¬ 
pheric air is drawn through the activated carbon filter in the opposite direction and is sup¬ 
plied for combustion via the engine's purge air pipe (8). The evaporative emission valve (6) 
controls the purging, which is activated by the ECM. 

The air which is now free of hydrocarbon molecules escapes via the dust filter into the 
atmosphere. If the fuel level reaches the ventilation valve (30), the ball floats and closes the 
ventilation pipe. The tank pressure increases beyond the pump nozzle cut-out pressure and 
switches it off. During fuel withdrawal, the fuel tank system is ventilated in the reverse direc¬ 
tion to prevent the formation of a vacuum. 


Fuel Supply System: The fuel tank system must fulfill various requirements concerned 
with supplying the engine with fuel. These include: 

• Providing sufficient fuel volume and pressure regardless of the driving style 

• Ensuring that the tank can be almost completely drained (full utilization of volume) 

The tank is made up of two halves which are only directly connected up to a certain height. 
A large proportion of the fuel volume cannot reach the fuel pump without assistance (suc¬ 
tion jet pumps). 

Fuel Supply System Components: 

• Fuel tank (22) 

• Surge chamber (18) 

• Fuel pump (19) 

• Two suction jet pumps (21) 

• Outlet protection valve (23) 

• Pressure relief valve (20) 

• Internal tank fuel lines 

• Fuel filter with fuel pressure regulator (25+26) 

• Fuel distributor pipe with injection valves (27) 


Internal Tank Fuel Circuit Operation 

The fuel pump supplies fuel from the surge chamber via the fuel filter (located next to the 
frame rail under the driver’s floor) to the fuel injection valves. The fuel pump always pumps 
more fuel than the engine requires in all operating conditions. The fuel pressure regulator 
built into the fuel filter adjusts the pressure to 3.5 bar and feeds the excess fuel in the return 
flow back into the tank. 


27 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 



The pressure regulator valve in the return flow sets a return pressure of 1.0 - 1.5 bar. This 
pressure prevents fuel vapor locks in the return flow and also ensures operation of the two 
suction jet pumps. 

The fuel flows from the pressure regulator valve on to an intersection point where the fuel 
return flow is split. Some of the fuel flows through the suction jet pump in the left half of the 
tank via the internal fuel line to the surge chamber. The suction jet pump acts like a venturi 
tube which draws the fuel from the left half of the tank into the right half. 

The other amount of diverted fuel flows via the second internal fuel supply directly to the 
right half of the tank and to the second suction jet pump (21). This pumps the fuel from the 
right half of the tank into the surge chamber to ensure that the surge chamber is always 
filled with enough fuel in all driving conditions and takes full advantage of the reserve capac¬ 
ity. 

Fuel Pressure Regulator 

The pressure regulator is integrated in the fuel filter and the two parts are only available as 
a single unit. There is a return line from the pressure regulator between the fuel pressure 
regulator and the fuel tank. The pressure regulator has a small hose connected to ensure 
that if there are any leaks in the pressure regulator, any leaking fuel does not escape into 
the environment. This hose connects to the intake air pipe behind the HFM. 


Electric Fuel Pump (EKP) 

The fuel pump is a two part in-tank gear pump. The first part is for the pre-delivery stage. 
It primes the second part in-tank gear pump which is designed to eliminate cavitation. The 
two parts are driven by the same electric motor. 


Electric Fuel Pump (EKP) Regulation 

The fuel is delivered in accordance with fuel consumption by engine use controlled regula¬ 
tion. This produces the following benefits: 

• The load balance of the alternator/battery is improved (lower pump power demand) 

• The lower power input reduces the fuel pump heat radiation in the fuel tank 

• Integration of the crash cut-out in the EKP regulation 

• Longer EKP service life 

• Deletion of the EKP relay 


28 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


Injection Valves / Fuel Rail 


The fuel injection valves have been positioned 
closer to the intake valves. This means that 
larger injection angles can be covered by the 
injection spray. Greater fuel spray atomization 
leads to optimum fuel mixing and thereby 
reduces fuel consumption and exhaust emis¬ 
sions. 

The Non Return Fuel Rail System has been 
improved for better fuel distribution. A “service 
valve” is provided to check fuel pressure 
(arrow). 



42 - 02-84 


The Siemens fuel injection valves are the dual outlet “directional angle plate” type with a coil 
reisistance of approximately 12 ohms each. 


Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor: This sensor provides the crankshaft position and 
engine speed (RPM) signal to the ECM for engine management operation. This is a Hall 
type sensor mounted in the bell housing which scans the impulse wheel (attached to the 
ring gear). The impulse wheel contains 58 teeth with a gap of two missing teeth. The ECM 
provides the power supply to this component. 


The rotation of the impulse wheel generates a 
square wave DC voltage signal in the sensor 
where by each tooth of the wheel produces one 
square wave. The ECM counts the pulses and 
determines engine rpm. 

The gap of two missing teeth provides a refer¬ 
ence point that the ECM recognizes as crank¬ 
shaft position. 

The crankshaft position sensor is monitored as 
part of OBD II requirements for Misfire Det¬ 
ection. 



42 - 02-04 


Notes: 


29 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 













Camshaft Position Sensors (Hall Effect): The ECM uses the signal from the camshaft 
sensors to set up the triggering of the ignition coils, correct timing of fully sequential fuel 
injection and VANOS operation. The ECM monitors power flow through the Hall elements 
as the basis for the signal output. 

As the camshafts rotate, the leading edge of the impulse wheel approaches the sensor tip 
creating a magnetic field with the permanent magnet in the sensor. The attraction causes 
the magnetic field to penetrate through the Hall element. The magnetic field affects the 
power flow in the element causing the input signal to go high. As the impulse wheel pass¬ 
es by the sensor, the signal goes low. 

The repetitive high/low creates a square wave 
signal that the ECM uses to recognize the 
camshaft position. The ECM determines an 
approximate location of the camshaft position 
(high or low signal) during engine start up opti¬ 
mizing cold start injection (reduced emissions). 

An impulse wheel is mounted on the end of 
each camshaft for position detection. The sen¬ 
sors are mounted on each side at the back of 
the cylinder heads cover (2 and 3). 



Engine Coolant Temperature: The Engine 
Coolant Temperature is provided to the ECM 
from a Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) 
type sensor. The ECM determines the correct 
fuel mixture and base ignition timing required for 
the engine temperature. 

The sensor is located in the thermostat housing 
(3). The sensor decreases in resistance as the 
temperature rises and vice verse. The ECM 
monitors an applied voltage to the sensor (5V). 
This voltage will vary (0-5V) as coolant temper¬ 
ature changes the resistance value. 



42 - 04-89 


Notes: 


30 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 




















Principle of Operation 


Fuel Management delivers fuel from the tank to the intake ports of the engine. To accom¬ 
plish this, fuel supply must be available to the fuel injectors. Then the fuel must be inj¬ 
ected in the precise amount and at the correct time. The ECM does not directly monitor 
fuel supply, although it does control it. The ECM controls and monitors fuel injection. 


The Fuel Pump (EKP) 

EKP regulation and fuel cut-out in the event of a crash, are ISIS (Intelligent Safety Integration 
System) features. 

The fuel requirement is transmitted by the ECM via the PT CAN bus and the byteflight bus 
to the right hand side satellite B-pillar (SBSR). The EKP regulation is integrated in the SBSR. 
The SBSR controls the front right belt force limiter and the fuel pump. 

The SBSR controls the EKP via a pulse width modulated (PWM) signal according to the fuel 
quantity required by the ECM. The present pump speed is recorded in the SBSR from the 
EKP electrical current consumption to calculate the fuel quantity required. The fuel quanti¬ 
ty required is then set (from the coded map in the SBSR) by the PWM signal to control cur¬ 
rent which regulates the pump speed. 


P’PCAN 


byteftigtit 





Fuel Requirement Signal Path 


Note: If the fuel quantity requirement from the ECM and/or the EKP rotation speed signal 
in the SBSR fails, the fuel pump will continue to operate with the greatest delivery rate when 
terminal 15 is activated. This guarantees the fuel supply even if the control signals fail. 


31 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 

























The Fuel Injectors will be opened by the ECM to inject pressurized fuel into the intake 
ports. The ECM Relay (in the IVM) supplies voltage to the fuel injectors. The ECM controls 
the opening by activating the ground circuit for the Solenoid Windings. The ECM will vary 
the duration (in milli-seconds) of “opening” time to regulate the air/fuel ratio. 

The ECM has eight Final Stage output transistors that switch ground to the eight injector 
solenoids. The Injector “triggering” is first established from the Crankshaft Position/RPM 
Sensor. 

The ECM is programmed to activate the Final Stage output transistors once (per cylinder) 
for every working cycle of the engine (Full Sequential Injection). The ECM calculates the total 
milli-second time to open the injectors and triggers them independently. 

During start up, the ECM recognizes the Camshaft Position (Cylinder ID) inputs. The 
camshaft positions are referenced to the crankshaft position. This process “times” the injec¬ 
tion closer to the intake valve opening for increased efficiency. When activated, each injec¬ 
tor delivers the full fuel charge at separate times for each cylinder working cycle. 

The Camshaft Position input is monitored by the ECM during start up. There will be an 
effect on injector timing if this input is missing when the engine is started. When KL15 is 
switched “off”, the ECM discontinues voltage to the Fuel Injector Relay and deactivates the 
eight Final Stage transistors to discontinue fuel injection. 


The Injector “open” Time maintains engine operation after start up is determined by the 
ECM (programming). 

The injection ms value is influenced by battery voltage. When cranking, the voltage is low 
and the ECM will increase the ms value to compensate for injector “lag time”. When the 
engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the injection ms 
value due to faster injector reaction time. 

Cold starting requires additional fuel to compensate for poor mixture and the loss of fuel as 
it condenses onto cold intake ports, valves and cylinder walls. The cold start fuel quantity 
is determined by the ECM based on the Engine Coolant Temperature Sensor input during 
start up. 

During cranking, additional fuel is injected for the first few crankshaft revolutions. The ECM 
recognizes the Camshaft Positions and precisely times the Full Sequential Injection. After 
the first few crankshaft revolutions, the injected quantity is metered down as the engine 
comes up to speed. 


32 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


When the engine is cold, optimum fuel metering is not possible due to poor air/fuel mixing 
and an enriched mixture is required. The Coolant Temperature input allows the ECM to 
adjust the injection ms value to compensate during warm up and minimize the the fuel 
injected at engine operating temperature. 

When the engine is at idle, minimum injection is required. Additional fuel will be added if the 
ECM observes low engine rpm and increasing Valvetronic valve lift / air volume inputs 
(acceleration enrichment). As the accelerator pedal is actuated, the ECM monitors accel¬ 
eration and rate of movement. The ECM will increase the volume of fuel injected into the 
engine by increasing the injection ms value. The “full throttle” position indicates maximum 
acceleration and the ECM will add more fuel (full load enrichment). 

As the accelerator pedal is released, the ECM decreases the injection ms value (fuel shut 
off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreases fuel consumption and 
lowers emissions. When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injection ms value is 
increased (cut-in) to prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon the 
engine temperature and the rate of deceleration. 

The HFM signal provides the measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by 
the ECM to determine the amount of fuel to be injected to “balance” the air / fuel ratio. 

The Air Temperature Signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The vary¬ 
ing voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found in 
cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the amount 
of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on the oxygen content (details 
in Emissions). 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECM to start injection as well as providing infor¬ 
mation about the engine operation. This input is used in combination with other inputs to 
determine engine load which increases / decreases the injection ms value. Without this in¬ 
put, the ECM will not activate the injectors. 

When KL15 is switched “off”, the ECM relay discontinues voltage to deactivate the eight 
Final Stage transistors to cease fuel injection. 


33 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


Injection “Reduction” Time is required to control fuel economy, emissions, engine and 
vehicle speed limitation. The ECM will “trim” back or deactivate the fuel injection as neces¬ 
sary while maintaining optimum engine operation. 

As the Valvetronic valve lift is decreased during deceleration, the ECM decreases the injec¬ 
tion ms value (fuel shut off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreas¬ 
es fuel consumption and lowers emissions. 

When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injection ms value is increased (cut-in) to 
prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon the engine temperature 
and the rate of deceleration. 

The ECM will deactivate the injectors to control maximum engine rpm (regardless of vehi¬ 
cle speed). When the engine speed reaches 6500 rpm, the injectors will be deactivated to 
protect the engine from Over-Rev. As the engine speed drops below 6500 rpm, injector 
activation will be resumed. 


Maximum vehicle speed is limited by the ECM reducing the injection ms value (regardless 
of engine rpm). This limitation is based on the vehicle dimensions, specifications and 
installed tires (speed rating). 

The ECM will also protect the Catalytic Converters by deactivating the injectors. 


If the ECM detects a “Misfire” (ignition, injection or combustion), it will selectively deactivate 
the Final Stage output transistor for that cylinder(s). On the ME 9.2 system, there are eight 
individual injector circuits resulting in deactivation of one or multiples. This will limit engine 
power, but protect the Catalytic Converters. 


Fuel Injection Control Monitoring is performed by the ECM for OBD II requirements. 
Faults with the fuel injectors and/or control circuits will be stored in memory. This monitor¬ 
ing includes: 

• Closed Loop Operation 

• Oxygen Sensor Feedback 

These additional corrections are factored into the calculated injection time. If the correction 
factor exceeds set limits a fault will be stored in memory. 


34 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


