Table of Contents 


MED 9.2.1 Engine Management System 
- Workbook 

Subject Page 

MED 9.2.1 

Objectives of the Module.2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components.4 

Principle of Operation.7 

Power Supply 

Integrated Voltage Supply Module.8 

Local-CAN bus.10 

Air Management 

Auxiliary Air Flaps..12 

Intake Manifold Pressure Sensors.12 

Fuel Management 

Fuel Supply.14 

High Pressure Injection System.16 

Direct Injection System Control.25 

Emissions Management 

Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor..27 


Performance Controls 

Exhaust Flap. 


29 
















MED 9.2.1 Engine Management System 

Model: E66 - 760Li 
Production Date: MY 2003 
Manufacturer: Bosch 

Pin Connector: 134 Pins - 5 Modular Connectors per Control Module 


This intent of this workbook is to assist you with diagnosis and testing in addition to the 
detailed information found in the the latest Diagnosis and TIS of the DISplus/GTI. 

This section will be instructor led for a brief review of the MED 9.2.1 Engine Management 
System. You are encouraged to use this workbook with the latest Diagnosis and TIS infor¬ 
mation to make notes during diagnosis and testing of the new/unique components of the 
MED 9.2.1 system. This will be valuable to you as supplementary information or a memo¬ 
ry refresher when performing diagnosis in the future. 

Note: For more in depth and detailed information about the MED 9.2.1 Engine Management 
System, refer to the ST047 2003 Systems Diagnosis training manual. 

For additional and updated information, always refer to: 

www. bmwcenternet. com 

- Diagnosis and TIS information/updates 

- Service Information Bulletins 

- DCS messages 


Objectives: 


After completion of this module you will 

be able to test and diagnose the following: 

• Integrated Voltage Supply Module 

• High Pressure Injection System 

• Local-CAN bus 

• Direct Injection System Control 

• Auxiliary Air Flaps 

• Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor 

• Intake Manifold Pressure Sensors 

• Exhaust Flap 


2 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 




MED 9.2.1 

Purpose of the System 

The MED 9.2.1 system manages the following functions: 




MED 9.2.1 
ECM 1 



© n 




MED 9.2.1 
ECM 2 



4_4 



A \ 

i A 

A A 


J 







Emissions: 

• Secondary Air Injection 

• Pre and Post Catalyst Oxygen Sensing 

• Oxygen Sensor Heating 

• Misfire Detection 

• Evaporative Purge Control/Leak Testing 

• Malfunction Indicator Light 


Performance Controls: 

• Bi-VANOS 

• Oil Condition 

• Electric Cooling Fan 

• MAP Thermostat 

• Alternator 

• E-Box Cooling Fan 

• Comfort Start 

• Cruise Control 

• A/C Compressor (high engine load) 

• Exhaust Flap 


The basic engine management inputs, processes and outputs are not included in this work¬ 
book because they have not changed, refer to the ST055 Engine Electronics hand out for 
details. Some components and functions are the same as the ME 9.2 Engine Management 
System found in the E65/E66. Refer to the ST042 E65 Part 2 hand out for details. 


3 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 
















































System Components 


MED 9.2.1 Engine Control Modules - New Features: This Bosch Engine Management 
System is introduced for more stringent emission requirements as well as reducing fuel 
consumption and increasing driving performance. Flash EEPROMs (additional 1 MB flash 
memory) are used as the storage medium for program data, fault code memory as well as 
the adaptation values. 


The 134 pin MED 9.2.1 ECMs are manu¬ 
factured by Bosch to BMW specifica¬ 
tions. The ECM is the SKE (standard 
shell construction) housing and uses 5 
modular connectors. 

For testing, use the Universal Adapter 
Set (break-out box) Special Tool: # 90 88 

6 121 300 



The ECMs work in combination with the 
Valvetronic Control Module. The N73 
engine has a total of 5 control modules 
to manage the engine functions: 


1. MED 9.2.1 ECM 2 - overall engine management 

2. MED 9.2.1 ECM 1 - overall engine management 

3. Valvetronic Control Module - intake valve lift 

4. High pressure fuel injector control module 
(HDEV) - activates injector group for one bank 



5. High pressure fuel injector control module 
(HDEV) - activates injector group for one bank 


D-BUS 



These modules are located in the elec- 


tronic box in the engine compartment 


— DME1 - 

- EMF 

together with the Integrated Voltage 

Supply Module (6). 


— DME2 ■ 


The ECM controls an electric cooling fan 

Vr. viTtron lc 1 

- 

- GRS 

in the base of the electronic box to draw 
in cool air from the passenger compart- 

IHDEV1 

EDC-K - 

- DSC 

ment. 

HDEV2 — 

ACC - 

- EGS 


4 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 













































MED 9.2.1 ECM 1 Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


\,mmm 



CAS 


31 


ACCELERATOR 
PEDAL MODULE 



MAP 

SENSOR 



VALVETRONIC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 



RAILPRESSURE SENSOR 


AIRMASS 

SIGNAL 



COOLANT 
TEMPI, 
SENSOR 


_ 

n 


KNOCK 

SENSOR 

3x 



RPM 

SENSOR 



PRE & POST 
CAT CONV. 
0„ SENSOR 





^ MONITORING ^ < ^3 





Camshaft 
Shaft Sensor 
(2x) 


u 




EBJ 

DMTL 


(j 


RADIATOR OUTLET 
TEMPERATURE 
SENSOR 



ROLLING CODE 


JUT-rLTL 


KL 50 E 


CAS 



CRUISE CONTROL 



DRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 


DSC 






GENERATOR 




ENGINE 
OIL SENSOR 



N 


MED 9.2.1 
ECM 1 


POWER 

SUPPLY 


AIR 

MANAGEMENT 


FUEL 

MANAGEMENT 


IGNITION 

MANAGEMENT 


INTEGRAL 

BAROMETRIC 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 


PROVIDES ADDITIONAL CORRECTION 
FACTOR FOR FOLLOWING FUNCTIONS 


EMISSION 

MANAGEMENT 



PERFORMANCE 

MANAGEMENT 



CAS 


-tt I 




ELECT*! C THTWTTLE 


AUXILARY 
AIR FLAP 
SOLENOID 


ECCENTRIC 

SENSOR 


VALVETRONIC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 


P '! 





VALVETRONIC RELAY 


HDEV 


FUEL INJECTORS 

(8X) 


ZGM 


SIM 


SBSR 


p \ FUEL 
PUMP 



■N. 


Fuel Shutoff Valve 


Fuel Quantity 
Control Valve 


SECONDARY 
AIR PUMP 
RELAY 



IGNITION COIL 
CONTROL (6x) 

HEATED THERMOSTAT 





°2 

SENSOR 

HEATING 



Jl 



EVAP. EMISSION VALVE 


DMTL 


CHECK 

ENGINE 

LIGHT 



CLOSE 

FILLER 

CAP 



EXHAUST FLAP 
SOLENOID 


E-BOX FAN 


VAN OS 

(2x) 


. [>—• 





■ ■" 


; 


TRANSMISSION 

AC COMPRESSOR 





STARTER 


IVM 


LOCAL CAN 


PT-CAN 


S 



AJUX. FAN 
MOTOR 


ISO 9141 PROTOCOL 


ODD n 


HI 



DISplus 


GT-1 


5 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 










































































































































































































































































MED 9.2.1 ECM 2 Inputs - Processing - Outputs 




IVM 


B+ 


-as 

CAS 




ELECTHiC THMmf 



AUXILARY 
AIR FLAP 
SOLENOID 



HDEV 


FUEL WJECTORS 
(8X) 






Fuel Quantity 
Control Valve 


Fuel Shutoff Valve 


I 

IGNITION COIL 
■ CONTROL (6x) 


+ + 



EVAP. EMISSION VALVE 




ECM1 


6 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 













































































































































Principle of Operation 

The ME 9.2 Engine Management System from the N62 engine provides the basis for the 
MED 9.2.1 Engine Management System. 

The main distinguishing features of the MED 9.2.1 are: 

• Extended computer capacity (additional 1 MB flash) 

• Modified oxygen sensor chip which permits detailed diagnosis of the oxygen sensors 

• One MED 9.2.1 control module for each cylinder bank 

• Power is supplied to the high pressure fuel injectors for each cylinder bank by a high 
pressure fuel injector control module (HDEV) 

• Omission of DISA and variable intake manifold activation (N62) 

• Three knock sensors for each cylinder bank 

• Activation of the auxiliary air flaps in the air cleaner housing 

• Rail pressure sensor 

• Fuel quantity control valve 

An MED 9.2.1 control module is used for each cylinder bank. Both control modules are 
the same design and are classified into ECM 1 and ECM 2 by the programming. ECM 1 
receives the input signals from a sensor or switch: 

• Accelerator pedal module 

• Oil condition sensor 

• Alternator 

• Coolant temperature 

• Oil pressure 

ECM 1 transmits these signals via the Local-CAN bus to ECM 2. All further input signals 
are transmitted directly to the control module responsible for the relevant cylinder bank (see 
overview pages 5 and 6). 

Output signals which relate to not just one cylinder bank (e.g. electric fuel pump or exhaust 
flap) are transmitted by ECM 1 to the corresponding actuators. The crankshaft sensor sig¬ 
nal is transmitted simultaneously to both control modules. 

The MED 9.2.1 regulates the injected fuel quantity. For this purpose, the MED 9.2.1 
receives the rail pressure sensor signals and regulates this pressure with the fuel quantity 
control valve according to the value defined by the program map. This ensures that a 
defined quantity of fuel is injected over the injection period. 


7 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 




Integrated Voltage Supply Module (IVM) 

The IVM contains integral relays, replaceable fuses and offers a convenient splice point for 
harness connections. The IVM serves as a central power supply for Engine Management 
(including Valvetronic), Electronic Transmission and DSC. This diagram is a partial repre¬ 
sentation of the IVM for Engine Electronics. 



47-04-04 


8 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 




























































































































1. What pin and connector number of ECM 1 and ECM 2 supplies ground to the ECM 
(main) relays? 

ECM 1 ECM 2 

2. What fuse(s) (numbers) supply operating voltage from relay 1 to the ignition coils of: 

Cylinder bank 1-6 Cylinder bank 7-12 

3. if fuse 005 from relay 3 were defective, what control modules would be affected? 


4. Relay 5 supplies operating voltage to what components? 


5. What type of signal is found on pin 26 (X60204) of ECM 2? 

Is this signal an input or output? 

Where does this signal originate? 

What is the voltage value? 

Does ECM 1 receive this signal? 

6. What type of signal is found on pin 7 (X60201) of ECM 2? 

Is this signal an input or output? 

Where does this signal originate? 

What is the voltage value? 

Does ECM 1 receive this signal? 


9 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 



Indirect Signals and Wiring 

The ECMs are not directly connected to the OBD diagnostic connector. The OBD diag¬ 
nostic connector is connected to the ZGM. Both ECMs are connected to the ZGM (cen¬ 
tral gateway module) by the PT-CAN bus. ECM 2 is also connected via the Local-CAN bus 
to ECM1. The ECMs are also connected to the Valvetronic control module and HDEV con¬ 
trol modules by the Local-CAN bus. Valvetronic faults are stored in the ECMs. 

The ECMs are classified into ECM 1 and ECM 2 by the wire harness connections (color 
coded) and location. ECM 1 receives the input signals from a sensor or switch and trans¬ 
mits these signals via the Local-CAN bus to ECM 2. All further input signals are transmit¬ 
ted directly (via hardwire harness) to the control module responsible for the relevant cylin¬ 
der bank. 

Output signals which are required for both cylinder banks are transmitted by ECM 1 to the 
corresponding actuators. The crankshaft sensor signal is transmitted simultaneously to 
both control modules. 


D-BUS 



Local-CAN PT-CAN 


KT-9715 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 







































































PT-CAN 

1. What are the circuit descriptions of the three wires that make up the PT-CAN bus? 


2. Record the voltage levels on the PT-CAN bus (high and low) using the DISplus scope as 
shown - when the bus is: 

Inactive - high low Active - high low 


Notes on setup: 


IVurl 


J I nd n I st ™ | 


(Intpri 




A lU-taT? 


BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 


5,0 

4.0 

5,0 

2*0 

1.0 

0.0 

- 1.0 

■ 2.0 

-3.0 








►j- 'MV| v 

▲ 




-H-+ 
+ + + 

++*#* 

5.0 

4.0 

3.0 

2.0 

1,0 

0,0 


USD 


4.0 

3,0 

2.0 

1.0 

0 

- 1.0 

- 3.0 

- 4.0 


T 

r 

i 

i! 

e 

r 




-1.0 Ojo 

yQ -i. 

0. D 

□ u 

2.0 

i _vt 


IN 

ms 







LIU 

County | 

IteillOMift 

Slimulalor* | 



111 ' ■ 

Eldp 



\inrlithJL' 
( - i.JIIMl'1 H 


\ll idHin.lv 
(hjMFwHi 


! iilkv.il'iL' 


Milhlihik- 


E 


47 002 


Local-CAN 

1. What are the circuit descriptions of the two wires that make up the Local-CAN bus? 


2. Record the voltage levels on the Local-CAN bus (high and low) using the DISplus scope 
- when the bus is: 

Inactive - high low Active - high low 

3. What pin and connector numbers did you test the Local-CAN bus circuit on ECM 1 ? 

Pins Connector 

4. Are you able to test the Local-CAN bus for resistance? Value: 

11 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 





Air Management 

Auxiliary Air Flaps: Each air cleaner housing incorporates an auxiliary air flap in its side 
wall. The auxiliary air flaps supply the engine with enough air volume to attain the maximum 
performance. The auxiliary air flaps are closed in the lower rpm ranges so that only cooler 
ambient air is drawn in for hot idling and stop and go driving. 

The auxiliary air flaps are actuated by vacuum diaphragms which are located inside the air 
cleaner housings. Both diaphragms are supplied with vacuum from a common solenoid 
valve. 

The auxiliary air flaps are fully opened by the 
ECM: 

• In driving position “D” with kickdown 
operation from 3500 rpm 

• In driving position “S” from 3000 rpm 
and simultaneous full load recognition. 

10-15% additional air is drawn in from the engine compartment when the auxiliary air flaps 
are open. It is not necessary to draw in additional cold air from outside the engine com¬ 
partment since the engine compartment is adequately ventilated at full load. 



Intake Manifold Pressure Sensors: The pressure sensors (one per bank) are located in 
the back of intake manifold (1 peizo-electric). The voltage supply from the ECMs is 5 V. The 
varying resistance of the sensors is dependent on manifold pressure. The output voltage 
signal is processed by the ECMs. The intake manifold pressure is calculated by the ECMs 
and is compared with the ambient pressure (internally measured in ECM 1). 

A minimum intake manifold vacu¬ 
um of 50 mbar is required for the 
fuel tank evaporative purge func¬ 
tion. 

This vacuum is set by the elec¬ 
tronic throttle valves (4) and mon¬ 
itoring with the intake manifold 
pressure sensors. 

Shown to the right is the intake 
manifold (upside down) with both 
sensors (1). 

12 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 



















Auxiliary Air Flaps 


1. What are the pin and connector numbers at the ECM (1 or 2) for the auxiliary air flap 
vacuum solenoid? 

2. Is there a Test Plan available for the auxiliary air flaps? 

3. Select Control Unit Functions (MED 9.2.1), Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under 
the “Part Functions” column for observing the “Messages and Results"? 

Is there a “Component Activation” feature for the auxiliary air flaps? 


Intake Manifold Pressure Sensors 

1. What are the pin and connector numbers at the ECM (1 or 2) for the pressure sensors? 

Pins Connector 

2. Is there a Test Plan available for the pressure sensors? 

3. Select Control Unit Functions (MED 9.2.1), Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under 
the “Part Functions” column for observing the “Messages and Results”? 

4. What is the value at idle speed? mbar 

5. What is the voltage value at pin 2 (X60103) of ECM 1 at: 

Idle speed 2000 rpm 

6. With the ignition off, unplug the electronic throttle valve (on the bank you are testing). 
Restart the engine and check the value at idle speed. mbar 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 



Fuel Management 


1 2 345678 9 



24 23 22 21 20 


KT-9780 


1. Air cleaner 

2. Intake manifold 

3. Engine 

4. Exhaust system 

5. Oxygen sensor 

6. Evaporative emission valve (TEV) 

7. Purge vapors 

8. MED 9.2.1 ECM 

9. Carbon Canister 

10. Fuel tank leak diagnostic module (DM TL) 

11. Roll-over valve 

12. Liquid/vapor expansion tank 

13. Dust filter 

14. Service ventilation 

15. Pressure test lead 

16. Fuel tank filler cap 

14 


17. Filler vent valve 

18. Service vent valve (float valve) 

19. Anti-spitback flap 

20. Surge chamber (fuel pump baffling) 

21. Electric fuel pump (EKP) 

22. Pressure relief valve 

23. Suction jet pumps 

24. Fuel Tank 

25. Outlet protection valve 

26. Service vent valve (float valve) 

27. Refueling breather 

28. Leakage line 

29. Fuel pressure regulator (6 bar) 

30. Fuel filter 

31. High pressure fuel pump (HDP) 

32. Fuel rails 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 













































































































































Fuel Supply System: For the N73 engine, minor modifications have been made to the fuel 
supply system to adapt it to the direct injection system. The additional features are: 

• Leakage line 

• Electric fuel pump with increased delivery 

The N73 in tank electric fuel pump is a roller cell type (EKP Bosch 3.1) with an increased 
delivery pressure of 6 bar. This pressure is required to adequately supply the high pressure 
fuel pumps. 

Fuel Supply System Components: 

• Fuel tank (24) 

• Surge chamber (20) 

• Fuel pump (21) 

• Two suction jet pumps (23) 

• Outlet protection valve (25) 

Internal Tank Fuel Circuit Operation 

The fuel pump supplies fuel from the surge chamber via the fuel filter (located next to the 
frame rail under the driver’s floor) to the high pressure fuel pumps (HDP). The fuel pump 
always pumps more fuel than the engine requires in all operating conditions. The fuel pres¬ 
sure regulator built into the fuel filter adjusts the pressure to 6 bar and feeds the excess fuel 
in the return flow back into the tank. 

The pressure regulator valve in the return flow sets a return pressure of 1.0 - 1.5 bar. This 
pressure prevents fuel vapor locks in the return flow and also ensures operation of the two 
suction jet pumps. 

The fuel flows from the pressure regulator valve on to an intersection point where the fuel 
return flow is split. Some of the fuel flows through the suction jet pump in the left half of 
the tank via the internal fuel line to the surge chamber. The suction jet pump acts like a 
venturi tube which draws the fuel from the left half of the tank into the right half. 

The other amount of diverted fuel flows via the second internal fuel supply directly to the 
right half of the tank and to the second suction jet pump. This pumps the fuel from the right 
half of the tank into the surge chamber to ensure that the surge chamber is always filled 
with enough fuel in all driving conditions and takes full advantage of the reserve capacity. 


• Pressure relief valve (22) 

• Internal tank fuel lines 

• Fuel filter with fuel pressure regulator (30&29) 

• High pressure fuel pump (HDP) 

• Fuel rails with injection valves (32) 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 



High Pressure Injection System: A BMW gasoline direct injection system is used for the 
first time in the N73 engine series. Each fuel rail is supplied with fuel by a high pressure 
pump (HDP), which is driven via a bucket tappet by a triple lobe cam on the exhaust 
camshaft. 

The two high pressure pumps are supplied with fuel by the electric fuel pump (EKP), which 
is located in the fuel tank. The high pressure fuel injectors are connected to a pressure rail 
(accumulator) for each cylinder bank. The two rails are not interconnected. 



KT-9612 


1. Supply line 

2. High pressure pumps 

3. High pressure lines 

4. Fuel rail (7-12) 

5. Fuel rail (1-6) 


6. High pressure fuel injectors 

7. Rail pressure sensors 

8. Pressure limiting valves 

9. Leakage line 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 




























High Pressure Pumps: A single cylinder high pressure pump is used for each cylinder 
bank. The pumps are mounted on the cylinder heads and driven via bucket tappets by 
triple cam lobes on the exhaust camshafts. Each pump has three connecting lines: feed 
line, high pressure line and leakage line. 


1. Feed line 

2. Inlet valve 

3. High pressure chamber 

4. Outlet valve 

5. High pressure line 

6. Pump plunger 

7. Annular plunger groove 

8. Feed area channel 

9. Sealing ring 

10. Fuel quantity control 
valve 

11. Diaphragm 

12. Pressure attenuator 

13. Mounting flange 

14. Leakage line 


1 5 4 11 12 2 3 10 



14 13 8 9 7 6 8 


KT-9698 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 














































Fuel is delivered to each high pressure pump through the feed line at a pressure of 6 bar 
from the electric in tank fuel pump via a T-branch. In the pump, the fuel passes through 
the inlet valve (2) into the high pressure area (3). 

As the pump plunger is forced up by the camshaft, the fuel is pressurized (up to 120 bar) 
in this area. The pressurized fuel is then forced out through the high pressure line to the 
fuel rail. The outlet valve (4) prevents back flow from the rail into the high pressure pump. 

Due to the extreme pressure on and around the plunger shaft, a small amount of fuel (max. 
1 litre per hour) flows past the plunger shaft against the sealing ring (9). This also serves 
as lubrication for the plunger shaft. The sealing ring provides a seal between the fuel side 
of the pump and the engine oil at the pump drive. 

To relieve the pump pressure (up to 120 bar) at the sealing ring, the pressure is reduced in 
two stages, at which point the fuel returns through the leakage line to the tank. The pump 
pressure is reduced down to 6 bar at the annular groove (7) because it is connected by a 
channel (8) to the feed area of the pump. The fuel flow from this channel is regulated by 
the fuel quantity control valve (MSV). 

Below the annular groove, some fuel flows past the pump plunger against the sealing ring. 
At this point the fuel pressure is virtually reduced to atmosheric pressure, which is sufficient 
to return the fuel through the leakage line to the tank. 


Fuel Quantity Control Valves (MSV): The fuel quantity control valve (10) is installed in the 
high pressure pump to regulate the fuel delivery rate as required based on load and engine 
rpm. This valve opens a channel from the high pressure chamber (3) to the feed area allow¬ 
ing excess fuel to return to the feed area. 

When the pump plunger is at it’s lowest position, the valve is energized closed by the ECM. 
The valve is de-energized as soon as the injection pressure calculated by the ECM is 
reached during the upwards travel of the pump plunger. The valve is now opened to allow 
excess fuel to return to the feed area. This switching is repeated three times per camshaft 
revolution because the drive cam for the pump has three lobes. 

The pulsations generated in the pump during the process are absorbed by the pressure 
attenuator spring (12). The pressure attenuator is sealed by a diaphragm (11) from the 
pump feed area. 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 



In Tank Electric Fuel Pump 

1. Request the Test Plan for the in tank electric fuel pump. What can cause faults in the 
fuel supply control? 


2. Select #4 “Fault in electric fuel pump”. When the Test Plan requests you to check the 
wires and power supply to the fuel pump, can you find a quicker way to confirm this? 


3. Is there a “Component activation” for the in tank electric fuel pump? 
If yes, how can you confirm that it is operating? 


High Pressure Pump with Fuel Quantity (volume) Control Valve 

1. Is there a Test Plan available for the high pressure pump/fuel volume control valve? 

2. Select Control Unit Functions (MED 9.2.1), Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under 
the “Part Functions” column for observing the fuel volume control valve? 

3. What are the pin and connector numbers at the ECM (1 or 2) for the fuel volume control 

valve? Pin Connector 


4. Record the voltage value at this pin with the engine not running (ignition on). V 

Engine running at idle speed. V 


5. Record the frequency at this pin with the engine running at idle speed. Hz 

at 2000 rpm. Hz 


6. Use the MFK 2 cable to observe a scope pat¬ 
tern from the same pin and record that pat¬ 
tern on the right (engine at idle speed). 

Hint: Start out with a scope setting of 10Hz 
at 50 V for MFK 2 (Channel B). 

Increase the engine speed to 2000 rpm and 
observe pattern. 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 




















































































































Fuel Rails (pressure accumulator): The fuel 
is stored in the fuel rail at a pressure between 50 
and 120 bar for distribution to the fuel injectors. 
The fuel rail connects to the injectors through 
brass coupling connections. 

Due to length and position compensation 
between the rail and the fuel injectors, brass 
coupling connections are used in order that the 
fuel injector O-ring can float inside this coupling. 



Pressure Limiting Valves: Each fuel rail contains an integral pressure limiting valve (1 
below). This valve opens from a pressure of 125 bar to prevent damage to the injection 
system. The outlet of this valve is connected by a line to the high pressure pump fuel feed 
line. The valve can open briefly: 

• When no fuel is required by the fuel injectors (fuel cutoff when vehicle is coasting) 

or 

• During the afterheating (hot soak) phase when the hot engine is turned off. 



1 

2 V r> 

1P1 ') 





,«* . * ■ - 



\f ' , -■— 




DSC00632 


Rail Pressure Sensors: Each fuel rail incorporates a rail pressure sensor (2 above). The 
sensor is a pressure dependent resistor and the voltage (5 V) is supplied by the ECM. The 
increasing system pressure alters the sensor resistance. 

According to the fuel pressure applied, the rail pressure sensor outputs a varying voltage 
signal as the rail pressure increases from 0.5 V (0 bar) to 4.5 V (140 bar). If the rail pres¬ 
sure sensor malfunctions, the fuel quantity control valve (on the HDP) is activated with a 
back up function (set value) by the ECM. 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 




Fuel (rail) Pressure Sensor 

1. What type of sensor is this? 

2. Is there a Test Plan available for the fuel pressure sensor? 

3. Select Control Unit Functions (MED 9.2.1), Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under 
the “Part Functions” column for observing the fuel pressure sensor? 

4. What are the pin and connector numbers at the ECM (1 or 2) for the fuel pressure sen¬ 
sor? Pin Connector 

5. Record the voltage value at this pin with the engine not running (ignition on). V 

Engine running at idle speed. V 

Engine speed at 2000 rpm. V 

6. Shut the engine off and turn the ignition back on “KL15” (engine not running). Observe 
the voltage value at this pin for approximately one minute. What did you observe? 


7. If the pressure limiting valve is defective, could the answers to questions 5 and 6 (above) 
indicate this? 


Additional notes: 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 



Return Shut-off Valve: The return shut-off valve prevents a pressure drop in the system 
while the engine is stopped and is located in the leakage line. When the engine is started, 
the valve is energized after a slight delay to prevent a pressure drop in the feed area of the 
high pressure pump (cavitation). 

While the engine is running, this valve is sup¬ 
plied with system voltage (from the ECM Main 
Relay) and activated by the ECM providing a 
ground path which allows leakage fuel to return 
to the tank. 


1. High pressure pump 

2. Leakage line 

3. Return shut-off valve 



Pressure Damper Vent Valve: The Pressure Damper Vent Valve provides a controlled 
outlet for fuel/vapors that accumulate in the Pressure Attenuator (damper) chamber in the 
top of each High Pressure Pump. This is a 3/2 way electrically controlled valve (KL15 from 
the IVM, ground path provided by ECM 1) that provides: 


• A circuit for fuel to return to the fuel tank when energized (KL15 on) or 

• A circuit for fuel vapors to vent into the evaporative system when de-energized (KL15 off) 




HDEV 


HDEV 


IVM 


ECM 1 


PRtSSUE DAMPER 
VENT VALVE 


RETURN Ll ME 
{TO FUEL TANK} 


LEAKEAGE LIME FROM 
RETU RM SHU T OFF VA LVE 


EVAPORATIVE LINE 
(TO EVAPORATIVE 
E M IOM VALVE) 


EVAPORATIVE LINE 

T FRO M ACTIVE CHAR COAL CAN I5TE R) 


MED 9.2.1- Workbook 




















When the engine is running, a slight amount of fuel may accumulate in the Pressure 
Attenuator upper chambers due to natural leakage through the internal diaphram (extreme 
pressure). This fuel (circuit) is returned to the fuel tank by combining with the Leakage Line 
of the Return Shut-off Valve. The Pressure Damper Vent Valve provides a passage to com¬ 
bine these two circuits when the ignition is switched on (KL15) and isolates the Evaporative 
Emission circuit. 

When the engine is not running, fuel vapors remain in these chambers and is routed into 
the Evaporative Emission circuit. This is accomplished by Pressure Damper Vent Valve 
blocking the passage from the Return Shut-off Valve (KL15 off) and opening a passage to 
the circuit leading from the Active Charcoal Canister to the Evaporative Emission Valve. 


High Pressure Fuel Injectors (HDEV): The high pressure fuel injectors are designed 
essentially the same as conventional fuel injectors. They are secured by a taper in the cylin¬ 
der head and sealed by a Teflon ring against the combustion chamber. 

The O-ring seals the top of the injector and floats inside the brass coupling connections on 
the fuel rail. Each fuel injector incorporates a single hole nozzle with a spray angle of 70° 
to the piston crown. 


1. Electrical connection 

2. Solenoid coil 

3. Fuel inlet port 

4. Pressure spring 

5. Nozzle needle 

6. Single hole nozzle 



To open the high pressure fuel injector, the nozzle needle is lifted off its seat when the sole¬ 
noid coil is energized. Due to the high injection pressure (up to 120 bar), the pressure 
spring is designed to accommodate a pressure force of 30 newtons (5 newtons for con¬ 
ventional fuel injectors). The pressure spring forces the nozzle needle onto its seat during 
closing with sufficient contact pressure. 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 


























































Return (flow) Shut-off Valve 

1. Is there a Test Plan available for the return flow shut off valve? 

2. Select Control Unit Functions (MED 9.2.1), Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under 
the “Part Functions” column for observing the return flow shut off valve? 

3. What are the pin and connector numbers at the ECM (1 or 2) for the return flow shut off 

valve? Pin Connector 

4. Measure and record the resistance value of this valve. ohms 

5. Record the voltage value at this pin with the engine not running (ignition on). V 

Engine running at idle speed. V 

Engine speed at 2000 rpm. V 

6. Shut the engine off. Wait ten seconds and restart the engine. Observe the voltage value 
at this pin while the engine cranks and starts. What did you observe? 


High Pressure Fuel Injectors (HDEV) 

1. What is the resistance value of a high pressure fuel injector? ohms 


Visual identification of the high pressure fuel injector: 


1. Teflon ring (combustion chamber seal) 

2. Taper (seats against cylinder head) 

3. O-ring (brass coupling seal in fuel rail) 


Additional notes: 




MED 9.2.1- Workbook 

















Direct Injection System Control 


A high pressure fuel injector control module (HDEV) is used for each cylinder bank and is 
located in the engine compartment E box. The HDEV control module is supplied with sys¬ 
tem voltage from the ECM main relay (in the IVM). Data is transmitted from the ECMs to 
the HDEV control modules for each high pressure fuel injector via the Local-Can bus. The 
HDEVs activate the injectors individually. 

Note: The high pressure fuel injectors are activated by the HDEV control modules with a 
voltage of 100 V and energized during the opening period with approx. 85 V. 



DME 


HDEV 

CONTROL 

MODULE 


LO CAN H 

LO CAN L 
PEVZ1 

«--*»«■ mm ‘ 

P EVZ2 

KL 15 & KL 31 


IVM 


Partial circuit of ECM (DME) 1 
with two injectors shown 


FUEL INJECTOR 1 


FUEL INJECTOR 2 


HDEV Control Modules: The HDEV control modules contain pulse width modulated final 
output stages with high performance capacitors to transform the system voltage up to 85 
to 100 volts. Current flows in the output stages up to a specific cutoff value. This cutoff 
creates an induced voltage, e.g. 85 V, which is then charged to the high performance 
capacitors (boosters). The high pressure fuel injectors are actuated by this capacitor with 
2.8 to 16 amps of current. 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 

























High Pressure Fuel Injector Control Module (HDEV) 

1. Is there a Test Plan available for the HDEV? 

2. Select Control Unit Functions (MED 9.2.1), Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under 
the “Part Functions” column for observing the HDEV injector output? 

3. What are the pin and connector numbers at the ECM (1 or 2) for the fuel injector output 

request? Connector Pins 


4. Record the voltage value at one of these pins with: 
The engine not running (ignition on). V 
Engine running at idle speed. V 

Rev engine up to 2000 rpm. V 


5. What are the pin and connector numbers at the HDEV (1 or 2) for the output control of 
one of the fuel injectors? Connector Pins 


Ask the Instructor for assistance: 


voltage 


ground 


6. Using the around pin of this fuel injector at the HDEV, record the voltage value with: 
The engine not running (ignition on). V 
Engine running at idle speed. V 

Rev engine up to 2000 rpm. V 


7. Use the MFK 2 cable to observe a scope 
pat¬ 
tern from the same pin and record that pat¬ 
tern on the right (engine at idle speed). 

Hint: Start out with a scope setting of 10Hz 
at 100 V for MFK 2 (Channel B). 




r, [VJ 

A 



■T 

- 



A 











A 

A 




















































































X 1 











T 

▼ 

◄_ M 

fflS 


T 




tiw-Lsi jj 

Caunier 


JSkJ 






Increase the engine speed to 2000 rpm and 
observe pattern. 

HDEV activation (sample shown to the right): 

1. Premagnetization time 

2. Booster phase 

3. Starting current phase 

4. Holding current phase 

26 


12 3 4 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 







































































































































Emissions Management - N73B60 Low Emission Vehicle (LEV) 


Oxygen Sensors: The N73 engine is fitted with a total of four oxygen sensors. One pla¬ 
nar broadband oxygen sensor (constant characteristic curve), which regulates the fuel-air 
mixture, is located upstream of each of the two catalytic converters. The catalytic converter 
assemblies are integral with the exhaust manifolds. 


There is a post catalytic converter sensor 
(Bosch LSH25) for each cylinder bank posi¬ 
tioned downstream of the catalytic converter 
which monitors the catalyst efficiency. 

This monitoring means that if the exhaust gas 
concentration is too high, a fault code is 
stored. The post catalyst sensors can also 
detect an emission relevant fault in a pre-cat¬ 
alyst oxygen sensor. 



N73 Oxygen Sensors 


Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor: The N73 engine is equipped with planar 
wideband oxygen sensors (pre-catalyst). The sensor is planar shaped (type of construc¬ 
tion) which is more compact and is made up of thin layers of zirconium dioxide (Zr02) 
ceramic films. This modular lamination structure enables the integration of several functions 
including the heating element which ensures the minimum operating temperature (750 °C) 
is reached rapidly. 

In contrast to conventional oxygen sensors, the wideband features can measure not only 
at Lambda=1, but also in the rich and extremely lean range (Lambda=0.7 to complete 
atmospheric oxygen) very rapidly. 

The pump cell and reference cell are made of zirconium dioxide and each coated with two 
porous platinum electrodes. They are arranged so that there is a measuring gap between 
them. This measuring gap is connected by an inlet opening to the exhaust gas. The pump 
cell is controlled by the ECMs applying voltage to the electrodes to initiate oxygen ion 
pumping across the porous membrane of the reference cell, providing a quicker response 
time. 

The pump current flow is proportional to the oxygen concentration (lean) or the oxygen 
requirement (rich). The pump is constantly working to maintain that the gas composition in 
the measuring gap is constantly at Lambda=1. 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 




Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor 

1. Is there a Test Plan available for the LSU oxygen sensor? 

2. Select Control Unit Functions (MED 9.2.1), Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under 
the “Part Functions” column for observing the LSU oxygen sensor? 

List the status that apply to the oxygen sensor: 


3. Using the DISplus voltmeter, connect MFK2 to the full circuit of the oxygen sensor. 

(for example: pin 13 to pin 20 at ECM 1 of LSU bank 1). Start engine and allow warmup. 

Select Control Unit Functions (MED 9.2.1), Diagnosis Requests. Under the “Part 
Functions” column for the LSU oxygen sensor, select: Oxygen-sensor control, Oxygen¬ 
sensor controller, Lambda value, Additive lambda adaptation and Multiplicative lambda 
adaptation - now select “Display”. 

Ask the Instructor for assistance: 

4. With the engine running and the voltmeter displayed, introduce a vacuum leak. 


With the Minimum/Maximum feature selected, observe the voltage value and reconnect 
the hose. 

What is the minimum? V maximum? V 

5. Slowly disconnect the hose and allow the engine to run for approximately 1-2 minutes. 
Under the “Part Functions” column for the LSU oxygen sensor, record the values for: 

Oxygen-sensor control Additive lambda adaptation 

Oxygen-sensor controller Multiplicative lambda adaptation 

Lambda value 

Caution: Do not conduct this test for longer than 5 minutes! (allow engine to cool) 

6. What do the values from question 5 indicate? 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 




Performance Controls 


Exhaust Flap: The 12.6 liter rear silencer (4) is fitted with an exhaust flap to keep noise to 
a minimum at engine idle speed and low rpm. The flap provides exhaust efficiency based 
on two effects: 

• Minimization of the cross section (slight back pressure) and the outlet noise level at low 
exhaust flow rates 

• Large cross-section with low backpressure at high speeds and loads 


The exhaust flap is opened allowing additional flow when: 

• The transmission gear is engaged and 

• The engine speed is approximately above 1,500 rpm 



A vacuum controlled diaphragm (2 - actuator mounted on the silencer) opens and closes 
the exhaust gas flap. The vacuum is supplied from the camshaft driven vacuum pump. 

The exhaust flap is opened with vacuum, and is sprung closed by the actuator (when vac¬ 
uum is not present). The procedure is carried out using a solenoid valve (1) which is elec¬ 
trically controlled by the ECM and located in the left rear luggage compartment (below the 
light assembly). 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 












Exhaust Flap 

1. Select Control Unit Functions (MED 9.2.1), Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under 
the “Part Functions” column for observing the “Messages and Results”? 

Is there a “Component Activation” feature for the exhaust flap? 

2. Is there a Test Plan available for the exhaust flap? 

3. If so, does the engine need to be run? Why? 

4. What are the pin and connector numbers at the ECM for the exhaust flap solenoid acti¬ 
vation? 

Pin Connector 

5. Which ECM controls the exhaust flap (1 or 2)? 


Additional notes: 



MED 9.2.1- Workbook 



