Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 

Objectives of the M odule .1 

Purpose of the System.2 

Technical Data.5 

Mechanical System Components 

Torque Converter.6 

Oil Pump.7 

Multi-disc Clutches.8 

Lepelletier Planetary GearTrain.10 

Double Planetary GearTrain.11 

Power Transfer in the Planetary Gear Train 

Principle of Operation.12 

Power Flow in First and Second Gear.13 

Power Flow in Third and Fourth Gear.14 

Power Flow in Fifth and Sixth Gear.15 

Power Flow in Reverse.16 

Parking Lock 

Principle of Operation.17 

Emergency Release.20 

Electric-hydraulic Control 

Mechatronic Module .21 

Solenoid Valves.22 

Electronic Pressure Control Valves.22 

Solenoid Valve and Clutch Logic.24 

Workshop Hints.25 

Electronic Transmission Control 

System Components.28 

Selector Lever.28 

L/D Push Button.29 

Position Indication with Shift Pattern.30 

Principle of Operation.34 



























Subject 


Page 


Interlock.35 

Starter Inerlock.35 

Warm-up Program.35 

Downshift Inhibit.35 

Reverse Interlock.35 

Adaptive Transmission Control 

Driver Type Adaption.36 

Kick-Fast.37 

Cornering Evaluation.37 

Brake Evaluation.37 

Constant Driving Evaluation.38 

Winter Program.38 

Hill Recognition Function.38 

Cruise Control Strategy.39 

Emergency Programs 

Electrical Emergency Program.40 

Mechanical Emergency Program.41 

Feedback in the Event of a Failure.42 

Check Control Messages 43 

Review Questions 46 




















GA6HP26Z AUTOMATIC TRANSMISSION 


Model: E65 - 7451 / E66 - 745Li 
Engine: N62B44 

Production Date: 11/2001 - E65, 01/2002 - E66 


Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

List the GA6HP26Z designation. 

Describe Stand By Control. 

Name the clutches used in the GA6HP26Z. 

Identify what is unique about 5th and 6th gear. 

Explain the Parking Lock function. 

Demonstrate how to use the Emergency Release. 

List the Mechatronic components. 

Name the two paths of communication for the Selector Lever. 
Explain the L mode. 


1 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 




GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


Purpose of The System 

BMW has developed a new automatic six speed gearbox together with ZF (Zahnradfabrik 
Friedrichshafen), designated the GA6FIP26Z for the E65. It represents a further develop¬ 
ment of transmission technology and features innovations used for the first time in BMW 
automatic gearboxes. This gearbox makes an important contribution to the "revolutionary" 
features of the E65 in the luxury class segment. 


G = Gearbox 
A = Automatic 

6 = Number of gears (speeds) 

HP = Hydraulic planetary gear 
26 = size 

Z = Gearbox manufacturer ZF 
(Zahnradfabrik Friedrichshafen) 



GA6HP26Z Auto Transmission 


42 - 05-00 


The GA6HP26Z is designed in two versions for the different E65 engines. There is a more 
powerful version available for the V-12 that differs with the following components: 

Power output and torque characteristics 
Torque converter 

Clutches with different numbers of steel discs and lined plates 
Lepelletier planetary gear train with a different number of planet gears 

The gearbox used in the 745i is designed for a torque of 440 N m. The more powerful ver¬ 
sion (7 60 i) is designed fora power output of 320 kW/435 bhp and a torque of 600 N m. The 
fundamental design and function of both gearbox versions are the same. 


2 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 






Mechanical Design of the Gearbox 


The mechanical power transmission of the gearbox has been optimized with regard to 
gearshift comfort, quality and reduced fuel consumption. The engine torque is transferred 
to the gearbox by a torque converter with a controlled lockup clutch. The six forward gears 
and the reverse gear are produced by a Lepelletier planetary gear train. The gears are shift¬ 
ed by multi-disc clutches. 


1. Output shaft 

2. Double gear train 

3. Clutch D 

4. Clutch C 

5. Clutch E 

6. Clutch B 

7. Clutch A 

8. Single gear train 

9. Oil pump 

10 Torque converter with lockup clutch 



42 - 05-01 


The new automatic gearbox has the following advantages: 


Designed as a 6-speed gearbox with an overdrive ratio in 5th and 6th gear, fuel con¬ 
sumption is reduced by up to 5 percent. 


The 6-speed gearbox allows for more gear spread, improving vehicle acceleration. 


The new 6-speed gearbox is approximately 30 kg lighter and 50 mm shorter as com¬ 
pared to the previously used gearbox (A5S560Z). 


The number of transmission components has been reduced from approx. 660 parts in 
a 5-speed gearbox to approx. 470 parts for the new 6-speed gearbox. 


The number of interfaces has been reduced by using the M echatronics M odule for the 
electronic transmission. 


3 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 







Transmission Control 


The gearbox is controlled by the Mechatronic Module that is a combination of the valve 
body and electronic control module. The following system overview shows the main com¬ 
ponents of the electronic control system. 






f— o -1 „ 

EMF 

l_ ± _J 






Transmission Control 


42 - 05-02 


1. Key signal, starter interlock 

2. Redundancy (park lock, n) 

3. Automatic gearbox 

4. Controls in vehicle interior (for emergency release) 

5. Mechanical emergency release for parking lock 

6. Driver's choice P,R,N,D,(L,-) 

7. Shift pattern (shift gate) 

Position indicator P, R, N, D, LI..16 
Shift lock indicator 
Error message 

CAS - Car access system 

EMF - Electromechanical parking brake 

EGS - Electronic transmission control (in mechatronic module) 

SZL - Steering column switch center 


4 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 




















































The driver's request is transmitted in the form of an electrical signal from the selector lever 
on the steering column or from several control buttons in the multifunction steering wheel. 
The signals are transferred over the CAN bus to the transmission control module. In the 
gearbox, the commands are implemented while evaluating various ambient conditions. The 
relevant positions are indicated in the instrument cluster. 

Pure electronic transmission control (shift by wire) eliminates the conventional gearshift 
lever in the centerconsole and all of the associated components. There are additional safe¬ 
ty enhancements, for example the automatic parking lock is active when the ignition key is 
removed. In the event of faults orcomplete failure of electrical connections orsystem com¬ 
ponents, numerous measures are provided: 

An additional serial data link (hard wire) between the selector lever and Mechatronic 
The display of error messages in the instrument cluster and/or in the CC display 
The mechanical emergency park release 


Technical Data: The following table lists the technical data of the gearbox versions. 


Technical Data 

Explanation 

Gearbox Type 

Passenger vehicle automatic gearbox with 

6 forward gears and one reverse gear in 
standard arrangement 

Transmission Data 7451 

Max torque at 4200 rpm 440 Nm 

M ax power output at 6600 rpm 

230 KW / 313 bhp 

Transmission Data 7601 

Max. torque at 4200 rpm 600 Nm 

M ax. power output at 5800 rpm 

320 kW / 435 bhp 

Converter 

Slip-controlled torque converter lockup 
clutch in the gears 1 to 6 

Max. permissible continous speed 7000 rpm 

Transmission Ratios 

1st gear 4.171 / 2nd gear 2.34/ 

3rd gear 1.521 / 4th gear 1.143 / 

5th gear 0.867 / 6th gear 0.697 / 
reverse gear 3.403 

Control 

Electrohydruallc with adaptive electronic 
control 

Weight 

84 to 90 kg with oil depending on version 


5 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 













Mechanical System Components 


The new features/changes of the individual components as compared to previous BMW 
automatic transmissions will be covered. The component and functional description follows 
the power flow progression in the gearbox, from the torque converter to the output shaft. 

Torque Converter and Lockup Clutch: The torque converter is the link for transmitting 
power from the engine to the gearbox. It converts high speed/low torque into low 
speed/high torque with a slight slip from the fluid coupling. The integral converter lockup 
clutch eliminates slip during the transfer of rotational speed. 

The torque converter clutch is locked when the control module diverts oil pressure in the 
converter. The oil flow is reversed to depressurize the area in front of the clutch and apply 
pressure to the back side of the clutch pushing it against the converter housing. The clutch 
plate locks the turbine wheel directly to the converter housing allowing it to rotate as a unit 
without slip. 


The lockup clutch is a two-friction surface clutch. It is slip-controlled in all forward gears (1 
through 6). The operating points when the lockup clutch is engaged are increased which 
reduces fuel consumption. 


1. Pump 

2. Turbine 

3. Stator 

4. Overrunning Clutch 

5. Torque Converter Hub 

6. Stator Shaft 

7. Turbine Shaft 

8. Torque Converter Casing 

9. Piston for lockup clutch 

10. Lined clutch plate 


The lockup clutch will not engage 
until the oil temperature is >35 2 C. 
The control of the lockup clutch 
depends on various factors such 
as: 



42 - 05-04 


Torque Converter & Lockup Clutch 


Load requirement signal Engine load status Selected gearshift program 

Vehicle speed Gearbox oil temperature 


6 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 





Examples: 


Control of the lockup clutch takes place in the XE program (extreme economy) in gears 
1 through 6 at a speed of approx. >30 km/h when a load requirement of <50% is pre¬ 
sent. The lockup clutch is disengaged if the load requirement is >50%. 

The converter clutch is engaged from a speed of approx. 80 km/h in all forward gears. 

It is engaged at a speed of 20 km/h at full load or kick-down. 

There are small oil channels in the lining of the lockup clutch. This oil circuit quickly reduces 
the temperature in the torque converter after the lock-up clutch engages. 

The GA6HP26Z has a new feature of reducing the load on the engine when the vehicle is 
stationary and the brake pedal pressed. The turbine (input) shaft is uncoupled from the 
drive so that only a minimum load remains, reducing fuel consumption. The uncoupling 
phase is achieved by a control feature of the "A" clutch which is called Stand By Control 
(SBC). The pressure is reduced in the A clutch allowing the turbine shaft and torque con¬ 
verter to turn freely until acceleration is requested. 


Oil Pump: The oil pump supplies the required oil pressure and lubricating oil for the auto¬ 
matic gearbox. It is a crescent-type pump and a delivery control valve is not required. The 
converter is supported by a needle bearing in the pump housing. 


1. Intermediate Plate 

2. Centering Plate 

3. Stator shaft 

4. Intake 

5. To Oil Strainer (intake pipe) 

6. O-ring 

7. Bearing 

8. Snap ring 

9. Rotary shaft seal 

10. Impeller 

11. Internal Gear 

12. Pump Housing 




Oil Pump 


42 - 05-05 


7 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 








































Multi-disc Clutches: The GA6HP26Z gearbox requires only 5 clutches to engage 6 gears. 
The clutches are divided into drive clutches and brake clutches. Clutches A, B and E are 
drive clutches while clutches C and D are brake clutches. The A, B and E drive clutches 
are "dynamic pressure" balanced. 



42 - 05-06 

A Drive clutch B Drive clutch C Brake clutch D Brake clutch E Drive clutch 


Dynamic Pressure Balance (Example: Clutch E) 


Oil is applied to the clutch piston on both sides to avoid speed dependent pressure reduc¬ 
tion in the clutch. This balance is achieved by the pressure plate (9) and the non-pressur- 
ized residual oil in the lubricating oil gallery (1) through which the area between the piston 
and pressure plate is filled with oil. This ensures the clutch disengages and engages exact¬ 
ly in all speed ranges while also improving gearshift comfort. 


1. Lubrication Oil Gallery 

2. Turbine shaft 

3. Main pressure for clutch E 

4. Disc Spring 

5. Internal gear for single gear train 

6. Cylinder E (outer disc carrier) 

7. Piston E 

8. Clutch assembly E 

9. Pressure plate 

10. Area for pressure compensation 

11. Inner disc carrier E 



Clutch E 


07 


8 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 






















































































































Free wheel gearshifts (using overrunning clutches) are not used in this transmission. In the 
GA6HP26Z gearbox, all gearshifts from 1st to 6th gear and from 6th to 1st gear are exe¬ 
cuted as overlap shifts. The overlap gearshift system saves weight and space. The electro- 
hydraulic gearshift is executed by valves in the valve body that are controlled by pressure 
regulators. The speed, pressure and torque curves are shown in the following diagrams. 


Speed 

Curve 



Pressure 

Curve 



Torque 

Curve 


Nm 



42 - 05-08 


9 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 





















Lepelletier Planetary Gear Train: The Lepelletier planetary gear train provides six forward 
gears and one reverse gear using a lightweight design. The planetary gear train consists of 
a single carrier planetary gear train and a downstream double planetary gear train. 

The single carrier planetary gear train consists of: 



- I Sun C, 

- i Planet Carrie 

- 3 Plas^l 

-1 Internal G 


1. Internal gear 1 

2. Planet gear 

3. Planet carrier 

4. Planet carrier 

5. Turbine shaft 

6. CylinderA 

7. Pressure plate A 


10 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 



Lepelletier Planetary Gear Train 


42 - 05-10 


























































Double Planetary Gear Train: The series connected double planetary geartrain consists 
of: 



- 2 Chilean iced Sura 

- 3 liFig ptmcl jjrjirn 

- 3 ar-on pufHtmBflfn 
»1 plqrwt camar 

- 1 Ii^erp^l gfr3r 


42 - 05-11 


1. Internal gear 2 

2. Planet carrier, clutch E 

3. Output 

4. Double planet gear (long) 

5. Sun gear 3, clutch E 

6. Sun gear 2, clutch A 

7. Planet carrier 1 

8. Planet gear (short) 



Double Planetary Gear Train 


42 - 05-12 


li 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 

















































Power Transfer in the Planetary Gear Train 

Principle of Operation 


Neutral Position: The turbine shaft drives the internal gear for the front single planetary 
gear train and the outer disc carrier of clutch E. The internal gear drives the planet gears 
that roll on the fixed sun gear. The planet carrier of the gear train is driven together with the 
outer disc carrier of clutch A and the inner disc carrier of clutch B. This steps up the drive 
for clutch A and B. 



Power Transfer in the Planetary Gear Train 


42 - 05-13 


7. Fixed connection to housing 

8. Double gear train 

9. Internal gear 2 

10. Sun gear 2 

11. Sun gear 3 

12. Double planet carrier 


12 

GA6H P26Z Automatic Transmission 


1. Turbine shaft 

2. Stator shaft 

3. Single gear train 

4. Sun gear 

5. Planet carrier 

6. Internal gear 












































































Power Flow in IstGear: Drive clutch A is engaged in 1st gear. The sun gear 3 in the dou¬ 
ble planetary gear train is driven and is meshed with the short planet gears. Due to clutch 
D being engaged, the double planet carrier is held by the gearbox housing. As a result, the 
internal drive gear is driven overthe long planet gears (large gear reduction) in the direction 
of engine rotation. 



42 - 05-15 


1. Drive (turbine shaft) 

2. Gearbox housing 

3. Sun gear 2 

4. Sun gear 3 

5. Planet gear, long 

6. Output 


Planetary Gear Train 

7. Planet gear, short 

8. Internal gear 2 

9. Sun gear 1 (stator shaft) 

10. Internal gear 1 

11. Planet carrier 
A - Drive clutch 


B - Drive clutch 
C - Brake clutch 
D - Brake clutch 
E - Drive clutch 


Power Flow in 2nd Gear: Clutch A is also engaged in 2nd gear so that sun gear 3 (4) in 
the rear gear train is driven. Sun gear 2 (3) in the rear gear train is now blocked by clutch 
C. The long planet gears and the short planet gears move on rolling contact (reaction) with 
the fixed sun gear 2 and drive the double planet carrier as well as the internal gear 2 in the 
direction of engine rotation (gear up - ratio change). 


2 



11 












































Power Flow in 3rd Gear: As in 1st and 2nd gear, drive clutch A is engaged. Drive clutch 
B is now also engaged. Both sun gears in the double planetary gear train are driven (reac¬ 
tion). As a result, the gear train moves as an assembly and the gear ratio is achieved only 
by the front single planetary gear train (gear up - ratio change). 



42 - 05-16 


Power Flow in 4th Gear: Drive clutches A and E are engaged in 4th gear. Clutch A dri¬ 
ves the sun gear 3 (4). Clutch E drives the planet carrier in the double planetary gear train. 
Together with the double planet carrier, the long planet gears and the short planet gears 
drive the internal gear 2 in the direction of engine rotation (gear up - ratio change). 



14 

GA6H P26Z Automatic Transmission 










































Power Flow in 5th Gear: Drive clutches B and E are engaged in 5th gear. The sun gear 
2 (3) in the double planetary gear train is driven by clutch B and the planet carrier of the 
double planetary gear train by clutch E. Together with the double planet carrier, the long 
planet gears and the short planet gears drive the internal gear 2 in the direction of engine 
rotation This results in a gearratio with a slight overdrive. 



42-05-18 


Power Flow in 6th Gear: In 6th gear, the sun gear 2 in the double planetary gear train is 
blocked by clutch C. The planet carrier is driven by the engaged clutch E. As a result, the 
long planet gears are forced to move by rolling contact (reaction) on the fixed sun gear 2 
(3) and drive the internal gear in the direction of engine rotation. This results in a large gear 
ratio in overdrive. The single gear train is not operative in 6th gear. 



42 - 05-19 


15 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 










































Power Flow in Reverse Gear: The drive clutch B is closed in reverse gear. As a result 
the sun gear 2 (3) in the double planetary gear train is driven while being in mesh with the 
long planet gears. The double planet carrier is supported by brake clutch D and the gear¬ 
box housing. The internal gear 2 (output shaft) can now be driven by the long planet gears 
in the opposite direction of engine rotation (large gear reduction). 



Notes: 


16 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 




































Parking Lock 


The parking lock secures the vehicle to prevent it from rolling away. When the vehicle is sta¬ 
tionary it is electrically applied by a solenoid valve as requested from the selector lever. 


The parking lock "locks" the output shaft of the gearbox when the linking rod (2) is extend¬ 
ed to pivot the pawl (4) to engage in the gear teeth of the parking lock disc gearwheel (1). 
The parking lock will hold the vehicle on uphill or downhill gradients of up to 32% and will 
only engage at speeds below 2 km/h. The Mechatronic Control Module will prevent the 
parking lock from engaging at speeds above 2 km/h. 


1. Parking lock disk (gear wheel) 

2. Linking rod 

3. Guide plate 

4. Parking lock pawl 

5. Lock pawl lifting spring 


Principle of Operation 



Parking Lock 


In the electrical parking lock, a combination of 
mechanical lock engagement (as described 
above) and electric/hydraulic activation are 
used. The electrical components include mag¬ 
netic solenoid valves (MV2 and MV3) mounted 
on the valve body. MV3 is mounted into the 
parking lock hydraulic cylinder. 

Electrical activation of the parking lock is trig¬ 
gered by a push-button on the selector lever or 
by removing the ignition key. Activation of the 
solenoid valves is controlled by the M echatronic 
Control Module. 



42 - 05-01 


17 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


































When the parking lock is engaged the solenoid valve (M V3) for the parking lock cylinder is 
deactivated, cancelling the electro-mechanical lock and the piston released. The solenoid 
valve (MV2) is also deactivated and the chamber ofthe parking lock cylinder is vented. The 
piston is pulled to the parking lock position by a preloaded barrel spring behind the oper¬ 
ating lever. The linking rod is extended to pivot the pawl to engage in the parking lock disc. 


Spring-* 



42-05-01a 


When tiie parking lock is disengaged (below) the MV2 solenoid valve is activated and the 
main pressure is applied in the chamber of the parking lock cylinder. This pushes the pis¬ 
ton, operating lever and linking rod back to release the parking lock. The parking lock pawl 
is lifted by a spring to disengage from the gear teeth of the parking lock disc gear wheel. 
The M V3 solenoid valve for the parking lock cylinder is also activated. The piston is addi¬ 
tionally held by locking (detent) balls in position "Id” when the engine is not running. 

The transmission can be shifted from the park position to position "N" only with the engine 
running (main pressure required). If engine operation is not possible, the parking lock can 
be released manually by an additional bowden cable. 



42-05-24 


18 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


































































Examples: 

The parking lock is engaged by pressing the "P" push button on the selector lever 
when the speed signal is less than 2 km/h. 

The parking lock is automatically engaged when the ignition key is removed and the 
speed signal is 0. 

Position "N" is automatically engaged when the engine is turned off (ignition switched 
off) with the key remaining in the lock. The park position will be automatically engaged 
after approximately 30 minutes. Position "Id” can remain engaged for a further 30 min¬ 
utes if position N is selected again before the 30 minutes have elapsed. 

The parking lock is disengaged only by moving the selector lever in position R, D or N 
with the engine running and the brake pedal pressed. 


Interaction Between Parking Lock and EMF: An electromechanical parking brake 
(EM F), is fitted in the E65. Based on the operating status of the EMF, it is possible to engage 
the parking lock when the engine is not running in the event of a fault in the EMF. 


Interaction During EMF "AUTO HOLD" Function: The parking brake and parking lock 
is engaged when the driver leaves the vehicle with the engine running with position D or R 
engaged, seat is not occupied and the door is opened. 


Interaction Between EMF and EGS in the Case of Fault: If the EM F cannotswitch from 
the "hold" to "lock" mode, the parking lock is engaged following a plausibility check in the 
EGS control unit. The plausibility check determines whether position N is engaged, the 
speed is 0 km/h and the engine and ignition are off. 


Notes: 


19 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 









Emergency Release for Parking Lock 


A mechanical emergency release is provided if the parking lock can not be automatically 
released (battery failure, engine, engine electrical system, transmission electrical system, 
etc.). This allows the vehicle to be towed or pushed as required. 

To tow the vehicle, the emergency release must be operated even if the transmission con¬ 
tra//s fully operable. Depending on the type of fault, the N-hold function cannot be guar¬ 
anteed during the entire time even if an output speed is recognized (corresponding infor¬ 
mation in the Owner's Handbook and Towing Instructions for BMW 7 Series). 


The emergency release for the parking lock is located in the vehicle interior at the A-pillar 
in the footwell on the driver's side (1). On US vehicles, the emergency release can only be 
accessed with the vehicle key releasing the locked cover. Before performing this procedure, 
apply the brake pedal! 


A cable assembly is routed from the operating lever to the gearbox lever on the selector 
shaft. The emergency release should not be operated during normal vehicle operation. 
After being released, the "gearbox emergency released" message is displayed in the posi¬ 
tion indicator section of the instrument cluster. 



The emergency release must be reset to re-engage the parking lock after eliminating the 
fault. The gearbox lever moves during normal operation and must not be influenced by the 
cable assembly. Press on the red tab on the back side of the lever and guide the lever 
assembly back into the orignal position. 


When the emergency release has been operated by mistake or not reset after repairs it is 
detected by a plausibility check of the actual position by the two park position sensors in 
the gearbox. In this case, the parking lock cannot be engaged automatically. The driver is 
informed by an error message in the instrument cluster (Check Control). 

20 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 














Elec trie-hydraulic Control 

System Components 


Mechatronic Module: The mechatronic module is a combination of the hydraulic valve 
body and electronic control module which are installed in the oil sump. This is the first time 
the mechatronic module is used in a BMW automatic transmission. This offers the advan¬ 
tages of improved shift quality, increased driving comfort and increased reliability due to the 
reduced number of electrical connections and interfaces. 

The hydraulic valve body contains valves, springs, dampers and electric solenoid valves. 

The electronic control module manages the complete electronic control oftiie transmission 
and is an integral part of the valve body (replaceable as a complete unit). The electronic 
control module is completely sealed and oil tight. 



Electric-Hydraulic Control 


42-05-26 


1. Output speed sensor 

2. Temperature sensor 

3. Position switch 


4. Turbine (input) speed sensor 

5. Hydraulic module (valve body) 

6. Electronic Control Module 


21 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 









The electronic-hydraulic transmission gearshifts in the GA6HP26Z are controlled by 3 sole¬ 
noid valves and 6 electronic pressure control valves. These components are not separate¬ 
ly replaceable at this time. 


Solenoid Valves (MV): Three solenoid valves are mounted on the valve body and are 3/2- 
way valves, i.e. valves with three hydraulic connections and two electrically switch posi¬ 
tions. The solenoid valves are activated by the electronic control module. 


Electronic Pressure Control Valves (EDS): The electronic pressure control valves con¬ 
vert electrical current into a proportional hydraulic pressure. They are regulated by the elec¬ 
tronic control module to activate the hydraulic valves (in the valve body) to the pistons in 
the clutch assemblies. Two types of EDS valves are used: 


EDS with rising characteristic curve 


EDS valves 1, 3 and 6 are identified by a 
green cap. 

The rising characteristic curve starts at 
0 mA = 0 bar, up to 700 mA =4.6 bar. 





Operating voltage - 12 V 


Resistance at 20 2 C = 5.05 Ohm 



42-05-27 


EDS with falling characteristic curve 


EDS valves 2, 4 and 5 are identified by a 
black cap. 

The falling characteristic curve starts at 
700 mA =0 bar, up to 0 mA = 4.6 bar. 

Operating voltage - 12 V 




Resistance at 20 2 C = 5.05 Ohm 

42-05-28 


22 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 








































Location of Solenoid Valves and Pressure Control Valves 


Note: Care must be taken when installing the Mechatronic module to ensure that the pis¬ 
ton of the parking lock cylinder (2) is engaged in the position switch (15). 



11 

42-05-29 


Solenoid Valves and Pressure Control Valves 


1. Position Switch Slide 

2. Parking lock cylinder piston 

3. Solenoid valve 3 ; parking lock cylinder 

4. EDS 

5. Solenoid valve 1 

6. EDS 4 

7. EDS 5 

8. EDS 3 


9. EDS 2 

10. EDS 1 

11. Electronic plug connector 

12. Electronic module 

13. Hydraulic module (valve body) 

14. Solenoid valve 2 

15. Position switch 


23 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


















Solenoid Valve and Clutch Logic 


POS / gear 




Solenoid valve logic 

Clutch lo< 

3ic 



MV 


P-EDS 

Drive clutches 

Brake clutches 


1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

A 

B 

E 

WK 

C 

D 

P = Park 







X 

-X- 







• 

R = Reverse 

X 

X 

X 




X 

-X- 



• 




• 

N = Neutral 

X 

X 

X 




X 

-X- 







• 

D, 1st gear 

X 

X 

X 

X 



X 

-X- 

-X- 

• 



• 


• 

D, 2nd gear 


X 

X 

X 


X 


-X- 

-X- 

• 



• 

• 


D, 3rd gear 



X 

X 

X 



-X- 

-X- 

• 

• 


• 



D, 4th gear 

X 


X 

X 



X 

-X- 

-X- 

• 


• 

• 



D, 5th gear 

X 


X 


X 


X 

-X- 

-X- 


• 

• 

• 



D, 6th gear 

X 


X 



X 

X 

-X- 

-X- 



• 

• 

• 



Shift valve 1 

Parking lock valve 

Parking lock cylinder 

Clutch A 

Clutch B 

Brake C 

Brake D / clutch E 

System pressure 
(situation-related) 

Gear logic control 
(situation-related) 

Planet carrier 

Single gear train 

Sun gear 1 
(double gear train) 

Carrier 

Double Gear Train 

Situation-related control 
of converter lockup 
clutch 

Sun gear 1 
(double gear train) 

Planet carrier 
(double gear train) 


X Activated 

-X- Situation-related control 

• Engaged 


42 - 06-30 


Notes: 


24 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 














































Work Shop Hints 


Note: 

• The transmission requires oil replacement every 100,000 miles. 

Contact the BMW Technical Hotline for additional assis¬ 
tance. 

• Consult the Repair Information (in TI5) and the Service 
Information Bulletins regarding static electrical dis¬ 
charge before any repair attempts are made to the 
Mechatronic Module! 


The oil pan can only be removed at temperatures below 40 2 C. The oil pan is made of 
plastic which will distort at high temperatures. 

External seal replacement, torque converter replacement and replacing the M echatronic 
as a unit assembly are the only recommended repairs at this time (aside from replacing 
the complete transmission). No repair attempts should be made to the valve body com¬ 
ponents (mechanical or electrical) or the electronic control module. 

The drain plug is found in the rear of the oil pan. There 

are final alignment indications embossed in the drain 
plug and the oil pan. 

When installing the drain plug, observe the tightening 
torque. The arrow (embossed in the oil pan) must 
locate within the range span (embossed in the plug). 

Do not overtighten the drain plug because the plug and 
oil pan will distort or crack! 




The inlet oil filter and debris magnets are inte¬ 
gral in the oil pan (replaced as a unit). 

When installing the oil pan, observe the tighten¬ 
ing torque of the bolts. 

Do not overtighten the bolts because the oil 
pan will distort or crack! 



42 - 05-54 

25 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 










The harness plug insulating sleeve must be removed 
prior to removing the Mechatronic Module from the 
transmission housing. 

The sleeve is released by sliding the lock lever up as 
shown to the right. The sleeve is then pulled from the 
transmission housing. 

Afterthe sleeve is installed in the transmission housing, 
the lock lever must be slid down until it locks. 



When unbolting the Mechatronic Module for 
replacement, only the TorxT40 bolts (1) and (2) 

in the diagram are to be loosened to remove the 
assembly from the transmission housing (as per 
the Repair Information). 

1. = M6 x 58 mm 

2. = M6 x 20 mm 



Consult the TIS for the correct tightening torque 

on installation. When installing the Mechatronic 
module, make sure that the piston of the park¬ 
ing lock cylinder and the control lever is 
engaged in the position switch. 


Use the Transmission Support (Special Tool) 

PN 90 88 6 245 306 in conjunction with 88 88 
6 002 030 for removal/installation of the com¬ 
plete transmission. 


R3i iMi a 

42 - 05-14 

Mechatronic Removal 



42 - 05-13 


26 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


Transmission Removal 































Electronic Transmission Control 


The electronic transmission control module is an integral part of the Mechatronic Module. 
The electronic inputs are evaluated in the control module and electronic actuation is output 
to control the shifts and regulate shift quality. The control module is integrated in the E65 
electrical system by the PT-CAN bus (power train) connection and a separate data link 
(hardwire) for signal transfer between components. 


5 



1. Automatic transmission 

2. Serial, unidirectional line (hardwire) 

3. Selector lever 

4. Ignition Key 

5. Display, position indicator 

CAS module-Car access system 


Gateway-Centra I gateway module (ZGM) 
EGS-Electronic transmission control module 
SZL-Steering column switch center 
PT-CAN (Powertrain) 

K-CAN (Body) 

Si-Bus-Safety and Information Bus, byteflight 
optical fiber 


In addition to the bus line, the signal transfer between the steering column switch center 
(SZL) and the transmission control module additionally takes place overa unidirectional ser¬ 
ial line (hardwire) for safety reasons. The central gateway module (ZG M) is a link in the data 
transfer from one bus to another. 

The data required for gear shifts are injection timing, engine speed, Valvetronic position, 
engine temperature and engine intervention. These signals are transmitted between the 
ECM and transmission control module over the PT-CAN bus. 


27 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 















































System Components 

Selector Lever: The selector lever is located on upper 
right of the steering column. Shift position N, D and R 
are possible. The parking lock P is operated with a 
push button on the end of the selector lever (2). 

All gearshifts are electrically controlled - there is no 
mechanical connection to the gearbox from this lever. 

The positions are indicated in the instrument cluster. 


Selector Lever Positions in Automatic Mode 



42 - 05-14 


The shift pattern consists of positions R, N, D and the corresponding arrows. The selector 
lever can be moved from its mid-position by pulling back towards the driver (1). The lever 
can then be moved in a clockwise or counterclockwise direction and returns from each 
position automatically to the mid-position. Position P is separated from the shift pattern and 
is activated by pressing the push button at the end of the selector lever (2). 


Position R: With the brake pedal pressed, the selector lever must be pulled back and 
pressed as far as it will go in the counterclockwise direction (past detent). 


Position N: With position R engaged, N can be engaged by pulling the selector lever 
back and pressing it in the clockwise direction (up to but not beyond detent). When posi¬ 
tion D is engaged, position N can be engaged by pulling the selector lever back and 
pressing it in the counterclockise direction (up to but not beyond detent). When position 
P is engaged, position N can be engaged by pulling the selector lever back and press¬ 
ing it in either direction. 


Position D: With the brake pedal pressed, the selector lever must be pulled back and 
pressed as far as it will go in the clockwise direction (past detent). 


Position P: Position P is engaged by pressing the push button integrated in the selec¬ 
tor lever. The parking lock is released by depressing the brake pedal and engaging posi¬ 
tion R, N or D. 


Special Features 

The transmission can be shifted from the park position to position "N" only with the 
engine running (main pressure reguired) and the brake pedal depressed. 

28 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 












Automated Functions 


The park position is automatically engaged when the ignition key is removed. 


Position N is engaged automatically when the engine is turned off and the ignition is 
switched off with the key remaining in the lock. The park position is then automatical¬ 
ly engaged after approximately 30 minutes. Position N can remain engaged for an 
additional 30 minutes if position N is selected again before the 30 minutes have 
elapsed. 


L/D Push Button in MFL: US vehicles are equipped with the L mode (limiting function) 
which allows the driver to suppress certain shifts (ascending or descending steep grades). 


Starting from position D, the limitation mode is select¬ 
ed by pressing the L/D push button. Initially, the cur¬ 
rent gear is retained and the vehicle will not upshift to 
a higher gear. 

The system returns to the automatic mode by pressing 
the L/D button again or pressing the selector lever to 
position D. 

Example: Position D is engaged and the gearbox is in 
4th gear. After pressing the L/D push button in the 
M FL, 4th gear is retained and is the upper limit. Gears 
1 through 4 will be shifted automatically when the vehi¬ 
cle is driven. 



42 - 05-15 


There are two push buttons integrated in the steering wheel facing the driver (ten and two 
o'clock position as shown above). The limitation stages are manually downshifted by press¬ 
ing either of these buttons when the L mode is selected. It is not possible to upshift the lim¬ 
itation stages. There is no forced upshift when reaching the maximum engine speed. 

When the L mode is selected, the indicator in the instrument cluster will illuminate to indi¬ 
cate LI through L6. 

Impermissible shift requests, such as a down shift that will cause the engine to exceed the 
maximum speed are suppressed by the transmission control module and are indicated only 
temporarily in the instrument cluster. 


29 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 















Position Indication with Shift Pattern: The engaged position is only indicated in the 
instrument cluster. Depending on what position is selected, the corresponding selection is 
illuminated in the shift pattern. The arrows indicating the possible movement directions of 
the selector lever are also illuminated. An additional indication is provided in the L mode. 


1 FGsillOft P 1 


3 PdsitKiri D 3 



2 Position M 


4 4 Position R 


L -program (L1 through L6| 


42 - 05-36 


After switching on the ignition and starting the engine, the P 
or N positions and all of the arrows are indicated. In positions 
D orR, the single arrow for the shift direction to return to N is 
indicated (next to the N indicator). 

Detailed explanations for Typical Indications: 

The shift pattern consists of the locator illumination for the R, 
N and D positions with the associated arrows. This is indicat¬ 
ed when the ignition is "ON" and the transmission is not in 
position P. 


The position indicator for R, N or D is highlighted correspond¬ 
ing to the engaged gear position (position D is highlighted 
here). The positions are indicated when the ignition is "ON" 
and the transmission is not in position P. 



30 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 












Position P is separate from the actual shift pattern. P is indi¬ 
cated in the instrument cluster only when the park position is 
engaged and the ignition is "ON". 



The L mode is indicated in a separate display and illuminates 
LI through L6 when the L mode is selected. Impermissible 
shift requests, such as a down shift that will cause the engine 
to exceed the maximum speed are suppressed by the trans¬ 
mission control module and are indicated only temporarily. 



The indicator in the instrument cluster is blank when the P 
position is engaged and the bus is in sleep mode. This can 
also occurwhen position P is engaged and the bus wakes up, 
the CAN signals are valid but terminal 15 is OFF. 



The N position indicator will begin to flash before the N-hold 
function elapses (30 min). Flashing takes place at a frequency 
of 1.5 Hz, controlled by the transmission control module. 



31 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 























Detailed explanations for Fault Indications: 


When the CAN signals are invalid and the activation line is 
"high", the shift pattern and P position indicator are illuminat¬ 
ed when position P is engaged (Bus is awake). 



When the ignition is switched "ON" and the transmission con¬ 
trol module does not detect the P position , position N will 
flash in addition to the Check Control message "emergency 
release may be operated". This can also occur if the Bus is 
awake, KL15 is ON and the Bus activation line is "high". 



This display is illuminated when the transmission is in the 

mechanical emergency operation (with forward movement). 
The R and N illumination will remain on and all of the arrows 
along with the D position indicator will flash at a frequency 1.5 
Hz. 



This display is illuminated when the transmission is in the 

mechanical emergency operation and in the P position All of 
the arrows will flash at a frequency 1.5 Hz. The shift pattern 
locator illumination for R, N, D will remain on and the P posi¬ 
tion is indicated. 



32 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 
























This display is illuminated when the transmission is in the 

mechanical or electrical emergency operation and the CAN 
communication is not functional. 

In the event of a transmission failure or a CAN bus error, the 
instrument cluster assumes control and will illuminate this dis¬ 
play. All of the arrows will flash at a frequency 1.5 Hz. The shift 
pattern locator illumination for R, N and D will remain on and 
the P position indicator is switched off. 



Notes: 


33 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 





























Principle of Operation 


The data required for gear shifts is transmitted between the ECM and transmission control 
module (EGS). The transmission control module requires additional information from the 
vehicle foroperation. In addition, othercontrol modules in the E65 require information about 
the electronic transmission status. 

The PT-CAN bus is used forthis purpose, below is a list of the the signals and components: 


Signals Transmitter Receiver 


Selector switch 

SZL 

EGS 

Ignition terminal status 

CAS 

EGS 

Central locking system 

CAS 

EGS 

Transmission data (P/N) 

EGS 

CAS 

Engine data 

ECM 

EGS 

Wheel speeds 

DSC 

EGS 

Deceleration request 

EMF 

EGS 

Display, transmission data 

EGS 

Instrument cluster 

Check Control message 

EGS 

Instrument cluster 

Torque requirement 

EGS 

ECM 

Battery voltage 

Power module 

EGS 

Electric loads (30 min. N hold) 

EGS 

Power module 


Note: The turbine (input) and output speeds of the gearbox are determined with Hall sen¬ 
sors that transfer the values directly to the electronic transmission control module. The 
position switch also transfers information directly over a hardwire. 


As in previous transmission control modules, the "flash" programmable coding is for the 
new control module. 

The processor of the transmission control module features a 440 KB internal flash memo¬ 
ry. Approximately 370 KB of this is taken up by the basic transmission program. The 
remaining 70 KB contain the vehicle specific application data. 


34 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 






Interlock 


The CAS module signals the "ignition key inserted or not inserted" status to the transmis¬ 
sion control module. The parking lock is engaged in the transmission when "ignition key not 
inserted" is signalled. The parking lock can only be released when the ignition key is insert¬ 
ed, the engine is running, the brake pedal is depressed (Shiftlock) and R, N, or D is select¬ 
ed. 

Starter Interlock 

The engine will only start in position P or N. The CAS module evaluates two signals from 
the transmission control module to activate the starter: 

The gearbox P or N position (CAN signal) 

Position P over the hardware line from the P position sensors 

The engine can still be started in position P in the event of a CAN signal fault. The engine 
can not be started if the emergency release is operated (not in P position). In addition to 
evaluating these two signals when the ignition is switched "OFF", the transmission always 
rests in "hydraulic neutral" so the gearbox will not transfer power during an engine start. 

Warm-up Program 

The warm-up program is selected after every engine start when the engine temperature is 
below 60 2 C (approx.). The upshifts occur at a higher engine rpm allowing the engine and 
catalytic converters to reach operating temperature faster. The warm-up program is not in 
effect when the engine temperature is above 60 2 C or after 120 seconds of operation. 

Downshift Inhibit 

This function prevents a downshift when the maximum engine speed will be exceeded, pre¬ 
venting engine and transmission damage. 

Reverse Interlock 

This prevents shifting into reverse gear at a speed above 5 km/h. If the reverse gear is 
selected at a speed above 5 km/h, the gearbox will shift into neutral and N is indicated in 
the instrument cluster. Only when the vehicle has reached a speed of less than 5 km/h is it 
possible to select reverse gear by operating the selector lever again. 


35 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


Adaptive Transmission Control 

As in the previous automatic transmissions, there are different adaptation modes for the 
A-program (automatic - in selector lever position D) in the 6-speed automatic transmission. 

Adaptive transmission control provides the following features: 

Shift points and shift pressures based on driver type 

M aintains shift quality over the lifetime of the transmission through adaptive pressure 
control 

Torque converter lock up clutch. 


In the A-program, only the basic shift characteristic map XE (extreme economy) and the 
performance-oriented shift characteristic map E (economy) are selected. The A-program 
offers the driver comfortable gearshift characteristics with very smooth gear changes. 

The control module simultaneously monitors engine speed, turbine (input) speed and out¬ 
put speed. This is necessary to determine the slip ratio and slip time during a shift. Slip ratio 
and slip time are influenced by production differences between transmissions and normal 
wear 

The control module performs the adaptive pressure control function by modifying the con¬ 
trol of the EDS valves increasing the clutch apply pressures to compensate for internal slip. 
The adaptive pressure control function optimizes the shift quality and increases the life span 
of the clutch plates. 

Pressure adaptation takes place automatically while driving. After performing repairs on the 
transmission, it is necessary to reset the pressure adaptation with the DIS plus. A test drive 
should then be performed ensuring that the transmission is driven in all gears. 


Driver Type Adaptation 

In the 6-speed automatic transmission, the drivertype adaptation is based on the values of 
kick-fast, cornering evaluation, brake evaluation and constant driving evaluation. The adap¬ 
tation function evaluates the longitudinal and transverse dynamics from the standard con¬ 
trols such as accelerator pedal, brake and steering. The current driving status and driver's 
load choice are calculated from these values. 


36 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


Based on these values, the adaptation offers a basic gearshift program. To achieve the 
most fuel economy and comfort, a conservative shift characteristic is selected for driving 
situations without specific power requirements. 

For example, when driving in the highest possible gear and increased power is required, a 
downshift is not implemented before the engine outputs the full torque. The downshift 
thresholds are very low so that a maximum of 2 gears can be downshifted over the full 
pedal travel range. Since this is not the optimum for each situation, the vehicle operation 
assessment function automatically provides the most suitable basic gearshift strategy. 


Kick-Fast 

The kick-fast function can change the basic gearshift program depending on the rate of 
speed that the accelerator pedal is pressed. The accelerator pedal value is compared to a 
threshold in the control module. As a result, one of two possible functions is selected: 

XE, extreme economy E, economy 

Moderate movement results in moderate shifts while a quick application of the throttle ini¬ 
tiates performance shifts. 


Cornering Evaluation 

This feature is activated when the control module detects a variation in front and rear wheel 
speeds (while cornering) from the DSC control module. In addition, the DSC monitors the 
steering angle sensor, yaw rate and overall vehicle speed to further determine the corner¬ 
ing forces. 

When curves are recognized, the control module prohibits up shifting until the wheel speed 
signals equalize indicating the vehicle is driving straight ahead. Downshifts in conjunction 
with high power while negotiating a curve can have a negative influence on the stability of 
the vehicle. 


Brake Evaluation 

Using the same evaluation method as kick-fast, brake evaluation provides driver type infor¬ 
mation. Overrun downshifts are triggered at various high speeds depending on the braking 
requirement. 


37 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


The vehicle deceleration is determined by the change in the speed proportional signals 
(wheel speeds ortransmission output speed) orthe braking pressure in the brake system. 
The shift speed for the individual downshifts (determined from one of the characteristic 
curves), depends on the set drive mode, the initial speed at the start of braking and the 
determined deceleration or brake pressure. 


Constant Driving Evaluation 

Constant driving evaluation takes place when the driver maintains a constant accelerator 
pedal position and the vehicle speed does not change. When requested, a downshift takes 
place immediately in the A-program. 


Winter Program 

The winter program is activated for the best possible stability and driving safety on slippery 
roads in winter in addition to control interventions by DSC. Wheel slip is evaluated by the 
control module based on wheel speed signal data provided by the DSC system over the 
PT-CAN bus. The control module modifies shift characteristics to match winter mode for 
better traction. 

When active, the transmission will start in second gear and the shift points are lowered. 
The purpose of this program is to improve the stability of the vehicle with slippery road con¬ 
ditions. Downshift requests that would cause wheel spin are suppressed. 


Hill Recognition Function 

The control module activates this feature when it detects a high engine load (constant dri¬ 
ving resistance) condition at lower road speeds. When the vehicle is traveling up hill the shift 
points are raised to prevent repetitive up/down shifting. 

The parameters that reside in the control module for this feature include vehicle weight, 
gearbox, differential ratio, rolling resistance and wind resistance. 

To adapt for performance reduction of the engine at high altitude, the uphill adaptation is 
influenced by the altitude compensation function in the EC M . 


38 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


Cruise Control Shift Strategy 

The cruise control function supports speed controlled operation to achieve smooth overall 
driving characteristics. This function ensures that the acceleration requested of cruise con¬ 
trol is achieved while ensuring comfort is not impaired by increased gearshifts. 

When cruise control is activated by the ECM, the transmission control module is notified 
over the PT-CAN bus. The transmission control module activates the program for cruise 
control operation which minimizes locking/unlocking of the torque converter clutch and 
up/down shifting. Additionally, the cruise control can request a downshift if the vehicle 
speed exceeds the set speed limit when coasting downhill. 


Notes: 


39 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 






















Emergency Programs 


The following designs of the GA6HP26Z are used to reduce faults 


Reduction of system interfaces by using the Mechatronic (assembly) 


Redundant selector lever signals and monitoring (PT-CAN and hardwire) 


ultiple substitute programs 


Substitute program 1: restricted gear selection 

Substitute program 2: corresponds to previous emergency program with only fon/vard, 

reverse, neutral and park positions possible 


Actuator (MV and EDS) deactivation: hydraulic/mechanical emergency operation 


Electrical Emergency Program 

The electrical emergency program shifts the transmission into 5th or 3rd gear (speed and 
previous gear dependent) after a CAN bus failure. After restarting the engine, 3rd gear is 
engaged when selecting position D. After a CAN bus failure, positions P, R, N and D are 
selected via a separate serial line (hardwire). 

Caution: The Shiftlock function is also deactivated, making it is possible to engage a gear 
without pressing the brake pedal. This is also indicated by a Check Control message. 

When KL15 is switched "OFF", position P will be engaged immediately at speeds below 2 
km/h. This is because the "key inserted/key not inserted" signal is not detected. The N-hold 
function is not possible with "engine off" (Caution in carwash systems). 

The instrument cluster can not detect a position change. The position indicator in the 
instrument cluster is blanked out. The shift pattern with R, N, D remains and the arrows will 
flash. 


Notes: 


40 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 









Mechanical Emergency Program 


The following applies in the event of total failure of the transmission control: 


No interruption in power transfer while driving forward (no gearchanges) 


When the vehicle is stationary and "engine off": the parking lock will be engaged 


The transmission electronics may still be in operation during the mechanical emergency 
program, communication may also still be possible but the power supply to the actuators 
(MV and EDS) is deactivated. The hydraulic system of the gearbox is designed so that 
restricted operation is still possible. 


It is not possible to reselect a drive position with the selector lever. This means the vehicle 
can only be driven forward within certain restrictions until the engine is switched off. A drive 
position can not be engaged after turning the ignition off and restarting the engine. 


Vehicle safety is ensured because the parking lock engages when it is depressurized. As 
soon as the pressure in the parking lock cylinder drops the parking lock system is preten¬ 
sioned mechanically (operating lever spring). The mechanical parking lock will not engage 
at speeds > 5 km/h Once engaged, the parking lock can only be released with the 
mechanical emergency release. 


When the mechanical emergency program occurs: 

While driving forward, it is still possible to continue driving in 3rd/5th gear (3rd gear 
when 1st, 2nd or 3rd gear was previously engaged, 5th gear when 4th, 5th or 6th gear 
was engaged). This is interrupted by turning off the engine, the parking lock will engage 
once the hydraulic pressure has dropped. 

While in reverse, the gearbox assumes the neutral position and the parking lock is en¬ 
gaged (< 5 km/h). 


While in hydraulic neutral, the parking lock will engage (< 5km/h). 


In position P, the gearbox remains in this status and the parking lock remains engaged. 


The driver is informed of the different emergency situations by the Check Control mes¬ 
sages. 


41 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 









Feedback in the Event of a Failure 


In the event of a total failure of the transmission control or the 
5ZL, the selector lever operation can not be detected or 
implemented. In addition to the flashing shift pattern and the 
corresponding error symbols (shown to the right) in the instru¬ 
ment cluster, additional warnings will draw the driver's atten¬ 
tion to the situation: 

Acoustic warning signal (gong) 



Acceleration limitation: This function reduces the start-off 
acceleration when the vehicle begins to move. This function 
is implemented by the ECM, depending on the restriction 
of the transmission control by a request or by PT-CAN 
timeout of the signals. 



Workshop Hints 

The GA6HP26Z automatic gearbox requires oil 

replacement every 100,000 miles. Only the 
approved oil must be used for replacement or 
after conducting repairs on the gearbox (consult 
the Operating Fluids information). Check oil 
level: 

The vehicle must be parked flat and level 

Check the oil level through fill plug (1) corre¬ 
sponding to the Repair Instructions (TIS) 

Observe the oil temperature * 

* Diagnosis of this gearbox is carried out with 
the DIS plus as part of the service and repair 
work. 

A 16 Pin Adapter Cable PN 90 88 6 246 080 is 

used in conjunction with break out box 88 88 6 
611 459 to adapt to transmission harness. 


42 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 


W2+fit»D 

42 - 05-16 



















Check Control Messages 


The E65 has different warning and information outputs depending on the driving situation 
and possible faults. The display provides more detailed information with longer and under¬ 
standable texts in the control display. The message texts and characteristics are stored in 
the instrument cluster and are initiated by the transmission control module's evaluation of 
the fault. Only the transmission relevant faults and special messages are shown in the fol¬ 
lowing charts. 


Driving Situation 
Fault/consequences 

Check Control 

Message 

Supplemental Information 
in the control display 

Temperature in gearbox high 

Transmission Overheated 1 
Drive moderately 

Reverts to default shift program, 
reduce response. Avoid high 
speeds and engine loads. 

Temperature in gearbox very high 

Transmission Stop 
vehicle carefully 

Transmission Overheated. Move 
selector lever to pos. P. Leave 
engine running. Allow trans. 
to cool then carefully cont. 
driving if problems persist, 
contact BMW Retail Center. 

Selector lever CAN fault 

Transmission fault! 

Drive moderately 

Limited transmission operation 
Danger of complete trans. 
failure! Please contact the 
nearest BMW Center. 

Key signal, invalid CAS, CAN 
fault, P-M agnet short to positive 
or open circuit, parking lock 
engaged incorrectly. 

Trans. Range N only with 
engine on! 

The transmission automatically 
shifts to P when the engine is 
switched off. Please contact 
your BMW Center as soon as 
possible. 

Pos. P mechanical emergency 
operation active (also applies to 
emergency operation triggered 
in Pos. R and N) 

Gearbox defective 
Transmission Fault! 

The fault may be resolved by 
restarting engine. 

Contact the nearest BMW 

Center if necessary. Use 
emergency release to 
disengage park detent prior 
to towing or pushing vehicle. 

Engine speed invalid 

ECM CAN fault 

Transmission Failsafe! 

Drive moderately 

Only P,R,N,D3 and D5 available 
Ranges may be engaged 
without depressing brake. 

Please contact the nearest 

BMW Retail Center. 

Have checked by nearest 

BMW Retail Center. 


43 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 











Driving Situation 
Fault/consequences 

Check Control 

Message 

Supplemental Information 
in the control display 

Gear, monitoring and shift monitoring 

Gearbox position R, 
Transmission range R, 
Fault! 

Reverse gearcannot be 
engaged. It maybe impossible 
to select R, Reduce 
acceleration. Please contact 

The nearest BMW center. 

Short to ground of an MV, EPS 
mechanical emergency operation 
and Pos, D Selector level signal 
fault (CAN and serial line) 

Transmission range 

P,R, N Fault' 

Only transmission range D is 
available, P engages auto. 

When engine is switched off 

P lease contact the nearest 

BMW Retail Center. 

V>3km/h, P-push-button invalid, 
p-sensor implausible 

Trans, In P only when 
stationary 1 


Signal from P-push-button invalid, 
P-sensor implausible 

Transmission range P 

Fault 1 

Transmission range P may be 
unavailable. Engage parking 
brake when vehicle is stationary 

P lease contact the nearest 

BMW Retail Center. 

Parking lock does not engage, 
possible P-sensor fault, emergency 
release activated 

Gearbox in position N 1 
Transimission in position 

N! 

Gearbox position P is engaged 
Transmission automatically 
shifts into P when the remote 
control unit is extracted from 
the ignition lock or once 30 
minutes have elapsed. 

Indicate in N-hold phase with door 
open or seat occupancy = 0 
indication in H-hold phase with 
selector lever operation D,R, and N 
Detected 

Transmission in position 

N! 

Gearbox position P is engaged. 
Transmission automatically 

Shifts into P when the remote 
control unit is extracted from 
the ignition lock or 30 minutes 
have elapsed. 

EGS CAN interface defective (gearbox 
fault probably) instrument cluster 
cannot receive valid display message 
from EGS, Passive message from 
Instrument cluster. 

Transmission Fault 1 

Drive Moderately 

No transmission display, Poss. 
Reduction of gear selections. 
Possible to select new gears 
without depressing the brake. 

P lease contact the nearest 

BMW Center. 


44 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 












Driving Situation 
Fault/consequences 

Check Control 

Message 

Supplemental Information 
in the control display 

Indicate at terminal 15 
on and dooropen orseat 
occupancy =0 

Gearbox in position N 1 
Transmission in position N ! 

Gearbox position P is 
engaged. 

Shift lock note 

To engage gear, brake 


Brake signal invalid 

Brake signal implausible 

Gear engage without 
brake poss 1 

Before engaging gear, 

Press brake. When 
leaving the vehicle, 
switch off the engine. 

Accident hazzard 1 Please 
contact your BMW 

Retail Center as soon 
as possilble. 

Indication in the event of sloppy 
operation or P-push-button faulty 

Repeat gear selection 


M essege before N-hold 
phase elapse 
(30 minutes) 

Transmission position P 
engaging! 

To maintain transmission 
range N, press selecto 
lever within 10S to position 

N. 

Gear monitoring 

Shift monitoring 

Transmission Failsafe 1 

Drive moderately 

Transmission failsafe program 
activated, Possilbe reduced 
acceleration. Please contact 
the nearest BMW Center, 

Ignition on and N engine =0 
and gearbox Pos. P and 
selector lever push to N 

Pos, R, N, D Only within 
engine on. 



45 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 












Review Questions 

1. What does the GA6HP26Z designation stand for 7 

G HP A 26 6 Z 

2. Describe Stand By Control: 


3. Name the clutches used in the GA6HP26Z: 


4. What is unique about 5th and 6th gear (as compared to the others) 7 

5. What happens to the Parking Lock when engine operation is not possible 7 


6. What does the Emergency Release do 7 

7. The Mechatronic includes what components 7 


8. Name the two paths of communication for the Selector Lever: & 

9. What is the L/D Push Button for 7 


46 

GA6HP26Z Automatic Transmission 






























