Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Suspension and Steering 

Objectives of the M odule .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

Front Axle 

System Components.4 

Front Axle Carrier.5 

Control Arms.5 

Stabilizer Bar.6 

Spring Strut, Hub Carrier and Wheel Bearing.6 

Upper Mount.6 

Technical Data.7 

Rear Axle 

System Components.8 

Rear Axle Carrier.8 

Control Arms and Links.9 

Stabilizer Bar.9 

Technical Data.9 

Differential and Axle Shafts.10 

Steering 

System Components.11 

Steering Gear.11 

Power Steering Pump.12 

Steering Column.12 

Steering Angle Sensor.14 

Chassis Integration Module.15 

Steering Column Adjustment.16 

Servotromc.17 

Safety Requirements.18 


Wheels/Tires 


21 



























SUSPENSION and STEERING 


Model: E65 - 745i 
Production Date: 11/2001 


Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

Identify the correct installation of the twin tube gas pressurized shock absorbers. 

Describe the alignment adjustments that can be performed. 

Understand the correct installation procedure for the "quick couplings" on the steering 
gear. 

Explain the Crash Element function. 

Locate the steering angle sensor. 

List the functions controlled by the CIM module. 

Install the wheel weights in the correct position. 

List the correct wheel bolt torque value. 


2 

E65 Suspension and Steering 




Suspension and Steering 

Purpose of The System 

The E65 front suspension uses the double pivot spring strut axle design with tension rods 
(based on the E39 528i). The multi-link rear suspension with the integral axle is also used 
in the E65 to allow each wheel to move and flex individually without transmitting loads and 
forces through the sub-frame to the other wheel. 

The suspension is equipped with coil springs on the front and rear (standard equipment) 
providing the best comfort possible.This suspension systems keep the vehicle level during 
hard acceleration, braking and cornering. 

One of the factors that influenced the E65 suspension design was weight reduction. This 
results in improved fuel economy and handling characteristics (reduction of unsprung 
weight). The front and rear axle carriers, front and rear control arms, tension rods and front 
hub carrier assemblies are all made from aluminum. The weight is reduced by approxi¬ 
mately 30% as compared to using steel components. 



42 - 06-00 


3 

E65 Suspension and Steering 


System Components 

Front Axle: The traditional double pivot spring strut axle with tension rods is used. The 
double pivot refers to the lower mounting of the strut and hub carrier around which the 
wheel turns. The lower control arm and the tension rod form the two lower physical pivot 
points. The lower pivot point is actually an imaginary point formed by the extension of the 
control arm and tension rod. 

This suspension system is preferred because of these excellent features: 

Constant tracking over the entire compression and extension travel of the suspension. 
Camber change (reaction) during compression. 

Straight-ahead driving with 0 mm kingpin offset (also reduces steering effort) even 
though wide tires are used. 

Anti-dive control (during braking). 

Fewer components (weight savings). 


The double pivot front axle of the is bolted to the body sub-frame 



42 - 06-02 


4 

E65 Suspension and Steering 


Front Axle Carrier: The materials used in the front axle carrier offer high tensile strength 
to support extreme loads. The front axle carrier is also manufactured from aluminum. It con¬ 
sists of cast alloy preformed sections which are welded into the extruded sections. 

The front axle carrier accommodates the steering gear, control arms and tension struts, 
engine mounts, stabilizer bar, heat shield and the underbody panels. 

An "thrust zone" panel is bolted on to increase the transverse rigidity of the front of the vehi¬ 
cle. This reinforcement has a positive effect on the handling, sound level and crash perfor¬ 
mance. 


1. Thrust zone 

2. Control arm 

3. Tension rod 

4. Hub carrier 

5. Wheel bearing 

6. Axle Carrier 

42 - 06-03 

Front Axle Carrier 



The benefits as a result of the improved front axle include increased agility, improved com¬ 
fort by the reduction of unsprung weight, a reduction in fuel consumption by lowering the 
gross vehicle weight and better axle load distribution. 


Control Arms: The control arm locations are similar to the E39 528i with a single control 
arm and tension rod per side. The layout of the arms combined with the tensioning rods 
located in front of the wheel center provides balanced steering during cornering. 

The hydro mounts in the front of the tension rods contain 
hydraulic fluid in internal channeling to dampen wheel vibra¬ 
tions. 

Small vibrations are cushioned by these mounts and isolated 
from the steering wheel. 


42 - 06-04 

5 

E65 Suspension and Steering 



Stabilizer Bar: The standard stabilizer bar (1) is designed as a tubular stabilizer bar, which 
minimizes body "roll" during cornering. It is connected to the spring struts by links (rods) to 
provide the best performance leverage. 


The connection on the spring strut 
is high mounted so that when dri¬ 
ving straight ahead and hitting a 
bump on one side, the spring strut 
will not be turned (bump steer). 

The active roll stabilizer bar (ARS) 
will be covered in Dynamic Drive. 



View from Bottom 



Spring Strut, Hub Carrier and Wheel Bearing: The twin tube gas pressurized shock 
absorbers and the hub carrier are bolted together. The tube is made of aluminum and has 
a locating tab on the side which is used to align it into the hub carrier in the correct posi- 


The tube and hub carrierare produced in left and 
right versions and are identified by a label. The 
wheel bearing assembly is bolted onto the hub 
carrier. 


1. Support tube 

2. Hub carrier 

3. Locating tab 


06 

Spring Strut, Hub Carrier, and Wheel Bearing 


Upper Mount: The upper mount contains the spring strut 
support bearing and a centering pin (1) inserted to retain the 
factory preset camber. 

The centering pin can be removed for minor camber adjust¬ 
ments (+/-18 1 ) provided by slots in the strut tower under the 
upper mount securing nuts . 

The cable shown in the diagram is the connection forthe EDC- 
K which will be covered in Dynamic Drive. 



07 


6 

E65 Suspension and Steering 



Technical Data 

The following shows the alignment data in relation to the wheel sizes 


Wheels 8 I x 18 

Caster angle (202 wheel lock) 72 56' ±30' 

Caster offset (mm) 30’ 

Camber -6' ±25' 

Total toe 02 10' ±8' 

Track differential angle (202 |ock - inside wheel) -l 9 27' ±30' 
Rim offset (mm) 24 

Track (mm) 1578 


Workshop Hints 

Refer to the Repair Instructions for the following adjustments. 

Toe Setting: The toe is set by loosening the external securing nuts and turning the inner 
track rods (left and right). Consult TIS for proper tightening torque on the securing nuts. 

Camber Setting: The camber is set on the spring-strut support bearing. If it is necessary 
to adjust this in the workshop, the centering pin is removed and the camber correction is 
provided using the slots in the strut tower (adjustments of ±30' are possible). 


Notes: 


7 

E65 Suspension and Steering 













Rear Axle: The rear axle is designed with kinematics, aerodynamic features and also hous¬ 
es the differential. This suspension system incorporates anti-dive (when braking) and anti¬ 
squat (when accelerating) geometry which keeps the vehicle level. 

Kinematics relates to the suspension system design type. The term implies flex, which in 
fact the system does. Under load (acceleration, turning, braking), the suspension changes 
its geometry to counteract changes induced by the increased loads. The suspension 
changes are pre-determined and built into the system. 



42 - 06-08 


Rear Axle 

1. Rear cross member 

2. Differential mounting, rear 


3. Differential mounting, front 

4. Thrust plate 


Rear Axle Carrier: The rear axle carrier is a welded structure made of formed aluminum 
sections and cast aluminum joints. The differential is mounted in the rear axle carrier, with 
two mount points at the front and one at the rear. 

This offers advantages regarding sound and vibration characteristics. The rear rubber 
mount features kidney-shaped recesses allowing for vibrations in horizontal or vertical 
direction. 


Note: The differential mounts must be installed in the correct position (direction indicated) 
Refer to the Repair Instructions for correct removal and installation. 

8 


E65 Suspension and Steering 


When the rearsuspension is in the 
normal position, it is aligned paral¬ 
lel to the road and creates the 
desired air flow to the rear of the 
vehicle. 


1. Upper control arm 

2. Integral link 

3. Lower traction strut 

4. Upper traction strut 

5. Hub carrier 



Control Arms and Links: The control arms and links are aluminum and are geometrical¬ 
ly adapted to the E65 


Control Arms & Links 


Stabilizer Bar: The stabilizer bar is designed as a tubular stabilizer bar, which minimizes 
body "roll" during cornering. It is connected by links between the rear axle carrier and the 
control arms. The connection at the control arm is an axial ball joint which is secured by a 
taperseatand Torx bolt. The active roll stabilizer bar (ARS) will be covered in Dynamic Drive. 


Technical Data 

Wheel 

Tires 

Track width (mm) 

Total toe-in 

Geometric axis deviation 
Camber 


Steel Spring 

8J x 18 
245/55 R18 
1582 

02 18' ±10' 
02 ± 12 ' 

-12 30' ±20' 


Workshop Hints 

Refer to the Repair Instructions for the following adjustments. 

Toe Adjustment: The toe is adjusted by an eccentric bolt at the front upper traction strut. 

Camber Adjustment: The camber is adjusted by an eccentric bolt on the lower control 
arm at the connection to the axle carrier. 


9 

E65 Suspension and Steering 





Differential and Axle Shafts: The compact final drive is an "open" differential (traction 
controlled by DSC) with a ratio of 3.38 : 1. The axle mounting bolts feature a special sur¬ 
face paint coating for corrosion resistance. 

The oil fill and drain plugs contain integral seals and are also treated with the corrosion pro¬ 
tection coating. The drive shaft is aluminum for weight reduction. The compact output 
shafts are also weight-optimized. 



42 - 06-10 


Differential & Output shafts 

1. Differential Unit 

2. Output (half) shafts 


If the differential is damaged, internal repairs are not permitted. The differential is replaced 
as a complete unit. The only repairthat can be performed is external seal replacement (out¬ 
put shaft seals and pinion seal). The differential does not require an oil change because it 
has a lifetime oil fill. 


10 

E65 Suspension and Steering 







Steering 


The E65 is equipped with a rack and pinion power assisted steering system with 
Servotromc. The adjustable steering column is all electric with the adjustment control locat¬ 
ed on the left on the steering column. The steering column is designed without a steering 
wheel lock, the anti-theft requirement is fulfilled by the parking lock in the automatic trans¬ 
mission. 

As a driver protection feature, a newly designed telescopic crash element is mounted in the 
upper section of the steering column. 


System Components 

Steering Gear: The steering gear is bolted at 4 
points to the front axle carrier. The gear ratio is 
variable from 47.0 to 59.0 mm rack movement 
per steering wheel revolution. This keeps the 
numberof total steering wheel revolutions as low 
as possible when turning to full lock. 

1. Thrust piece 

2. Variable pitch gear tooth rack 

3. Steering shaft 



42 - 06-11 


Steering Gear 


With largerdimensioning, the rack and pinion steering system is used in the E65. The thrust 
piece required for automatic play compensation is lengthened and equipped with a 
stronger spring. The thrust piece contains integral lubrication pockets where it contacts the 
rack for longevity and noise reduction. 


Threadless plug "quick couplings" are used at the supply (1) 
and return (2) connections on the steering gear. 



The gearing is pressed on the rack to increase resistance to stress. The rack is hollowed 
which saves weight (reduction of 280 g) and allows air equalization between the right and 
left bellows eliminating the external plastic tube. 


06-12 


11 

E65 Suspension and Steering 


To release the quick coupling, turn the cap to 
position 2. The connection is then released by 
pressing with the thumb while at the same time 
pulling the quick coupling. 


1. Operating position 

2. Release position 


Prior to reconnection, the cap must be reset to 
the locked operating position (1) and should be 
plugged into the connection only in this position. 42-06-13 




Power Steering Pump: Different power steering pumps are used depending on the vehi¬ 
cle equipment. Vehicles without dynamic drive are equipped with a vane type pump and 
standard oil reservoir. 

A tandem pump is used when the vehicle is equipped with dynamic drive. This pump con¬ 
sists of a radial piston pump with a maximum output of 180 bar and a vane pump section 
with a maximum output of 135 bar. These vehicles are also equipped with large oil reser¬ 
voir with oil level monitoring. 


Steering Column: The upper steering column with crash element can be compressed 
telescopically by 70 mm when the steering column is subject to load in the event of a crash. 
This telescopic action is controlled by a crash element made of fiber glass reinforced plas¬ 
tic. 


1. Steering column 

2. Slide tube 

3. Shear pins (3) 

4. Crash element 

5. Support webs for SZL 

6. SZL carrier 

7. Telescopic adjustable splines 

8. Steering shaft 



Steering column 


14 


12 

E65 Suspension and Steering 



The compression movement begins when the three plastic pins shear under an axial force 
of approximately 3 kN 


The telescopic adjustment splines inter-slide 
allowing compression when the crash element is 
deformed over a defined length (at a force of 3 
to 7 kN). 


1. Shear pins (3) 

2. Crash element 

3. Support webs for SZL 

4. Splined shaft (steering wheel mount) 


Crash Element Components 


Crash Element (before and after compression): 




42 - 06-16 


42 - 06-17 


1 Crash element before 


after 


Note: Never disassemble the steering column to perform repairs on the crash element! In 

the event of a defect (particularly a crash), replace the entire steering column. 

Always set the steering wheel in the straight ahead position before removal/installation. 
Remove/install the steering column switch center (SZL) in the straight ahead position, also 
observe the marking on the locking tooth when installing the steering wheel. 


13 

E65 Suspension and Steering 


Steering Angle Sensor: The steering angle sensor is integrated in the Steering Column 
Switch Center (SZL) module. The steering angle positions are transferred by Bus signals to 
other control modules. 


1. SZL - Steering column switch center module 

2. Steering angle wiper contact 

3. Steering angle wiper tracks 



Steering Angle Sensor 


The steering angle sensor is a 3.4 kOhm potentiometer with two wipers offset by 90 
degrees. From the two wiper signals and a reference signal, the SZL calculates the steer¬ 
ing angle sensor position and transfers it over the Byteflight and CAN Bus to other control 
modules. Shorts to B+ or ground are detected as faults. 


SZL - Steering column switch center 
DSC - Dynamic stability control 
SIM - Safety integration module 
ARS - Dynamic Drive 
ZGM - Central gateway module 




42 - 06-19 

Steering Angle Sensor Communication Link 


Note: When replacing the SZL with the integrated steering angle sensor, the coil spring cas¬ 
sette must be installed in the center position with the wheels set in the straight ahead posi¬ 
tion. The wiper does not have an electrical reference point and steering angle matching 
must be performed with the DIS plus after repairs. 

After performing the steering angle matching, self-learning with the front wheel speed sig¬ 
nals is necessary to determine the number of steering wheel turns. The number of steering 
wheel turns is necessary for determining the exact steering angle. 


14 

E65 Suspension and Steering 











Chassis Integration Module (CIM): The CIM is 

located on the underside of the steering column. 


The CIM controls the following functions: 
Servotronic 

Electric steering column adjustment 


1. Crash element 

2. CIM module 



The CIM is linked to the K-CAN S Bus forcommunica- 
tion with other control modules. The ZG M provides the 
gateway for diagnostic communication. 


42 - 06-20 

CIM Location 


Steering Column 
AdjtelabJe Switch 



CIM Communication Link 


SM FA 

Seat memory, driver 

SZL 

Steering column switch center 

CAS 

Car access system 

ZGM 

Central gateway module 

SV 

Servotronic valve 

LSM 

Steering column motors 

DSC 

Dynamic stability control 

CIM 

Control module 

DM E 
SIM 

Digital motor electronics 

Safety integration module 

EDC-K 

Control module 


15 

E65 Suspension and Steering 





















































Systems in the CIM Module - Steering Column Adjustment 

The electric steering column adjustment system consist of the following components 
CIM module 

2 adjustment drive motors for forward/backward and up/down adjustment 
Hall sensors for position recognition 


Principle of Operation 

The steering column adjustment is electrically 
controlled by a button located on the left side of 
the steering column. 

The electric steering column is adjusted by two 
motors in the up/down and in/out directions. 
The various positions are stored in the driver's 
seat module when one of the seat memory but¬ 
tons are pressed. 

The steering column is automatically moved to 
the uppermost forward position to provide easy 
entry and exit from the driver's seat. 

There are no Check Control messages for the 
steering column adjustment because the driver 
receives immediate feedback in the event of a 
fault. 


1. Up/down adjustment 

2. Forward/backward adjustment 

3. Steering column 



42 - 06-23 

Steering Column Adjustments 



The CIM module will deactivate the steering column adjustment motors when overvoltage 
is detected (>16 V). The motors will be activated again when the voltage drops below 16 
V for more than 2 seconds. 

The motors are also protected from overheating by the CIM module. A temperature calcu¬ 
lation is performed in the CIM based on activation time (in case of jamming) and the motors 
will be deactivated to allow a "cool down" time. 


16 

E65 Suspension and Steering 













Systems in the CIM Module - Servotronic 



The Servotronic system consist of the following 
components: 


CIM module 

Servotronic solenoid valve (1) 


Principle of Operation 


42 - 06-03 


Servotronic provides speed dependent control of the power assisted steering. The flow of 
hydraulic oil is reduced (variable) by an electro-hydraulic pressure converter (solenoid valve) 
located on the steering rack (1). The degree of oil flow reduction is varied by the current 
supplied to the solenoid valve from the CIM control circuit. 

In connection with EDC-K, the driver can influence the power assisted steering by choos¬ 
ing between two characteristic curves, comfort or sport. The comfort or sport request dic¬ 
tates the current supplied to the solenoid valve dependent on the vehicle speed. 

Start Preconditions: The ignition "ON" signal is the only requirement and the solenoid 
valve is activated only when the engine is running. If a speed signal or steering angle input 
(movement) is not present within 5 seconds after starting the engine, the Servotronic 
switches over to the fast drive characteristic (power assist reduced). 

This is the substitute value (without power) when there is a fault present. When a speed sig¬ 
nal is received or steering angle input, the solenoid valve is activated by current from the 
CIM module control circuit to increase the power steering assist (speed variable). 

Servotronic Initialization: A short initialization phase (approximately 1 second) is neces¬ 
sary to achieve the characteristic curve as fast as possible during the starting procedure. 
During this phase, vehicle standstill is detected. A current flow plausibility test is conduct¬ 
ed and concluded within the initialization phase (test for short to B+ or ground). 

Speed Acquisition: The speed signal is generated oy the DSC module and is transferred 
overthe PT-CAN and K-CAN Busses to the CIM module to calculate the acceleration. If the 
acceleration values are greater than 1.3 g, the speed is interpreted as being implausible 
and the CIM formulates a "failsafe" speed. 


17 

E65 Suspension and Steering 


Determining Setpoint: Depending on the measured vehicle speed value, the Servotronic 
is adjusted every 100 ms in the comfort or sport characteristic curve. This provides a 
smooth transition in power assisted steering regulation. 

Characteristic Curve Changeover: The transition between the comfort and sport char¬ 
acteristic curves is gradual in order to avoid jolts in the power steering during changeover. 
The time required for the changeover is dependent on the cyclic CAN message "comfort 
or sport" sent by the EDC-K. The comfort characteristic curve is used if the vehicle is not 
equipped with EDC-K. 

Actual Value Acquisition: The voltage drop generated by the solenoid valve current dur¬ 
ing operation is monitored by the CIM for plausibility, comparing the actual value in relation 
to the Servotronic required. 

Solenoid Valve Control: The solenoid valve is activated by a pulse width modulated sig¬ 
nal (PWM ) that has a period duration of 2.5 ms at 400 Hz. The pulse duty factorcan be set 
in 2000 steps from 0 - 99.95%, at a time of 1.25 ms per step change. 

Operation at the Controller: The Controller and Control Display form the interfaces to the 
driver. If the vehicle is equipped with EDC-K, the driver can set the chassis to sports tun¬ 
ing. The Servotronic will also switch to the sport steering characteristic curve. 

The comfort characteristic provides greater 
power assist to the steering over the entire vehi¬ 
cle speed range. 

The sport characteristic provides less assist over 
the speed range, giving the driver more "road 
feel" and feedback required for this driving style. 


Servotronic Safety Requirements 

The CIM will output the Check Control message "Servotronic failed" to make the driver 
aware of a fault. In addition, a fault code will be stored in the CIM module. If the fault is still 
present upon the next engine start, the Check Control message will re-appear. 



Overvoltage: The CIM module will not apply power to the solenoid valve if a voltage value 
greater than 17 V is detected (failsafe). 


18 

E65 Suspension and Steering 







Undervoltage: A momentary dip in voltage will self correct, the CIM functions will resume 
again after a delay time. The undervoltage fault code will not set during engine starting 
(crank signal). 

> 7.5 V CIM module operates normally 

6.5 V...7.5 V Reset after 200 ms; CIM will assume sleep mode, woken by CAN Bus 
< 6.5 V Reset after 20 ms; CIM will assume sleep mode, woken by CAN Bus 


Speed Signal Monitoring: The CIM module evaluates the vehicle speed signal for three 
different reasons and will produce different fault codes when faults are detected. 

Timeout Vehicle Speed: The vehicle speed (V_DSC) is read cyclically (every 100 ms) by the 
CIM module via the K-CAN Bus. If an update is not received within 500 ms, the solenoid 
valve is deactivated. The sport characteristic (power assist reduced) will be in operation. 

A CAN timeout fault code will be stored in the CIM after 10 failed messages. A Check 
Control message will be sent if an update is not received in 5 seconds. The timeout fault 
code is reset with the next engine start. The fault code counter will be cleared by a cor¬ 
rectly received message within the 5 second monitoring period. When a general CAN fault 
is detected, the solenoid valve is deactivated and the speed monitoring is ignored. 

Fault Value of Speed Message: The CIM is informed of speed faults detected by the DSC 
by a fault value. A Check Control message is sent and the solenoid valve is deactivated 
when the fault value is received ten times in succession. 

Plausibility Check by Calculating the Acceleration: The acceleration is calculated based on 
the vehicle speed. The Servotronic is regulated to the speed up to an acceleration of 1.3 
g. If the acceleration exceeds the value of 1.3 g: 

The speed is calculated internally during braking by deducting 4 km/h per 100 ms from 
the last speed and storing this value as the current speed. 

The speed is calculated internally during acceleration by adding 6 km/h per 100 ms to 
the last speed and storing this value as the current speed. As soon as an accelera¬ 
tion value less than 1.3 g is observed between the stored speed and the speed sup¬ 
plied on the Bus, the Servotronic regulation is resumed. 


19 

E65 Suspension and Steering 


Solenoid Valve Circuit Monitoring: The circuit is monitored for shorts (B+ and ground) 
and breaks. If a fault is detected in the control circuit for the solenoid valve, the circuit and 
solenoid valve will be deactivated. Only minimum power assisted steering will be provided. 
This check is conducted within the initialization phase of 1 second. This function will repeat 
each time the ignition is cycled. The Servotronic will not operate during the engine start pro¬ 
cedure if a fault is present for longer than 1 second. 


Current Plausibility Check: The solenoid valve current is monitored by the CIM module 
and must be within a tolerance range. This takes place within the initialization phase and 
the output stage for the solenoid valve is deactivated if a fault is detected. 


Damper Program Signal Status Monitoring: The EDC-K status is observed by the CIM 

module cyclically (every 200 ms) overthe K-CAN Bus. The EDC-K provides the comfort or 
sport request. If a message is not received within 2 seconds, the comfort characteristic will 
be set and the fault code "timeout EDC-K status" will be stored. A Check Control message 
will not be sent. 


Diagnosis Information 

External Faults: All inputs, actuators and mechanical functions are monitored. Open or 
short circuits in the wires and actuators to the CIM module are monitored. 


Internal Faults: The electronic function of the CIM module and the output stages are also 
monitored. When a fault occurs, the entire system is shut down and a fault code is stored. 
The cyclic CAN signal is also monitored. 


Fault Generation: When a fault is detected in a function or component, that output func¬ 
tion is deactivated. The fault information is stored in the fault code memory. If correct func¬ 
tion of the component cannot be determined after a fault has occurred, the function will 
remain deactivated. After repairs, the fault can be deleted by the DISplus. 


20 

E65 Suspension and Steering 



Wheels/Tires 


The E65 is equipped with light alloy wheels including the spare wheel. The alloy wheels 
reduce unsprung weight and also provide an attractive, stylish appearance. 


The 8J x 18 cast aluminum wheels shown to the right are stan¬ 
dard equipment. The wheels are equipped with 245/45R-18 V 
rated all season tires. 



The optional cast aluminum wheels shown to the right are dif¬ 
ferent sizes for the front and rear: 


• Front Wheel =9J x 19 with 245/45R -19 Performance tire 

• Rear Wheel = 10J x 19 with 275/40R -19 Performance tire 



42 - 06-25 


Adhesive balance weights are used on the E65 wheels. The 
weights are installed on the inside of the rim on the designat¬ 
ed precision cut areas for dynamic balancing. 



1. Bonding surfaces for balance weights 



06-26 


Note: The wheel bolts are torqued to 140 Nm. 


21 

E65 Suspension and Steering 


