Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Driving Dynamics Systems 

Objectives of the M odule .2 

Purpose of the Systems.3 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

History.6 

Principle of Operation.7 

System Components.10 

Sensors.12 

Electronic Damper Control - Continuous (EDC-K) 

History.13 

System Components.14 

Damper Valve Details.15 

Principle of Operation.17 

System Faults and Reactions.21 

Workshop Hints.23 

Dynamic Drive - Active Roll Stabilizer Bar (ARS) 

Stabilizer Bars.24 

Purpose of the System.25 

System Components.28 

Sensor System.31 

Actuator System.32 

Valve Block.33 

Active Stabilizer Bars.34 

Hydraulic Components .36 

Principle of Operation.38 

Workshop Hints.41 


Review Questions 


46 

























DRIVING DYNAMICS SYSTEMS 


Model: E65 - 7451 
Production Date: 11/2001 


Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

List the Driving Dynamics Systems. 

Demonstrate how to deactivate Dynamic Traction Control. 
Explain how EDC-K influences hydraulic damper operation. 
Identify the correct EDC-K solenoid valve resistance value. 
Describe the Dynamic Drive influence on the stabilizer bars. 
Name the Dynamic Drive components and locations. 
Understand the Valve Block sub-components and functions. 
Explain the Oscillating Motors hydraulic/mechanical operation. 
Describe "Failsafe" hydraulic flow. 

Demonstrate Dynamic Drive Commissioning. 


2 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




Driving Dynamics Systems 

Purpose of The Systems 


The E65 chassis offers the driver optimum ride comfort, driving safety, good agility and 
excellent handling. The chassis also adapts to changes in road conditions: traffic, ice, snow 
etc. Vehicle speed and changes in the direction of travel generate forces that have an effect 
on the chassis which requires the driver to react correctly to maintain safe driving. 

The following forces occur while driving: 

Vertical forces - uneven road surfaces, bumps and potholes 


Lateral forces 


centrifugal forces during cornering and crosswinds 


Longitudinal forces - acceleration, deceleration and braking 


The following vehicle structure movements occur as a result of these forces: 

Around the transverse axis: pitch 
Around the longitudinal axis: roll 
Around the vertical axis: yaw 



Yaw, 


Vertical axis 


42 - 06-28 

3 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 





Active Driving Dynamics Systems are integrated in the E65 chassis which support the dri¬ 
ver both actively and passively by suppressing the effects of these forces as much as pos¬ 
sible. The Driving Dynamics Systems include: 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) with subsystems 


Electronic Damping Control (EDC-K) continually adjustable system 


Dynamic Drive active roll stabilizer bar (ARS) 


The Driving Dynamics Systems monitor the driving conditions using sensors. The sensor 
signals are transmitted to the control modules that interpret and evaluate the driving con¬ 
ditions. The control modules send output signals to actuators that will counter these forces 
providing adaptation for the road and driving situations. 


Systems Indications 

The indicator/warning lamps, Check Control, On-board Computer messages and Control 
Displays as well as the respective activation are described in the Drive display and controls. 


Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

The DSC controls the vehicle stability in all driving conditions, counteracting the driving 
dynamics forces by using brake intervention or engine load control depending on the situ¬ 
ation. DSC consists of the following subsystems: 

ABS Anti-Lock Braking System 
ASC Automatic Stability Control 
MSR Engine Drag Torque Reduction 
DBC Dynamic Brake Control 
CBC Cornering Brake Control 

The following are new in the E65: 


FBS Fading Brake Support 
FLR Driving Performance Control 
DTC Dynamic Traction Control 
Parking Brake (hydraulic service brakes) 



4 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 





Electronic Damping Control (EDC-K) 


The continuous Electronic Damping Control (EDC-K) absorbs vertical forces while driving 
and dampens these forces to the chassis. The forces are measured by two vertical accel¬ 
eration sensors on the front axle (left and right) and one at the rear axle (right). The front 
sensors are located in the wheel housings and the rear on the trunk tray underneath the 
trunk ventilation ports. The dampening characteristics are mapped in the control module to 
continuously regulate the EDC-K providing maximum comfort. 


The EDC-K works with infinitely variable valves 
in the dampers to regulate the hydraulic fluid 
flow using electromagnetic control valves. EDC- 
K provides the actual damping force required at 
any time. 


The steering angle sensor is used along with the 
front wheel speed sensors to determine the lat¬ 
eral acceleration. The controller provides the 
opportunity to select from two basic settings: 
Comfort or Sports. 



42 - 06-09 


Dynamic Drive 


Dynamic Drive controls two active stabilizer bars based on the lateral acceleration. The 
active stabilizers are split with a hydraulic actuator in between them so that the left and right 
sides can be turned in opposing directions. These active stabilizers set the stabilizing 
torque using hydraulic actuators so that: 


The rolling motion of the body is minimized or 
eliminated while cornering. 

The extent to which the body rolls on straight, 
uneven road surfaces is reduced. 

A high degree of agility and precision adjust¬ 
ment is achieved using the full speed range. 

An optimum self steering characteristic is 
produced. 



42 - 06-03 


5 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 





Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

History 

The history of wheel slip control systems used in B M Ws is covered in the Chassis Dynamics 
course (ST056). DSC III was technically modified (deletion of the pre-charging unit), the 
functions were extended and renamed DSC 5.3. The DSC 5.3 was further developed into 
DSC 5.7 by adding these functions: 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) Maximum Brake Support (MBS) 

Dynamic Brake Support (DBS) 

These functions have been used in Bosch systems since 1999. For the E65, DSC 5.7 is 
further developed and expanded to include the software functions to achieve improved sys¬ 
tem operation: 

FBS Fading Brake Support Parking Brake (hydraulic service brakes) 

FLR Driving Performance Control DTC Dynamic Traction Control 

In addition, the evaluation of the 2-stage brake lining wear sensors is integrated in the DSC 
control module. The DSC system is connected to the PT-CAN Bus. 


aj-tJ 


cm 





1 vu 

1 







31 



5kuF 




RLE 









TrfAT 

1__J 


H 

TuflFT 

i^B 

■c™ 

-y 

3-D 









FATH 


r-H 

TJJ- 

H=m 


LM 


3H 

1 









5WQIH 


DM 


RTj^F 







| HK1 |J 




rntu 

V—-I 

WM 



D-iUS 



EEL 








AftS > 4 Ei»* 


ytUL 




Sim 


stvk 


* 




I 




SEW 


EC-5 









G"E 



ESEl 


EBEK 


EDCH 


S8H 


K-CAN P 




MOST 




P7-GA.N 

42 - 06-04 


6 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 










































































































Principle of Operation 


DSC 


DSC calculates the current driving conditions and cor¬ 
rects detected driving instability through active brake 
interventions. Forexample, in the event of vehicle over¬ 
steer, DSC initiates brake intervention at the front 
wheel furthest from the curve to create a stabilizing, 
opposing torgue. 

In the event of vehicle understeer, active interventions 
at the wheels nearest to the curve provide a stabilizing 
counter torgue. DSC stabilization is performed in all 
driving situations: normal running, acceleration and 
braking. 

The DSC control module is combined with the 
hydraulic unit and is located on the right front strut 
tower in the engine compartment. 

The DSC function can be deactivated by the 
Controller in the Control Display menu and the 
DSC light in the instrument cluster will illuminate 
to alert the driver. DSC can be reactivated by 
the Controller or automatically when the ignition 
is cycled. 


Bi 


cck 



AUtri P 

— "zn u .pin 

Cmnfnrt EDC 

fti'<irr. lir MfL 1 ^ 

~ ■ RPC 


42 - 15-18 



Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS) 

The ABS system will operate under a full or failsafe state: 

ABS full system: the control module achieves a stabilizing effect on the driver's reguests 
through active brake pressure increase at the individual wheels. Information from the 
wheel speed sensors, the yaw rate and steering angle sensors determine the vehicle 
speed. At vehicle speeds <60 km/h an individual control operation matching each situ¬ 
ation shortens the braking distance. 

ABS failsafe level: the ABS adopts the failsafe level in the event of a sensor failure or a 
CAN Bus fault. In this case, the vehicle speed is determined by the wheel speed sen¬ 
sors. In addition, the "select low" control for rear axle stabilization will be applied and the 
active interventions during brake activation and MSR will be deactivated. 

7 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 










Automatic Stability Control (ASC) 

A5C prevents the wheels from spinning during acceleration on all types of road surface. 
The ASC function is the same as models currently in use. 


Engine Drag Torque Control (MSR) 

When the accelerator pedal is abruptly released or in the event of unadapted downshifting 
to a lower gear, the MSR function maintains stability on the rear of the vehicle. 

The MSR function is activated at vehicle speeds above 15 km/h to decrease strong load 
changes through a brief engine torque increase by increasing the Valvetronic lift, advancing 
the ignition timing, increasing the injected amount of fuel, etc. 


Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

The DBC function is designed to provide the maximum braking force available during rapid 
(panic) braking situations and includes the following subfunctions. 

Dynamic Brake Support (DBS): DBS assists the driver in panic braking situations. This 
function is triggered by a sufficiently fast actuation of the brake pedal. 

The brake pressure generated by the driver is increased by the hydraulic pump to the 
extent that the front and rear axles go into ABS control mode. The driver can achieve a full 
deceleration with low pedal force. 

Fading Brake Support (FBS): FBS is a new subfunction of DBC that compensates for the 
brake force loss from an increase in brake temperature. The diminishing braking effect due 
to hot brakes requires the driver to press the brake pedal more firmly. 

This increase in pressure is assumed by an activation of the DSC hydraulic pump. The tem¬ 
perature measurement is a virtual value which is calculated by the DSC control module 
based on wheel speed, brake pressure, braking time (length) and ambient temperature. 


Cornering Brake Control (CBC) 

The CBC function is activated in the event of medium to high lateral acceleration. If a vehi¬ 
cle drives into a curve under braking and threatens to oversteer, an increase in stability is 
achieved through a partial release of the rear wheel brake nearest the curve. 


8 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


During corner braking, CBC provides the best possible directional stability through opti¬ 
mum brake force distribution. The hydraulic pressure in the rear brake calipers is controlled 
individually to prevent the vehicle from oversteering. 

CBC controls the vehicle prior to ABS or DSC intervention. CBC also operates even when 
DSC is deactivated and CBC is deactivated in the event of an ABS failure. 


Driving Performance Control (FLR) 

FLR is a new subfunction of DSC that protects the brakes against overloading (misuse). 
When a temperature of over 600 2 C is determined, the engine power is reduced (max. 
engine torque 330 Nm) by the ECM. This engine torque reduction is stored as a fault (dri¬ 
ving performance control active). 


Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) 

To improve propulsion, the ASC slip thresholds can be increased up to a speed of 45 mph 
(70 km/h). The permissible slip is doubled which offers advantages when driving on poor 
roads and in heavy snow (increased rear wheel spin is permissible). 


When chassis dynamics increase as measured by the yaw rate sensor, the slip thresholds 
are reduced back to the normal mode for stability reasons. 


The DTC function can be activated/deactivated 
by the Controller in the Control Display menu. 

When the DTC traction mode is activated, the 
"DTC” light is illuminated above the DSC safety 
light (in the instrument cluster). 



42 - 15-17 


Parking Brake (Hydraulic Section) 

DSC controls the hydraulic function of the Parking Brake. The "Automatic Hold" and 
"Dynamic Braking" functions affects a hydraulic braking operation on the front and rear ser¬ 
vice brakes (referto the E65 Brakes Section). 


9 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 
















System Components 



□PAM. 

□ FAVP 

*C 

•irrWTCi IDfAilLI 



KOMBI 


L. r i r n-^A|- 



MT-Lih 


f l.!U 



DSC Components 


BBF - Brake lining sensors 
VP - Precharging pump 
DSC - DSC control module 
Vx - Hydrualic control valves 
VBTWEG - Mileage signal 
CD - Control Display 
ZGM - Central gateway module 
Kombi - Instrument cluster 
CAS - Car Access System 
GRS - Yaw rate sensor with integrated transversal 
acceleration sensor 


Gl- G4 - Wheel speed sensors 

BFS - Brake-fluid sensor 

P - Pressure sensor 

DFA - Speed-sensor output 

BS - Brake-light switch 

DME - Digital Motor Electronics (ECM) 

SIM - Safety Information Module 

CON.- Controller 

LWS - Steering angle sensor 


10 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 










































































Hydraulic System Components 





I 



Hydraulic System Components 


BA - Brake fluid reservoir 

THZ - Tandem brake master cylinder 

HA - Rear axle 

VA - Front axle 

Pvor - Pressure sensor 

DK - Damper chamber 

EVLP - Single precharging pump 

Kombi - Instrument cluster 

GRS - Yaw-rate sensor 

CAS - Car Access System 

HSV - High pressure switching valve 

USV- Changeover valve 

SK - Accumulator Chamber 


sRFP - Self priming return pump 
ISD - Integrated flow damper 
EVHL - Inlet valve, left rear 
EVHR - Inlet valve, right rear 
EVVL - Inlet valve, left front 
EVVR - Inlet valve, right front 
AVHL - Outlet valve, left rear 
AVHR - Outlet valve, right rear 
AWL - Outlet valve, left front 
AWR - Outlet valve, right front 
HL/HR - Left rear / right rear 
VL/VR - Left front / right front 


11 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 










































































































Sensors 


The DSC 5.7 receives input signals from the following sensors: 


Wheel speed sensors (4 active wheel speed sensors with direction of rotation detection) 
Steering angle sensor (located in the SLZ), made available over the PT-CAN Bus 


Brake fluid level warning switch (level monitoring in brake fluid reservoir) 


Brake light switch (BS) 

Rotation rate sensor- yaw (satellite of DSC on PT-CAN Bus) 

Transversal acceleration sensor (integrated in rotation rate 
sensor) 

The Rotation rate (yaw) sensor is located under the carpet 
in front of the passenger's seat in the passenger compart¬ 
ment. 



42 - 06-09 


Pressure sensor (installed at the inlet of front brake circuit) 


42 - 06-10 



Notes: 


12 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 














Electronic Damper Control - Continuous (EDC-K) 

History 

With EDC I in the 1987 E32, B M W AG was the first European manufacturer to introduce a 
fully automatic electronically adjustable damper system. EDC I provided manual selection 
during driving between hard, sport and soft damping. Since the market launch, this 2-stage 
system has been continuously enhanced and evolved into EDC III, it has set the standard 
for adjustable damper systems in the 5 and 7 Series. 

EDC III evaluates the status of the road surface, vehicle load, driving speed and driver's 
request to automatically activate one of three damper programs: soft, medium or hard. The 
driver also has the option of selecting a comfort or sports program. 

EDC-K is a further development of EDC III. The German abbreviation "K" stands for con¬ 
tinuous damping force adjustment. The major change from EDC III is the damper valves 
and the activation control. 


Rear Dampers 



Front Dampers 


42 - 06-11 


EDC-K operates with a continuously adjustable valve in each damper. The damping force 
is adjusted for individual piston speed. The damping force adapts continuously to the low 
frequency movement of the vehicle body, resulting in a significant increase in driving com¬ 
fort. The driver has the option to select a comfort or sports setting by using the Controller 
in the Control Display menu. 

The EDC-K system is an option offered under the Adaptive Ride Package. 


13 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


System Components 

EDC-K Control Module: The control module 
is located in front of the glovebox and is pow¬ 
ered by B+, operating within a voltage range of 
9 to 16V. In the event of undervoltage, the EDC- 
K system shuts down to prevent excessive bat¬ 
ten/ draw. 

The control module incorporates various con¬ 
trol functions that determines the current 
applied to the damper valves. 


Vertical Acceleration Sensors: The three 
vertical acceleration sensors provide a varying 
voltage signal (0.2 - 4.5V) to the control module 
indicating the speed of body movement. The 
three sensors are identical and have a measur¬ 
ing range of ± 2.5 g. 

The front sensors (1) are mounted on the inside 
top of the wheel archs and the rear sensor (2) is 
mounted on the side of the rear wheel arch. 

42 - 06-13 

Electronically Adjustable Dampers: The front and rear axles are equipped with twin 
tube gas pressurized dampers supplied by Mannesmann Sachs Boge. The fully variable 
dampers are map controlled and do not have fixed stages. 

Each damper incorporates an adjustable proportioning control valve on the piston. The 
wiring harness for this valve is routed through the hollow piston rod. Damper oil flows 
through this valve during compression and rebound. The control valve generates a pres¬ 
sure drop between the lower and upper chambers depending on the oil flow volume. 

The front and rear axles are separately activated to achieve an optimum response for vibra¬ 
tions in all driving conditions. The valves are deactivated in the event of a control module 
failure or when the ignition is switched "OFF". The dampers automatically rest in the hard¬ 
est setting (without power). On vehicles equipped with Dynamic Drive, the spring struts 
have different valve configurations on the front and rear axles. The dampers are de-ener¬ 
gized when the vehicle is stationary. They are energized initially from 5 km/h. 



14 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 





1. Pre-tensioning screw 

2. Solenoid coil 

3. EDC-K Damper valve 

4. Primary valve 

5. Floating seat ring 

6. Valve spring 

7. Armature 



42 - 06-14 

EDC-K Damper Valve - Detail 


Infinitely Variable Control Valve: Without power, the maximum hydraulic resistance is set 
by the screw (1), which pre-tensions the valve spring (6). This is the hardest damper set¬ 
ting, also known as the failsafe (rest) setting. 

The valve spring provides maximum tension on the armature (7), which presses down on 
the EDC-K Damper valve (3). This in turn presses down on the floating seat ring (5) which 
offers resistance to the oil flow by restricting the orifices (indicated by arrows). 

When the solenoid coil (2) is energized by the EDC-K control module, the armature is mag¬ 
netically pulled upwards against the valve spring tension. The armature will exert less pres¬ 
sure on the EDC-K Damper valve. The tension is decreased on the floating seat ring 
decreasing the orifice restriction. The oil flow will increase, resulting in softer damping. 

When the solenoid coil receives maximum power, the effect will be the lightest tension on 
the floating seat ring. The orifices are unrestricted, providing the softest damping. 


15 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 






























































Damper Valve - Hydraulic Details 


Compression Stage: The rod and attached piston is forced 
downwards in the damper cylinder. The oil in the cylinder pro¬ 
vides lubrication and resistance to the piston movement 
(shown to the right). 

The oil is forced through the primary valve which pushes the 
EDC-K Damper valve upwards. The floating seat ring rests at 
the bottom and the oil will flow through the orifices which con¬ 
trol the rate (direction indicated by the arrow). 




42 - 06-15 


Rebound Stage: The rod and attached piston is forced 
upwards in the damper cylinder. The oil in the cylinder provides 
resistance to the piston movement (shown to the left). 


The oil will flow through the orifices forcing the floating seat ring 
up against the EDC-K Damper valve. The oil continues to flow 
through the primary valve to control the rate (direction indicat¬ 
ed by the arrow). 


The armature is controlled (electronically) by the EDC-K control 
module to regulate the EDC-K Damper valve and floating seat 
ring positions which varies the resistance to oil flow by restrict¬ 
ing the orifices. 


16 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


42 - 06-16 















































Principle of Operation 

EDC-K is a microprocessor controlled damper adjusting system. The system consists of 
mechanical, hydraulic and electrical/electronic subsystems. Acceleration sensors record 
the driving/road surface conditions and the control module receives the sensor frequency 
signals for evaluation. The sensor signals are compared with each otherfor plausibility. The 
control module logic activates the damper valves according to internal programmed maps 
to dampen body and wheel movement as needed. 

The drivercan use the Controller and Control Display menu to select between comfort and 
sports programs. The system is diagnosable with the DISplus. In the event of sensorfaults, 
the system is switched to a "safe state" by supplying fixed power to the damper valves. In 
the event of a system failure (no power), the dampers are mechanically sprung to the 
firmest setting. 

The EDC-K function is divided into 3 blocks: 

Control Module 

Sensors and program selection option 
Actuators - 4 electronically adjustable dampers 


The input signals for the system are generated by: 


Sensor/Switch 

Signal 

Calculated Variable 

Location 

Acceleration sensors 
front axle, rear axle 

Vertical acceleration 
front, rear 

Vertical velocity, 

Compression/rebound 

travel 

Sprint-strut 
dome FR, 

FL, RR 

Steering angle sensor 

Steering angle 

Steering angle velocity 

SZL 

Wheel speed sensors 

FL/FR 

Wheel speed 

Driving speed, 
acceleration/braking 

Wheel hubs 
FL/FR 

Program selection 

Comfort/sports 

program 


Controller 


In addition to the forces calculated in each measured movement, there are vertical, longi¬ 
tudinal, transversal, copy and tolerance control logic. 


17 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 










EDC-K Electronic System Overview 



EDC-K Components 


VL - Front left acceleration sensor 

CD - Control Display 

VR - Front right acceleration sensor 

DVVR - Damper valve, front right 

HR - Rear right accelerator sensor 

DVVL - Damper valve, front left 

DF A - Front left wheel speed sensor 

DVHR - Damper valve, rear right 

Con. - Controller 

DVHL - Damper valve, rear left 

LWS - Steering angle sensor 

ZGM - Central gateway module 


Vertical Dynamics Control 

Vertical Dynamics Control responds to vertical (up/down) body movements based on 
wheel/body acceleration and speed. A distinction is made between a low frequency body 
vibration (approx. 1 Hz) and a high frequency wheel vibration (approx. 10 to 15 Hz). 
Because the body speed cannot be measured, a characteristic value is calculated from the 
acceleration signals. This value is adapted based on the vehicle speed, frequency ranges 
and road surfaces. 


18 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 
























































































The higher frequency vibrations of the axle are calculated as the wheel dynamics value 
based on the wheel speed signal inputs. The value is determined from the irregularities of 
the wheel rotation when driving over bumps. This control operation takes place separately 
for both axles. 


Longitudinal Dynamics Control 

The Longitudinal Dynamics Control responds to acceleration and braking body movements 
(fon/vard/backward). The vehicle speed signals are monitored by the control module: two 
direct wheel speed inputs from the DSC control module and three digital inputs from the 
PT-CAN Bus. Two of the signals on the PT-CAN Bus correspond to the 2 wheel speed sig¬ 
nals from DSC and the third signal is the averaged vehicle speed. 

The EDC-K control module assesses the plausibility of these signals. A Longitudinal 
Dynamics value is calculated from the wheel speed signal, which represents the level of 
acceleration or deceleration. The dampers are adjusted (on both axles) to the harder set¬ 
ting to counter act the longitudinal movement. 


Transversal Dynamics Control 

The Transversal Dynamics Control responds to transversal movement (dive and squat - 
front to back roll). This value is calculated from the steering angle sensor and the vehicle 
speed signals. The onset of "yaw” movement is detected very early from the steering angle 
sensor signal. A harder damper setting to support the vehicle as it enters a curve is acti¬ 
vated at an early stage. The front and rear axles are separately controlled. 


Copy Control 

The Copy Control function responds to the compression and rebound of the body (encoun¬ 
tering bounces on one side of the vehicle) while driving straight ahead. Through comfort¬ 
able damper tuning, EDC-K responds to one sided unevenness due to the road surface. 
This prevents a side to side rolling motion while driving straight ahead. 

Once vehicle "copying" is detected, a harder damping combination is applied to the front 
and rear axles. Detection is based on the evaluation of the right and left vertical accelera¬ 
tion signals from the front axle. 


19 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


Tolerance Adaptation 

The damperforce is diminished as part of the operating time function. Diminishing damper 
forces are compensated by current (amperage) reductions which are calculated by the tol¬ 
erance control. This also individually compensates for mechanical damper wear on each 
axle. 


Control Strategy 

All of the dampers are controled simultaneously until a single damper control in particular 
is required. For stability reasons, the smallest desired output current of the four damper 
controls (hardest damper setting) is set. 


Plausibility Monitoring and Safety Concept 

The EDC-K inputs and outputs are checked for plausibility. Depending on the type of fault, 
restricted operation of the damper control system will occur while a high degree of safety 
and comfort is maintained. 

The control display informs the driver when an EDC-K system fault has occurred. There are 
two different shutdown options in the event of faults. 

In partial operation, medium damping is set by a fixed current at the front and rear axle 
valves. 

When the entire system is shut down, the de-energized valves instantly switch (spring 
loaded) and remain in the "hard damping" setting. 


In the event of system faults, the chassis and suspension is set to a safe condition that is 
acceptable to the driver. The valves, sensors, electric circuits and EDC-K control module 
are fault monitored. 


Notes: 


20 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 







System Faults and Reactions 


Malfunction 

Fault response 

CAN steering angle signal correction 

Deviation > 10 Q 

Fixed current, fault in memory, gong at end of 
trip 

Acceleration sensors (front, left, right, rear) 

Fixed current output for front axle, rear axle 

Fault in memory, gong at end of trip 

Wheel speed front left/right 

1) Control operation with replacement 
sensor 

2) Fixed current output for front and rear 
axles 

External voltage supply fault fluctuation (nominal 
should be 5 V +/- 10%) 

Fixed current output for front axle, rear axle 

Fault in memory, gong at end of trip 

Voltage supply to EDC control module between 

2 V and 8 V 

Valves de-energized, fault in memory, gong 

During trip 



Valve failure 

Valves de-energized, fault in memory, gong 
during trip 

Voltage wake up, <2V standing & wake up>7V 

Valves de-energized, fault in memory, gong 
during trip 

No vehicle speed via CAN Bus 

Fixed current, fault in memory, gong at end of 
trip 

Control module EEPROM faulty 

Fixed current, fault in memory 

Control module - no alive message from EDC-K 

Valves de-energized, fault in memory, gong 
during trip 


CAN Interface 

The steering angle value is prepared and is transmitted by the 5ZL overthe CAN Bus. Both 
of the front wheel speed signals (including the direct DSC wheel speed signal), the vehicle 
speed reference value and the mileage reading are provided by the DSC control module 
overthe CAN Bus to the EDC-K control module. 


Power Supply 

Low current supply to the damper valves results in hard damping and a high current results 
in soft damping. The EDC-K control module determines the setpoints and outputs pulse- 
width modulated (PWM) signals to the damper valves to regulate the current flow. Current 
flow limitation is ensured by an overcurrent detection and deactivation. All of the analog 
inputs are protected by diodes against positive and negative overvoltage. The following 
analog signals are processed by the EDC-K control module: 


Vehicle supply voltage 

EDC-K switched output voltage 

Damper valve voltage and current 


21 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


















Valve Activation/Output Stage Circuit 

The solenoid valves have low resistance, approximately 2.2 ohms per valve at room tem¬ 
perature because high current is needed at a low voltage. The current is set in the 0 to 2 
Amps range depending on the desired damping force. The setpoint value will not exceed 
2 Amps to avoid valve damage. The solenoid valves are connected in series for each axle 
and are supplied with a ground (PWM for continuous adjustment) from the EDC-K control 
module. 

Rear Axle EDC-K Valves Series Connection 


uC = M icrocontroller (EDC-K control module) 
PWM = Pulse width modulation (output signal) 
DVHR = Right rear damper valve 
DVHL = Left rear damper valve 



Controller and Control Display Operation 


42-06-18 


Sports program: The driver can activate/deacti¬ 
vate the sports program by the Controller in the 
Control Display menu. 

A firmer damping is set when the EDC-K 
request is set to "SPORT". EDC-K always 
reverts back to the comfort program each time 
the engine is restarted. 



42-06-02 


Notes: 


22 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 

















































Workshop Hints 
Diagnosis 

System monitoring and plausibility: For safety reasons, faults with one damper valve will 
result in deactivation of all damper valves. Fault detection takes place on each axle. To pin¬ 
point which valve is faulty, use the DISplus to measure the resistance of the individual valves 
(per axle). The resistance of a good valve is 2.2 ohms ±10% at room temperature (20 2 C). 

Acceleration sensors: The EDC-K control module does not distinguish individual malfunc¬ 
tions between the sensors. The power supply to the three sensors is connected in parallel 
in the control module (without isolation). A short circuit in the supply voltage to one of the 
sensors will also affect the supply to the other sensors. 

A maximum of seven different faults can be stored for the acceleration sensors. The cod¬ 
ing data will indicate the functions of the control module (vehicle and country specific). 


Notes on Service 

When the steering angle sensor is removed, the steering wheel must be manually posi¬ 
tioned to the straight ahead position and this position re-initialized in the SZL. The steering 
wheel straight ahead position is permanently monitored while driving. 

EDC-K diagnosis detects electronic damper faults on the complete axle only. Mechanical 
testing of individual dampers can be carried out in the dampertest. Mechanical wearcaus- 
es the dampers to weaken over the service life, therefore a running time memory adapts 
the damper curves towards a harder setting (over time). Faulty dampers must be replaced 
together (in pairs) on a single axle. After a replacement, the running time memory for the 
front or rear axle must be reset with the DISplus. 


A 10 Pin Adapter Cable is available to adapt the 
M FK cables to the EDC-K control module when 
using the DISplus (Test Plan). 

Special Tool #90 88 6 372 050 



42-06-20 


23 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 









Dynamic Drive - Active Roll Stabilizer Bar (ARS) 

Stabilizer Bars on the Front and Rear Axles 

Body roll is built up over the vehicle's longitudinal axis as a result of the centrifugal force at 
the center of gravity. This force causes the vehicle body to lean towards the outside wheels 
while cornering and quickly draws the vehicle closer to the limits of driving dynamics. The 
tilt angle of the body and the increased wheel load is counteracted by the use of stabilizer 
bars. 

Yaw, 



I tolling 


Longitudinal 

axis 


Transverse 
axis —■ 


Vertical axis 


42-06-08 


When cornering, the wheel on the outside of the 
corner compresses the spring, and the inner 
wheel extends the spring which causes the the 
stabilizer bar to turn (twist). 

The forces on the mounting points of the stabi¬ 
lizer bar generate a torque that counteracts the 
body angle providing better load distribution on 
both wheels on the same axle. 




42-06-20 


The suspension is firmer with a solid stabilizer bar. The disadvantage is that when you are 
driving straightahead during a one-sided compression (bounce), this transmits a "copying” 
effect through the suspension, which reduces comfort. 


24 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




Purpose of the System 


The Dynamic Drive - Active Roll Stabilizer Bar (ARS) is a revolutionary step forchassis tech¬ 
nology. ARS goes a long way towards removing the conflict between handling/agility and 
comfort. ARS has two stabilizer bars that have a positive effect on the body roll and han¬ 
dling, allowing softer springs and dampers to increase comfort. 

Active Stabilizer Baron the Rear Axle 



Dynamic Drive controls two active stabilizer bars on the axles depending on the lateral 
acceleration. 


Oscillating Motor 


The two separate stabilizer bars on each axle 
are mounted in roller bearings and are connect¬ 
ed by a hydraulic oscillating motor. 

One half of the stabilizer bar is connected to the 
oscillating motor shaft and the other is con¬ 
nected to the oscillating motor housing. 

Active stabilizer bars introduce fewer forces into 
the body as compared to solid stabilizer bars- 
because the separate "halves" will not copy one 
sided suspension compressions (bounces). 



42-06-22 


25 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




The active stabilizer bars set the stabilizing torque, resulting in 


M inimizing or completely eliminating body roll while cornering 
Reduction in the "copying effect" of the vehicle 


A high degree of agility and precision throughout the entire speed range 


Produces optimum self steering characteristics 


Improved suspension comfort (when driving straight ahead) because the stabilizer bar 
halves are independent and do not stiffen the basic suspension during a one-sided 
compression. 


The distribution of the active body torque between the front and rear axle depends on the 
road speed. The following describes the different body torque distribution. 

Self Steering Affect 

The self steering affect is influenced by the distribution of the stabilizing torque on the axles. 
The greater the stabilizing torque on an axle, the lower the lateral forces will be that are 
transmitted on this axle. Two situations are described below with a different distribution of 
stabilizing torque on the axles: 

Identical stabilizing torque on both axles: Handling is "NEUTRAL". The front wheels will 
apply about the same amount of lateral force to the road as the rear wheels (without drive 
torque). A vehicle that is tuned to neutral handling provides very agile handling and the 
steering reacts very quickly. The driver experiences precise handling. 

Larger stabilizing torque on the front axle: Handling is "UNDERSTEERING". The front 
wheels cannot apply the same amount of lateral force to the road as the rear axle wheels. 
The vehicle tends to go straight requiring an increase in steering to make the vehicle turn. 

Dynamic Drive sets the stabilizing torque on the front and rear axle to create a different 
handling characteristic for low and high speeds. 

Road Speed Handling 

Low Neutral 

High Understeer 


26 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 






Passenger vehicles are designed for slight understeer depending on the speed range. 
Dynamic Drive is tuned to neutral in the lower speed range, requiring less steering to go 
around the same corner. This produces optimum handling and agility. In a higher speed 
range, Dynamic Drive is designed so that a larger active stabilizing torque will occur on the 
front axle as compared to the rear axle This means that the vehicle with Dynamic Drive 
reduces over sensitive steering a higher speeds to enhance handling characteristics. 

System Dynamics 

When the vehicle changes lanes, corners or changes direction quickly (winding roads), 
Dynamic Drive reacts very quickly. The system dynamics reaction time is shown in the fol¬ 
lowing steps: 


Process 

Signal detection by sensors, processing of sensor 
signals and valve control. 

Change of direction, switching over the torque 
direction, direction valve. 

Pressure build up (force per wheel). 

0 to 30 bar ( 0 to 350 N) 

0 to 180 bar (0 to 2100 N) 


Time 

approx. 10 ms 


approx. 30 ms 


approx. 120 ms 
approx. 400 ms 


Dynamic Drive Bus Structure 


AnA - 



FDC 


WWYA 


TUFAT 


1M I i 

MTH H 


Uyi aj ! 


HKL 


fjJBF 


TMEFT 




Tm 

fc^H 


I M 


;=Md Fm 


J 




■=*.H 


4 


ihK* 


ClHy 

□= 


fc’Ll 


HLS 


sy-n 


■Ji 




'frwA 



L-3 

l~L>Z 


I 

■SE+: 

i.VT 

l 

L_ 

T*L 

LOGIC? 

l 

I~ 


SvS 


^ Wh p 





S8h 


Mitt P 


k-Can £ 






PT-Cili 


27 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 












































































































System Components 


Dynamic Drive (ARS) consists of the following components: 



Dynamic Drive (ARS) 


5. Control module 

6. Transverse acceleration sensor 

7. Rear oscillating motor 


1. Fluid reservoir 

2. Tamdem pump 

3. Front oscillating motor 

4. Valve block 


ARS Control Module: The control module is 
located on the right side "A" pillar in front of the 
glovebox and is powered by B+through a 10 
Amp fuse. The control module is activated by a 
CAN alarm lead from the CAS module when the 
ignition is switched "ON". 

A vehicle authentication process takes place 
when the system is started. This compares the 
vehicle identification number from CAS with the 
vehicle identification number which is encoded 
in the ARS control module. 



28 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 

























After the ignition is switched "ON", the ARS hardware and software is self-checked. All of 
the outputs (magnetic valves) are checked for short circuits and breaks. When there is a 
fault, ARS switches the actuators to a safe driving condition. The control module will switch 
off in the event of undervoltage or overvoltage. 


Dynamic Drive (ARS) Component Overview: 



CAS 



K-GAH 5 




* 


KlJ 5 W 








Dynamic Drive Component Overview 


42 - 06-25 


ARS - Control module 
VB - Valve block 
P - Pressure sensors 
G - Rotational rate (yaw) sensor 
CAS - Car Access System 
KOMBI- Instrument cluster 
LM - Light switch center 
LWS - Steering angle sensor 


SIM - Safety integration module 
ZGM - Central gateway module 
EDC - Electronic damping module 
DME - Digital engine electronics 
DSC - Dynamic stability control 
S3 - Lateral acceleration sensor 


29 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 










































































Inputs: The ARS control module requires dynamic driving input signals to calculate the 
required activation. The following input signals are monitored and checked for plausibility: 

Lateral acceleration 
PT-CAN Bus 

Front axle ARS circuit pressure 
Rear axle ARS circuit pressure 
Selector position recognition sensor (SSE) 

Fluid level sensor signal 

The PT-CAN provides additional information about lateral dynamics: 

Vehicle speed signal (DSC) 

Steering wheel turning angle (Steering Angle Sensor) 

Yaw velocity - Transversal acceleration (Roational Rate Sensor) 

These inputs allow the ARS control module to determine the stabilization requirement at the 
appropriate inertia moments. The reaction time is decreased by using the vehicle speed 
and steering angle inputs. 


Outputs: All of the outputs are check by diagnostics and are short circuit protected. The 
outputs (and control) include the following: 


Pressure control valves for the front and rear axle ARS 
Directional valve 
Failsafe valve 

5 V sensor voltage supply 


The valves are controlled by pulse width modulation current. The individual coil current 
requirements are constantly checked for plausibility. The current measurements allows the 
pressures to be precisely set and electrical monitoring of the hydraulic the shift valves. 


The PT-CAN sends a message to the ECM indicating how much engine power is required 
to drive the tandem hydraulic pump to activate the ARS stabilizer bars. 


An "alive” data signal is provided and monitored by othercontrol modules to detect the sys¬ 
tem status. All signal faults are permanently stored. Output faults include short circuits (B + 
and ground) and open circuits. 


30 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




Sensor System 


Lateral Acceleration Sensor: The lateral 
acceleration sensor is located under the carpet 
in front of the passenger's seat (1). While cor¬ 
nering, the vehicle's lateral acceleration is mea¬ 
sured (range is ±1.1 g). 


Transversal acceleration (yaw velocity) is provid¬ 
ed by the Rotation Rate Sensor (2) via the DSC 
control module. 


42 - 06-15 

Front and Rear Axle Stabilizer Bar Pressure Sensors: The pressure sensors provide 
the ARS control module with the front (1 below left) and rear (2 below left) axle stabilizer bar 
hydraulic operating pressures. The sensors are mounted on the valve block assembly and 
the pressure values are initialized in the control module (during assembly line commission¬ 
ing). The voltage value is proportional to the operating pressure (in bar shown below right). 




0 SO 100 p [bar] 200 

42 - 06-28 


Selector Position Recognition Sensor (SSE): The SSE is mounted on the valve block 
assembly (3 above left). This sensor allows the ARS control module to detect the specific 
position of the directional valve (4 above left). The 2 positions detected are: 

Left hand control (direction of torsional twist) 

Right hand control (direction of torsional twist) 


31 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




















Fluid Level Sensor: The fluid level sensor allows the ARS 
control module to detect the fluid supply level in the reservoir 
(power steering reservoir) for the tandem pump. The fluid level 
sensor indicates when the fluid drops below the minimum 
level and triggers a warning message. 


Normal fluid movement (slosh) will not trigger the sensor. 
Short/open circuits are not detected by the fluid level sensor 
circuit and a circuit break is interpreted as a loss of fluid. 



42 - 00-29 


Actuator System 

Pressure Control Valves: There is a pressure control valve for both the front (1 below) and 
rear (2 below) axle hydraulic circuits. The valves adjust the front and rear axle stabilizer bar 
actuation pressures. When driving straight ahead, the pressure control valves are de-ener- 
gized opening the valve diameters allowing the fluid to return to the reservoir (circulating). 

i „ 

When cornering, the valves are energized to 
readily increases the pressure in the oscillating 
motors to the setpoint value. 

Depending on the lateral acceleration and the 
vehicle speed, the pressures for the front axle 
are regulated between 5 to 180 bar and 5 to 
170 bar for the rear axle. 


Directional Valve: The directional valve (3 above right) is electrically actuated by the ARS 
control module to control the direction of the hydraulic pressure for right and left hand 
twists. 



Failsafe Valve: The failsafe valve (4 above right) is electrically actuated by the ARS control 
module to open the front axle hydraulic circuit to the oscillating motor. The circuit is closed 
when the failsafe valve is de-energized, decreasing the system pressure (circulating). 


Check Valves: The check valves (internal in the valve block) allow the hydraulic fluid to be 
drawn from the reservoir preventing cavitation in the oscillating motor. 


32 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




Valve Block: The valve block is an electrically controlled hydraulic distribution assembly 
and is located behind the right front wheel housing panel (at the base of the A-pillar). 



42 - 06-31 

Valve Block Functions 

Distribution of hydraulic fluid flow to the oscillating motors: The pressure at the front axle 
oscillating motor is greater than or equal to the pressure at the rear axle oscillating motor. 

Measuring the actual pressure of the high pressure hydraulic fluid: There is a pressure 
sensor for both the front and rear axle oscillating motor hydraulic circuits on the valve 
block. 

Fast and precise regulation via the pressure control valves: Introduced pressure changes 
as a result of uneven roads are passively regulated to reduce noise as much as possi¬ 
ble. 

Adjustment of the volume flow direction (left hand/right hand twist) via a directional valve: 

The directional valve position is detected by a selector position recognition sensor (S5E). 

Switch to Failsafe mode in the event of power supply failure ora fault is detected in the 
system: The front axle oscillating motor hydraulic circuit is closed off and hydraulic flow 
is diverted to the reservoir. The check valves will open to allow the hydraulic fluid to be 
drawn from the reservoir. The rear axle oscillating motor hydraulic circuit is also deacti¬ 
vated and hydraulic flow is diverted to the reservoir. 

Limiting the system pressure in the event of a fault: The Failsafe valve causes the circuit 
to close when de-energized, decreasing the system pressure (circulating). 


33 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 








Valve Block Sub-Components: 


Components 

Description 

Pressure control valves 

The pressure control valves are electrically 
actuated. They set the active pressure for the 
front and rear axle stabilizer bars. 

When driving straight ahead, the pressure 
control valves are de-energized and the valve 
diameters are open. The fluid can flow freely to 
the reservoir. 

The valves are energized when the vehicle is 
cornering. The pressure in the oscillating motors 
increases rapidly and is regulated to the setpoint 
value. 

Directional valve 

The directional valve is electrically actuated. It 
specifies the direction of the high pressure fluid 
(active pressure) and the return fluid pressure for 
the right hand and left hand twists. 

SSE 

There is a selector position recognition sensor 
(SSE) for monitoring the directional valve position 
in the directional valve. 

Failsafe valve 

The Failsafe valve is electrically actuated. It 
closes the front axle oscillating motor circuit, 
when de-energized. The system pressure is 
limited by the circulation position and causes a 
circulating flow. 

Check valves 

The check valves are located in the valve block. 
They allow the fluid to be drawn from the 
reservoir to prevent cavitations in the oscillating 
motor. 

Pressure sensors 

The stabilizer bar pressure sensor signals are 
used to monitor the hydromechanics. In 
addition, the pressure control pressure signals 
are used. 


Active Stabilizer Bar (one assembly per axle): The active stabilizer bar consists an 
oscillating motor and two stabilizer bar halves with press fit roller bearings to mount the 
assembly to the axle carrier. 


The oscillating motor and the 
oscillating motor housing joins 
the two halves of the stabilizer 
bar 

The rear axle Active Stabilizer Bar 
is shown on the right. 



34 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


42 - 06-32 











The Active Stabilizer Bar assembly has three tasks: 


The oscillating motor decouples the two halves of the stabilizer bar. 

The oscillating motor guides the torque into the two halves of the stabilizer bar. 

In the event of system failure (Failsafe mode), the front axle stabilizer bar creates suffi¬ 
cient damping from the oscillating motor hydraulic fluid (hydraulic locking) to work like a 
conventional stabilizer bar. 

Exception: If the oscillating motor chambers do not contain any fluid as a result of a leak, 
the front axle stabilizer bar will not dampen and rely on the spring strut assemblies. 


Oscillating Motors: The oscillating motors are split chamber hydraulically controlled rotary 
actuators. This motor contains a total of four chambers, opposing chambers are connect¬ 
ed with one another and receive the same hydraulic pressure. 


Two chambers are supplied with high pressure 
through an internal connection and the other 
two chambers are connected to the reservoir 
return line. 

The pressure and drain (return) is switched 
between the two pairs for right or left hand tor¬ 
sional twists. 



The different pressures result in the high and low 
forces that apply torque. One half of the stabiliz¬ 
er bar is connected to the shaft and the other 
half is connected to the housing. 


The two halves will turn in opposite directions. 
As a result, the shaft will turn in an opposite 
direction of the housing. 


The stabilizer bar is mounted to the axle carrier. 
The torque generated while cornering will force 
the body upwards on the outside of the curve 
and pull it down on the inside of the curve. 


42 - 06-33 



35 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 

















42 - 06-35 

The maximum torque influence on the front and rear axle occurs when there is a high 
degree of lateral acceleration (producing body roll). During this situation, the system pres¬ 
sure is 180 bar at the front axle and 170 bar at the rear axle. The front oscillating motor is 
smaller than the rear one and builds up a force of 600 N m at 180 bar. The rear oscillating 
motor builds up a force of 800 N m at 170 bar. The oscillating motors also act as torsional 
vibration dampers (hydraulic cushion). 


During torsional twists, the fluid is displaced from two chambers returning through the lines 
and the valve block to the reservoir. The return path has a slight hydraulic resistance which 
creates damping. With failsafe (hydraulic blocking), the oscillating motor will turn as a unit 
because of the closed circuit hydraulic locking occurring internally (like a conventional sta¬ 
bilizer bar). 


Tandem Pump: The tandem pump mounted on the engine and is driven by the ribbed V- 
belt. The pump assembly consists of a radial piston pump for Dynamic Drive and a vane 
pump for the power steering. 


When the engine is idling, the pump speed is 
approx. 750 rpm providing a minimum flow rate 
of 4.5 l/min at 0 - 5 bar and 3.3 l/min at 180 bar. 


This volume and pressure provides sufficient 
system dynamics when the engine is idling. At a 
pump speed of approx. 1165 rpm, the flow rate 
is limited to 7 l/min. Dynamic Drive and power 
steering share the fluid reservoir and fluid cooler. 



36 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


42 - 06-36 










Fluid Reservoir: The fluid reservoir is identical 
on all E65 vehicles, whether equipped with 
Dynamic Drive or not. The fluid reservoir also 
supplies the power steering hydraulic circuit. 

The reservoir contains a fluid filter (as on mod¬ 
els in current use) and a fluid level sensor to 
detect when the fluid level drops below the min¬ 
imum amount. 



42 - 06-29 


Fluid Cooler: The cooler ensures a long term fluid temperature of < 120 2 C and a short 
term fluid temperature of < 135 2 C in all hydromechanical components under all operating 
conditions. 



42 - 06-38 

Hydraulic Lines and Hoses: The hydraulic lines and hoses are designed for extremely 
high pressures. The hydraulic component connections and fittings are designed with dif¬ 
ferent dimensions and lengths to avoid improper installation. 


Hydraulic noises transmitted to the vehicle interior predominantly occurs through the 
assemblies and connections. The lines and hoses must be properly positioned through the 
mounting supports (noise insulation) and not touch the body surface. The supply hose in 
the engine compartment has excess loops (and length) to also reduce hydraulic noise. 


37 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 













Principle of Operation 


Dynamic Drive System Pre-drive Procedure 


When the ignition is switched "ON", the ARS control module self test is first performed. The 
electrical valve functions are conducted to detect short/open circuits in the valve solenoid 
coils, connectors and harness. The sensors are checked for short/open circuits in the har¬ 
ness, connectors or the internal electronics. 


Finally, the hydraulic safety functions 
are checked before the vehicle 
moves as part of the "Pre-drive 
Check". 



fiMY 


SMH 


A test pressure (<60 bar) is set 
between the pump and the failsafe 
valve. This allows the ARS control 
module to check if the failsafe valve is 
actually in the de-energized failsafe 
position. When in this position, the 
system pressure is decreased (circu¬ 
lating). 

When the failsafe valve is energized 
(FS as shown to the right) by the ARS 
control module, the front axle hydr¬ 
aulic circuit is open providing pres¬ 
sure to the oscillating motor (S M V). 

The front axle pressure control valve 
function is tested simultaneously. If 
pressure does not build up at the 
front axle stabilizer bar, the Predrive 
Check criteria will not be met. 




The Dynamic Drive function is deactivated when the vehicle is stationary (inertia is not pre¬ 
sent) and all the valves are de-energized. This also applies when the vehicle is at a stand¬ 
still on an incline (one sided load). Even though the lateral acceleration sensor provides a 
signal, the vehicle speed signal is not present. 


When the vehicle speed is >15 km/h, the ARS function is started. 


38 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 



































































Straight Ahead Driving 


When the engine is running, the tandem pump supplies hydraulic fluid to the system at a 
pressure of 3 to 5 bar. The front and rear axle stabilizer bar pressure valves are de-ener¬ 
gized (open) and pressure is not applied to the oscillating motors. The hydraulic fluid circu¬ 
lates directly back to the reservoir for as long as the vehicle is driven straightahead. 


Cornering 

When cornering, the signals from the lateral acceleration sensor are conveyed to the AR5 
control module. The control module outputs a pulse width modulated signal (PWM) to the 
front and rear axle stabilizer bar pressure valves. The stronger the lateral acceleration, the 
greater the signal (current flow). The increasing valve current will progressively close the 
valves forming a higher pressure in the stabilizer bar oscillating motors. 


The pressure sensors provide the ARS control module with the stabilizer bar oscillating 
motor pressures. To direct the buildup pressure according to the corner (left hand or right 
hand twist), the directional valve is actuated by the control module. The S5E sensordetects 
the directional valve selector position. 


E MU 






Restricted Function 

The system reverts to failsafe mode when 
a fault is detected. The control module 
stores the fault and indicates failsafe 
mode in the instrument cluster. The fail¬ 
safe situation is shown to the right in the 
hydraulic overview diagram. 

In the event of system failure, the failsafe 
valve (F5) is de-energized and sprung 
closed. The hydraulic fluid in the front sta¬ 
bilizer bar is sealed in, ensuring the stabil¬ 
ity and understeer effect of a convention¬ 
al stabilizer bar. 

The check valves (RVV1, RVV2) allow the 
hydraulic fluid to be drawn from the reser¬ 
voir preventing cavitation in the oscillating 
motor when the vehicle is driven straight. 































































External Leakage 

External leakage is detected by the front or rear pressure sensors and the ARS control 
module will deactivate Dynamic Drive (system failure). 


ARS Block Diagram 

» MJL-J 


» 








JJ 



2h 



» 

10 

lie 


'77 


■ _d 
■2 J J 
■+3 


ARS 


n 


/1 


!. I 

-a i 


" 

. i 


: 







I FS 




n 

i—i 

w 

tL 




Ki, 11 


42 - 06-41 


ARS 


aq Lateral acceleration 

ARS Active roll stabilizer bar control unit 

SSE Selector position recogniton sensor 

DSV Front axle pressure sensor 

DSH Rear axle pressure sensor 


PVV Front axle pressure control valve 
PVH Rear axle pressure control valve 
RV Directional valve 
FS Fail-safe valve 


40 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




















































































Workshop Hints 
Diagnosis 


The following component faults can be detected: 


Component 

Type of fault 

Fault detection via: 

ARS control module 

De-energized or faulty 

Instrument cluster via omission of 
the Alive-Counter, vehicle 
identification number with 
authentication not recognized, 
watchdog 

Pump 

No pressure 

Target-performance comparison 
pressures 

Directional valve 

Stuck in the "energized" 
position (wire break) 

Stuck in the "de-energized" 
position (wire break) 

Directional valve sensor 

Pressure control valve 

Open (de-energized) 

Front axle target-performance 
comparison pressure, current 

M easurement 

Closed (mechanicalfault) 

Front axle target-performance 
comparison pressure 

Pressure control valve 

Open (de-energized) 

Rear axle target-performance 
comparison pressure and current 
measurement. 

Closed (mechanicalfault) 

Rear axle target-performance 
comparison pressure 

Failsafe valve 

Stuck open 

Predrive-Check 

Stuck closed 

Current measurement 

Actuator 

Front/rear axle 

Leaking (no moment) 

Target-performance compliance 
pressure 

Blocked 

Target-performance comparison 
pressure 

CAN bus 

Completely omitted (line out) 

CAN-timeout 

Steering angle 

Implausible, or omitted 

Plausible monitoring and fault 
detection CAN bus signals 

Sensor 

Completely omitted (line out) 

Voltage monitoring 

Incorrect signal 

Check p ausibility via CAN signals 

Fluid leve sensor 

No signa (ine) 


Front axle 

Pressure sensor 

No signal (line) 

Front axle target-performance 
comparison pressure 

Incorrect signa 

Rear axle pressure sensor 

No signal (line) 

Voltage monitoring 

Incorrect signal 

Target-performance comparison 
pressure 

Directional valve sensor 

No signal 

Voltage monitoring 

Incorrect signal 

SSE directional valve target - 
performance comparison 


41 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 











































Depending on the fault, the system exhibits one of the reactions listed below: 


System shutdown (Failsafe mode) 

The following faults lead to system shutdown and all output stages are de-energized 
Fault in the front axle stabilizer bar 
Fault on the front axle pressure sensor 

Fault with pressure build up (pump, pressure relief valve on the front axle) 

Fault in the control module 

Vehicle identification number is not conveyed by the CAS/is missing/is incorrect 
Directional valve positioning fault, faulty SSE 
Omitted PT-CAN signal 

The de-energized failsafe valve blocks the chambers of the active stabilizer bar on the front axle. 

The fluid is only equalized via the internal oscillating motor and valve block leakage. The check valves 
in the valve block make it possible 


Warning message Handling instructions 

Cornering stability. Take corners slowly Directional stability system with unlimited 

Directional stability. No high road speeds 
When cornering. Drive on, contact BMW 
Center immediately 



If there is a fluid loss in the ARS or the steering circuit, the fluid level sensor in the fluid level sensor in 
the fluid reservoir responds to this. 


The driver is informed in order to avoid damaging the tandem pump by driving on. _ 

Handling instructions 

Fluid loss in the chassis and steering system 
Do not drive on, contact BMW Center 
immediately 


A 12 Pin Adapter Cable, Special Tool #90 88 6 372 040 is 

used in conjunction with the DISplus to adapt the MFK cables 
when diagnosing the ARS system. 



Warning message 

Fluid loss. Stop carefully, switch off the engine 



42 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 








Restricted Control Comfort 

Lateral acceleration is calculated from the vehicle speed and steering wheel angle (CAN signals). 
This signal is fasterthan the actual lateral acceleration and compensates forthe hydromechanics 
time delay. If there is a fault with these two signals, the system reacts with delayed rolling compen¬ 
sation. This only happens with extremely fast steering, when cornering normally it is barely 
detectable. 

If the lateral acceleration senor is faulty, the lateral acceleration is calculated solely from the can 
signals. The driver will not feel any restriction in function. 

If there is a fault in the rear axle circuit and there is stabilizing on the front axle only, the d river feels 
that the vehicle is making larger rolling movements. Agility is reduced at road speeds <120 km/h. 

The system also reacts this way if the Pre-drive Check brings up the "failsafe valve stuck open" 
message. 

In the event of an electrical fault on the rear axle pressure sensor, there may be roll angle 
compensation defects. To be on the safe side, slightly more stabilization torgue is transferred to the 
front axle than in the normal operating mode (this can be felt by the driver). 


Warning message Handling instructions 

Cornering stability slightly restricted Chassis stability slightly restricted when cornering. 

Drive on, contact BMW Center as soon as possible 


Restricted System Monitoring 

Dynamic Drive receives the following sensor signals from the DSC and SZL via the PT CAN Bus: 

Lateral acceleration 
Yaw velocity 
Road speed 
Steering wheel angle 

These signals are used to check the lateral acceleration sensors. 

Control comfort is restricted if the engine speed signal (DmE) fails. 

In the event of a fault with the CAN signals and the yaw velocity, the system is missing two pieces of 
information. Since this information is used solely to check the other signals, the ARS function remains 
available with full control. 

Although there is no restriction of the Dynamic Drive function, the driver will be shown the "chassis 
control comfort" display. The driver is instructed to drive to the workshop if possible. 


Warning message Handling instructions 

Cornering stability slightly restricted Chassis stability slightly restricted when 

cornering. Drive on, contact BMW 
Center as soon as possible. 


43 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 






A "dynamic" driver will notice the loss of the steering angle signal and the warning mes¬ 
sages will be acknowledged. The warning message will disappear once it has been ack¬ 
nowledged. When the cause of the fault is corrected, the ARS control module will have full 
capacity. 


Depending on how fast a fault is detected, there are two reset opportunities: 


When the ignition is off, all faults which have been corrected will be reset. You must wait 
until the sleep mode has been activated before switching the ignition back on. 


Faults that occur sporadically and can generally be traced back to CAN bus communi¬ 
cation malfunctions, are automatically reset when driving straight ahead or when sta¬ 
tionary. In this case, the driver may not be aware of the re-activation when driving or 
when the car is stationary. 


The faults are stored in memory with important additional information. The additional 
information includes the mileage when the fault occurred, details of whether the fault is 
present and the frequency of the fault occurance. 

Note: When there is a Dynamic Drive failure, the DSC can not be deactivated or if it is 
already deactivated it will not switch back on automatically. 


Dynamic Drive Commissioning 

The commissioning procedure must be earned out using the DISplus after the hydraulic 
system was opened or a component was replaced (in particular the lateral acceleration 
sensor). This procedure is found underServ/ce Functions - Chassis - Dynamic Drive - Start 
Startup - TestPlan and follow the on screen instructions. The following criteria must be met 
for matching the lateral acceleration sensor and the two pressure sensor offset values: 

The vehicle must stand level on all four wheels (on the ground). 

The vehicle must be unloaded. 

The engine must be idling at operating temperature. 

The doors must be closed and occupants are not allowed in the vehicle. 

Note: Stay clear of the moving chassis parts during the commissioning! The ground and 
side to side clearance must not be limited or obstructed and the doors must be closed. 
The arms of the lift hoist must not be situated underneath the vehicle. Vehicle will not be 
able to be driven (transmission will remain in "Park" during this procedure). 


44 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


The commissioning is performed in five steps that are automatically carried out during the 
procedure: 


1. Direction valve test 

(from 3 to 3.4 seconds) 

First the direction valve is tested by evaluating 
the SSE signals. 

2. Low pressure test 

(from 3.4 to 4.3 seconds) 

The failsafe and direction valves are without power 
during this stage. Then tests are carried out with 
pressure control valves (with and without power) on 
the front and rear axle. The body is then tilted. The 
sides of the vehicle must be clear. 

3. Front axle high pressure test 

(from 4.3 to 9.9 seconds) 

Pressure of 180 bar is applied to the front axle 
oscillating motor. Air in the system, internal leaks 
and a blocked oscillating motor is detected. 

4. Rear axle high pressure test 
(from 9.9 to 15 seconds) 

Pressure of 170 bar is applied to the rear axle 
oscillating motor. Air in the system, internal leaks 
and a blocked oscillating motor is detected. 

5. Pressure control valve test 

(from 15 to 25 seconds) 

The characteristic curves of the front and rear axle 
are checked. (Target/actual value comparison) 

Faulty pressure control valve is detected. 


Dynamic Drive Bleeding 

After all work on the Dynamic Drive and the steering system in which hydraulic lines have 
been opened, the steering system must be bled and initial operation of the Dynamic Drive 
(commissioning) must be performed with the DISplus. 

Procedure: 


1. Check fluid level in the powersteering reservoir; if necessary, top up to the "MAX” level 
while the engine is stopped. 


2. Start the engine. Turn the steering wheel left and right to the full lock twice. 


3. Check the fluid level with the engine stopped; if necessary, top up to the "MAX" level. 


4. Start the engine, connect vehicle to the DISplus. 

5. Start the Commissioning procedure which is found under Serv/ce Functions - Chassis - 
Dynamic Drive - Start Startup - Test Plan and follow the on screen instructions. 

Note: Refer to the Repair Instructions for details on the Dynamic Drive bleeding procedure. 


45 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 








Review Questions 

1. What identifies the correct installation of the twin tube gas pressurized shock absorbers 7 

2. Explain the Crash Element function. 


3. List the correct wheel bolt torque value. 


4. Following a brake pad replacement, what must be performed to properly complete the 
repair 7 


5. How is the "Auto Hold" parking brake function activated 7 


6. Explain how the EMF applies the parking brake. 


7. List the procedures to resume operation after an EM F emergency release. 


8. Explain how EDC-K influences hydraulic damper operation. 


9. Describe the Dynamic Drive influence on the stabilizer bars. 


10. Describe "Failsafe" hydraulic flow (for the front axle). 


46 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 






























