Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

E65 Service 

Objectives of the M odule .2 

Connected Service Introduction .3 

Condition Based Service (CBS) 

Purpose of the System . 6 

Principle of Operation. 6 

Service Indicators 

Service Need Display (SBA).10 

Key Reader 15 

Service Forms 17 


Review Questions 


20 










E65 SERVICE 


Model: E65 - 745i / E66 - 745Li 

Production Date: 11/2001 - E65, 01/2002 - E66 


Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

Describe the sensor based service items. 

List the internally calculated service items. 

Identify the service indicators. 

Demonstrate how to extract Condition Based Service information from the Control 
Display. 

List the E65 key information read by the Key Reader. 


2 

E65 Service 




E65 SERVICE 


Introduction 


Connected Service 

The term "Connected Service" refers to "Networked service." Modern vehicles are already 
heavily networked internally by the single bus systems. Communication of vehicle occu¬ 
pants with the vehicle occurs via several control and display systems like the instrument 
cluster, on-board monitor with navigation system and on the E65 with the central Control 
Display. 

This networking in constant progress is also revolutionizing the service process. It is called 
"Connected Service" and allows increasing communication and networking between the 
vehicle and the Retail Service Departments. 

Customers can expect the following from the B MW Service in the future: 

Exactly planned appointments, no loss of information, early problem detection and flex¬ 
ible service. 

Fast handling of the service process without long waiting times for the service advisor, 
spare parts or vehicle. 

Departure from fixed items of inspection/repair, same high service quality, personal and 
individual advice. 



Connected Service offers new possibilities. Vehicle specific service requirements are auto¬ 
matically assessed. Fixed inspection/maintenance schedules will be replaced by more flex¬ 
ible maintenance services. 

The existing process will be further optimized, the appointment process will be faster and 
more effective and service advisors will have more time for individual consultation. 


3 

E65 Service 




Overview of Technical Aspects 

Connected Service is made up of several modules some of which are already available or 
are introduced starting with the E65. 

The modules are: 

Condition Based Service (CBS) 

CBS defines vehicle specific maintenance requirements by sensor based monitoring of 
engine oil, air conditioning micro-filters and the front and rear brake linings. In addition, time 
dependent monitoring of the engine oil, brake fluid and coolant. 

CBS also provides distance dependent monitoring of spark plugs as well as visual and 
functional checks. The service need display (SBA) is located in the instrument cluster and 
the details are displayed in the Control Display. 


Coded Keys 


The BMW keys have already been storing information for approximately 3 years. 
Since 1998 the chassis numberand since 1999 the chassis number, mileage and 
status of the Service Interval Display (SIA) is stored. 



42 - 15-24 


The E65 keys (FBD keys or remote control service keys) store more information, 
such as check control messages and all CBS relevant data like: mileage, oil 
condition, brake pad wear and microfilter condition. The key is the "business 
card" of the vehicle. 



42 - 15-18 


Key Reader 

The Key Reader allows readout of the data stored in the key when the vehicle is checked 
in for service. The required basic data of the vehicle and the data concerning all service 
requirements are automatically available. 


Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM) 

SAM is the software running at the service advisor work place. The software interprets and 
displays (processes) the data stored in the key. 


4 

E65 Service 



SAM includes two future extension levels: 


SAM 2 (Extension of SAM 1 - Future) 

Associated with TeleService 1, it allows the remote transmission of vehicle data stored in 
the keys and access to the central service databases (central repair history). 


SAM 3 (Extension of SAM 2 - Future) 

Associated with TeleService 2, it allows the dealerto communicate with the vehicle fortrou¬ 
bleshooting complex electronic problems. 


TeleService (Future) 

TeleService will be offered at two levels: 

TeleService 1 will allow automatic or manual data transfer by cellular phone from the 
vehicle to a TeleService center. The Service Call transmits wear and fault information. 
Emergency service calls may be placed to an assistance service center. The transmis¬ 
sion of information via S M S (Short M essage Service) will allow collection of data from 
customers. 

TeleService 2 will allow remote diagnosis of the vehicle electronics. Finally, Tele- 
Programming will allow the removal of faults, encoding and flash programming via 
the telephone interface. 


Transfer and Analysis of Vehicle Operation and Service Data (FASTA) 

FASTA increases product guality, gives input to Research and Development and is the basis 
for developing more accurate diagnostic tools and optimizing processes aimed at solving 
problems. In the workshop, the vehicle data is read with DISplus and transferred via net¬ 
work to the central FASTA vehicle related database at BMW. 

Starting with the E46, FASTA was implemented for the first time for a select number of 
dealers in Europe and in the USA. This pilot phase now is over and FASTA is now being 
used for the launch of all new models and as an integral part of quality control. 

Please refer to SIB #07 08 01 & # 07 07 01 for further details. 


5 

E65 Service 


Condition Based Service (CBS) 


Purpose of the System 

The current Service Interval Indicator systems (SIA3 and SIA4) determine maintenance 
intervals based on fuel consumption, which is done to assess the need to change the 
engine oil. The main determining factor for the maintenance interval currently is the condi¬ 
tion of the engine oil. Other maintenance needs, including the replacement of wearand tear 
items, are arranged to coincide with due engine oil changes. 

On the E65, B M W is measuring the need for maintenance of several critical components 
besides the engine oil, and independently of the engine oil. This would theoretically afford 
us the ability to bring a vehicle in for service whenever one of the measured components 
reguires maintenance or replacement. However, customers would be inconvenienced 
because the maintenance intervals would be dramatically reduced. 

Condition Based Service (CBS - further development of SIA) will strike a compromise 
between too freguent maintenance and too rigid intervals which call for the replacement of 
maintenance items that may still have substantial useful life left. The objective is to furnish 
economical maintenance by providing the ideal service for individual vehicles. 


Principle of Operation 


Sensor Based (CBS) Schedules 

The trend in the vehicle service business is to lengthen service intervals and reduce replace¬ 
ment of maintenance items. Additional measures have been taken to keep the vehicles in 
a roadworthy and comfortable condition. 

Usage dependent maintenance of select wear and tear items is detected by physical and 
virtual sensors. This means that, in cases where the wear is not measured directly, the ser¬ 
vice due date will be determined by using auxiliary variables such as mileage, vehicle per¬ 
formance, temperature, etc. 

Sensors built into certain components and control module algorithms take even more 
detailed account of the various conditions of vehicle use. The remaining times for selected 
maintenance tasks as well as any dates for State and/or Emissions Inspections (determined 
by the state in which the vehicle is registered) are individually displayed. 

6 

E65Service 




CBS thus determines the current and future maintenance requirements. The current status 
of Service items determined by CBS are shown in the Control Display. This data can also 
be read from the vehicle key by using the Key Reader, as the vehicle's current service sta¬ 
tus is automatically saved in the ignition key every time the key is used to operate the vehi¬ 
cle. 

3 sensors detect the following wear conditions: 

Engine oil (sensor) 

M icrofilter (virtual sensor) 

Front and rear brake linings (sensor as reference point) 

The instrument cluster collects the values from the wear detection control modules and 
manages the internally defined service repair schedule. Data exchange is carried out on the 
bus systems. 


Engine Oil Condition 

The condition of the engine oil is detected by the oil condition 
sensor. Simultaneously it also detects the engine oil level and 
the oil temperature. 

The engine oil condition sensor is monitored by the ECM and 
is mounted in the lower oil sump. 

The ECM contains an algorithm for evaluating the service due 
date. The following parameters are considered in the calcula¬ 
tion: 

The correct oil grade is installed Fuel consumption (ti signal) 

Oil level Mileage 

Oil temperature Date (time elapsed since the last oil change) 

Engine load 



The remaining life to the next service is forwarded from the ECM to the instrument cluster 
by a bus message when the ignition is switched "ON." When the "engine oil" service is due, 
it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 

Note: The instrument cluster and the ECM must not be replaced simultaneously, otherwise 
all current oil maintenance schedule data will be lost. 


7 

E65 Service 



Microfilters State of Wear 


t 


The air intake section of the air conditioning sys¬ 
tem includes a microfilter on the right and on the 
left. The microfilters (1) include an additional 
active carbon filter. 

The condition of the micro filter is detected by the 
IH KA control module. It does not include a phys¬ 
ical sensorto measure the level of contamination 
in the micro filter. 



The IH KA uses an algorithm to calculate this from the following parameters 


Ambient air temperature 
Heating use 
Driving speed 
M ileage 


Rain sensor signal 
Air recirculation settings 
Fan speed 

Date (time elapsed since the last oil change) 


The remaining life to the next service is forwarded by the IH KA control module to the instru¬ 
ment cluster by a bus message when the ignition is switched "ONWhen the "microfilter" 
service due date occurs, it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 

Note: The instrument cluster and the IH KA control module must not be replaced simulta¬ 
neously otherwise all current oil maintenance schedule data will be lost. 


Front and Rear Brake Linings State of Wear 

The brake lining state of wear on the front and rear axle is detected by 2-stage brake lin¬ 
ing wear sensors. These are located on the left front and right rear brake pads. 

The first stage (reference point for the calculation) of the wear indicator is activated when 
the thickness of the lining is 6 mm, and the second when it is down to 4 mm. 

The brake lining wear sensors voltage signals are monitored by the DSC control module. 
The brake lining wear sensor operates in the first stage as on current models and a resis¬ 
tor was added for the second stage. 


8 


E65 Service 



The algorithm is controlled by these two different voltages in the control module and deter¬ 
mines the residual thickness of the brake lining. The residual wear of the brake lining is cal¬ 
culated from the following input parameters: 


Wheel speed 
Brake disc temperature 
Braking frequency 


Brake pressure 
Braking time 
M ileage (travel distance) 


The residual wear of the brake lining on the front and rear axles is stored in the DSC con¬ 
trol module when the ignition is switched "OFF" and is used as the starting value the next 
time the vehicle is started. 

The residual distance to the next service is forwarded by the DSC control module to the 
instrument cluster by a bus message when the ignition is switched "ON." The "Front or 
Rear brake linings" service due date is displayed in the instrument cluster or the Control 
Display. 

Note: The instrument cluster and the DSC control module must not be replaced simulta¬ 
neously, otherwise all current oil maintenance schedule data will be lost. 


Internal Calculation of CBS Service Volumes 

For certain wear and tear items, sensors are not needed by the Condition Based Service. 
The wear items that are calculated and managed internally by the instrument cluster are: 

Brake fluid 
Coolant 
Spark plugs 

Visual and functional checks (vehicle check) 

Official State safety and/or emissions inspections 


The maintenance of these items is performed at fixed intervals. The residual wear or the 
remaining time to next service is calculated by the instrument cluster using the travel/time 
parameters of: mileage, current date and internal distance counter. When a service item is 
due, it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 

Note: The internal distance counter plays a particular role. Unlike the Time/Date, this 
counter cannot be set by the driver. 


9 


E65 Service 


However, battery down times (battery cut off by the distribution switch) also stop the trip 
distance counter which leads to longer time based service intervals. This will disrupt the 
CBS volumes for engine oil, microfilter, brake fluid and coolant. 

To correct this, the internal counter status must be reset by the DISplus. The wear depen¬ 
dent items internally calculated by the instrument cluster are stored in the instrument clus¬ 
ter and in the CAS control module (redundancy). 

Note: The instrument cluster and the CAS must not be replaced simultaneously otherwise 
all current oil maintenance schedule data will be lost. 


Service Indicators 

Regarding CBS, there are three different service indicators: 

Service need display (SBA) in the instrument cluster (base of speedometer) 
Check Control display in the instrument cluster (base of tachometer) 

CBS indicator in the Control Display 


Service Need Display (SBA) 

The Service Need Display is the evolution of the SIA4 Service Interval display. When KL15 
is "ON," the Service Need Display appears underthe speedometer in the instrument clus¬ 
ter for 10 seconds in the place where the fuel tank level is normally displayed. 


The first line corresponds to the mileage depen¬ 
dent service items. It specifies the mileage 
when the next service is due. If the mileage is 
exceeded (service overdue), it appears with a 
minus sign. 

The second line corresponds to the time 
dependent service items and is displayed by a 
clock symbol. It specifies the weeks/months/ 
years when the next service is due. If the service 
is overdue, it appears with a minus sign. 



42 - 15-01 


The actual service item (with additional information) can be viewed in the Control Display. 
10 

E65 Service 




Check Control Message 


The CBS produces a Check Control message that indicates the brake lining wear at the 
front or rear axle. When the brake linings are worn, this is shown as follows: 


The general brake warning lamp and the vari¬ 
able control lamp come on in the instrument 
cluster. 

The variable control lamp shows the symbol 
of a car on a lifting platform. 



In the base of the tachometer is a Check Control message that appears in short form: 
"Service, see Vehicle menu." For more detailed information, the user can access the 
Control Display. 


CBS Indicator in the Control Display 

The Control Display provides additional infor¬ 
mation on service and maintenance procedures 
by selecting the "OB data" menu. 

After releasing the Controller or returning to the 
central position, the "On-board data" menu 
appears. 

Turn the Controller to the left until the bottom 
left button is highlighted (vehicle symbol). 

Confirm your selection by pressing the 
Controller. 



42 - 15-19 


BC 


GC Tl; Arrival n.'ij.ui 

11:1 J'A-ui 

Lim it Beverly Hills 

'ft? n’i 1 : 

© Range 

j i y ir a 

EI3 Cgrwumpllgn 

ZZJnipjj 

tp4cd 

mil n 


42 - 15-02 


The CBS menu appears with the service items. 

The Control Display shows a list of selected ser¬ 
vice and maintenance procedures, as well as 
legally-mandated official inspections. 



42 - 15-03 


11 

E65 Service 




























Now you will see a service road in the Control 
Display. The service and maintenance proce¬ 
dures are displayed in different colors: 

Green: No service is currently required 

Yellow: Service daedline is approaching 

Red: Service deadline has already passed 



The service items highlighted in red with the highest priority appear in the bottom part of 
the display. 


You can scroll through the list of service and maintenance procedures from top to bottom 
by turning the Controller from right to left. You can leave the list of service items by press¬ 
ing the button with the Up arrow symbol. 


The service and maintenance items are 


1. Engine oil 

2. Front brake pads 

3. Rear brake pads 

4. Ventilation system microfilter 


5. Brake fluid 

6. Coolant 

7. Spark plugs 

8. Vehicle check 


9. State Inspection 
10. Emissions Inspection 


To display the service and maintenance item information in the Control Display turn the 
Controller to select the item and confirm your selection by pressing the Controller. 


For the "Spark plugs" service and maintenance 
item, for example, the following information 
appears: 

1. Service due 9000 mis, Have your BMW Center replace 
the spark plugs. 


Servian 9DOD mi* 

Have spark plugs replaced by your 
BMW center, 



42 - 15-05 


2. Button with arrow symbol 


You can exit this menu by pressing the button with the arrow symbol at the bottom left. The 
lowest menu automatically closes after a short time (timeout) if you do not touch the con¬ 
troller. In the same way, you can access the full text for each service item. 


12 

E65 Service 












To Enter and View Official Emissions and 
Vehicle Inspections Deadlines 

Select "Emissions inspection" or "State inspec¬ 
tion" and confirm your selection. 


Turn the Controller to select an inspection date 
for entry. 



42-15-06 


Confirm the inspection date. The first part of the 
date entry is activated - here month. 

Turn the Controller to reset. Press the Controller 
to store and move to the next entry - here year. 

The system adopts the date when you store 
your entry. Press the Controller to select "CON¬ 
FIRM". 


Nejfi (j smiisionE test 

11 .MOi 

J3 .CUM-lkh,' 


42-15-07 


Note: This function is only available if the time in the Control Display has been correctly set 


When the deadline for the next emissions or 
state vehicle inspection is approaching, the 
remaining distance and time will appear briefly 
in the base of the speedometer when the igni¬ 
tion is switched on "KL15" (as shown on the 
right). 


Resetting Service Items 



42-15-08 


When one or more service and maintenance 
items has been performed, these items must be 
reset (to the full service interval). This is 
achieved via the instrument cluster or DISplus. 

To reset a service item, press the reset button 
(1) on the top left side of the instrument cluster 
for > 10 seconds. 



This brings you directly to Reset mode 


KT-9270 


13 

E65 Service 




















A 4-line menu appears in the speedometer. At the top is the Back function, then the first 
three service and maintenance items sorted by priority. In addition, the residual wearorthe 
remaining time are specified (possibly with a minus sign). 

The "!" symbol means that you can reset this service and maintenance item, while a "0" 
indicates it is not able to be reset (the first 20% of the service interval is protected against 
premature/accidental reset). 

1. Service items (in the speedometer) 1 2 

2. Resettable service item (in the tach¬ 
ometer) 

a. Back 

b. Vehicle Check 

c. Micro filters 

d. Brake fluid 

e. Back 

f. RESET Vehicle Check 

KT-8988 

You can scroll through the service and maintenance items by pressing the reset button or 
the lower axial (FAS) button on the turn signal/high beam switch. When you have selected 
a service item, press the reset button for a few seconds to display a 2-line menu in the 
tachometer. 

The Back function is at the top and the resettable service and maintenance item is below 
it. Now select the service and maintenance item with the reset button (or the axial button) 
and press the reset button again for a few seconds. 

In a third menu line, the system confirms that the reset was successful. The whole interval 
for the service operation is highlighted in the Service Need Display. 



Using the DISplus, the CBS resetting procedure is found under: Service Functions - 
Maintenance - CBS Reset Two selections are possible: 


CBS Reset Selection 1 

Reset engine oil 
Reset microfilter 
Reset front brakes 
Reset rear brakes 
Reset vehicle check 


CBS Reset Selection 2 

Reset spark plugs 
Reset brake fluid 
Reset coolant 

Correction motor vehicle inspection 
Correction emissions inspection 


14 

E65 Service 



Key Reader 

The Key to a New Dimension 

Starting with the E65, BMW opens a new dimension in customer service. Using the Key 
Reader, Service Reception uses the data stored in the vehicle key to provide the following 
benefits: 

Accelerate and facilitate service consultation. 

Routine tasks, such as collecting vehicle data, w 
be minimized. 

After accessing the data stored in the vehicle's key, 
service and maintenance requirements are deter¬ 
mined for the individual vehicle (CBS). 

A customized service maintenance list will be print¬ 
ed out for specific operations (E65 no longer utilizes 

a conventional Service Maintenance Checklist). KT -9275 

The customer expects not only innovative products, but also a perfect mobility service. The 
Key Reader facilitates and accelerates service reception. As soon as the key is inserted, the 
reader accesses the stored vehicle data and the information is displayed on screen 
depending on the vehicle and model. Refer to SI #04 04 02 for additionalinformation. 



Key - Vehicle Data Holder and Business Card 


The Key Reader automatically collects service 
relevant data from the vehicle key. The data is 
transmitted from the CAS module to the key. 

The CAS is located in the instrument panel 
behind the key insertion unit (next to the 
start/stop button). 

The CAS requests data from the instrument 
clusteroverthe K-CAN Bus and stores the time 
when the data was last written to the key. 



KT-7836 


1. Start/stop button 2. Key insertion unit 


15 

E65 Service 


Under the following conditions, the data is re-transmitted to the key and stored there: 

Vehicle at standstill (no speed signal) 

Distance of at least 6 miles driven since last data storage 
Driving speed since last data storage exceeds 6 mph at least once 

Note: There are circumstances under which the current vehicle data is not stored in the key, 
for example: the customer has provided the spare key, which has not been used recently. 

For this reason, a service function is provided to store data in the key: 

Keep centeiiock toggle switch in the unlock position and use the start/stop but¬ 
ton to switch the vehicle on or off = Vehicle data is will be stored on the spare 
key. 

The following information is stored on the vehicle key: 


M odel Range M odel Year 

E46, E38, E39 2000 

E52, E53 


From E65 From series launch 


Information on the Vehicle Key 


General vehicle data: 

- Vehicle Identification Number 

- Current mileage 

- Build code 

General vehicle data: 

- Vehicle Identification Number 

- Current mileage 

- Vehicle type 
Other vehicle data: 

- Check Control message 

- Condition Based Service Data 


Notes: 


16 

E65 Service 











E65 Service Maintenance Checklist 


As previously explained, Condition Based Sen/ice will determine which of the possible 
maintenance sen/ices listed below are required for a particular service visit. Please refer to 
SI #00 05 01 that outlines the proper service procedures. 

Standard Operations 

o brief diagnostic test 

0 verify Check Control messages 
0 check indicator and warning lights 
o reset CBS display 

Engine Oil 

o Change engine oil and oil filter. We recommend BMW High Performance 5W-30 
Synthetic Oil, available under part number 07 51 0 017 866 

o after every 4th engine oil change: replace air cleaner filter element 

Microfilter 

o replace 

Front Brakes 

o Brake pads: replace; clean brake pad contact points in calipers 
o Brake discs: check surface and thickness 

Rear Brakes 

o Brake pads: replace; clean brake pad contact points in calipers 
o Brake discs: check surface and thickness 
0 Parking Brake: check condition, brake lining thickness and function 

Vehicle Check 

o check operation of horn, headlight flasher and hazard warning lights 

o check instrument and control lighting, and heater/AC blower 

o check lighting system: turn signals, back-up, license plate, interior (incl. map reading 
lights), glovebox, flashlight, luggage area lights 

o safety belts: check condition and function 


17 

E65 Service 


o check windshield wiper and jet positions 
o body: check for corrosion 

o tires: check tread depth, wear pattern, outer condition, inflation pressure (incl. spare) 
o battery: check state of charge ("magic eye") and recharge if reguired 
o power steering reservoir: check fluid level 

o visually inspect all SRS airbag units for torn covers, obvious damage or attachment of 
stickers 

0 function of rear-view mirrors 

o coolant: check fluid level and concentration 

o windshield washer system: check fluid level and protection level 

o brake system connections and lines: check for leaks, damage and correct positioning 

o underbody: all visible parts incl. transmission, rearaxle, fuel tank, exhaust system: check 
for damage, leaks, corrosion 

o steering components: check for clearance, leaks, damage and wear 

o parking brake: check function 

o Final Inspection: road test with check of 
brakes 
steering 

shock absorbers (external) 
transmission 


Brake Fluid: replace every 2 years 

Coolant: replace every 4 years 

Spark Plugs: replace every 100,000 miles 

Automatic Transmission: replace ATF every 100,000 miles 


18 

E65 Service 


Service Booklet 

The Service booklet provides evidence of maintenance work. The innovation introduces a 
new appearance in the service and maintenance items. As in the past, it will show which 
service item and the mileage when the service is performed. The Retail Centerappears with 
date, stamp and signature. This documentation must be checked in the "yes" or "no" to 
record and verify the indications in the Control Display (CBS). 



KT-9282 


Notes: 


19 

E65 Service 























Review Questions 

1. Describe the sensor based service and maintenance items. 


2. List the internally calculated service and maintenance items 


3. What are the service indicators 7 


4. How is the Condition Based Service information extracted from the Control Display 7 


5. List the E65 key information read by the Key Reader: 


20 

E65 Service 

























