Table of Contents 


Condition Based Service - CBS 


Subject Page 

Introduction 2 

Purpose of the System 3 

Principle of Operation 3 

Service Indications 5 

Resetting Service Items 

- Using the Instrument Cluster 8 

Setting/Resetting Service Items 

- Using the DISplus/GTl 10 

CBS Handover Inspection.10 

CBS Correction Tester Data.15 

CBS Reset.16 

CBS Correction Vehicle Data.19 

Review Questions 20 














Condition Based Service - CBS 


Model: E65 - 745i / E66 - 745Li 

Production Date: 11/2001 - E65, 03/2002 - E66 


Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

Describe the sensor based service items. 

List the internally calculated service items. 

Identify the service indications. 

Demonstrate how to extract Condition Based Service information from the Control 
Display. 

Properly program the State and Emission Inspection dates using the Control Display 
and the DISplus/GTl. 

Reset Condition Based Service and maintenance items using the DIS plus/GTl. 


2 


CBS 




Condition Based Service (CBS) 


Purpose of the System 

The current Service Interval Indicator systems (SIA3 and SIA4) determine maintenance 
intervals based on fuel consumption, which is done to assess the need to change the 
engine oil. The main determining factor for the maintenance interval currently is the condi¬ 
tion ofthe engine oil. Other maintenance needs, including the replacement of wearand tear 
items, are arranged to coincide with due engine oil changes. 

On the E65/E66, BMW is measuring the need for maintenance of several critical compo¬ 
nents besides the engine oil, and independently ofthe engine oil. This would theoretically 
afford us the ability to bring a vehicle in for service whenever one ofthe measured compo¬ 
nents requires maintenance or replacement. However, customers would be inconvenienced 
because the maintenance intervals would be dramatically reduced. 

Condition Based Service (CBS - furtherdevelopment of SIA)strikes a compromise between 
too frequent maintenance and too rigid intervals which call for the replacement of mainte¬ 
nance items that may still have substantial useful life left. The objective is to furnish eco¬ 
nomical maintenance by pmviding the ideal service for individual vehicles. 


Principle of Operation 
Sensor Based CBS Service Items 

The trend in the vehicle service business is to lengthen service intervals and reduce replace¬ 
ment of maintenance items. Additional measures have been taken to keep the vehicles in 
a roadworthy and comfortable condition. 

Usage dependent maintenance of select wear and tear items is detected by physical and 
virtual sensors. This means that, in cases where the wear is not measured directly, the ser¬ 
vice due date will be determined by using auxiliary variables such as mileage, vehicle per¬ 
formance, temperature, etc. 

Sensors built into certain components and control module algorithms take even more 
detailed account of the various conditions of vehicle use. The remaining times for selected 
maintenance tasks as well as any dates for State and/or Emissions Inspections (determined 
by the state in which the vehicle is registered) are individually displayed. 


3 

CBS 



CBS determines the current and future maintenance requirements. The current status of 
Service items determined by CBS are shown in the Control Display. This data can also be 
read from the vehicle key by using the Key Reader, as the vehicle's current service status is 
automatically saved in the ignition key every time the key is used to operate the vehicle. 

Three sensors detect the following wear conditions: 

Engine oil (sensor) 

M icrofilter (virtual sensor) 

Front and rear brake linings (sensor as reference point) 

The instrument cluster collects the values from the wear detection control modules and 
manages the internally defined service schedule. Data exchange is carried out on the bus 
systems. 

Internal Calculation of CBS Service Items 

For certain wear and tear items, sensors are not needed by the Condition Based Service. 
The wear items that are calculated and managed internally by the instrument cluster are: 

Brake fluid Visual and functional checks (vehicle check) 

Coolant Official State Safety and/or Emissions Inspections 

Spark plugs 

The maintenance of these items is performed at fixed intervals. The residual wear or the 
remaining time to next service is calculated by the instrument cluster using the travel/time 
parameters of: mileage, current date and internal distance counter. When a service item is 
due, it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 

Note: The internal distance counter plays a particular role. Unlike the Time/Date, this 
counter cannot be set by the driver. 

However, battery down times (battery cut off by the distribution switch) also stop the trip 
distance counter which leads to longer time based service intervals. This will dismpt the 
CBS volumes for engine oil, microfilter, brake fluid and coolant 

To correct this, the internal counter status must be reset by the DISplus/GTl. The wear 
dependent items internally calculated by the instrument cluster are stored in the instrument 
cluster and in the CAS control module (redundancy). 

Note: The instrument cluster and the CAS must not be replaced simultaneously, otherwise 
all current oil maintenance schedule data will be lost. 

4 


CBS 



Service Indications 


Regarding CBS, there are three different service indicators: 

Service need display (SBA) in the instrument cluster (base of speedometer) 

Check Control display in the instrument cluster (base of tachometer) 

CBS indicator in the Control Display 

Service Need Display (SBA) 

The Service Need Display is the evolution of the SIA4 Service Interval display. When KL15 
is "ON," the Service Need Display appears under the speedometer in the instrument clus¬ 
ter for 10 seconds in the place where the fuel tank level is normally displayed. 

The first line corresponds to the mileage depen¬ 
dent service items. It specifies the mileage when 
the next service is due. If the mileage is exceed¬ 
ed (service overdue), it appears with a minus 
sign. 

The second line corresponds to the time depen¬ 
dent service items and is displayed by a clock 
symbol. It specifies the weeks/months/years 
when the next service is due. If the service is 
overdue, it appears with a minus sign. 

The actual service item (with additional information) can be viewed in the Control Display. 



42 - 15-01 


Check Control Message 


The CBS produces a Check Control message that indicates the brake lining wear at the 
front or rear axle. When the brake linings are worn, this is shown as follows: 


The general brake warning lamp and the vari¬ 
able control lamp come on in the instrument 
cluster. 

The variable control lamp shows the symbol 
of a car on a lifting platform. 



A brief Check Control message appears: "Service, see Vehicle menu." For more detailed 
information, the user can access the Control Display. 


5 

CBS 





CBS Indicator in the Control Display 


The Control Display provides additional informa¬ 
tion on service and maintenance procedures by 
selecting the "OB data" menu. 


After releasing the Controller or returning to the 
central position, the "On-board data" menu 
appears. 



Turn the Controller to the left until the bottom left 
button is highlighted (vehicle symbol). 


Confirm your selection by pressing the 
Controller. 



42 - 15-02 


The CBS menu appears with the service items 


The Control Display shows a list of selected ser¬ 
vice and maintenance procedures, as well as 
legally-mandated official inspections. 


Now you will see a service road in the Control 
Display. The service and maintenance proce¬ 
dures are displayed in different colors: 

Green: No service is currently required 

Yellow: Service deadline is approaching 

Red: Service deadline has already passed 



42 - 15-03 


(Check 


Spark plugs 


S BC 


42-15-U4 



The service items highlighted in red with the highest priority appear in the bottom part of 
the display. 


6 

CBS 


















































































You can scroll through the list of service and maintenance procedures from top to bottom 
by turning the Controller from right to left. You can leave the list of service items by press¬ 
ing the button with the Up arrow symbol. 

The service and maintenance items are: 


1. Engine oil 

2. Front brake pads 

3. Rear brake pads 

4. Ventilation system microfilter 


5. Brake fluid 

6. Coolant 

7. Spark plugs 

8. Vehicle check 


9. State Inspection 
10. Emissions Inspection 


To display the service and maintenance item information in the Control Display, turn the 
Controller to select the item and confirm your selection by pressing the Controller. 

For the "Spark plugs" service and maintenance 
item, for example, the following information 
appears: 

1. Service due 9000 mis, Have your BMW Center replace 
the spark plugs. 

2. Button with arrow symbol 


You can exit this menu by pressing the button with the arrow symbol at the bottom left. The 
lowest menu automatically closes after a short time (timeout) if you do not touch the con¬ 
troller. In the same way, you can access the full text for each service item. 


r --- 111 1 1 i 


Service 9000 mis 

Have spark plugs replaced by your 
BMW center. 



42 - 15-05 


To Enter and View Official Emissions and Vehicle Inspections Deadlines 


If the E65 customer lives in a state which 
requires regular State and/or Emissions 
Inspections, these must be programmed into 
the vehicle's Condition Based Service System 
using the Controller as follows: 

Select "Emissions Inspection" or "State inspec¬ 
tion" and confirm your selection by pressing 
"down" on the controller. 



7 


CBS 











Turn the Controller to select an inspection date 
for entry. 

Confirm the inspection date. The first part of the 
date entry is activated - here month. 

Turn the Controller to reset. Press the Controller 
to store and move to the next entry - here year. 

The system adopts the date when you store 
your entry. Press the Controller to select "CON¬ 
FIRM". 


i 


Next emissions test 

n .2000 



42-15-07 


Note: This function is only available if the time in 
the Control Display has been correctly set. 

When the deadline for the next emissions or 
state vehicle inspection is approaching, the 
remaining distance and time will appear briefly 
in the base of the speedometer when the igni¬ 
tion is switched on "KL15" (as shown on the 
right). 



42-15-08 


Resetting Service Items - Using the 
Instrument Cluster 


When one or more service and maintenance 
items has been performed, these items must be 
reset (to the full service interval). This is 
achieved via the instrument cluster or DIS plus. 

To reset a service item using the instrument 
cluster, press the reset button (1) on the top left 
side of the instrument clusterfor > 10 seconds. 



KT-9270 


This brings you directly to Reset mode 


Notes: 










A 4-line menu appears in the speedometer. At the top is the Back function, then the first 
three service and maintenance items sorted by priority. In addition, the residual wear or the 
remaining time are specified (possibly with a minus sign). 


The "!" symbol means thatyou can resetthis service and maintenance item, while a "0" indi¬ 
cates it is not able to be reset (the first 20% of the service interval is protected against pre¬ 
mature/accidental reset). 


1. Service items (in the speedometer) 

2. Resettable service item (in the tach¬ 
ometer) 

a. Back 

b. Vehicle Check 

c. Micro filters 

d. Brake fluid 

e. Back 

f. RESET Vehicle Check 



KT-8988 


You can scroll through the service and maintenance items by pressing the reset button or 
the lower axial (FAS) button on the turn signal/high beam switch. When you have selected 
a service item, press the reset button for a few seconds to display a 2-line menu in the 
tachometer. 


The Back function is at the top and the resettable service and maintenance item is below 
it. Now select the service and maintenance item with the reset button (or the axial button) 
and press the reset button again for a few seconds. 

In a third menu line, the system confirms that the reset was successful. The whole interval 
for the service operation is highlighted in the Service Need Display. 


Notes: 


9 

CBS 









Setting/Resetting Service Items - Using the DISplus/GTl 


E65/E66 Vehicle Preparation and Maintenance Requirements settings of CBS are per¬ 
formed using the DISplus/GTl. This also includes programming the phone numbers forthe 
customer's preferred BMW center and BMW of North America's Customer Relations into 
the BMW ASSIST menu of the Control Display. Refer to SIB #84 14 01. 


CBS Handover Inspection 

The CBS handover inspection is 
for the deletion of past data in the 
vehicle and reconfiguring the 
vehicle for latest data (updating 
after a service). 

The CBS resetting procedure is 
found under: Service Functions - 
Maintenance - CBS. 

Select the CBS handover inspec¬ 
tion and press <Test Plan>. 
Highlight the procedure bar and 
press the <Green Arrow > to the 
right. 



The CBS handover inspection 
includes: 

1. Check status, telephone numbers 

2. Check status, vehicle inspection * 

3. Check status, exhaust emission * 

4. Check Tester data 

5. Write trip odometer 

6. Write data 

7. Enter date of first registration 

8. Activate/deactivate Emission test * 

9. Activate/deactivate vehicle (State - 
Safety) Inspection * 

10. Deactivate transport mode 



*Set to coincide with the customer's state requirements 


10 

CBS 





1. The first step involves the status of telephone numbers if the customer has the E65 

CPT8000 telephone installed. For additional details refer to SIB #84 14 01 

When installing an E65 telephone and priorto customer delivery, the customer's local BMW 
dealer telephone number and the BMW Customer Relations (or Assistance) telephone 
number should be programmed into the vehicle in order to enable all features of the B M W 
mobile phone. 

Note: The Roadside Assistance and the SOS/Emergency telephone numbers are prepro¬ 
grammed into the Telematics Control Unit (TCU). 

The programming of these telephone numbers is carried out in two parts. The first part pro¬ 
grams the numbers to the DISplus, the second part transfers the numbers to the telephone 
handset (if the handset is used in another vehicle, the numbers go with the phone). Unless 
the numbers are changed for any reason, programming the numbers to the DISplus is nor¬ 
mally a "one time" procedure. These numbers are retained in the DIS tester for future tele¬ 
phone installations. 



The BMW dealer telephone number can be entered here or changed later on in the CBS 
correction, Tester data. 

Note: When entering a number, the "+" should preface an international phone number only. 


11 


CBS 




2 . & 3. This screen allows you to 
check the current Vehicle 
Inspection(s) due date, or it may 
be necessary to reset to coincide 
with the customer's state require¬ 
ments. 

If a customer desires, the Vehicle 
Inspection due dates can be 
deactivated. 

4. The next step is vital to syn¬ 
chronize the correct time and 
date from the DISplus/GTl with 
the vehicle. 



The internal vehicle trip odometer 
and vehicle data (5. & 6.) are 
coordinated with the internal 
Tester data. 

This is importantfortime/distance 
based service items that are man¬ 
aged by the instrument cluster. 

If this is found to be incorrect, go 
back to the Administration page 
of DISplus/GTl (main menu) and 
reset the current date and time. 



Notes: 


12 


CBS 





7. The first date of registration 
must be entered here. This will 
provide helpful verification for 
future service and warranty con¬ 
cerns. 



By selecting <Yes>, the first of 
three screens is shown on the 
right. 

This screen prompts you to input 
the numerical day of registration 
(1-31). 

The second screen prompts you 
to input the numerical month of 
registration (1-12). 

The third screen prompts you to 
input the numerical year of regis¬ 
tration (last 2 digits of the year, for 
example: 02 for 2002). 



Notes: 


13 

CBS 







8. This screen will activate/deacti¬ 
vate the displayed Emission 
Inspection date. 

This will allow you to provide the 
"next" date that the Emission 
Inspection will be due as shown in 
the 5BA (base of the speedome¬ 
ter) and Control Display. 

If a customer desires, the Vehicle 
Emission Inspection due date can 
be deactivated. 


The first of two screens is shown 
on the right. 

This screen prompts you to input 
the numerical month of the next 
Emission Inspection (for example: 

08 for August). 

The second screen prompts you 
to input the numerical year of the 
next Emission Inspection (last 2 
digits of the year, for example: 04 
for 2004). 

The following is a repeat of the 
above procedure (inputting) 

reg a rd ing S tate Inspection 

9. This step will activate/deactivate the displayed State Inspection date. This will allow you 
to provide the "next" date that the State Inspection will be due as shown in the SBA (base 
of the speedometer) and Control Display. If a customerdesires, the Vehicle State Inspection 
due date can be deactivated. 

The first of two screens will be shown. This screen prompts you to input the numerical 
month of the next State Inspection. The second screen prompts you to input the numeri¬ 
cal year of the next State Inspection (same process as the Emission Inspection). 

14 




CBS 












10. This procedure is necessary 
for deactivating the Transport 
mode and must be performed 
before the vehicle is delivered to 
the customer. 

Many of the E65/E66 features 
(unnecessary during transporting) 
are "locked out". This includes: 
limited window operation (driver's 
side only), radio, Control Display, 
interior lights, a/c, etc. 

Select <Yes> to terminate 
Transport mode and the vehicle 
will resume normal operation. 



CBS Correction Tester Data 

The CBS correction tester data allows "guick access" to create or change the basic data 
(stored in the tester) forthe CBS handover inspection. When the CBS handover inspection 
is carried out, the changed data in the tester is automatically transferred to the vehicle. The 
procedure is found under: Service Functions - Maintenance - CBS correction, Tester data. 

The CBS correction tester data includes: 


1. Change telephone numbers 

- Mobile Service 

- Customer Hotline 

- Local Dealer 

2. State Inspection presettings 

- Display/activate State Inspection 
(interval) 

- Display/deactivate State Inspection 


3. Emission Inspection preset¬ 
tings 

- Display/activate Emission Inspection 
(interval) 



15 

CBS 


- Display/deactivate Emission Inspection 





CBS Reset 


The CBS Reset procedure provides resetting of the individual Condition Based Service 
items The items that require a reset depend on the individual vehicle usage Whenoneor 
more service and maintenance items has been performed, these items must be reset. This 
was previously shown using the instrument cluster. 

Using the DISplus/GTl, the CBS Reset sets the selected service and maintenance items to 
100% (full service interval) and displays a service counterto indicate how many times these 
items have been reset. The procedure is found under: Sen/ice Functions - Maintenance - 
CBS reset. 

Select the CBS Reset and press <Test Plan>. Highlight the procedure bar and press the 
<Green Arrow > to the right. 


The first step is vital to synchro¬ 
nize the correct time and date 
from the DISplus/GTl with the 
vehicle. 


The internal vehicle trip odometer 
and vehicle data are coordinated 
with the internal Tester data. 


This is important for time/dis¬ 
tance based service items that 
are managed by the instrument 
cluster. 



After accepting by pressing <Yes> or <No> and entering corrections to the date and time, 
select the <Green Arrow > to the right. 

If this is found to be incorrect, go back to the Administration page of DISplus/GTl (main 
menu) and reset the current date and time. 


Note: The original values of the individual CBS service and maintenance items are deleted 
during the reset procedure. 

16 

CBS 




This screen displays the following service and maintenance items: 

Usage dependent wear and tear items are monitored by physical and virtual sensors. In 
cases where the wear is not measured directly, the service due date will be determined by 
using auxiliary variables such as mileage, vehicle performance, temperature, etc. 

1. CBS reset selection 1 

- Reset engine oil 

- Reset microfilter 

- Reset front brakes 

- Reset rear brakes 

- Reset vehicle check 



Certain wear and tear items are calculated and managed internally by the instrument clus¬ 
ter (time and mileage) for Condition Based Service. 

2. CBS reset selection 2 

- Reset spark plugs 

- Reset brake fluid 

- Reset coolant 

- Correction Vehicle State Inspection 

- Correction Emission Inspection 

3. End 


17 


CBS 






















By entering selection <1> and the 
<Green Arrow> to the right, the 
items are displayed in percent¬ 
age. 

By selecting the number < 3 > and 
the <Green Arrow> to the right, 
you can individually reset the ser¬ 
vice and maintenance item (front 
brakes) after the service was per¬ 
formed. 

The reset example shown on the 
rig ht d is p lays that the fro nt b ra kes 
have just been replaced (100) [% ]. 

In addition, the number of times 
the item was reset is also dis¬ 
played / (3), indicating three 
times. 



By entering selection < 2 > and the 
<Green Arrow> to the right, the 
items are displayed in percent¬ 
age. 

By selecting the <number> and 
the <Green Arrow> to the right, 
you can individually reset the ser¬ 
vice and maintenance item after 
the service was performed. 

In addition, the Vehicle State/ 
Emissions Inspections can be 
verified and corrected. 


: :: u: 


fi¬ 

ll 


£4 ■ ■ VIM H 


¥ -LI I 




srcpfe ,-, J n]niri - I +.F“In r 

[iwnn 

iwirori) 

' El IJU 

3 5 [outfunn nipicKr: 1 IIKA 
I 1 F!Ir ■■ Ktm OH 


Notes: 


18 

CBS 






After verifying/correcting the data, 
this screen is displayed to confirm 
the correct date and time is set in 
the DIS plus/GTl. 

To properly complete the CBS 
Reset, the date and time of ser¬ 
vice/maintenance will be trans¬ 
ferred to the vehicle. This includes 
setting the day counter and the 
date. 

The transfer is completed by: 
selecting OKAY (in setting status). 


CBS Correction Vehicle Data 

The CBS correction vehicle data allows "quick access" to correct (if improperly input) or 
change the basic data (stored in the vehicle) for the CBS reset. This includes decreasing 
the use percentage and number of resets when a reset was mistakenly performed. When 
the CBS reset is carried out, the changed data in the tester is automatically transferred to 
the vehicle. The procedure is found under: Service Functions - Maintenance - CBS correc¬ 
tion, vehicle data. 

1. CBS correction vehicle data selection 1 

- Correction engine oil 

- Correction microfilter 

- Correction front brakes 

- Correction rear brakes 

- Correction vehicle check 

2. CBS correction vehicle data selection 2 

- Correction spark plugs 

- Correction brake fluid 

- Correction coolant 

- Correction Vehicle State Inspection 

- Correction Emission Inspection 

3. CBS correction vehicle data selection 3 

- Write telephone numbers 

- Correction date of first registration 




19 

CBS 


4. End 






Review Questions 

1. List the internally calculated service and maintenance items 


2. What are the service indicators 7 


3. How is the Condition Based Service information extracted from the Control Display 7 


4. How many steps are required to properly program the Emission Inspection dates using 

the DISplus/GTl?_ 

5. When performing a CBS Reset after replacing the rear brake pads using the D IS plus/ 

GT1, what information is displayed next to that item (line 4.) 7 _ 


20 

CBS 



