Table of Contents 


CIP - Coding, Individualization, Programming 


Subject Page 

Introduction 2 

Purpose of the System 3 

Program Start 3 

General Rules for Programming.4 

Vehicle & Key Memory 5 

Programming 7 

Airbag Reactivation Procedure.7 

Resetting and Correcting CBS Data.7 

Review Questions 9 












CIP - Coding, Individualization, Programming 


Model: E65 - 745i / E66 - 745Li 

Production Date: 11/2001 - E65, 03/2002 - E66 


Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

List preconditions to perform CIP on a vehicle. 

Understand the VKM "mask" to perform settings. 

Perform Programming using CIP. 

Perform control module initialization after Programming. 

List the additional reference information needed for the rear seat side-impact airbag 
Activation/Deactivation. 


2 


CIP 




Purpose of The System 


The "CIP" program was launched with the release of the DISplus CD - version 28.0. CIP 
Programming is now contained on a separate CD forthe DISplus/GTl and will be updated 
as an individual CD. For installation instructions refer to 51 B09 03 02. Before proceeding 
on a vehicle, you must always refer to the latest version of SI B09 05 01 for additional 
details and updated information! 

CIP stands forCoding, Individualization, Programming. 

Coding - Updates and aligns (vehicle & country specific) the software resident in the con¬ 
trol modules. 

Individualization - Vehicle and Key specific settings are changed according to customer 
requests and stored in the Vehicle & Key Memory. 

Programming - Data/programs in the control modules are activated (new - basic mod¬ 
ule) or updated (including coding to the specific vehicle). 

New Developments: 

Graphic user interface, browser-based (clear display and onscreen prompting). 

Integrated compatibility and management program (automatic prompting in the selection 
of hardware/software which must be installed/altered). 

Integration, authentication and signature (protection against unauthorized access to 
control modules). 


Programming 

General Rules for Programming 

The procedure for programming control modules on E65/E66 vehicles is controlled by the 
CIP program. The following preconditions must be followed when using the CIP program: 

First connect the vehicle to an approved BMW battery charger (Deutronic Automotive 
Power Processor - follow the instructs ns found in SI B04 11 02) and never disconnect 
during programming. This charger must be connected in PS Power Supply Mode. 

The date and time must be set correctly in the DISplus/GTl ("Admimstration"-button on 
initial startup screen to check and modify). 


3 

CIP 



General Rules for Programming 




Diagnostic head must be hard wired to the 
network drop to ensure uninterrupted pro 
gramming. (do not use radio connections) 

Using DISplus: 

1. DISplus 

2. SI LAN cable 

3. Diagnostic head 

4. DK LAN cable 


Using GT1: 

1. GTl 

2. LAN Adapter BT 1:1 

3. SI LAN cable 

4. DK LAN cable 

5. Diagnostic head 


Park the vehicle where it does not obstruct (programming may take up to 4 hours). 

All control modules must be installed and functional. 

Perform a fault memory deletion with "QuickClearing" 

Readout and print Individualization settings with the CIP Program (Vehicle & Key M emory 
will be deleted during programming) 

Read out ( and print if applicable) Instrument Cluster/Control Display ( mileage, Condition 
Based Service data, radio station settings, etc.). 

Engine must be off and cooled down (trans. oil temp, must be < 85 s C). 

Transmission in P or N position, vehicle must not move. 

Coding/Programming all control modules ( with the ignition on - KL15), except the CAS. 
Coding/Programming the CAS module with the ignition switched "off" and key removed. 
Switch off all electrical consumers. 

Do not move seats, trunk lid, steering wheel, locks, windows, etc. 

Warning: wipers can move unexpectedly (make sure path is clear and moisten glass). 
Navigation CD V19.0 must be available when programming with CIP. 

Print as you go for all CIP procedures (Measures Plan, Program abort, multiple attempts). 

Initializing control modules (indicated on screen). 

Re-establishing customer VKM settings overwritten during Coding/Program (reverts to 
factory settings). 


4 


CIP 





Program Start 

Using DISplus or GT1 with the diagnostic head 
connected to the vehicle, select "Coding/ 
Programming" from the start mask. 

When the program is started for the first time 
after a CD installation, there is a longer wait time 
(approx. 90 seconds). 


Start CIP by selecting "8 C IP", then press the 
forward arrow. The initial CIP screen is then 
displayed. 


Note: After startup, CIP determines the vehicle order (VO) previously known as the Central 
Coding Key (ZCS) and records which control modules are installed in the vehicle. The vehi¬ 
cle order is not displayed on the screen. 


Vehicle & Key Memory 

Before programming Vehicle & Key Memory (VKM), the customer must be informed about 
the possible choices before delivery by filling out a Customer selection form {attachment#6 
of SI B09 05 01) 

The VKM screen displays all available VKM functions, their current settings, and the facto¬ 
ry default setting. Please refer to Attachment #5 ofSIBOQ 05 01 for a list of available VKM 
settings for CIP. 

Note: VKM Values can only be determined by CIP if all VKM relevant control modules are 
OK (found and no faults). A "Short Test" is important, to verify that all control modules are 
found before proceeding with coding or programming. 

Press the "CKM" button at the screen with the text "Program SELECTION: Load soft¬ 
ware, Car & Key Memory (CKM )" as shown above. 


5 

CIP 





1. Not Active (some columns have 
selections for individual Key Memory) 

2. Active (some columns have selections 
for individual Key Memory) 

3. Symbol for factory setting 

4. Function groups (quick path - Antitheft, 
Central Locks, Lights, etc.) 

5. Encode car 


CIP reads out the data and displays a list of the current settings with alternative settings. 
Additional system setting details can be activated by highlighting the subgroup heading 
bar. 

Select the desired change by touching the "active" / "not active" selection box ( accord¬ 
ing to the Customer Selection Form ) or factory default settings 

Press "Encode Car" to start the coding operation when all of the selections have been 
made. The save newly set function screen appears, press "Back" if additional changes 
are reguired, 

or: 

Press "Save" and a screen is displayed with green check marks (status report) to con¬ 
firm the VKM selections have been programmed/selected correctly. 

Press "Finish" to return to the selection screen, with the new selections marked accord¬ 
ingly (status of the current VKM settings). It is recommended to "Print" the display. 

Press "End" and "Termin. CIP" to terminate VKM and the "Coding/Programming" 
start mask is displayed. 



1 ——— i» 



43 - 02-03 

Functions and Settings in VKM 


Notes: 


6 

CIP 







Programming 

From the initial CIP start screen: 

Press "Load SW" with the text "Program 
SELECTION:" 

Use the latest copy of SI B09 05 01 
“Programming/Coding Explanations" to 
perform the Programming procedure. 
This will provide the most current details 
and additional information. 



Airbag Reactivation Procedure 

All airbag reactivation/deactivation on E65/E66 vehicles is performed using CIP. Referto the 
following SIBs for details: 

SIB #72 03 99 - Rear Airbag Activation/Deactivation Procedure. 

SIB #72 08 97 - Deactivation of Airbags. 

Note: A Deactivation/Activation code is required for rear airbags (available from the 
Technical Hotline). 


Resetting and Correcting CBS Data 

Correction of implausible CBS values is a (2) step process. First the value must be reset, 
then a correction factor must be applied. 

Step 1: 

This is found under Diagnosis - Function Selection - Service Functions - Maintenance - 
CBS Reset - Test Plan. 

At the CBS reset screens, select in turn the individual parameters with implausible CBS 
values and follow the on-screen instructions to reset them. 

Exit CBS. 


7 


CIP 



Step 2: 

This is found under Diagnosis - Function Selection - Sen/ice Functions - Maintenance - 
CBS Correction vehicle data - Test Plan. 

At the CBS correction screens, select in turn the individual CBS parameters to be cor¬ 
rected and follow the on-screen instructions to correct them. Refer to attachment #4 of 
SI B09 05 01 "CBS Correction" for the first correction factor(s) to be used. 

Note for example that if "Engine oil" is to be reset, this must be reset first, followed by 
other parameters in the order they are displayed on the screen. If this order is not fol¬ 
lowed, corrupted values will result. 

Exit CBS correction. 


Notes: 



Review Questions 

1. List preconditions to perform CIP on a vehicle 


2. Why do some of the VKM function groups have five columns of selection settings 7 


3. After installing a new control module and reviewing the control module selection list, con¬ 
trol modules highlighted in orange indicate: 

4. After completion of coding, the status report displays a red "X" to the left of a control 
module. What is your next action 7 


5. When do you need to perform control module initialization 7 


6. What additional references do you need for the rear seat side-impact airbag Activation/ 
Deactivation function 7 


9 

CIP 



