Table of Contents 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 

Subject Page 

MOST Technology 3 

MOST Multimedia Network 3 

Data Transport 5 

Optical Bus 6 

Optical Transmitter. 6 

Optical Receiver. 6 

Control Unit Connections 7 

Interfaces.8 

Control Display. 9 

ASK . 9 

CDC .10 

Navigation .10 

Slave Control Units .10 

Component Locations 10 

Communication Direction 11 

Diagnosis . 12 

Testing . 15 

Status Wakeup 18 

Review Questions 19 


Initial Print Date:03/02 


Revision Date:08/02 






















MOST Bus Diagnosis 
Model: E65 - E66 

Production Date: Start of Production 


Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

Understand the reason for optical busses. 

Know how optical busses transfer information. 

Relate the direction and flow of information on the MOST Bus 
Perform diagnosis and troubleshooting of MOST Bus. 


2 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 




System Overview 
MOST Technology 

Until very recently, only very few entertainment-related control units were networked. In the 
course of the development, the number of components increased continuously. 

In addition, the scope of functions of individual components has been extended consider¬ 
ably. In particular, however, completely new logical networking means that all the compo¬ 
nents are growing to become a system: individual functions work together and produce a 
high-guality overall system. This results in significant growth in system complexity. 

This new dimension of system complexity can no longer be managed using the existing bus 
systems. 



MOST Multimedia Network 

MOST technology meets 2 essential reguirements: 

1. The MOST bus transports control data as well as data from audio, video, navigation and 
otherservices (SMS =Short Message Service, TMC =Traffic Message Channel, in othermar- 
kets). 

2. M OST technology provides a logical framework model for control of the variety and com¬ 
plexity of data: the MOST Application Framework. The MOST Application Framework 
organizes the functions of the overall system. 

MOST is able to control and dynamically manage functions that are distributed in the vehi¬ 
cle. 


3 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 




Principle of a Multimedia Network 

An important feature of a multimedia network is that it transports not only control data and 
sensor data, e.g. like the CAN bus and I bus (instrumentation bus). A multimedia network 
can also carry digital audio and video signals and graphics as well as other data services. 

Information transmitted on MOST network 



Advantages of the Multimedia Network 

All data can be transported across a shared network. This offers the following benefits: 

Additional signal wiring harnesses are eliminated. 

The only addition many control units need is the power supply. 

As each participant (= each control unit) has access to all the 
data, cost-intensive assemblies for signal distribution can be 
eliminated. 

Different data formats also have different requirements for transmission regarding both 
mechanism (synchronous or asynchronous data) and the required band-width 
(baud or bits/second). The M OST format is able to meet these requirements to a satisfac¬ 
tory extent. 


4 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



Functional Description 
Data Transport 

MOST currently offers a band-width of 22.5 M bits/s . In the next generation, the band-width 
will be increased to 50 and then later to 150 Mbits/s (as of approx. 2002). 

In order to meet the different requirements of the applications regarding data transport, 
each MOST message is divided into three parts: 

Control data 


Asynchronous data: e.g. navigation system, arrow 
representation 

Synchronous data: e.g. audio, video signals 


Data Transport on the MOST 


22.5MBit; i 


A message over the MOST 



44.1 MHz 



Different data is "packaged" 
and then sent as one mes¬ 
sage to be "unwrapped" by 
next device on the MOST 
ring. 


Control Data Asynchronous Synchronous data 

700 kB/s Data 

2700 Messages e.g Navigation (arrow Audio 

display) Video 


KT-9388 


The control data controls the functions and devices in the network. The information can be 
compared to CAN bus data. 


The control data has a band-width of 700 Kbit/s. That corresponds to around 2700 mes¬ 
sages per second. 

For the data transmission of synchronous and/or asynchronous data, there is a total of 60 
bytes. The limit is variable: e.g. 20 bytes of synchronous data and 40 bytes of asynchro¬ 
nous data. 


5 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



Optical Bus 

The MOST bus is a plastic optical waveguide. The MOST bus is coded in green in the E65 
(Repair cables are black in color). The light wavelength is 650 nm (red light). The MOST 
bus reguires the following converter components: 

Optical transmitter 
Optical receiver 

Each control unit of the MOST framework contains a transmitter and a receiver. The trans¬ 
mitter and receiver have been developed by BMW. The low closed circuit (rest) current 
properties of the transmitter and receiver enable optical wake-up by the MOST bus. 


Optical Transmitter 

A driver is fitted in the transmitter. The 
driver energizes an LED (light-emitting 
diode). 

The LED transmits light signals on the 
MOST bus (650 nm light, i.e. red visible 
light). The repeat freguency is 44.1 
MHz. 


Transmitter 



3AIP 


Driver 


LED 


n=> Light 


43 - 07-31 


The sensing freguency on a CD playerand foraudio is 44.1 M Hz; this means than no addi¬ 
tional buffer is reguired, yet another reason why this bus system is so efficient for multi¬ 
media. 


Optical Receiver 

The receiver receives the data from the 
MOST bus. The receiver consists of: 

An LED 

A pre-amplifier 

A wake-up circuit 


Receiver 





Wake Pre- 

LED 

-up Amp. 



Light 


43 - 07-30 


An interface that converts the optical signal into an electrical signal 

The receiver contains a diode that converts the optical signal into an electrical signal. This 
signal is amplified and further processed at the MOST network interface. 


6 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 






Control Unit/Control Unit Connection 

The MOST ring is composed of optical point-to-point connections between 2 control units 
Each control unit has a network interface. The network interface consists of: 


Example 


svs 


Network interface 

NetServices SW 


Most 

transceiver 


Navigation 


Network interface 

NetServices SW 


Most 

transceiver 


MOST Fiberoptic cable 


KT-9397 

An opto-electrical converter (optical waveguide receiver, already mentioned). 

An opto-electrical converter (optical waveguide transmitter, already mentioned). 

A MOST transceiver (interface between the optical waveguide receiver/transmitter and 
the electronic network driver). 

A network driver, the so-called NetServices. 


The NetServices run on a microcontroller (main computer in the control unit) 

On the application level, a control unit in the MOST framework contains stand-alone func¬ 
tion units, so-called function blocks. Examples of function blocks include: 


Tuners 
Amplifiers 
CD players 


A control unit can contain several function blocks at one time, e.g. the AVT contains the 
functions: 


Antenna 

Amplifier 

Tuner 


7 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



Interfaces 


The following contains a brief summary of the tasks of the connected control units in the 
MOST framework: 

Control Display 

The Control Display is the system master of all MOST bus functions and serves as the 
power master. It wakes up the bus and is responsible for switching it off (power down). 
The DIS Plus and GT1 will show a Control Display and a Control Display (Gateway). 

Audio System Controller (ASK) 

The audio system controller has the following controller functions: 

Network Master 

The ASK performs the role of network master for the MOST bus. The functions of the net¬ 
work master are the following: 

Wake-up, initialization, power-down 

The network master wakes up the bus and has the task of achieving an orderly 
initialization of the network. The AS K can operate with KLR off. To turn it on, push in 
the volume/ON/OFF knob. Adjustments and control is carried out by using the 
Controller and Control Display. 

Anothertask of the network master is to control the power-down process. Each power¬ 
down is initiated and started by the ASK. 

Configuration control 

The network master detects the exact system configuration each time that the network 
is started and compares it to the stored coded configuration. 

Control of the network operation 

The network master controls the MOST transceiver of the slave equipment for correct 
operation. The equipment which is not operating properly will be released by a reset or 
switched to low power mode so that they do not affect bus communication. 

Fault code memory 

The network master includes the fault code memory of the MOST network. It stores all 
the faults occurring during the network operation as well as deviations from the 
nominal configuration. 



Audio Master 

As audio master, the AS K has the task to collect and process all the audio signals of the 
vehicle and to distribute them to their destinations. 

The ASK controls all the acoustic requests from the Control Display. The changes in the 
level of a signal is not sudden, but smooth, e.g. during suppression, insertion and fading 
out or tempo ran/ suppression of the signal at the destination: Because of this, a high-qual¬ 
ity acoustic sound is obtained. 

The ASK also assumes the generation and preparation of different acoustic signals, e.g. 
PDC signals and warnings. In the event of a request for a warning or caution signal from 
a control unit, the ASK provides a clean acoustic change of the signals. 

Audio data 

All audio data from any control unit are converted by the AS K into digital audio AF 
format at a sampling rate of 44.1 M Hz. 

Categorization of audio sources 

All possible audio sources are divided into different groups according to priority. Warning 
signals have priority over any other audio source. M ixing of lower priority audio signals 
(e.g. navigation, radio) is possible. 

Generation of acoustic gongs 

These are acoustic alarm signals which help the driver perceive sounds according to a 
system. The different sounds, requested by the different control units, (e.g. gongs, PDC, 
etc.), must be generated only in association with a visual indication. These come from 
the instrument cluster and the Control Display. 

The following sounds can be generated in the ASK. 

Beeping forthe PDC. 

Various Check Control and warning gongs. 


Note: 

A maximum of three sounds can be produced at once. Sounds are produced in order of 
importance. Sounds requested exceeding three will be lost. 

Connection Master 

As connection master, the AS K must provide channels to the equipment connected to the 
bus and distribute the audio signals on the outputs (loudspeakers). 

The connection master also controls the basic Hi-Fi or the LOGIC 7 Hi-Fi amplifiers. 


9 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



CD Changer Audio (CDC) 

The CD changer is a slave control unit in the MOST framework. 

Navigation System (NAV 01) 

The control unit of the navigation system has controller tasks and slave functions in the 
MOST framework. 

Slave Control Units 

The following control units are slave control units: 

Kombi (control unit of the instrument cluster) 

AVT 

L0GIC7 

SVS Speech processing system 

Telephone 

MMC 

Component Locations 

Located in the dashboard assembly: 


Control Display 
CD Changer 
AS K 
Kombi 

OPPS Connector 



Located in the luggage compartment, rear left: 


Logic 7 
SVS 
NAV 
MMC 

Telephone 


Located in the C pillar left side: 

AVT 



10 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



Communication Direction in MOST structure 


ZGM 

Genlrsi Gateway 


K-C AN-System 


ASK 

Autfa SiSlem 

Cc'ntri^lRT 


OPPS Connector 


KOMBI 


in ;.-ii .Tieri CiuTie-f 



H. 


The signal transmission direction of the MOST in a vehicle 
with full equipment takes place starting at the Control 
Display and travels serially towards the CD changer, 
Antenna tuner, Hi-fi amplifier, Speech Processing Module, 
Navigation, Multi-media Changer, telephone, Audio 
System Controller, Instrument Cluster and again back to 
the Control Display. 


CD 

Coniro! Display 


T 

r 


CDC 

Audio CD d'WijjGr 



Important!!! The component sequence of the MOST controllers in the ETM is incor¬ 
rect when it comes to signal transmission direction. The correct sequence is indi¬ 
cated above! 


11 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 




Diagnosis 


It is important to remember that on the MOST network, messages can only be transmitted 
provided the bus ring is complete and fully functional. If there is a ring fault in the MOST 
network, the diagnostic system only communicates with the instrument cluster and the 
Control Display because both of these modules are directly connected to the K-CAN 
System Bus. 

The fiberoptic signals on the MOST network always travel in one direction and only in one 
direction. Signals always originate at the Control Display and travel to the CD changer, AVT, 
Logic 7 (if eguipped), SVS, NAV, MultiMediaChanger (if equipped), Telephone, ASK, Kombi 
and back to the Control Display. 

The MOST bus allows intersystem fault memory entries in the individual control modules. 
A feature of the system faults is that faults may be entered in a control module although the 
control module is OK. Conclusions may be drawn about the cause of the fault, using the 
fault information stored in all the control modules. 

The possible system faults are: 

Optical wave guide communication fault (All MOST Control Module) FC 111 

A Control M odule does not switch a light off (All M OST Control M odules) 

Network wake-up unsuccessful (Control Display (Gateway), ASK, Telephone Only) 

FC E18D 

Ring fault diagnosis run (Control Display (Gateway) and Kombi Only) FC E190 

The Control Display functions are split between acting as a Gateway and Displaying infor¬ 
mation. The Gateway function serves as the interface between the MOST and the K-CAN 
System buses. Although the Control Display is one control module, two control module 
names are displayed in the DIS Plus: 

CD Control Display (Gateway) 

CD Control Display 

The faults stored in the Control Display are distributed between the Control Display 
Gateway and Control Display according to the function of the fault. 


12 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



Optical Wave Guide Communication Fault 

This fault (FC 111) indicates a problem with optical transmission. Insufficient light is being 
received by one of the modules in the ring. The loss of light may be caused by: 

Defective optical wave guide, Harness twisted too tightly (Min. bend radius 50mm.) 

Light output or reception sensitivity of a diode is too low 

Connector not installed correctly 

Voltage fluctuation while powering up a control module 

If the fault is stored, the system triggers a reset and starts up again. The music is switched 
off briefly and the display screen of the Control Display continues to operate. 

To find the module responsible for the fault, the fault memory of the modules must be read 
in M OST ring order. 

Fault lies between the module with the fault code (B) and the preceding module (A). 

If the voltage has dipped below 9v, the fault may be incorrectly stored. If the voltage is low 
perform the following test after connecting a battery charger. 

1. Clearthe fault memory in control module B. 

2. Lower the light output in control module A. 

3. Read out the fault memory in the M OST ring in order. 

4. If control module B is again the first to store the fault, it can be assumed the fault lies 

between control modules A and B. 

Then, check control modules A and B for loose connections and check the optical wave 
guide for kinks. If the visual inspection is OK, the fault can be located using the OPPS tester 
or optionally performing the following tests. 

Remove the input optical wave guide from control module B and confirm the presence 
of light. 

If light is present, install by-pass optical wave guide in place of control module A, clear 
fault codes in module B and perform ring break test. If M OST network operates prop¬ 
erly, then control module A is at fault and must be replaced. 

If MOST network still has a fault, put module A back in the network and by-pass mod¬ 
ule B. Clear faults and again perform ring break test. If MOST network operates now 
problem is with control module B and it must be replaced. 

If light is not present at input of module B, perform by-pass of module A as above. 


Note: AMP Butt connector # 1355734-1 


13 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



The possible fault scenarios are: 

Transmit diode in module A bad 

Receive diode in module B bad 

Optical wave guide fault between modules A and B 

Software error or fault in module A or B 

Control Module Does Not Switch Off Light 

When the MOST network is requested to sleep, the Control Display switches off the light in 
the M OST ring. The lack of light input is a signal to the individual control modules to switch 
off their light output and enter sleep mode. 

If a control module does not switch off its light, all down stream control modules register 
the fault "A Control Module is not switching light off." 

Important: 

Failure of a control module to turn its light off, will cause the MOST network NOT to enter 
sleep mode. If the MOST network fails to sleep, the rest of the car will not be able to enter 
sleep mode. This will lead to battery discharge. 

To diagnose: 

Read out fault memory in M OST ring order 

The fault lies in the control module that precedes the module where the fault is 
first stored. 

Always confirm the problem by first clearing the fault and performing the diagnosis a sec¬ 
ond time. If the same results occur, replace the defective control module. 

Network Wakeup Unsuccessful 

This fault indicates a problem with the optical transmission. An insufficient volume of light is 
coming through one position of the ring and may be caused by: 

Control Module is receiving no voltage 
Optical Wave Guide harness defective 

Optical Element in a control module defective (transmit or receive) 

Connector not installed correctly 

A distinction must be made as to whether the fault is currently present or sporadic. 

For faults currently present, run the Ring Break Diagnosis Test Plan. 

For sporadic faults perform the Luminous Power Reduction Test Plan. 


14 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



Ring Break Diagnosis Carried Out (FC E190) 

Reading out the fault memory of the Control Display (Gateway) after performing the Ring 
Fault Diagnostic, results in a fault of Ring Fault Diagnosis Carried Out being stored. 

This fault memory is not a true fault memory entry, but only an output of additional infor¬ 
mation for relative node position. 

Testing 

Light Output Reduction 

Reducing the light output of individual control modules is a convenient method of deter¬ 
mining the area of a defect. 

Switch on the radio. 


In Control Module functions, begin to activate luminous power reduction in the individ¬ 
ual control module. (In this test the light output of the selected control module is 
reduced for 5 seconds and then automatically reset to normal output) 

If the optical transmission for control module A to the next control module in the ring 
(control module B) is OK, a slight noise may occur when the light output is reduced 
however the radio will continue to play. 

If the radio goes off and comes back on again(radio volume may be reduced) in 5 to 10 
seconds, the optical transmission between control modules A and B is defective. 

If the visual inspection is OK, the fault can be located using the OPP5 tester or optionally 
performing the following tests. 


Remove the input optical wave guide from control module B and confirm the presence 
of light. 

If light is present, install by-pass optical wave guide in place of control module A, clear 
fault codes in module B. If M OST network operates properly, then control module A 
is at fault and must be replaced. 

If M OST network still has a fault, put module A back in the network and by-pass 
module B. Clear faults. 


If M OST network operates now problem is with 
control module B and it must be replaced. 

If light is not present at input of module B, 
perform ring break diagnostics. 



15 


MOST Bus Diagnosis 





Ring Break Test 


If there is a break in the ring (a defect between two control modules) the following fault pat¬ 
terns may occur: 

Transmit diode of the transmitting control module defective 

Power supply of the transmitting control module defective 

Internal control module fault of the transmitting control module 

Receiver diode of the receiving control module defective 

Power supply of the receiving control module defective 

Internal control module fault of the receiving control module 

Optical wave guide between transmitting and receiving control module defective 

These faults may occur alone or in combination. To diagnose a ring break, the first step is 
to locate the two control modules between which the transmission failure has occurred. 

This is accomplished with the ring break diagnostic function. Once the two control modules 
have been identified and the diagnostics have been performed, remember to check the 
power supply and ground circuit of both modules before condemning a module. 

Testing of the transmit/receive diodes will be possible using the OP PS tester. 

Perform Ring Break Test 

The ring break test mode is entered automatically when the power to all the modules in the 
MOST network is switched off and then switched back on. The most effective method of 
switching the power off and on is to disconnect the battery negative terminal for 45 sec¬ 
onds. This time will allow the capacitors of all the control modules to dissipate. 

When the battery is reconnected the control modules wake up and in MOST network order 
transmit a light signal to the next module. Each module checks to see if it has received a 
light signal from the previous module. If the control module does NOT receive a light input 
signal it still transmits a signal to the next module. A relative node number of 0 is stored in 
the control module that did not receive a signal but that transmitted one. 

The Control Display receives the light signal back and identifies which modules responded. 
Go to "Control Unit Functions" Control Display Gateway and read fault memory 


16 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



The Control Display will display a relative node number. This number will indicate how many 
modules communicated after the module which set the relative node number of 0. 

To find the control module with the relative node number of 0, count from the input side of 
the Control Display (counting the Control Display as 0) towards the control modules. When 
arriving at the control module with the number as displayed as the relative node number in 
the DISplus, the last known communicating module has been found. 

Example: 

While performing the ring break diagnostics the Control Display has set a relative node 
number of 2. Count the Control Display a 0, the Kombi will be 1 and the AS K will be 2. 
The ring break occurs between the ASK and the module which precedes it, the telephone 
module. 

Important 

When counting control modules, the multimedia changer (if equipped) and the Nav system 
must be counted as two control modules. 

In order to perform the count correctly the equipment on the vehicle must first be identified. 
When using the MOST network diagram in the DISplus, connector number 1 of the optical 
waves are inputs and connector number 2 are outputs. 



Workshop Hint 

For repair of MOST optical wave guide use special tools: 

61-4-320 Crimping Tool Kit 

Refer to EPC 61_1578 for specific optical wave guide repair parts. 


Workshop Hint 

When preparing to initiate a Ring Break Test it is very important that 
the removal and reinstallation of the battery cable be quick and with¬ 
out hesitation. 

Hesitation removing or replacing the battery cable may cause volt¬ 
age spikes that will render the Ring Break Test void. 


Module input 
Terminal 1 



CDC 

Module output 

Audio CD Changer 



Terminal 2 



Module input 




Terminal 1 



AVT 

Antenna Amplify 

Module output 

Tuner 

w 

Terminal 2 


17 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 






Status Wakeup 

MOST control modules require high current during standby operation and must be discon¬ 
nected or put in sleep mode to prevent the vehicle battery from being discharged. In case 
of a fault on the the MOST network that continuously wakes up, the entire MOST bus will 
be woken up. The Control Display will wake up the CAN Bus and all the vehicle busses will 
be woken up. This will lead to battery discharge. 

It is of great benefit to know which module initiated the wake up call. In order to find out 
which MOST node woke up the MOST bus, the following procedure is performed: 

In Control Unit Functions, press "STATUS WAKEUP" 

Three different response are possible: 

Control Module woke up 
Control Module woken up 
Control Module not initialized 

The Control M odule with the status "Control M odule woke up" is the module that woke up 
the rest of the M OST bus. 

This diagnosis only informs which control module woke, not the reason for the wake up, 
diagnostic testing should be performed on the control module and related equipment. 


Hints for Vehicle Equipment Identification 

CDC - Look on passenger side of dashboard above glovebox 


Logic 7 - Look for speaker grills on rear doors 
Look on left side of trunk for 
large amp. 

M M C - Look on left side of trunk. 


Workshop Hint 

Telephone modules may be swapped from vehicle to vehicle 
for testing purposes, however if the original telephone mod¬ 
ule is not returned to the original vehicle the Emergency func¬ 
tions will notoperated properly. 

In case of an accident, information regarding location and 
VIN will not be correct therfore help will not be dispatched. 



18 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



OPPS Diagnostics 


Customer Complaint: Navigation and Radio not functioning, CD appears to be locked 

up. 

Diagnosis: Perform Short Test Using Standard Diagnostic Head 

Which MOST bus components are found 7 _ 

How are these components found by the DisPlus?_ 

What procedure will be used to diagnose the MOST Bus 7 _ 


What happens when this diagnostic procedure is used 7 _ 

If a Ring Break Test is performed, what node number is given 7 
At this point what diagnostic path would be followed? 


Diagnosis with OPPS 

Connect the OPPS to the vehicle using the proper Diagnostic cable 

PN _. (Don't forget, some diagnostic operations will occur in the 

luggage compartment) 

Attach the OPPS to the OPPS connector in the vehicle using fiber optic 
cable PN_. 

Perform Short Test 

Which MOST Bus components are found 7 _ 

Is this different than in the previous test 7 Why 7 _ 


Follow the DisPlus Test Plan Procedures fortesting the light output of 
suspect components. 

What diagnostic path is followed now 7 Why 7 _ 


19 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 




Review Questions 

1. The MOST messages are divided into three parts. Name the three parts 


2. What component in a control unit converts the electrical signals into optical signals 7 


3. Name the functions of the Network M aster of the M OST network 


4. What is the maximum number of sounds that may be produced simultaneously 7 


5. Name the control units of a typical MOST bus in the direction of flow of the optical 
signal. _ 


6. When performing a Luminous Power Reduction, the radio goes off and comes back 
on at a lower volume, what could be the problem 7 _ 


7. Using the schematic on page 11 (a fully optioned vehicle), the Control Display shows 
a relative node number of 8. Which control module is identified as the last known 
communicating module 7 


20 

MOST Bus Diagnosis 



