Table of Contents 


Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 

Subject Page 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics.5 

Advanced Bus Systems.8 

FiberOptic Bus Networks.9 

Principle of Light Transmission.10 

Light Attenuation.10 

Causes of Excessive Attenuation .11 

Bending Radius .11 

Kinking.11 

Compression Points .12 

Stretching .12 

Abrasion Points .12 

Dirty or scratched Fiber Optic Cable Ends.12 

Fiber Optic System Service and Diagnosis.13 

Service Considerations.13 

Cable Repair .13 

Fiber Optic Connectors.13 

Fiber Optic Diagnosis .14 

MOST Bus.16 

MOST Multimedia Network.16 

Principle of a Multimedia Network .17 

Advantages of a Multimedia Network.17 

MOST Structure .17 

Data Quantities.18 

Functional Description .19 

Data Transport.19 

Optical Bus .20 

Optical Transmitter.20 

Optical Receiver.20 

Control Unit/Control Unit Connection.21 

E65 Interfaces .22 

Control Display.22 

Audio System Controller (ASK).22 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 



































Subject Page 

Network Master (Main Controller).22 

Audio Master.23 

Connection Master.23 

CD Changer Audio (CDC).24 

Navigation System (NAV 01) .24 

Slave (Subordinate) Control Units.24 

Component Locations .24 

MOST Bus Diagnosis .25 

MOST Control Unit Sequence (E65).26 

Optical Wave Guide Communication Fault.27 

Control Module Does Not Switch Off Light.28 

Network Wakeup Unsuccessful .28 

Ring Break Diagnosis Carried Out (FCE190) .29 

Testing.29 

Light Output Reduction.29 

Ring Break Test.30 

Perform Ring Break Test.30 

Status Wakeup.32 

E65 MOST Bus Diagnostic Tips .33 

Fault Symptoms E65 .33 

Creating Images.34 

Non-Digitized Area.34 

Self-Burnt DVDs.34 

Telephone E65.35 

Audio .35 

E60 MOST Bus Diagnosis .36 

CCC/MASK.36 

Diagnosis Excessive Temperature .36 

Control Module Resets .36 

MOST Configuration.37 

Same Sequence.37 

Different Sequence .37 

Store Configuration .38 

Ring Break Diagnosis.39 

Stability Check .39 

MOST Control Unit Supply.39 

Repair of the MOST Fiber-Optic Cables .40 

byteflight.46 

Introduction.46 

Design .46 











































Subject Page 

Function.47 

Transmitter/Receiver Module (SE).47 

Data Transmission.49 

Diagnosis .49 

Controller Area Network (CAN Bus).50 

Introduction.50 

E65 K-CAN.50 

Introduction.50 

K-CAN System/Peripherals .50 

Advantages of two K-CAN Busses.51 

Voltage Level on the K-CAN.52 

Terminal Resistor .52 

PT (Powertrain) CAN.54 

Introduction.54 

Voltage Level on the PT CAN .54 

PT CAN Terminal Resistors .54 

Failsafe Characteristics .55 

"Wake-up" Lead in PT CAN Network.55 

Diagnosis Bus.56 

Introduction.56 

Diagnosis Concept .57 

Vehicle Diagnosis Access Point.57 

























Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 


Model: E65, E66, E60, E63, and E64 
Production: All 

■micnure 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand changes to Body Electronic Systems on the E6X models 

• Understand advanced bus systems 

• Understand Principles of Fiber Optics 

• Diagnose MOST Bus concerns 


4 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 


Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 

Beginning with the 2002 model year, a new era in on-board electronics began with the 
new BMW flagship - The E65. Although there were significant cosmetic changes 
between the last generation 7-series and the new 7, the major advances were were 
“under the skin”. 



Some of the most obvious changes were in the cockpit area. The E65 no longer used a 
conventional key to start the vehicle, instead a remote key fob is used in conjunction with 
a start/stop button. Entertainment and communications are now accessed via a single 
controller, which is a part of the new Drive System. 



Some of the design objectives on the E65/E66 included an overall reduction in control 
knobs and switches. This is the objective of the Drive system, to simplify the control of 
the various vehicle functions. 

To make these changes possible, new bus networks were created. For the first time, 
fiber optic networks were used on BMW vehicles. The 2 new bus networks are the 
MOST bus and the new byteflight bus. In addition to the DISplus and GT-1, there are 
some new tools for diagnosing system using fiber optic technology. 


5 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 







As with previous 7 series introductions, the E65 platform initiated a new wave of techno¬ 
logical advances which were subsequently carried over to the rest of the model line. 

From the 2004 model year, the E60 also integrates many of the new innovations from the 
E65. 



02290J2 

The MOST and byteflight networks are still used, but modified slightly. The Drive con¬ 
troller is also carried over, with less overall features and an added menu button to simply 
operation. 



Kommunikation 

>V 


Klima 

I >li 

Car Data 


Entertainment 


A / A BAYERN 3 TMC O T.,ill 21:50 



To continue with the advances in technology, the new E63 and E64 were introduced with 
some new features such as Car Computer Control (CCC) and the new Head-up Display 
(HUD). These 2 new features will be seen on other models as well in the near future. 


6 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 








In this training course, the latest in BMW electronics technology will be covered. This 
course will focus on the new 5, 6 and 7 series models. This includes the following vehicle 
systems: 

• Power (energy) management 

• Driver information systems (Instrument cluster, Drive etc.) 

• Vehicle lighting systems (including LWR, AHL etc.) 

• Body Electronics (Power locks, windows, wipers etc.) 

• Vehicle warning systems (PDC, DWA and ACC) 

• Entertainment and Communication Systems 

• Seat, mirror and steering wheel functions 

• Head-up Display 

• Bus Systems 

• Fiber Optic technology 

Systems such as Passive Safety and Climate Control will be covered in their respective 
courses. 


7 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Advanced Bus Systems 


The launch of the E65 brought about new technological innovations which reguired some 
advancements in bus technology. Fiber Optics, newly introduced to BMW group vehi¬ 
cles, allow for a larger amount of data transfer at a faster rate. 

There are 2 new Fiber Optic Networks used on the E65. These new networks are 
MOST (Media Orientated System Transport) and byteflight. MOST is used for informa¬ 
tion and communication systems such as navigation, audio and telephone. The new 
byteflight system is used exclusively for the safety system (ISIS). 

In addition to fiber optics, copper wire bus networks were also modified to meet the 
needs of the new technology. New networks such as PT-CAN and K-CAN enhanced the 
existing CAN bus and K-bus already in use on earlier models. 


Example - E65 Bus System 


CAS 




SMFA 



SMBF 



TMFAT 



TMBFT 



TM FATH 



TM BFTH 



SMFAH 



SMBFH 



HKL 



PM 


AHM 


PDC 


RDC 


CIM 


LM 


CON 


RLS 


SHD 


SH 


WIM 


Kombi 

HZ 


ASK 

nz 


TEL 

nz 


CD * 




CDC 


1 


AVT 

1 


LOGIC7 

1 


svs 


NAV 


D-BUS 



SZL 


SFZ 


SASL 


SASR 


STVL 


SSFA 


SIM 


STVR 


SSBF 


ARS 



DME 



EGS 



EMF 


GRS 


DSC 


SBSL 


SBSR 


EDC-K 


SSH 


K-CAN P K-CAN S MOST 


byteflight 


PT-CAN 


The K-CAN (Body Controller Area Network) replaces the single wire K-bus used on earli¬ 
er models. K-CAN is subdivided into two sections: K-CAN System and K-CAN 
Periphery. K-CAN S and K-CAN P use the two wire twisted pair configuration. The com¬ 
munication speed has also been increased to 100Kbps. 

The PT-CAN system replaces the existing CAN system. PT-CAN differs from the existing 
CAN system by using an additional KL-15 “wake-up” wire. Communication speed 
remains the same at 500Kbps. 

New Sub-Bus systems have also been added to provide “local” communication to the 
larger networks. There are several Sub Bus systems on the E65, these include the 
Driver’s door P-Bus, the Engine LoCAN, Telecommander CAN, M-Bus DWA K-Bus and 
the BSD interface. These systems will be discussed later in this course. 


8 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 






































































































































Fiber Optic Bus Networks 

The ever-increasing level of features available in today’s automobiles require a corre¬ 
sponding increase in vehicle electronic systems. The transmission of data, voice and 
images require an efficient method to move data. 

Copper wire bus networks otter many advantages. However high data transmission rates 
in copper wires can cause electro-magnetic interference with other vehicle systems. 
Compared with copper wires, fiberoptic lines require less space and are lighter in weight 
for the same transmission band width. In contrast with copper wires, which carry digital 
or analog voltage signals as the means of transmitting data, fiber optic busses transmit 
light pulses. 

Fiber Optic technology has been in use in the telecommunications industry for many 
years. However, this type of fiber-optic cable is not practical for automotive use. These 
cable utilize glass based fibers which are not practical for automotive use. They are sub¬ 
ject to fracture from vibration and do not hold up to “tight radius” installations. 

POF (polymer optical fibers) were developed for the automotive industry. These fibers 
were developed and manufactured by Dow-Corning. 


Construction of Fiber Optic Cable 


1 



There are significant advantage to using POF fiber optic cables: 

• There is a low sensitivity to dust. Small amounts of contamination do not adversely 
affect communication. 

• They are easy to work with. These fibers can be bent to a radius of approximately 
50mm. This allows for practical installation within the vehicle. 

• Processing is practical, these fibers can be cut and modified which makes the pro¬ 
duction of wiring looms easy. Service repairs are also made simple. 

• These fibers are inexpensive to manufacture and do not require expensive connec¬ 
tions or housings. 


9 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 










Principle of Light Transmission 

The electrical signal generated by the control unit is converted to an optical signal by an 
internal transmitter module and sent along the fiber optic bus. The fiber core carries the 
light beam to a receiver module which converts the light signal back to a useable electri¬ 
cal signal. 



In order to prevent the light from escaping, the fiber core is enclosed by a cladding layer. 
The cladding is reflective and reflects light back into the core, thus making it possible to 
transmit light along the fiber. 

Light Attenuation 

Attenuation refers to the reduction in strength of a signal. Light transmitted along the 
optical fiber becomes weaker the further it has to travel. Attenuation is usually measured 
in decibel units (dB). In fiber optic cables, attenuation is measured in terms of the num¬ 
ber of decibels per unit of length (foot/meter etc). The less attenuation per unit distance, 
the more efficient the cable. 



In comparison with an electrical circuit, think of attenuation as “light resistance”. The 
more attenuation in the fiber optic cable, the less light output to the receiver module. 

The average attenuation for fiber optic bus lines is .5 decibels (dB) for each connector 
and .3 dB for each meter of cable. 


10 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 





















































Causes of Excessive Attenuation 

Excessive attenuation can be caused by the following reasons: 

• Bends in the fiber optic cable with a radius of less than 50mm. 

• Kinks in the fiber optic cable 

• Squashed or compressed fiber optic cable 

• Damaged insulation on fiber optic cable 

• Stretched fiber optic cable 

• Dirt or grease on the exposed cable ends 

• Scratches on the exposed cable ends 

• Overheated fiber optic cable 

Here are some examples of various fiber optic cable failures: 



Bending Radius 

The plastic fiber optic cable should not 
be bent to a radius of less than 50mm. 
That is roughly equivalent to the diame¬ 
ter of a soft-drink can. Bending the 
cable any tighter can impair its function 
or irreparably damage the cable. 

Light can escape at points where the 
cable is bent too tightly. This is caused 
by the fact that the light beam strikes the 
interface between the core and cladding 
at too steep an angle and is not reflect¬ 
ed. 



Kinking 

Fiber optic cables must not under any 
circumstances be kinked when fitted 
because this damages the cladding and 
the fiber core. The light is partially dis¬ 
persed at the point where the fiber is 
kinked and transmission loss results. 
Even just kinking the cable once very 
briefly is enough to cause permanent 
damage. 


11 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 










Compression Points 

Compression points must also be avoid¬ 
ed because they can permanently 
deform the light conducting cross sec¬ 
tion of the optical fiber. This would 
cause a loss of light. 



Stretching 

Overstretching of the fiber optic cables, 
caused by pulling for example, can 
destroy them. 

Stretching reduces the cross-sectional 
area of the fiber core. Restricted pas¬ 
sage of light is the end result. 



Abrasion Points 

In comparison with copper wires, abra¬ 
sion of fiberoptic cables does not cause 
a short circuit. 

Instead, loss of external light occurs. 

The system then suffers interference or 
fails completely. 


Dirty or scratched Fiber Optic Cable 
Ends 

Another potential source of problems is 
dirty or scratched cable ends. Although 
the ends of the cables are protected 
against accidental contact, damage can 
still occur by incorrect handling. 

Dirt on the end of an optical fiber will 
prevent light from exiting/entering. The 
dirt absorbs the light and increases 
attenuation. 


12 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 














Fiber Optic System Service and Diagnosis 


Service Considerations 

During repair work, there are some things that need to be taken into account when 
working with fiber optic cables. Any paintwork which reguires the use of drying by heat, 
the temperature should not exceed 85°C. This could case deformation of the fiber optic 
cable resulting in excessive attenuation. 

Extreme care should be taken around fiber optic cables. Any wiring harness that contain 
fiber optic cables should not be subjecting to stretching, pulling or any undue stress. 

Cable Repair 

Repair cable are available for the fiber optics. The MOST bus which is normally green in 
the vehicle is repair using a black or orange cable. The MOST bus allows for up to one 
splice between control units. 

There are special tool for servicing and splicing the optical cables. 

The byteflight which is a safety critical network does not allow for any splices or repairs 
between control units. The entire defective optical cable must be replaced. 

Replacement cables are orange or black. 


Fiber Optic Connectors 

There are slight differences between the connectors on the MOST and byteflight bus. 
The transmitter/receiver module on the MOST bus are set back into the control unit 
housing. This setup allows for the protection of the delicate fiber ends of the cable. Also, 
MOST cable connectors are marked 1 and 2. 1 is assigned to the incoming optical fiber 
and 2 is assigned to the outgoing optical fiber. 




Typical connector 
used on the MOST 
bus components 


13 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 















The byteflight bus uses a different connector configuration than MOST. Since the 
byteflight is connected directly to the diode, the protruding fiber end is protected by a 
flap. 

The flap is retracted when the connectors are plugged together. 



Typical connector used on byteflight 


FiberOptic Diagnosis 

When checking attenuation, the OPPS or OPS tester should be used in conjunction with 
the DISplus/GT-1. 

The Optical Testing and Programming System (OPPS) can be used as a substitute 
diagnostic head for diagnosis, or to expedite programming procedures. The OPPS can 
also be used to check attenuation on both the MOST or byteflight bus. 

The OPS is an abbreviated version of OPPS. The OPS does not have the capability to 
check attenuation on the byteflight bus. OPPS and OPS appear similar, but are different 
in color. OPPS is gray and yellow, while OPS is gray and orange. 





OPPS Tester (OPS not shown) 


14 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - Fiber Optic Cable Repair 

Using the instructor designated fiber optic cable/connector, perform a connector 
/cable repair. 

What special tool is used to remove the sheathing from the fiber optic cable? 

What special tool is used to crimp the fiber optic terminal to the fiber optic cable? 

What is the part number of the blades used for cutting the fiber optic cable? And how 
many cuts are allowed per blade? 

What precautions should be observed when handling fiber optic cable? 


How many splices are allowed between two MOST bus components? 
How many splices are allowed between two byteflight bus components? 
What is the part number of the AMP butt connector? 



15 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



MOST Bus 


Of the 2 fiber optic networks introduced on the E65, the MOST bus is used for audio, 
entertainment and communication systems. MOST stands for Media Orientated 
Systems Transport. 

Starting in 1998, OEM manufacturers such as Audi, Becker, BMW and Daimler/Chrysler 
came together to develop a common multi-media network. As of 2001, MOSTCo 
(Cooperation) has approximately 65 members including all of the American and European 
auto manufacturers. Toyota and Nissan represent the Japanese auto industry. MOSTCo 
now unites about 90 percent of global automotive production and is now on track to 
becoming the standard for automotive multi-media services. 

Since the introduction of the E65, MOST has been added to the E60, E63 and E64 vehi¬ 
cles. MOST will also be a part of future BMW models as well. 



E65 



TEL 


svs 


CD Fond 

LoaicT | AVT 

ASK 

CD 


1 CDC | 




TV f 


NAV 


In comparison with the E38, which had only a few entertainment -related control units on 
the network, the E65 has a significant increase in multi-media systems. This reguires a 
bus network with a substantial amount of bandwidth (communication speed). The 
MOST bus was introduced with a data rate of 22.5 Mbps and will be increased as system 
needs demand. 

MOST Multimedia Network 

MOST technology meets 2 essential reguirements: 

• The MOST bus transports control data as well as data from audio, video navigation 
and other services. 

• MOST Technology provides a logical framework model for control of the variety and 
complexity of data. The MOST application framework organizes the functions of the 
overall system. MOST is able to control and dynamically manage functions that are 
distributed in the vehicle. 


16 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 






































Principle of a Multimedia Network 

An important feature of a multimedia network is that it transports not only control data 
and sensor data. A multimedia network can also carry digital audio and video signals and 
graphics as well as other data services. 

Information transmitted on MOST network 



Advantages of a Multimedia Network 

All data can be transported across a shared network. This offers the following benefits: 

• Additional signal wiring harnesses are eliminated. 

• The only addition many control units need is a power supply. 

• As each participant (control unit) has access to the data, cost intensive components 
for signal distribution are eliminated. 

Different data formats also have different requirements for transmission regarding both 
mechanisms (synchronous or asynchronous data) and the required bandwidth. The 
MOST format is able to meet these requirements to satisfactory extent. 

MOST Structure 

The MOST bus is configured in a “ring” structure. Data transmission on the ring takes 
place in one direction only. Messages can be transmitted provided the bus ring is com¬ 
plete and fully functional. 

A failure, such as an interruption in the ring, will cause a complete failure of the MOST 
ring. All modules on the MOST bus will cease to function when there is an open in the 
MOST bus. 


17 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 






D-BUS 



Graphic example of “ring structure” 
used on MOST bus 


K-CANS 



MOST 


Example of MOST bus on the E65 



Data Quantities 

The aim is that in the near future all vehicle occupants can call up different services at 
one time, e.g.: 

• The driver calls up navigation information. 

• The passenger talks on the telephone. 

• A rear seat passenger listens to a CD. 


• The other rear seat passenger watches a DVD video. 

The data guantities this reguires produce the following example: 


Application 

Band-width (data rate) 

Data 

Data Format 

AM/FM 

Check Control 
Audio/CD 
Telephone 

svs 

1.4 Mbits/s 

1 Channel Stereo 

Synchronous 

TV 

CD Video 

1.4 Mbits/s 

Audio 

MPEG 1 Video 

Synchronous 

DVD 

2.8-11 Mbits/s 

MPEG 2 Video 

Synchronous and 
Asynchronous 

Navigation 

250 Kbits/s 

1.4 Mbits/s 

1.4 Mbits/s 

Vector data (arrows) 
MPEG 1 Video (maps) 
Voice commands 

Asynchronous 

Synchronous 

Synchronous 

Telematic services 

A few bytes 


Asynchronous 


Using MOST, there is already the capability today to transport these large data guantities. 


18 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 

























































Functional Description 
Data Transport 

MOST currently offers a band-width of 22.5 Mbits/s . In the next generation, the band¬ 
width will be increased to 50 and then later to 150 Mbits/s (as of approx. 2002). 

In order to meet the different requirements of the applications regarding data transport, 
each MOST message is divided into three parts: 

• Control data 

• Asynchronous data: e.g. navigation system, arrow representation 

• Synchronous data: e.g. audio, video signals 


Data transport on the MOST bus. 

Different data is “packaged” and then sent as 
one message to be “unwrapped” by the next 
device on the MOST ring. 


Bandwidth 

22,5mblT/S 



44,1 kHz 
23 |is 


A message over the MOST bus 



2700 Messages 


The control data controls the functions and devices in the network. The information can 
be compared to CAN bus data. 

The control data has a band-width of 700 Kbit/s. That corresponds to around 2700 mes¬ 
sages per second. 

For the data transmission of synchronous and/or asynchronous data, there is a total of 60 
bytes. The limit is variable: e.g. 20 bytes of synchronous data and 40 bytes of asynchro¬ 
nous data. 


19 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 





























Optical Bus 

The MOST bus is a plastic optical waveguide. The MOST bus is coded in green 
in the E65. 

The light wavelength is 650 nm (red light). The MOST bus reguires the following 
converter components: 

• Optical transmitter 

• Optical receiver 

Each control unit of the MOST framework contains a transmitter and a receiver. The 
transmitter and receiver have been developed by BMW. The low closed circuit (rest) cur¬ 
rent properties of the transmitter and receiver enable optical wake-up by the MOST bus. 

Optical Transmitter 

A driver is fitted in the transmitter. The driver energizes an LED (light-emitting diode). 

The LED transmits light signals on the MOST bus (650 nm light, i.e. red visible light). 
The repeat freguency is 44.1 MHz. 

The sensing freguency on a CD player and for audio is 44.1 MHz; this means than no 
additional buffer is reguired, yet another reason why this bus system is so efficient for 
multi-media. 




Optical Receiver 

The receiver receives the data from the MOST bus. The receiver consists of: 

• An LED 

• A pre-amplifier 

• A wake-up circuit 

• An interface that converts the optical signal into an electrical signal 

The receiver contains a diode that converts the optical signal into an electrical signal. This 
signal is amplified and further processed at the MOST network interface. 


20 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 










































Control Unit/Control Unit Connection 

The MOST ring is composed of optical point-to-point connections between 2 control 
units. Each control unit has a network interface. The network interface consists of: 


svs 


Network Interface 


Net Services Software 


MOST Transceiver 

1 

_ 1 _ _ > 

_ 

Optical 

Optical 

Receiver 

Transmitter 1 


Navigation 


Network Interface 


Net Services Software 


MOST Transceiver 

n 

1 

5 

r 

Optical 

Optical 

Receiver 

Transmitter 1 


MOST Fiber Optic Cable 


• An opto-electrical converter (optical waveguide receiver, already mentioned). 

• An opto-electrical converter (optical waveguide transmitter, already mentioned). 

• A MOST transceiver (interface between the optical waveguide receiver/transmitter 
and the electronic network driver). 

• A network driver, the so-called NetServices. 

The NetServices run on a microcontroller (main computer in the control unit) 

On the application level, a control unit in the MOST framework contains stand-alone func¬ 
tion units, so-called function blocks. Examples of function blocks include: 

• Tuners 

• Amplifiers 

• CD players 

A control unit can contain several function blocks at one time, e.g. the AVT contains the 
functions: 

• Antenna 

• Amplifier 

• Tuner 


21 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 


















































E65 Interfaces 


The following contains a brief summary of the tasks of the connected control units in the 

MOST framework: 

Control Display 

The Control Display is the system master of all MOST bus functions and serves as the 

power master. It wakes up the bus and is responsible for switching it off (power down). 

The DIS Plus and GT1 will show a Control Display and a Control Display (Gateway). 

Audio System Controller (ASK) 

The audio system controller has the following controller functions: 

Network Master (Main Controller) 

The ASK performs the role of network master for the MOST bus. The functions of the 

network master are the following: 

• Wake-up, initialization, power-down - The network master wakes up the bus 

and has the task of achieving an orderly initialization of the network. The ASK can 
operate with KLR off. To turn it on, push in the volume/ON/OFF knob. Adjustments 
and control is carried out by using the Controller and Control Display. Another task 
of the network master is to control the power-down process. Each power-down is 
initiated and started by the ASK. 

• Configuration control - The network master detects the exact system configura¬ 
tion each time that the network is started and compares it to the stored coded con¬ 
figuration. 

• Control of the network operation - The network master controls the MOST 
transceiver of the slave eguipment for correct operation. The eguipment which is not 
operating properly will be released by a reset or switched to low power mode so that 
they do not affect bus communication. 

• Fault code memory - The network master includes the fault code memory of the 
MOST network. It stores all the faults occurring during the network operation as well 
as deviations from the nominal configuration. 


22 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Audio Master 

As audio master, the ASK has the task to collect and process all the audio signals of the 
vehicle and to distribute them to their destinations. 

The ASK controls all the acoustic requests from the Control Display. The changes in the 
level of a signal is not sudden, but smooth, e.g. during suppression, insertion and fading 
out or temporary suppression of the signal at the destination: Because of this, a high- 
quality acoustic sound is obtained. 

The ASK also assumes the generation and preparation of different acoustic signals, e.g. 
PDC signals and warnings. In the event of a request for a warning or caution signal from 
a control unit, the ASK provides a clean acoustic change of the signals. 

• Audio data - All audio data from any control unit are converted by the ASK into digital 
audio AF format at a sampling rate of 44.1 MHz. 

• Categorization of audio sources - All possible audio sources are divided into different 
groups according to priority. Warning signals have priority over any other audio 
source. Mixing of lower priority audio signals (e.g. navigation, radio) is possible. 

• Generation of acoustic gongs - These are acoustic alarm signals which help the dri¬ 
ver perceive sounds according to a system. The different sounds, requested by the 
different control units, (e.g. gongs, PDC, etc.), must be generated only in association 
with a visual indication. These come from the instrument cluster and the Control 
Display. 

The following sounds can be generated in the ASK. 

• Beeping for the PDC. 

• Various Check Control and warning gongs. 

Note: A maximum of three sounds can be produced at once. Sounds are pro¬ 
duced in order of importance. Any sound requests of greater than three 
will be lost. 

Connection Master 

As connection master, the ASK must provide channels to the equipment connected to 
the bus and distribute the audio signals on the outputs (loudspeakers). 

The connection master also controls the basic Hi-Fi or the LOGIC 7 Hi-Fi amplifiers. 


23 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



CD Changer Audio (CDC) 

The CD changer is a slave control unit in the MOST framework. 

Navigation System (NAV 01) 

The control unit of the navigation system has controller tasks and slave functions 
in the MOST framework. 

Slave (Subordinate) Control Units 

The following control units are slave control units: 

• Kombi (control unit of the instrument cluster) 

• AVT 

• LOGIC7 

• SVS Speech processing system 

• Telephone 

• MMC (if eguipped - not currently used on US models) 

Component Locations 

Located in the dashboard assembly are the Control Display, Kombi, ASK, CD changer 
and OPPS connector. 



Located in the luggage compartment, rear left, are the Logic 7 Amp, SVS, NAV and TCU. 



Located in the C pillar left side, the AVT (Antenna Tuner) 


24 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 











MOST Bus Diagnosis 

Due to the differences in the configuration of the MOST bus, diagnosis methods will dif¬ 
fer slightly between the E65/E66 and the E60, E63, E64. However, there are many simi¬ 
larities and there are some some basic rules which apply to all MOST equipped vehicles. 

The following diagnosis applies to the E65/E66 configuration and the differences will be 
pointed out as necessary. 

It is important to remember that on the MOST network, messages can only be transmit¬ 
ted provided the bus ring is complete and fully functional. If there is a ring fault in the 
MOST network, the diagnostic system only communicates with the instrument cluster 
and the Control Display because both of these modules are directly connected to the K- 
CAN System Bus. 

The fiber optic signals on the MOST network always travel in one direction and only in 
one direction. Signals always originate at the Control Display and travel to the CD chang¬ 
er, AVT, Logic 7 (if equipped), SVS, NAV, Multi-MediA Changer (if equipped), Telephone, 
ASK, Kombi and back to the Control Display. 

The MOST bus allows intersystem fault memory entries in the individual control modules. 
A feature of the system faults is that faults may be entered in a control module although 
the control module is OK. Conclusions may be drawn about the cause of the fault, using 
the fault information stored in all the control modules. 

The possible system faults are: 

• Optical wave guide communication fault (All MOST Control Module) FC 111 

• A Control Module does not switch a light off (All MOST Control Modules) 

• Network wake-up unsuccessful (Control Display (Gateway), ASK, Telephone Only) 
FCE18D 

• Ring fault diagnosis run (Control Display (Gateway) and Kombi Only) FC El 90 

The Control Display functions are split between acting as a Gateway and Displaying infor¬ 
mation. The Gateway function serves as the interface between the MOST and the K- 
CAN System buses. Although the Control Display is one control module, two control 
module names are displayed in the DIS Plus: 

• CD Control Display (MOST CAN Gateway or MCGW) 

• CD Control Display 

The faults stored in the Control Display are distributed between the Control Display 
Gateway and Control Display according to the function of the fault. 


25 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



MOST Control Unit Sequence (E65) 


ZGM 

Central Gateway 
Module 


K-CAN-System 


ASK 

Audio System 
Controller 


OPPS Connector 


H KOMBI I Cl 

Instrument Cluster ^1 Control C 

- -y 


CD 

Display 


CDC 

Audio-CD Changer 


Communication direction in MOST structure (E65/E66) 


The signal transmission direction of the MOST bus in a vehicle with full 
equipment takes place starting at the Control Display and travels serially 
towards the CD changer. Antenna Tuner, Hi-Fi amplifier, Speech processing 
module, Navigation, MMC (if equipped), TCU, Audio System Controller, 

Instrument Cluster and again back to the Control Display. 

I AVT 

Antenna Amplifier 
Tuner 


TEL 

Telephone Interface 

z 


Counts as 2 



Counts as 2 


NAVI 

Navigation System 


▼ 

Logic 7 

Audio Amplifier 
Top hi-fi 

svs 

Speech Processing 
System 


Note: Important! The component sequence of the MOST controllers 
in the ETM is incorrect when it comes to signal transmission 
direction. The correct sequence is indicated above! 


26 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 


































Optical Wave Guide Communication Fault 

This fault (FC 111) indicates a problem with optical transmission. Insufficient light is being 
received by one of the modules in the ring. The loss of light may be caused by: 

• Defective optical wave guide, Flarness twisted too tightly (Min. bend radius 50mm.) 

• Light output or reception sensitivity of a diode is too low 

• Connector not installed correctly 

• Voltage fluctuation while powering up a control module 

If the fault is stored, the system triggers a reset and starts up again. The music is 
switched off briefly and the display screen of the Control Display continues to operate. 

To find the module responsible for the fault, the fault memory of the modules must be 
read in MOST ring order. 

Fault lies between the module with the fault code (B) and the preceding module (A). 

If the voltage has dipped below 9v, the fault may be incorrectly stored. If the voltage is low 
perform the following test after connecting a battery charger. 

1. Clear the fault memory in control module B. 

2. Lower the light output in control module A. 

3. Read out the fault memory in the MOST ring in order. 

4. If control module B is again the first to store the fault, it can be assumed the fault 
lies between control modules A and B. 

Then, check control modules A and B for loose connections and check the optical wave 
guide for kinks. If the visual inspection is OK, the fault can be located using the OPPS 
tester or optionally performing the following tests. 

• Remove the input optical wave guide from control module B and confirm the pres¬ 
ence of light. If light is present, install by-pass optical wave guide in place of control 
module A, clear fault codes in module B and perform ring break test. If MOST net¬ 
work operates properly, then control module A is at fault and must be replaced. 

If MOST network still has a fault, put module A back in the network and by-pass 
module B. Clear faults and again perform ring break test. If MOST network operates 
now problem is with control module B and it must be replaced. 

• If light is not present at input of module B, perform by-pass of module A as above. 

The possible fault scenarios are: 

• Transmit diode in module A defective 

• Receive diode in module B defective 

• Optical wave guide fault between modules A and B 

• Software error or fault in module A or B 

Note: AMP butt connector p/n - 1355734-1 

27 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Control Module Does Not Switch Off Light 

When the MOST network is requested to sleep, the Control Display switches off the light 
in the MOST ring. The lack of light input is a signal to the individual control modules to 
switch off their light output and enter sleep mode. 

If a control module does not switch off its light, all down stream control modules register 
the fault “A Control Module is not switching light off.” 

Important! 

Failure of a control module to turn its light off, will cause the MOST network NOT to enter 
sleep mode. If the MOST network fails to sleep, the rest of the car will not be able to 
enter sleep mode. This will lead to battery discharge. 

To diagnose, read out fault memory in MOST ring order. 

The fault lies in the control module that precedes the module where the fault is first 
stored. 

Always confirm the problem by first clearing the fault and performing the diagnosis a sec¬ 
ond time. If the same results occur, replace the defective control module. 

Network Wakeup Unsuccessful 

This fault indicates a problem with the optical transmission. An insufficient volume of light 
is coming through one position of the ring and may be caused by: 

• Control Module is receiving no voltage 

• Optical Wave Guide harness defective 

• Optical Element in a control module defective (transmit or receive) 

• Connector not installed correctly 

A distinction must be made as to whether the fault is currently present or sporadic. 

For faults currently present, run the Ring Break Diagnosis Test Plan. 

For sporadic faults perform the Luminous Power Reduction Test Plan. 


28 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Ring Break Diagnosis Carried Out (FC El 90) 

Reading out the fault memory of the Control Display (Gateway) after performing the Ring 
Fault Diagnostic, results in a fault of Ring Fault Diagnosis Carried Out being stored. 

This fault memory is not a true fault memory entry, but only an output of additional infor¬ 
mation for relative node position. 

Testing 

Light Output Reduction 

Reducing the light output of individual control modules is a convenient method of deter¬ 
mining the area of a defect. 

• Switch on the radio. 

• In Control Module functions, begin to activate luminous power reduction in the 
individual control module. (In this test the light output of the selected control 
module is reduced for 5 seconds and then automatically reset to normal output) 

• If the optical transmission for control module A to the next control module in the 
ring (control module B) is OK, a slight noise may occur when the light output is 
reduced, however the radio will continue to play. 

• If the radio goes off and comes back on again(radio volume may be reduced) in 5 
to 10 seconds, the optical transmission between control modules A and B is 
defective. 

If the visual inspection is OK, the fault can be located using the OPPS tester or optionally 
performing the following tests. 

• Remove the input optical wave guide from control module B and confirm the pres¬ 
ence of light. 

• If light is present, install by-pass optical wave guide in place of control module A, 
clear fault codes in module B. If MOST network operates properly, then control 
module A is at fault and must be replaced. 

• If MOST network still has a fault, put module A back in the network and by-pass 
module B. Clear faults. 

• If MOST network operates now problem is with control module B and it must be 
replaced. 

• If light is not present at input of module B, perform ring break diagnostics. 


29 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Ring Break Test 

If there is a break in the ring (a defect between two control modules) the following fault 
patterns may occur: 

• Transmit diode of the transmitting control module defective 

• Power supply of the transmitting control module defective 

• Internal control module fault of the transmitting control module 

• Receiver diode of the receiving control module defective 

• Power supply of the receiving control module defective 

• Internal control module fault of the receiving control module 

• Optical wave guide between transmitting and receiving control module defective 

These faults may occur alone or in combination. To diagnose a ring break, the first step is 
to locate the two control modules between which the transmission failure has occurred. 

This is accomplished with the ring break diagnostic function. Once the two control mod¬ 
ules have been identified and the diagnostics have been performed, remember to check 
the power supply and ground circuit of both modules before condemning a module. 

Testing of the transmit/receive diodes will be possible using the OPPS tester. 

Perform Ring Break Test 

The ring break test mode is entered automatically when the power to all the modules in 
the MOST network is switched off and then switched back on. The most effective 
method of switching the power off and on is to disconnect the battery negative terminal 
for 45 seconds. This time will allow the capacitors of all the control modules to dissipate. 

When the battery is reconnected the control modules wake up and in MOST network 
order transmit a light signal to the next module. Each module checks to see if it has 
received a light signal from the previous module. If the control module does NOT receive 
a light input signal it still transmits a signal to the next module. A relative node number of 
0 is stored in the control module that did not receive a signal but that transmitted one. 

The Control Display receives the light signal back and identifies which modules 
responded. 

Go to “Control Unit Functions” Control Display Gateway and read fault memory. 


30 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




The Control Display will display a relative node number. This number will indicate how 
many modules communicated after the module which set the relative node number of 0. 

To find the control module with the relative node number of 0, count from the input side 
of the Control Display (counting the Control Display as 0) towards the control modules. 
When arriving at the control module with the number as displayed as the relative node 
number in the DISplus, the last known communicating module has been found. 

Example: 

While performing the ring break diagnostics the Control Display has set a relative node 
number of 2. Count the Control Display a 0, the Kombi will be i and the ASK will be 2. 

The ring break occurs between the ASK and the module which precedes it, the tele¬ 
phone module. 

Important! 

When counting control modules, the multimedia changer (if eguipped) and the Nav sys¬ 
tem must be counted as two control modules. 

In order to perform the count correctly the eguipment on the vehicle must first be 
identified. 

When using the MOST network diagram in the DISplus, connector number 1 of the opti¬ 
cal waves are inputs and connector number 2 are outputs. 


31 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Status Wakeup 

MOST control modules require high current during standby operation and must be dis¬ 
connected or put in sleep mode to prevent the vehicle battery from being discharged. In 
case of a fault on the the MOST network that continuously wakes up, the entire MOST 
bus will be woken up. The Control Display will wake up the CAN Bus and all the vehicle 
busses will be woken up. This will lead to battery discharge. 

It is of great benefit to know which module initiated the wake up call. In order to find out 
which MOST node woke up the MOST bus, the following procedure is performed - 
In Control Unit Functions, press “STATUS WAKEUP” 

Three different response are possible: 

• Control Module woke up 

• Control Module woken up 

• Control Module not initialized 

The Control Module with the status “Control Module woke up” is the module that woke 
up the rest of the MOST bus. 

This diagnosis only informs which control module woke, not the reason for the wake up, 
diagnostic testing should be performed on the control module and related equipment. 

Hints for Vehicle Equipment Identification 

• CDC - Look on passenger side of dashboard above glovebox. 

• Logic 7 - Look for speaker grills on rear doors 

Look on left side of trunk for large amp. 

• MMC - Look on left side of trunk. 


32 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



E65 MOST Bus Diagnostic Tips 
Fault Symptoms E65 

Particularly when carrying out troubleshooting in the MOST system network it is impor¬ 
tant to know the precise significance of visible and audible symptoms. With this informa¬ 
tion it is possible to locate and correct faults much faster. 

The starting point for locating faults should always be to pose detailed questions relating 
to the fault to the customer. This information can then be used to formulate initial consid¬ 
eration before the BMW diagnosis system is connected. 

The following information should be available to the technician: 

• When does the fault occur? E.g. already during engine start or while driving? 

• Since when does the fault occur? 

• Does the fault depend on temperature? When cold, hot or after longer period of 
vehicle operation? 

• Do several functions fail simultaneously? If so, which? 

• Is the fault still present after shutting down and restarting the vehicle? 

• Was something switched on or off immediately before the fault occurred? 

• Is it necessary to enter the telephone PIN after restarting the system? 

• Does the radio/CD need to be switched on separately after restarting the system? 

• How often does the system fail? 

• How long does audio failure last? 

• Can a loud clicking noise be heard in connection with the fault? 

• Is the system OK again after switching terminal 15 off and on? 

• What was shown on the main screen and in the assistance window? 

• Does the control display fail? 

• Is the display white or black or does it flicker in connection with the fault? 

• Can a status line still be seen? 

• What is shown after resetting the MOST bus (last menu, basic menu/start menu, 
BMW logo)? 

• Does the CD changer make a noise after audio failure? 


33 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




In addition, various factors that could also cause malfunctions in the system should be 
clarified: 

• What control units have already been replaced? 

• Did the fault symptom change after replacing control units? 

• Was the light intensity reduced for the control units? 

• Were the plug connections at the MOST control units checked? 

• Was another or new road DVD inserted? 

• What road DVD was used? 

• Was something retrofitted on the vehicle or a repair carried out? 

• To what CIP status (integration stage) does the vehicle correspond? 

• Were aftermarket parts retrofitted into any vehicle electrical systems? 

Based on the information provided by the customer and after examining any changes 
in the system it may be possible to determine faults already at this stage. 

Why are these statements important? Examples from visual applications: 

Creating Images 

The control display (CD) contains two control units, i.e. the CD gateway that establishes 
the connection to the other bus systems and the CD graphics stage that builds up the 
graphics in the control display. Not all images in the CD are created by the CD graphics 
stage. All basic menus, sub-menus and the status line are created by the graphics stage 
(blue). The map is presented by the navigation computer via RGB lines (red). 

Consequently: 

If only the map is not displayed but the rest, e.g. the on-board computer, is still visible and 
if other menus can still be selected via the controller, in all probability the fault will be in 
the area of the navigation system. 

Important: The navigation map can also be displayed on the left-hand side. 

Non-Digitized Area 

A road map DVD, on which an area is not completely digitized can cause the navigation 
screen to turn green. 

Self-Burnt DVDs 

A self-burnt or faults road map DVD can cause the navigation computer to crash. Also a 
defective computer can trigger a reset of the navigation system, indicating "Initialization 
running" in the control display. 


34 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




Telephone E65 

The telephone AF is routed via the MOST bus in the form of light signals to the ASK. The 
light is converted in the ASK and the AF is output from the speakers by means of a hard¬ 
wired electrical signal. 

The microphone is connected via copper cables directly to the telephone control unit. 
Even if an SVS is installed, it does not have anything directly to do with hands-free tele¬ 
phone operation. 

SVS is activated when voice commands are executed. The cause of a fault in hands-free 
operation should be sought in the area of the microphone, telephone and ASK. 

If the telephone PIN is necessary after failure of the MOST bus, this indicates that the 
telephone control unit triggered a reset and in all probability the fault can be rectified by 
replacing the telephone control unit. 

If the MOST bus is blocked, a telephone conversation via the cordless keypad handset 
should still be possible provided the telephone itself is not defective. 

Audio 

The two models E60 and E65 differ considerably in the area of the audio systems. These 
design differences necessitate different assessment methods for the purpose of locating 
faults. 

The ASK is responsible for audio output on the E65. If the vehicle is equipped with a 
Top HiFi amplifier, the audio signal is sent in the form of a light signal from the audio 
source to the Top HiFi amplifier and forwarded to the speakers as an electrical signal. 

Some of the speakers are activated directly by the ASK and some by the Top HiFi amplifi¬ 
er (LOGIC 7). 

If the E65 is equipped with a HiFi amplifier, the sound information is transferred via a hard 
wire circuit to the amplifier. 

In connection with the Top HiFi system on the E60, all sound signals are routed from the 
multi-audio system controller/car communication computer in the form of light signals to 
the Top HiFi amplifier. 

No sound signals are transmitted along fibre-optic cables in connection with the stereo 
and HiFi systems. The multi-audio system controller/car communication computer itself is 
responsible for the control of the speakers. 


35 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



E60 MOST Bus Diagnosis 

The MOST network uses a ring bus for data communication between the various mod¬ 
ules. Signal transmission is by means of a fiber-optic cable. Data transmission on the ring 
bus takes place in one direction only. On the the MOST ring, messages can only be 
transmitted provided the bus ring complete and fully functional. 

If for example the power supply or the diode of a control module is defective, the MOST 
bus in non-operational and no communication is able to take place. Exceptions are the 
gateway control module (CCC or MASK) and the HUD control module. 

CCC/MASK 

E60 series vehicles are fitted with either the CCC or the MASK. Either of these control 
modules are the interface between the MOST bus and the K-CAN. 

To diagnose the CCC or MASK: 

• CCC (Car Communication Computer) all the control modules with the abbreviation 
CCC must be selected (e.g. CCC-GW). 

• MASK (Multi Audio System Controller) all the control modules the the abbreviation 
MASK must be selected (e.g. MASK-GW). 

Diagnosis Excessive Temperature 

If a control module becomes too hot, this control module switches off for up to 10 min¬ 
utes. This switches the ENTIRE MOST bus down for 10 minutes. After the control 
module cools down it (and the MOST bus) is functional again. 

If this fault, “Deactivation excess temperature”, is stored in the CCC (or MASK) and any 
of the other MOST control modules there are two possibilities: 

• If the fault is ONLY in the CCC (MASK), then this module is responsible for the 
MOST bus shut down. 

• If the fault is stored in the CCC (MASK) and one or more other control modules on 
the MOST bus, the most likely cause of MOST bus failure is the other control mod¬ 
ule. However, this does not rule out the possibility that the CCC (MASK) is also 
defective. 

Control Module Resets 

Using the DISplus or GT1 a Test Plan may be run to check number of control module 
resets for each control module on the MOST bus. 

A control module with 0 (zero) resets has performed no reset, is not installed in the vehi¬ 
cle, or can not be found with the diagnostic eguipment. 

The control module with the highest number of resets is the most probable cause of a 
fault with the MOST bus. 


36 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Below is an example of a readout from the DISplus or GT1: 


Head-Up Display 15 

CD Changer 0 

Headset Interface 0 

Amplifier 0 

Video Module 0 

Telephone 0 

Satellite Radio 0 

Nav System Japan 0 

MASK (or CCC) 15 


Note: Resets at a rate of less than 10 may be normal for a control module. When 
the number of resets is less than 10, this is only an indication on the pos¬ 
sible cause of a fault. The control module should generally NOT be 
replaced with less than 10 resets. 

MOST Configuration 

On the E60, certain control units are always arranged in the same order. 

Other control units, on the other hand, can be connected in a different sequence. 

Same Sequence 

Depending on the equipment configuration, the multi-audio system controller/car com¬ 
munication computer is always followed by the CDC, HUD and then the MOST bus ter¬ 
minal. 

Different Sequence 

The sequence can change as from the MOST bus terminal. Possible control units 
include: 

- Top HiFi amplifier 

- Telephone 

- Video module 

From the MOST bus terminal, the fibre-optic cable is routed back via the flash plug to the 
multi-audio system controller/car communication computer. 


37 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Store Configuration 

On the E60, the sequence of control units in the MOST system network is identical in 
the front area of the vehicle. All control units located in the luggage compartment can be 
connected to the MOST bus terminal in any arbitrary order so that the sequence of the 
control units can change. 

Diagnosis on the MOST bus is only possible over a known sequence of control units in 
the MOST. When storing the MOST ring configuration, the control units are written in 
their installed sequence to a registration file. It is first necessary to check whether com¬ 
munication on the MOST bus is possible (stability check). 

The configuration is automatically restored after replacing or retrofitting a control unit in 
the MOST system network. This takes place after programming/encoding with CIP so 
that the control unit sequence is up-to-date. 

The "Store configuration" function is not activated automatically when the control units 
sequence is changed manually in the area of the luggage compartment (e.g. accident 
damage repair). 

E60 MOST control unit sequence 

K-CAN 

ccc 

M-ASK FS 


CDC 


HUD 


04219.03 




TEL 


TOP-HIFI 


VM 



38 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 















Ring Break Diagnosis 

Ring break diagnosis is already known from the E65. During ring break diagnosis on the 
E65, the voltage supply is interrupted directly at the battery. 

Contrary to the E65, restart of the MOST users on the E60 is realized via "Transport 
mode." The following relays are switched off: 

• Relay 1 MPM 

• Terminal 30g 

These relays supply voltage to all control units in the MOST system network. On activat¬ 
ing transport mode, the relays are switched off and the voltage supply interrupted. 

After the relays have been switched on again and the control units started up, the multi¬ 
audio system controller/car communication computer can detect the control units that still 
have communication capabilities and evaluate the results. Consequently, the BMW diag¬ 
nosis system specifies a nodal point that provides an indication of the interruption on the 
MOST bus. 

The functional description in the BMW diagnosis system provides detailed information on 
determining the nodal position on the MOST bus. 

Stability Check 

On the E60, the antenna tuner and the audio system controller are located in one unit. 
The radio is still operable in the stereo and in the HiFi system in the event of a communi¬ 
cation fault in the MOST system network. The stability check module was introduced for 
the purpose of checking the MOST bus in such cases. 

Effective operation of the MOST bus on the E60 can be checked with the stability check 
function. 

MOST Control Unit Supply 

The "MOST control unit supply" module makes available schematic circuit diagrams and 
information on the power supply of the MOST control units so that specific information is 
quickly available as required. 


39 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Repair of the MOST Fiber-Optic Cables 

The MOST bus may only be repaired (spliced) once between 2 control units, otherwise 
the attenuation may become too much and disrupt communication. 

Attenuation in the Fiber-optic line increases as the distance between controllers 
increases. 


This diagram describes the approximate length of the fiber optic cable from one controller 
to the next. 



Color 

Length 

Max. Attenuation 

■ 

1-1.5 

-1.4dB 

■ 

1.5-2 

-1.7dB 

■ 

2.5-3 

-2.4dB 


5-5.5 

-4.5dB 


The chart above provides the maximum attenuation values based on the cable length. 

The MOST bus may only be repaired using the prescribed special tool (crimping pliers) 
and special connectors. 


40 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 






































Workshop Exercise - E65 MOST (Ring Break Diagnosis) 

Using an E65/E66 disconnect an instructor designated MOST bus component and 
perform complete quick test. 

What is observed from the quick test results? 


Access the “Ring Break” test plan in the diagnosis program. (Note: There are 2 
paths to access the ring break diagnostics). Follow the on-screen prompts. 

How can it be determined whether or not there is an existing ring break? 


What are the results of the ring break test? (What nodal position is indicated?) 


What does this nodal position indicate? 


What are some possible causes of a “ring break” fault? 


Restore MOST bus connection and clear all faults. 



41 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - E65 MOST (Luminous Power Reduction) 


Using the instructor supplied “attenuation tool”, dial in the appropriate amount of 
attenuation as to cause “crackling” in the audio system. 


Go to “luminous power reduction” test (a.k.a “test- drop in light output”). Perform 
test and follow on-screen instructions. 


What is the “luminous power reduction” test used for? (And when should it be used?) 


Which component (if any) exhibited a problem during the test? 


What does this indicate? 


Using the “control unit functions” menu and access the affected module. Perform 
the luminous power reduction test via the component activation menu. 

What occurs during the test? 


What does this indicate? 


42 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - E65 MOST (Attenuation Testing) 


Using the OPPS/OPS tester, perform an attenuation test on an instructor designated 
component/system. Follow on-screen prompts. 

What is tool# 663124 used for? 


During the 1st calibration step (using 663124), what is the observed attenuation reading? 


What is the allowable attenuation for this step? 


Note: Observe extreme caution when installing or removing tool # 663125. 
Permanent damage can result to the test cables, which would invalidate 
attenuation readings. 

What is the observed attenuation reading of the MOST control module being tested? 


What is the specification for the attenuation test for the MOST control module? 


Why is it necessary to reset the OPPS/OPS tester? 


Perform attenuation test on the “optical wave guide”. Follow on-screen prompts. 

What is the observed attenuation reading of the “optical wave guide” being tested? 


What is the specification for the attenuation test for the “optical wave guide”? 


43 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - MOST Bus (E60,E63 and E64) 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, locate the MOST splice point in the rear of 
the vehicle. 


Determine the order of the MOST ring manually and record below: 


11 “ 

ccc 


M-ASK 




FS 


sV 


List the diagnosis path to access MOST configuration: 


As per the instructors directions, manually re-configure the MOST bus by re-order¬ 
ing selected components using the MOST bus splice point. 

Check the re-configured MOST bus by access the MOST configuration test module 
in diagnosis. 

Why is this test module important and when would it be used? 


44 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 























Workshop Exercise - MOST Bus (E60,E63 and E64) 


After completing the MOST configuration test module, record the new (re-ordered) 
MOST bus configuration below: 



e; 


(M219.CC 


Restore MOST bus to original configuration and re-check system. 
Locate the fiber optic jumper harness. 

Where is the fiber optic jumper located? 


45 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




















byte flight 


Introduction 

The permanently increasing complexity of in-car 
electronics and the rapidly growing amount of sen¬ 
sors, actuators and electronic control units, places 
higher demands on high-speed data communica¬ 
tion protocols. 

Safety critical systems need guick “thinking” proto¬ 
cols with fault tolerant behavior. The need for on¬ 
board diagnostics calls for flexible use of bandwidth 
and an ever-increasing number of functions. 

None of the communication solutions available on 
the market until now have been able to fulfill all 
these demands. 

To solve these problems, BMW together with sever¬ 
al semiconductor companies have developed byte- 
flight a new protocol for safety-critical applications in 
automotive vehicles. 


D-Bus 


K-CAN f 


I 


ZGM 


PT-CAN 


cn cn 

'--j ic jri u 

O' o 

mk o 


byte flight 


The byteflight is the bus system used exclusively for 
the ISIS system. 


Design 

The Intelligent Safety Integration System (ISIS) consists, depending on equipment level, 
of up to 11 satellites (control units), the Safety Information Module (SIM) and the Central 
Gateway module (ZGM). Seven of the eleven satellites contain crash detection sensors. 

In the event of an accident, the necessary restraint systems have to be activated within a 
fraction of a second in order to provide the maximum amount of protection for the vehi¬ 
cle's occupants. 

The system also has to ensure that the restraint systems are not deployed accidentally. 

In order to ensure that the ISIS meets the requirements placed upon it, large volumes of 
data have to be exchanged between the control units. This is achieved by means of an 
extremely high data transmission rate. 

The data is exchanged via a bus system. In order to protect the signals traveling along the 
bus system from interference caused by electrical or magnetic fields, the ISIS system 
does not use copper bus wires but optical fibers. 


46 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 






The layout of the ISIS takes the form of a star pattern. The Safety Information Module 
(SIM) is at the center of the system. Arranged radially around it are the satellite modules. 

Each of the eleven satellites is connected to the SIM by a fibre-optic cable. Each of the 
satellites contains a transmitter/receiver module. 

The SIM contains twelve transmitter and receiver modules. All information from each of 
the satellites is made available to every other satellite by the SIM. Each individual fibre- 
optic cable in the byteflight bus system is used for bi-directional data transmission. 

Function 

Transmitter/Receiver Module (SE) 

The transmitter/receiver module is a module that can convert electrical signals into optical 
signals and transmit them via optical fibers. Every satellite has an electrical-optical trans¬ 
mitter/ receiver module. 


Intelligent Star Coupler 



The transmitter/receiver modules are connected individually via the byteflight to the 
Intelligent Star Coupler in the SIM. The SIM also contains a transmitter/receiver module 
for each satellite. 



All information transmitted across the byteflight is in the form of data telegrams sent by 
means of light pulses. The transmitter/ receiver modules in the SIM receive the light puls¬ 
es from the various satellites. The Intelligent Star Coupler sends the data telegrams to all 
satellites. Data transmission is possible in both directions. 


47 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 












3S 


The transmitter/receiver (SE) module contains the LED for the driver circuit and the 
receiver amplifier for converting the optical signals into digital signals. It also has an inte¬ 
gral transmission guality monitoring circuit. 

If one of the following faults occurs on one of the fiber-optic cables, the satel¬ 
lite concerned is shut down: 

• No optical signal received over a pre-defined period. 

• Transmitter diode sends a continuous light signal. 

• Attenuation on the fiber-optic cable too great. 

The permissible degree of attenuation is stored within the system. If the attenuation 
exceeds the specified maximum level, one of the following faults may be the cause: 

• Kinking in the fiber-optic cable. 

• Compression of the fiber-optic cable. 

• Stretching of the fiber-optic cable. 

• Broken fiber-optic cable. 

• Damaged fiber-optic cable. 


48 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 






















Data Transmission 

The ISIS has a number of sensors positioned at strategic points throughout the vehicle. 
They are located in the satellites that are connected to the SIM via the byteflight. All sen¬ 
sors are scanned continuously and the data distributed to all satellites. 


Airbag 


Satellit 

mit 

Sensor 



Airbag 



Satellit 

mit 

Sensor 


Airbag 


O 

O 



Airbag 



O 


Satellit mit 


□ 


□ 


□ 



0 

Satellit mit 
Sensor 


Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the byteflight is carried out using the Diagnosis Program. Since the byte- 
flight is a star structure and not a continuous ring like the MOST there is a test module 
“Data transmission to the satellites” that can check communication between each satel¬ 
lite and the SIM module. 

Any satellite that does not respond must then be checked individually using a separate 
Test Module. 

Repairs to the byteflight fiber-optic cable are not permitted. However, complete cables 
between the SIM and the affected satellites may be replaced. 


49 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 














Controller Area Network (CAN Bus) 


Introduction 

The CAN bus is a serial communications bus in which all connected control units can 
send as well as receive information. Data exchanges over a CAN operate at a rate of 100 
to 500Kbps. 

The CAN protocol was originally developed by Robert Bosch GMbH and the Intel corpo¬ 
ration in 1988 for use in the automotive electronics industry to provide a standardized, 
reliable and cost-effective communications bus. 

The CAN bus was originally introduced on BMW automobiles in 1992 740i/iL as a data 
link between the DME and AGS control units. 

E65 K-CAN 
Introduction 

For the E65, the functions that were incorporated within the main bodyshell electrical 
system on the E38 have been distributed among a number of separate control units. 
Those control units and various new control units are connected to the K-CAN. 

The K-CAN is a new development and is subdivided into two sections, the K-CAN 
System and the K-CAN Peripherals. 

Examples of new control units and functions on the K-CAN are the Car Access System 
(CAS), the Centre Console Control Center module (BZM), the Rear Centre Console 
Control Center module (BZMF) and the Power Module (PM). 

K-CAN System/Peripherals 

The subdivision of the K-CAN into the sections "SYSTEM" and "PERIPHERALS" 
relieves the load on the bus because the number of vehicle components (control 
units/modules) is divided between two "independent" bus systems. 


50 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Advantages of two K-CAN Busses 

The advantages of two K-CAN busses are as follows: 

• In a crash, it is possible that components could fail as a result of a short circuit on the 
K-CAN. The K-CAN Peripherals covers such at-risk areas. If the K-CAN Peripherals 
were to fail, the K-CAN System would still remain functional. 

• Addition of new vehicle components to either bus is possible at any time. (Maximum 
40 control units per bus) 

• Low data load on the bus system from bus users due to division into two sections. 

• Greater reliability. 



K-CAN P 


K-CAN S 


51 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 












































Voltage Level on the K-CAN. 

If the CAN High voltage level changes from low to high, this represents a logical 1. If the 
voltage level changes back to low, this represents a logical 0. The voltage level on the 
CAN is in the range of 1V to 5V. 




Note: The voltage can alter as a result of a defective terminal resistor, for exam¬ 
ple. This has an effect on the CAN system. Communication between bus 
nodes no longer functions properly. 

Terminal Resistor 

An electrical conductor through which current passes always has an ohmic, an inductive 
and a capacitive impedance. When data is transmitted from point "A" to point "B" over a 
CAN line, the total sum of that impedance has an effect on the transmission of that data. 

The higher the transmission freguency, the greater the effect of the inductive and capaci¬ 
tive impedance. The result of this can be that when the signal reaches the end of the data 
transmission line, it is unidentifiable. For that reason, the data line is "modified" by termi¬ 
nal resistors so as to preserve the original signal. 

The inductive impedance is produced by phenomena such as the coil effect of the wire. 
The capacitive impedance for example is produced by the effect of routing the wire paral¬ 
lel to the vehicle body. The terminal resistors on a bus system vary. They are generally 
dependent on the following parameters: 

• Freguency of data transmission on the bus system. 

• Inductive/capacitive load on the transmission channel. 

• Length of the data transmission cable (The longer the cable is, the greater is the 
inductive component). 


52 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 















The control units are categorized either as basic control units or other control units. 
Categorization is performed on the basis of the impedance level. Basic control units are 
those which always have to be fitted in the car regardless of eguipment level or market. 
Other control units are those that are dependent on the options fitted. 

The terminal resistor values for the K-CAN system are 820 Ohm for “Basic” controllers 
and 12K Ohms for all other control units. 



For the E65 the Basic controllers are: 

K-CAN S: LM, IHKA, CAS, CD, ZGM, KOMBI. 

K-CAN P: CAS, TMFAT, TMBFT, HKL 
The resistors are located inside of the control units. 

Wake-Up on the K-CAN 

The control units on the K-CAN network are "awakened" via the bus. For that reason, it 
has been possible to dispense with the previous function of terminal 15 as wake-up line. 
The wake-up message is passed directly to the control unit output stage by the CAS 
module receiver. The output stage switches terminal 30 on and the unit is woken up. 


53 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




PT (Powertrain) CAN 


Introduction 

The PT CAN is the fastest CAN bus in the E65. It is an existing bus system. PT CAN 
stands for powertrain CAN. It links all control units/modules associated with the power- 
train. All the bus nodes are connected in parallel with one another. In contrast with the 
previous bus, (two-core twisted pair) it now has three wires. The third wire of the bus 
cable is used as the wake-up line and has nothing to do with the actual CAN bus func¬ 
tion. 


Voltage Level on the PT CAN 

When the bus is inactive, the bus high and 
low levels are at 2.5 V. 

When the bus becomes active, the CAN Low 
voltage level changes to low (1.5 V) and the 
CAN High level changes to high (4 V), thus 
representing logical 1. 

PT CAN Terminal Resistors 

The PT CAN uses two terminal resistors to 
establish the correct inductive and capacitive 
impedance in the communication lines. Two 
120 Ohm resistors are located in the wire har¬ 
ness (no longer in the control units as on pre¬ 
vious systems). The resistors are located: 

• Ahead of the right front wheel. (Behind 
bumper) 

• Below the rear seat. 

The resistance is measured by connecting 
the appropriate adapter to any of the modules 
on the PT-CAN and measuring resistance 
between CAN-H and CAN-L. 

The measured resistance should be close to 
60 Ohms. 


v 




Wake Up 


PT-CAN 


54 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



























Failsafe Characteristics 

If the PT CAN goes into emergency mode it is no longer available for the engine control 
system. However, it can still provide communication between the other bus nodes even if: 

• One of the CAN leads (cores) is broken- one of the CAN leads (cores) is shorting to 
ground. 

• One of the CAN leads (cores) is shorting to the power supply B+. 

"Wake-up" Lead in PT CAN Network 

The PT CAN for the E65 is now a three wire CAN, the third wire is a hard wire KL-15 sig¬ 
nal used to wake up the powertrain control units. The "wake-up" lead has nothing to do 
with the actual PT CAN function. A wake-up telegram is still transmitted by the CAS via 
the ZGM - PT-CAN as a CAN message. 

Notes: 


55 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Diagnosis Bus 


Introduction 

The aim of diagnosis is to enable a Technician to reliably identify a defective component. 
By the use of appropriate hardware and monitoring software, the microprocessor of a 
control unit, for example, is able to detect faults in the control unit and its peripherals. 



OBD scan tools 
10.400 Bit/s 


CAS 


SMFA 


TMFAT 


TM 

FATH 


SMFAH 


HKL 


TM 

BFTH 


SM8FH 


PM 


AHM 


PDC 


RDC 


CIM 


LM 


OWA 


IHKA 



K-CAN P 


K-CAN S 


MOST 


byteflight 


PT-CAN 


Faults identified are stored in the fault memory and can be read out using the Diagnosis 
Program. Data transfer between the vehicle and the diagnosis tool takes place via the 
Diagnosis bus (D bus). The new features of the diagnosis bus are: 

• Faster data transmission speed of 115 kBd. 

• Central diagnosis access point (OBD connector). 

• Single diagnostic cable (TxD II) for the entire vehicle. 

• Omission of the TxDI cable. 

• Access to diagnosis functions reguires “Authorization”. 

• Diagnosis protocol "KWP 2000" (Keyword Protocol 2000). 

• Standardized diagnosis structure for all control units. 


56 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 






















































































































































Diagnosis Concept 

The "BMW Fast" (BMW fast access for service and testing) diagnosis concept introduced 
on the E65 is applied. This concept is based on the "Keyword Protocol 2000" (KWP 
2000 ) 

diagnosis protocol defined as part of the ISO 14230 standard. Diagnosis communication 
takes place entirely on the basis of a transport protocol on the CAN bus. 

The Diagnosis bus is connected to the Central Gateway Module. All bus systems apart 
from the MOST bus are connected to the Central Gateway Module (ZGM). 

Vehicle Diagnosis Access Point 

The diagnosis tool is connected to the vehicle by means of the diagnosis connector OBD 
( On-Board Diagnosis ). The connector is located behind a small cover in the drivers 
side kick panel trim. There is a black plastic cap that bridges KL-30 to the D-bus when 
the connector is not being used. This cap must be removed before installing the diagno¬ 
sis cable. 



TheTxD lead is located in pin 7 of the OBD socket and is connected directly to the ZGM. 

The ZGM detects by means of the data trans-mission speed whether a BMW diagnosis 
tool (DISplus, GT-1) or an aftermarket scanner is connected. 

The DME allows access to different data depending on the diagnosis tool connected. 

Note: When using an OBD scan tool for diagnosis, the transmission speed is 
10.4 KBit/s. 


57 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 








Workshop Exercise - PT-CAN 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, access the DME (ECM) and connect the 
appropriate breakout box and test cables. Using the Oscilloscope, obtain a pattern of 
the CAN High signal. 

What is the voltage of the CAN High signal? And what else can be observed of the CAN 
High signal? 


What is the wire color for CAN High? _ 

Record you oscilloscope setting and connections below. 

Voltage_ Freguency _ 

Connections: MFK 1 or 2 Describe positive and negative connections below: 


Using the Oscilloscope, obtain a pattern of the CAN Low signal. 

What is the voltage of the CAN Low signal? And what else can be observed of the CAN 
Low signal? 


What is the wire color for CAN Low? 

Record you oscilloscope setting and connections below. 

Voltage _ Frequency _ 

Connections: MFK 1 or 2 Describe positive and negative connections below: 


58 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Workshop Exercise - PT-CAN 

Using the DISplus or GT-1 (with MIB), display the CAN High and CAN low signal together. 

What can be observed regarding these two signals? 

Using the multi-meter functions of the DISplus/GT-1, measure the resistance 
between CAN High and CAN Low. 

What is the total resistance between CAN High and CAN Low? 

What causes the resistance readings obtained? 

Where are the PT-CAN terminal resistors located in this vehicle? What is the resistance 
value of the PT-CAN terminal resistors? 


What occurs when CAN High is grounded? 


What occurs when CAN High is grounded? 



59 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - K-CAN 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, access the K-CAN circuit and display pattern 
on oscilloscope. 

What is the voltage of the K-CAN (High and Low)? 


What are the major differences between the K-CAN and PT-CAN scope patterns? 


What occurs if there is a malfunction of the K-CAN Low circuit? (i.e. open/grounded) 


What occurs if there is a malfunction of the K-CAN High circuit? (i.e. open/grounded) 


Measure the resistance between K-CAN High and K-CAN low. 

What is the total resistance between K-CAN High and K-CAN Low? 


Where are the K-CAN terminal resistors located? What are the ohmic values of these 
resistors? 


60 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

Fill in the component location below: 



A. _ B. _ 

C. _ D. _ 

E._ 

In the E65, which modules perform the task of “Gateway”? 


What are some of the handling precautions when working with fiber-optic cables? 


61 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 

























4. 


What is the difference between the fiber-optic connector of a MOST component 
and a byteflight component? 


5. What is the difference between the D-Bus of the E65 and other BMW models? 


6. How many terminal resistors are located in the PT-CAN? Where are they located? 
What should the total resistance be on the PT-CAN? 


7. During a diagnosis of the MOST bus on an E65, the technician finds a recorded 
fault in the SVS. The fault is “A control module does not switch off light”. Which 
control module is most likely the cause of this fault? And why? (explain answer) 


8. When performing the “ring break” diagnosis test, battery voltage must be 
interrupted to MOST bus control units. What is the difference between the 
methods of disconnecting voltage on the E65 versus the E60? 


62 

Introduction to Advanced Body Electronics 



