Table of Contents 


E65 iDrive - Driving Area 

Subject Page 

iDrive.3 

Introduction .3 

Tri-Level Function Structure .4 

Driving Area .5 

Components.5 

Ignition Switch (CAS/ZAS).6 

Instrument Cluster (refer to separate training module).6 

Steering Column Switch Center (SZL) .7 

Steering Wheel Components .9 

Transmission Shift Buttons .10 

Signal Path.10 

MFL Function Buttons.11 

Left-Side Function Buttons .11 

Right-Side Function Buttons .11 

Steering Column Components.12 

Turn signal, High Beam, BC and CC Switch .13 

Transmission Selector Lever.14 

Wiper Switch .16 

Cruise Control Lever.17 

Steering Column Adjustment.18 

Steering Wheel Heater Switch .19 

Electro-Mechanical Parking Brake Button .20 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 Revision Date: 

























E65 iDrive - Driving Area 


Model: E65/E66 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the iDrive concept 

• Understand basic driver operated controls on the E65/E66 


2 

E65 iDrive - Driving Area 






iDrive 


Introduction 

The number of advanced driver assistance systems, communication and convenience 
functions with new capabilities is continually increasing in modern-day vehicles. That 
trend is set to continue at an ever growing speed, driven on by the digitization of elec¬ 
tronic and communication technologies. 

Conventional display and control systems are reaching the limits of their capabilities. 

The 700 or so control functions that are possible on the E65 would create a totally 
unmanageable conglomeration of switches, controls and displays if the conventional 
arrangement had to be used. iDrive redefines the concept of active driving and specifi¬ 
cally, driver-orientated ergonomics. 

This new control and display concept enables driver and passenger to access more infor¬ 
mation and functions in spite of the smaller number of buttons and switches. It lends a 
unique and intuitive feel to the process of controlling the E65, thereby increasing safety 
on the road as well as the pleasure of driving. 

The name iDrive does not identify a specific system or component, it is a term which 
expresses BMW's trademark driver's-car image. The letter i in iDrive stands for the phi¬ 
losophy of the entire control and display concept: 

• interactive 

• intelligent 

• innovative 

• intuitive 

• integrated 

• informative 

• inspired 



3 

E65 iDrive - Driving Area 





















The Drive concept is divided into two sections: 

• The "Driving Area" (steering wheel and immediately adjacent controls operated by 
driver only); all driver-operated functions are concentrated in the area immediately 
within the driver's reach. 

• The "Comfort Area" (in the middle of the dashboard) which gives both the driver and 
front passenger easy access to all convenience functions. 



Tri-Level Function Structure 

1. Basic functions such as gear shifting, windshield wipers and electro-mechanical 
parking brake (EMF), that are of greatest importance in terms of driving and safety, 
are positioned in the area around the steering wheel within the immediate reach of 
the driver. 

2. Frequently used basic functions such as lights, air conditioning/ heating temperature, 
radio volume and rear window heater are controlled by means of switches on the 
instrument panel in the conventional manner. 

3. The additional convenience, communication and driver-assistance functions are 
operated by means of the Controller (central control device) and displayed on the 
Control Display (central display screen). 


4 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 

























Driving Area 

Components 

The following components are within the Driving Area: 

• Ignition Switch (CAS/ZAS) with start/stop button. 

• Instrument Cluster. 

• Steering Column Switch Center (SZL). 

• Multi-function Steering Wheel (MFL). 

• Electro-mechanical Parking Brake button (EMF). 

All important control functions for driving and road safety such as automatic transmission 
selector lever, cruise control switch and turn indicator and high beam switches are 
arranged within the Driving Area. That means that the driver can direct his/her full atten¬ 
tion to the road and traffic conditions. 



Parking brake 
button 


SZL/MFL 


Instrument Ignition Switch 
Cluster (CAS/ZAS) 


5 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 





Ignition Switch (CAS/ZAS) 

The car can be started by means of the start/stop button in combination with the ignition 
switch and key once access authorization has been confirmed (clearance signal from Car 
Access System) and the brake pedal is depressed. 

The start/stop button can also be used to switch off the engine or to select the various 
electrical system statuses when the brake pedal is not depressed. 


The ignition switch no longer consists of the conventional ignition switch/steering lock 
and matching ignition key. The ignition switch now consists of: 


• Remote control holder unit with electro¬ 
mechanical lock. 

• Start/stop button. 

• Coil for scanning the transponder and 
charging the battery in the remote control. 

Refer to the chapter “Power Management for 
more information concerning the ignition 
switch functions. 


Instrument Cluster (refer to separate 
training module) 



As the description of the instrument cluster is very extensive, it has not been included 
here in the module on the "Driving Area." 


Information about the instrument cluster can be found in the separate module, "E65 
Instrument cluster." 



6 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 





Steering Column Switch Center (SZL) 

The Steering Column Switch Center (SZL) handles all functional components of the 
Multi-Function Steering Wheel (MFL) and the steering column. Those functions include: 

• Audio system, telephone, transmission shift, horn and a freely programmable func¬ 
tion button via the MFL function buttons. 

• Direction indicators/high-beam headlights, transmission selector lever, windshield 
wiper, cruise control via the 4 control stalks on the steering column. 

• Electrical steering wheel adjustment via the button on the left of the steering 
column. 

• Steering wheel heater via the button on the left of the steering column. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

MFL with function buttons 

5 

Cruise control stalk 

2 

Turn signal/high beam stalk 

6 

Steering wheel heating switch 

3 

Transmission selector lever 

7 

Steering column adjustment stalk 

4 

Wiper switch 




The electronic control system for the SZL is divided between two electronic modules 
that are integrated respectively in the Steering Column Switch Center and inside the 
steering wheel. 

Signal transmission from the controls of the MFL is passed on to the SZL by means of a 
coil-spring (slip-ring) conductor. 

The steering angle sensor for DSC is also integrated in the SZL. The SZL processes the 
control commands and sends them via the byteflight bus system to the appropriate con¬ 
trol units (e.g. DSC, LM). 

The E65 is the first model on which a steering column switch center with such an exten¬ 
sive range of functions has been used. 


7 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 












Integrated Steering Wheel Electronics Module Exploded view of the SZL and integrated 
(LRE) located in steering wheel steering angle sensor (LSE) 


The steering angle sensor is a component of the SZL module and is integrated inside it. 


D-BUS 



The SZL is a satellite of the overall ISIS system (Intelligent Safety and Integration System) 
on the byteflight bus system. 

More detailed information about the Intelligent Safety and Integration System can be 
found in the chapter "Passive Safety." 

In addition to the bus link, there are also two hard-wire cable connections to the LM and 
EGS systems for (redundancy) safety reasons. 


8 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 


















































































Steering Wheel Components 

The Multi-Function Steering Wheel (MFL) in the E65 is the most complex steering wheel 
produced by BMW and consists of the following components: 

• Steering wheel 

• Airbag unit 

• Left and right-hand function buttons 

• Shift buttons 

• Steering wheel module (control unit) 

In addition to the MFL buttons familiar from the E38, the transmission can now also be 
shifted from the steering wheel. The left-hand group of function buttons on the steering 
wheel are used to control the functions: voice input, audio/navlGATion/telephone(volume), 
telephone (send/end call). 

The function buttons on the right operate the functions: “Low” program for the transmis¬ 
sion , station search for radio channels, and an additional programmable function button. 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Steptronic buttons for upshifting 

5 

“Free” programmable button 

2 

Shift buttons for downshift 

6 

Telephone send/end button 

3 

“Low” program button 

7 

Volume control 

4 

Search buttons for audio system 

8 

Voice input (push-to-talk) 


9 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 














Transmission Shift Buttons 

The transmission shift buttons are integrated 
in the steering wheel. For reasons of conve¬ 
nience (changing gear one-handed) the 
switches are duplicated on each side. 

“Low” program: Operating the two buttons on 
the face of the steering wheel signals the EGS 
(TCM) to perform a down-shift. 

Before the EGS (TCM) will respond to the but¬ 
tons the “Low” program must be activated 
using the “L” button in the right-hand MFL 
button group. 

The shift buttons are Hall-effect sensors. 

Signal Path 

When the shift +/- buttons are pressed, the signal is sent via the steering wheel electron¬ 
ics module and the slip-ring to the SZL module. 

From the SZL the signal is passed on to the byteflight bus. 

It then travels via the Safety Information Module (SIM) and the Central Gateway Module 
(ZGM) to the PT-CAN and ultimately the EGS (TCM) where it is processed. 

For safety reasons, there is a hard-wired serial data cable available as redundant back-up 
in case of any bus problems. 



D-BUS 



SZL 


SFZ 


SASL 

\ 


SASR 





sm 


SIM 


STVR 



SSVL 



SSVR 






SB3L 


SBSR 




SSH 


DD 


□ME 


EGS 


EMF 


GRS 


CSC 


EDCK 


byteflight 


PT-CAN 


10 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 


















































MFL Function Buttons 


Left-Side Function Buttons 

Pressing the voice input button ("push to talk") activates the Speech Processing System 
(SVS). 

The +/- rocker allows adjustment of the volume of audio system, telephone and naviga¬ 
tion system. The telephone receiver button is used to make or end a telephone call or 
accept an incoming call. 



Right-Side Function Buttons 

Pressing the L button signals the EGS (TCM) to engage the “Limiting program”. The lim¬ 
iting mode is indicated on the instrument cluster display by the letter "L" when active. 
Pressing the button again restores the normal drive program. 

Pressing the “up/down” rocker button activates the radio station search function. When a 
compact disc is playing, touching the rocker button moves playback to the next/previous 
track. With a telephone, it can be used to scroll through the stored phone book. 

The bottom button is a programmable-function button with Key Memory function. The 
Key Memory function allows the button to be programmed differently for different drivers 
(keys). 

The "Settings" menu in the Control Display offers a choice of functions such as 
"Automatic Hold" (automatic parking brake operation) and "Air Recirculation" for which 
the button can be programmed. 

Those functions are selected using the controller. The button is then assigned the select¬ 
ed function. 


11 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 





Steering Column Components 

The 4 steering column stalks and the steering column module (SZL) are a single unit. 

The steering column stalks of the SZL are: 

• Turn signal and high beam switch. 

• Transmission selector lever. 

• Wiper switch. 

• Cruise control lever. 



On the E65, a new design of steering column stalk has been introduced. 

What is new is that the steering column stalks are now essentially buttons (momentary 
switches). 

That means that they no longer engage in fixed positions for their various functions. 

In order to operate the direction indicators, for example, the stalk is pushed beyond a 
point of resistance (detent). When released, it returns to its center position. 


12 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 






Turn signal, High Beam, BC and CC Switch 

The turn signal and high beam switch is a button (momentary switch) that is used to 
operate the high beam, direction indicators and to switch on the parking lights. 




The turn signal switch incorporates two axial (push button) switches for the On-Board 
Computer displays. 

The top switch (2) activates the board computer display on the instrument cluster below 
the tachometer. This shows information such as average fuel consumption and average 
speed. The lower switch (1) activates the On-Board Computer display on the instrument 
cluster below the speedometer. This shows information such as fuel level and range. 

Automatic cancelling of the turn signals is controlled by the signal from the steering angle 
sensor. The SZL sends the command via the bus system to the light module (LM) where 
it is converted. 

Brief operation of the turn signals can be accomplished by touching the stalk as far as 
(but not beyond) the point of resistance. 

The parking light function is switched on by pressing the stalk beyond the point of resis¬ 
tance when the ignition is off. The function is cancelled by pressing the stalk in the 
opposite direction. 

To switch the high beam “ON”, the stalk is tapped forwards, and to switch high beam 
“OFF” or flash the headlights, it is tapped backwards. When the driver operates the turn 
signal or high beam switch, a message is sent to the light module. 

The signal travels from the SZL via the byteflight bus to the SIM. From there is passes to 
the ZGM and onto the K-CAN SYSTEM and the light module (LM). 

The light module simultaneously analyzes a redundant back-up signal from the SZL. 

This is transmitted via a separate lead. This means that the signal is independent of the 
K-CAN SYSTEM and the byteflight bus. 

The purpose of this duplication is to ensure vehicle safety. Even if the bus systems fail, 
the functions can still be operated. 


13 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 



Transmission Selector Lever 


The new automatic transmission for the E65 has an electronic gear shift system. That 
means there is no mechanical link between the selector lever and the gearbox. 

The transmission selector lever is positioned on the right-hand side of the steering col¬ 
umn and like the turn signal switch, is a momentary switch. 



The selector lever is used to select the transmission modes R - N - D and R 

Advantages of electronic gear shift system: 

• Greater ease of operation, e.g. the parking lock is engaged automatically when the 
key is removed from the ignition. 

• The components of an electronic gear shift system take up less space. 

• No transmission of noise or vibration as there is no physical connection between 
lever and gearbox. 

• Electronic shift lock prevents unauthorized operation. This means that the steering 
lock is no longer required as an anti-theft feature. 

The transmission selector lever is the main input device for controlling the electronic 
transmission control unit (EGS). 

The selector lever has 7 Hall-effect sensors that are duplicate-coded in such a way that 
the failure of one of sensors does not result in failure of the complete selector lever. 

The driver's request is detected by the dual-system sensors in the transmission selector 
lever and transmitted by the SZL to the electronic transmission control unit (EGS). 


14 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 





The EGS checks that the gear shift is permissible and initiates the operation via the elec¬ 
tronic-hydraulic control unit that is integrated in the automatic gearbox. 

The currently selected gear and any Check Control messages such as "Press brake 
pedal to engage gear" are displayed on the instrument cluster for the information of the 
driver. 


D-BUS 





SASL 

\ 


SASR 





STVL 


SIM 


STVR 



SSVL 



SSVR 














byte flight PT-CAN 

The selector lever signals are not carried out unless the EGS has received a clearance 
signal from the Car Access System (CAS). That means that an authorized key must have 
been detected in the holder unit of the ignition switch. If the key is removed from the 
ignition, the parking lock is automatically engaged. 

The gear shift "gate" pattern on the selector lever is fitted with locator lighting (controlled 
by terminal 58g). 

When the selector lever is operated, the signal is transmitted to the SZL. 

From the SZL the signal is passed to the byteflight bus. 

It then travels via the SIM and the ZGM to the PT-CAN and ultimately the electronic 
transmission control unit (EGS) where it is processed. 

For safety reasons, there is a serial cable available as redundant back-up in case of any 
bus problems. 


15 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 
































Wiper Switch 

The wiper switch is also a momentary switch. It does not engage in fixed positions for its 
various functions. 

The control concept incorporates a seguential mode. That means that the wiper speed 
settings are selected by tapping the stalk repeatedly the required number of times in the 
desired direction. 



The wiper switch also incorporates an axial (push-button) switch (1). The Rain/Light sen¬ 
sor (RLS), system is switched on and off by this switch. The function is indicated by an 
LED (3). 

When the ignition is switched “OFF”, the wiper and the rain sensor are switched off at 
the same time. 

The rain sensor is activated by means of the push-button switch on the wiper stalk. The 
LED then lights up. 

When the rain sensor is switched on, the windshield wipers are controlled automatically 
according to how much precipitation (rain or snow) is on the windshield. 

That includes switching them on and off and selecting the required setting from intermit¬ 
tent to continuous wipe. The rain sensor is switched off by touching the push-button 
switch again or automatically when the ignition is switched OFF. 

The adjuster wheel sets the sensitivity of the rain sensor to a choice of 4 levels. 


16 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 


Cruise Control Lever 

The cruise control (FGR) is a function of the 
DME (ECM) and has multi-speed storing capa¬ 
bility on the E65. 

This new multi-speed function allows the driver 
to program and store multiple speed settings 
which can then be activated as desired. 

Frequently required speed settings such as 
55, 65 or 70 mph can be selected directly at 
the touch of a button without having to drive 
the vehicle at precisely that speed beforehand. 

This is a considerable added convenience. Those preset cruise control speeds are pro¬ 
grammed by the driver in advance and then activated when driving.The memory can 
store up to 6 preset speeds. 


Index 

Description 

i 

Speedometer display 

2 

Preset speed markers 

3 

Cruise control active pointer 
(illuminated) 

4 

Cruise control not active pointer (dim) 


The signal path for the cruise control switch is from the SZL to the SIM to the ZGM via 
the byteflight. 

The signal then is placed on the PT-CAN by the ZGM and received by the DME (ECM). 


Function 

Operation 

Engage cruise control Accelerate/set 

Push lever forward 

Decelerate/set 

Pull lever back 

Activate Multi-speed function 

Push lever forward past detent 

Select higher preset speed 

Push lever forward past detent 

Select lower preset speed 

Pull lever back past detent 

Cancel cruise control 

Tap lever up/down 

Resume/set/delete preset speeds 

Touching lever inwards 




17 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 



















Steering Column Adjustment 

The E65 is supplied with electrical steering column adjustment. 

The adjuster knob for the adjustment is located on the left-hand side of the steering 
column trim. 



The electrical steering column adjustment incorporates the comfort entry function. The 
steering wheel can be adjusted fore and aft and vertically to suit the driving position. 

The steering wheel position is a car memory function and is memorized together with the 
driver's seat position and stored in the Seat Module (SMFA). 

When the ignition is switched off and the door opened, the steering wheel is moved to its 
highest and most forward position to make getting in and out of the car easier. 

The adjuster button has four possible directions of movement. These enable the steering 
wheel to be moved up, down, forwards or backwards. 

The signal from the adjustment knob is from the SZL to the SIM to the ZGM via the byte- 
flight. The signal then is placed on the K-CAN-S by the ZGM and received by the CIM. 

Control of the electric motors for steering column adjustment is carried out by the 
Chassis Integration Module (CIM) 


18 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 








Steering Wheel Heater Switch 

The steering wheel heater is switched on by a button on the left-hand side of the steer¬ 
ing column between the two steering column stalks. 

It can be switched on provided the electrical system status is at least terminal 15. An 
LED on the switch indicates when the steering wheel heater is on. 

The steering wheel heater consists of a coil heater element in the steering wheel rim. 

A temperature sensor (PTC sensor) in the steering wheel sends the temperature signal 
back to the steering wheel electronics module. 

Operation of the steering wheel heating is explained in the “Central Body Electronics” 
Chapter. 



19 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 



Electro-Mechanical Parking Brake Button 

The parking brake is an automated electro-mechanical parking brake system (EMF) intro¬ 
duced for the first time on the E65. 

When the engine is running, the parking brake system operates the front and rear disc 
brakes via the brake hydraulics. When the engine is switched off, the parking brake is 
operated by an electro-mechanical system. Two cables are then used to actuate the rear 
parking brake drums. 



When the vehicle is stationary with the ignition switched on, the parking brake is applied 
or released by pressing the button. 

The parking brake can also be applied with the ignition switched off. The indicator lamp 
on the instrument cluster lights up briefly. 

The parking brake can only be released when the ignition is switched on. 

In an emergency, (e.g. if the brake pedal is jammed by an object), the parking brake can 
also be used as a dynamic emergency brake when the vehicle is in motion. 

The vehicle is then braked by means of the brake hydraulics and the front and rear disc 
brakes as long as the parking brake button is pressed. 

Automatic application of the parking brake, e.g. in stop-and-go traffic or when performing 
a hill start (Automatic Hold), can be activated/deactivated on the Control Display 
("Settings" menu) using the Controller. Automatic Hold is a key memory function. 

If automatic application is activated, "Auto P" appears on the instrument cluster. 

If the parking brake is released by pressing the button when the engine is running, this 
also deactivates the automatic application function. 


20 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 














n Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What is meant by “tri-level function structure”? 


2. How many control modules make up the Steering Column Switch Center (SZL)? 
(List them) 


3. Which functions of the SZL use a redundant hardwired-data cable for plausibility and 
safety? 


4. What are the 5 main components of the “driving area”? 


5. What is the difference in the operation of the Electro-mechanical parking brakes 
from the engine is running as opposed to when the engine is off? 


21 

E65 Drive - Driving Area 



























