Table of Contents 


E65 Audio System 


Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

System Diagram.3 

Components 


Antenna/Radio Tuner with Diversity (AVT) 

Antenna System. 

Rear Window. 

Antenna Diversity Unit (FM) . 

Antenna Amplifier (FM) . 

Antenna Amplifier (AM). 

Audio System Controller . 

Network Master. 

Audio Master. 


Output of Audio Signals .1 

Connection Master.1 

Basic Hi-Fi Amplifier.11 

LOGIC 7 Hi-Fi Amplifier (Part of optional sound package) .12 

Speakers .15 

Audio CD Changer .16 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 


ootDaicoNjNjcnroai^* 





















E65 Audio System 


Model: E65/E66 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain how audio signals are transported in the E65 

• Describe the functions of the ASK 

• Recognize the component layout of the audio system in the E65 


2 

E65 Audio System 





Introduction 

On previous vehicle models, the radio was always controlled by an integrated control unit. 
This control unit included the tuner, cassette deck, amplifier, display and the operating 
unit. 

The radio could be equipped as an Hi-Fi audio system by adding further components 
(CD changer) or boosters (Digital Signal Processor etc.). Because of the increasing num¬ 
ber of functions in a radio and the limited area available in the standard radio chassis, new 
solutions had to be found for the radio control unit. 

In the E65, the radio control unit is no longer in a single module. The audio system has 
distributed functions which are integrated in various control units, e.g. the display and 
operating function. 

The radio is operated via the Controller in the center console, the display is produced in 
the Control Display located in the instrument panel and the audio signals are controlled in 
the ASK. 

There are two audio systems available for the E65 from the start of production: A basic 
Hi-Fi and the optional LOGIC 7 Hi-fi. 

System Diagram 

Block diagram of the basic E65 audio systems. 


E65 Audio System (Hi-Fi) 


E65 Audio System (Logic 7) 



K-CAN 5 




K-CAN 5 



ASK 




3 

E65 Audio System 


































































































Components 

Antenna/Radio Tuner with Diversity (AVT) 

The E65 tuner is different from previous radios. The tuner is actually a control unit with a 
MOST port and is placed in a different location than the radio. 

The tuner (2) is now located close to the antennas. The installation location of the anten¬ 
na tuner is in the rear left C pillar. Due to the direct connection of the antenna diversity 
(1), no antenna amplifier is needed on the left-hand side. 

On the right-hand side, there is an antenna amplifier which is linked via a coaxial cable to 
the diversity unit. The tuner provides the power supply to the antenna diversity and the 
antenna amplifier. 

The digital audio signals are transmitted to the ASK via the MOST, therefore there is no 
antenna coaxial cable. This avoids signal losses and interference. 


AVT in Left C-pillar 



4 

E65 Audio System 








The tuner used on U.S. E65s is a world tuner which can receive long wave (LW), medium 
wave (AM), short wave (SW) and frequency modulation (FM), as well as traffic and weath¬ 
er forecast information (US). In the U.S. weather forecast information is transmitted on 7 
different frequencies 24 hours a day. 

The single tuner is set for all country variants, with the exception of the ECE. It corre¬ 
sponds to the former Business Radio. 

Antenna System 

The antenna for radio and remote control services (FBD) on the E65 are located in the 
rear window. They include an AM antenna for LW, MW, and SW and 4 FM aerials for VHF 
reception. The FBD frequency for U.S. vehicles is 868.4MHz 


4 



Index 

Description 

Index 

Description 

1 

Antenna tuner 

FM3 

Third FM antenna 

2 

Antenna diversity 

FM4 

Fourth FM antenna 

3 

Antenna amplifier 

FM5 

FM antenna for traffic announcements (Japan) 

4 

Coaxial cable 

FBD 

Antenna for remote control services 

5 

Suppressors are integrated into the harness 

PM 

Power module 

6 

Filter trap 

KL30 

Power supply 

LMK 

AM antenna for long, middle and short waves 

KL31 

Ground 

FM1 

First FM antenna 

UANT 

Power supply for antenna modules 

FM2 

Second FM antenna 




5 

E65 Audio System 







































































































The antennas are switched by the diversity module, which is directly located on the tuner 
and is connected to it by an 8-pin ribbon cable. 

The antennas for telephone and navigation are located in a separate shark fin antenna on 
the roof. 

The advantages of the new E65 antenna system are the following: 

• Powerful AM (LMK) antenna. 

• FM diversity available in the basic audio system. 

• High FM diversity performance due to 4 switchable antennas: FM 1 -4. 

• Modular application of basic system on many system variants, e.g. radio, TV, FBD. 

• The antenna system (tuner) has diagnosis capability. 

The antenna system is made up of the following components: 

Rear Window 

The rear window is made laminated safety glass (VSG) with infrared coating (IR). 

The glass thickness is 4 mm. The antenna consist of leads 0.4 mm wide. The rear win¬ 
dow is partitioned into three sections. The first part includes the AM and FM 5/FBD 
antennas. The second part includes the FM 1, FM 2 and FM 3 antenna. The lower half 
includes the FM 4 antenna. 

The rear screen defroster uses the central and lower panels of the FM antenna. The 
heating power is approximately. 300 W. 

Antenna Diversity Unit (FM) 

The antenna diversity is installed in the left C pillar, together with the tuner. It is connect¬ 
ed to the tuner by an 8-pin ribbon cable. 

The ribbon cable is used to transmit the operating voltage and the switching signals 
DIAGNOSIS, CONTROL, LEVEL, AUDIO from tuner to diversity. The HF signal is trans¬ 
ferred from diversity to the tuner. 

The antenna diversity is used to define the best antenna signal and controls the 
changeover and the output of the antenna signal on the HF output. 


6 

E65 Audio System 




Antenna Amplifier (FM) 

The antenna amplifier in the RH C-pillar is associated to antennas FM 3-4 and to the 
FBD antenna. The antenna amplifier is linked by a coaxial cable to the antenna diversity 
unit. 

The FM antennas are switched over by a control signal, fed via the coaxial cable. 



Index 

Description 

Index 

Description 

1 

FBD Antenna connection 

6 

Antenna amplifier 

2 

Power input for the rear defroster 

7 

Read defroster grid output connection 

3 

Rear defroster grid output connection 

8 

Filter trap circuit for rear defroster 

4 

Antenna connection (FM1-FM5) 

9 

Coax connection to antenna diversity unit 

5 

Wiring harness connection (8-pin) 




Antenna Amplifier (AM) 

The AM amplifier used for LW, MW, and SW ranges, is located in the diversity unit in the 
LH C-pillar. 


7 

E65 Audio System 
















Audio System Controller 

In the past, each system used its own output media (e.g. gong, dual cone speakers etc) 
which generated a number of different sounds in the car. It was often not possible to 
achieve coordination between these sounds or at best, it could be done only in particular 
cases. 

This created situations where acoustic information for other sources had to be sup¬ 
pressed, otherwise the driver would have been faced with a confusing mix of acoustic 
signals. 

On the E65, a control unit has been developed to control, coordinate and generate 
acoustic signals according to priority: the Audio System Controller, (ASK). 



The Audio System Controller (ASK) has three main functions: 

• Network master 

• Audio master 

• Connection master 

Network Master 

The ASK performs the role of network master for the MOST bus. The functions of the 
network master are the following: 

• Wake-up, initialization, power-down - The network master wakes up the bus 

and has the task of achieving an orderly initialization of the network. The ASK can 
operate with KLR off. To turn it on, push in the volume/ON/OFF knob. Adjustments 
and control is carried out by using the Controller and Control Display. Another task 
of the network master is to control the power-down process. Each power - down is 
initiated and started by the ASK. 

• Configuration control - The network master detects the exact system configura¬ 
tion each time that the network is started and compares it to the stored coded con¬ 
figuration. 


8 

E65 Audio System 










• Control of the network operation - The network master controls the MOST trans¬ 
ceiver of the slave equipment for correct operation. The equipment which is not 
operating properly will be released by a reset or switched to low power mode so that 
they do not affect bus communication. 

• Fault code memory - The network master includes the fault code memory of the 
MOST network. It stores all the faults occurring during the network operation as well 
as deviations from the nominal configuration. 

Audio Master 

As audio master, the ASK has the task to collect and process all the audio signals of the 
vehicle and to distribute them to their destinations. 

The ASK controls all the acoustic requests from the Control Display. The changes in the 
level of a signal is not sudden, but smooth, e.g. during suppression, insertion and fading 
out or temporary suppression of the signal at the destination: Because of this, a high- 
quality acoustic sound is obtained. 

The ASK also assumes the generation and preparation of different acoustic signals, e.g. 
PDC signals and warnings. In the event of a request for a warning or caution signal from 
a control unit, the ASK provides a clean acoustic change of the signals. 

• Audio data - All audio data from any control unit are converted by the ASK into digital 
audio AF format at a sampling rate of 44.1 KHz. 

• Categorization of audio sources - All possible audio sources are divided into different 
groups according to priority. Warning signals have priority over any other audio 
source. Mixing of lower priority audio signals (e.g. navigation, radio) is possible. 

• Generation of acoustic gongs - These are acoustic alarm signals which help the dri¬ 
ver perceive sounds according to a system. The different sounds, requested by the 
different control units, (e.g. gongs, PDC,etc.), must be generated only in association 
with a visual indication. These come from the instrument cluster and the Control 
Display. 

The following sounds can be generated in the ASK. 

• Beeping for the PDC. 

• Various Check Control and warning gongs. 


9 

E65 Audio System 



Output of Audio Signals 

The output of audio signals occurs under the following conditions: 

• Two gong signals are never output simultaneously. 

• It is possible to generate a maximum of 3 signals at the same time. 

• If the input includes a fourth signal, the signal at the lowest priority is muted. 

• When issuing the 3 higher priority signals, the entertainment source is suppressed 
(radio). If the entertainment source is a CD, it is stopped and switched off. When the 
CD is reactivated, it restarts from the point where it was stopped. 

Examples of audio output: 

• Radio - The radio plays in the background, the PDC is active and a navigation 
message is output. If a gong request comes, the radio is muted and the gong is 
generated. 

• Telephone - When the hands-free function is activated the loudspeakers are muted. 
Gongs are mixed as required according to their priority. The Speech Processing 
System is not active when the hands-free function is used. 

• Speech Processing System - When the voice processing system is activated, a gen¬ 
eral mute suppresses the loudspeakers. Gongs are mixed as required according to 
their priority. The hands-free operation and the navigation messages interrupt the 
Speech Processing System. 

Connection Master 

As connection master, the ASK must provide channels to the equipment connected to 

the bus and distribute the audio signals on the outputs (loudspeakers). 

The connection master also controls the basic Hi-Fi or the LOGIC 7 Hi-Fi amplifiers. 


10 

E65 Audio System 



Basic Hi-Fi Amplifier 

A hi-fi system is offered as standard equipment and is characterized by vehicle-specific 
tuning to the interior (equalizing) with balanced acoustics. 

The basic signals delivered by the ASK are amplified in the hi-fi amplifier equipped with 
bridge end stages. The output power is 40 W per channel. Total system output is 180 
watts. 



The hi-fi amplifier is controlled by the ASK. The medium-range loudspeakers and the 
tweeters are directly controlled by the ASK. The large sub-woofers underneath the driver 
and passenger seats are driven by the amplifier. 

The hi-fi amplifier has no diagnosis capability. 



11 

E65 Audio System 






































































































LOGIC 7 Hi-Fi Amplifier (Part of optional sound package) 

To satisfy customers with the more demanding requirements for a low-distortion playback 
even at high levels and non-linear frequencies (e.g. amplified low frequencies), it is neces¬ 
sary to provide a sufficient output power to control the loudspeaker. 


For these reasons, a LOGIC 7 hi-fi system with Surround Sound and 7-band equalizer 
was developed. The main differences from the hi-fi amplifier are the following: 

• Active MOST bus components. 

• Complete control via the software. 

• Extended features versus the hi-fi system. 

• Higher output power in the low-frequency range. 

• More channels available to control additional loudspeakers. 

• Diagnosis capability. 


K-CAN-S 



-CO 

KQfnlH 


KLB ? 


MOST 


KL M 


azM 


HTR1 


HTL1 


MTR1 


MTL1 


TTR 


ASK 


MIL 2 


WIT R 2 


KL JU 


HTL2 


MTR3 


1. MOST connector 

2. 20-pin connector 


* 


* * * * * _ * 

*»*»» ■ * 

* *»* ■ * 
,«•**••*•** 

■ *•(»*•**•••* 

i*#*? r- ■» * * * * 

i* ***•('•**•■ 





m •****•• 

ft#*tf***** 
*■*■***■#•*■•*• 




12 

E65 Audio System 





























































































The LOGIC 7 hi-fi amplifier includes a MOST bus connection, to produce all audio and 
control signals in digital form. A digital / analog converter converts the audio signals and 
amplifies them in the final stages. 

The output power of the mid-range loudspeaker is 40 W and the woofer is 70 W. Total 
system output is 420 watts. 

Additional features are the central front loudspeaker in the instrument panel, the mid¬ 
range speakers in the rear doors and the tweeters under the rear shelf. 

Besides the known functions like volume, fader, balance, treble, bass and GAL (speed- 
sensitive radio volume control) the two amplifiers hi-fi and LOGIC 7 hi-fi achieve the fol¬ 
lowing functions: 

• 7-band equalizer (LOGIC 7 hi-fi only) - The frequency ranges can be adjusted indi¬ 
vidually by the customer. The adjustment is performed by the Controller and the 
Control Display on the ASK. 

• Surround Sound (LOGIC 7 hi-fi only) - Can be enabled / disabled by the customer. 
Surround Sound is the use of at least 5 channels in the interior. With an additional 
loudspeaker in the front between the left and the right channel, a true spatial sound 
can be obtained. 

The following functions cannot be controlled by the customer, but they are achieved in 
the amplifier software: 

• Level adaptation - Switching between different audio sources (e.g. CC-CD) 
should produce no change in volume. For this purpose, all levels in ASK are 
processed on a standard level. 

• Loudness - To improve reception at a low-volume setting, the low frequencies are 
slightly amplified. 

• Vehicle-specific equalizing - Tuning of the acoustics according to the interior of 
the vehicle. 

• Speed-dependent equalizing (LOGIC 7-hi-fi only) - Adjustment of the 
acoustics to increasing noise emission from moving vehicles. 

• Dynamic compression - In a moving vehicle, the usable dynamics is limited in the 
upper range by the output power of the amplifier and the load characteristics of the 
loudspeaker. For this reason, a speed-dependent dynamics reduction must be per¬ 
formed. 

• Frequency-dependent delay (LOGIC 7 hi-fi only) - The frequency-dependent 
delay is used to introduce time corrections on the individual speaker units. This 
ensures that the audio signals are sent simultaneously to all speaker units. 


13 

E65 Audio System 



1. MOST Connector 



2. 20-pin connector 


Location of LOGIC 7 
mplifier in trunk 


14 

E65 Audio System 







































Speakers 

The Basic Hi-Fi of the E65 comes equipped with 10 speakers. If the LOGIC 7 system is 
ordered the vehicle has 13 speakers. The speaker locations are as follows: 

• 100mm mid-range and 44mm high range speaker in each front door. Rear doors 
have mid-range speakers if equipped with LOGIC 7. 

• 100mm center channel mid-range speaker located in the center of the instrument 
panel speaker if equipped with LOGIC 7. 

• 210mm sub-woofers located underneath the driver and passenger seats. 

• Two 100mm mid-range and two 44mm high-range speakers located in rear shelf. 


I * 

L 

100mm center channel mid-range speaker 
located in the instrument panel (with Logic7). 



210mm sub-woofers located underneath the 
driver and passenger seats. 



100mm midrange and 44mm high range 
speakers in each front door. 



Two 100mm mid-range and two 44mm high- 
range speakers located in the rear shelf 


15 

E65 Audio System 















Audio CD Changer 


The audio CD changer on the E65 has the same features and mechanical structure as its 
equivalent in E38 / E39, it is produced by Alpine. 



This is a 6-way-changer with magazine (4). It is installed on the passenger side in the 
instrument panel, behind a decorative strip. If you press the eject key (3) and use the 
powered flap control, you can control the insertion and removal of the magazine from 
the driver and the passenger side. 

A new feature of the CD changer is the optical connection to the MOST bus. The CD 
changer is controlled via the MOST bus interface and sends its digital audio signals 
over it. 

The audio signals are sent to the ASK which 
to the loudspeakers. 

To operate the CD changer, you can use 
the following options: 

• Controller and Control display 

• ASK and MFL 

• Voice input 

The CD changer has diagnostic capabilities 
in the Diagnosis Program via MOST. 



16 

E65 Audio System 


















Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


Which device in the audio system is responsible for receiving the radio signals and 
converting them to digital signals? How are those signals transported? 


Which control unit is responsible for producing the audio signals? How many 
signals may be output at one time? 


From what terminal (KL) is the audio system operational? 


What other component shares the Network Master responsibility with the ASK? 


Describe the system differences between the Basic Hi-Fi and the LOGIC 7. 


17 

E65 Audio System 


























