Table of Contents 
E65 Telephone 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

Components.4 

Handset.4 

Telecommander.5 

Antenna.5 

Hands-Free Microphone.5 

Multi-Function Steering Wheel.6 

Manual Emergency Call Button .6 

Audio System Controller (ASK).6 

Speech Processing System (SVS).6 

Compensator .6 

Telephone Control Unit.7 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 Revision Date: 















E65 Telephone 

Model: E65/E66 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the integration of the telephone into the electronics of the E65 

• Recognize the various methods of controlling the telephone 


2 

E65 Telephone 




Introduction 

For the E65 the CPT-8000 Timeport® portable phone will be offered as standard equip¬ 
ment. 

To integrate the telephone into the communication network, the telephone control unit 
(TCU) is equipped with a MOST port. All communication with the vehicle occurs in digi¬ 
tal form via the MOST network. 

The telephone can be operated with the following devices: 

• Handset 

• Controller and Control Display 

• Telecommander 

• Speech Processing System 

• Multi-Function Steering Wheel 


Diagnose 



3 

E65 Telephone 




























































































































Components 


Handset 

The telephone to be introduced with the E65 in the United States will be the Motorola R 
CPT 8000 tri-mode, dual-band portable phone (810 or 1990 Mhz CDMA/TDMA, or ana¬ 
log). 

The phone is stowed and charged inside of the center console storage area. 



For safety reasons the handset is not operational when the vehicle is in motion. 

Controller and Control Display 

The Control Display operated by the Controller can be used to access stored numbers in 
the address book or view SMS messages. The telephone control unit communicates 
with the CD and Controller via the MOST network. 


1. Top 8 

2. Last (call) 

3. Search 

4. Search 

5. Phone book 

6. Next page 



2 


3 


1 


4 


6 


5 


4 

E65 Telephone 










Telecommander 


The Telecommander is located on the left of the 
center console close to the ASK. If you press on the 
telecommander it moves outward. 

The Telecommander allows control and dialing of 
the telephone from a 3X5 alpha-numeric key pad. 

The ergonomic arrangement in the vehicle allows 
easy operation of the telephone. 

The connection of the Telecommander to the tele¬ 
phone control unit is made via a CAN sub-bus. 



Antenna 

The telephone antenna always includes a multiple- 
band antenna for the telephone and a GPS antenna 
(Global Positioning System) for the navigation sys¬ 
tem. 

In the U.S. models two telephone antennas are 
installed for ranges of 810 Mhz and 1990 Mhz as 
well as a GPS. The U.S. antenna is recognizable by 
its three plug connections. 

Hands-Free Microphone 

In the head liner, two covers (1) for the hands-free 
microphone are mounted on the left and on the right 
close to the sun visors. 

The hands-free microphone is always mounted on 
the driver’s side, the right side cover is a blank (Right 
side cover is used for RHD vehicles). 

The microphone is an active microphone with input 
sensitivity of 75 mV/74 dB. 

Hands-free operation takes place via the microphone 
and the audio system via the ASK. The ASK pro¬ 
vides the audio channels and switches off all other 
audio sources during hands-free operation. 

This is a digital full duplex transmission. It means that the AF (audio freguency) is 
enabled for both parties (speaking and listening simultaneously in both directions). An 
echo compensation avoids feedback. 

The hands-free microphone is also used for voice input for the Speech Processing 
System. In the telephone control unit, the analog signals from the microphone are con¬ 
verted to digital signals and forwarded to the SVS via the MOST. 




5 

E65 Telephone 

























Multi-Function Steering Wheel 

The left side button pad of the MFL contains controls 
that can be used for the telephone system. The 
push-to-talk button activates the SVS menu. The 
+/- rocker switch allows adjustment of the telephone 
handsfree volume via the ASK and the send/end 
(phone icon) button allows accepting, initiating or 
ending a hands free call. 

On the right side button pad the “up/down” rocker 
buttons allow scrolling through the telephone 
address book. 

Communication with the MFL is via the byteflight- 
ZGM-K-CAN-CD-MOST connection. 

Manual Emergency Call Button 

The manual emergency call button (1) is a direct 
input (hardwired) to the telephone control unit. When 
a call is made the LED (2) illuminates. 

Once the call is initiated there is no way to cancel. 

The automatic emergency call is made by the SIM 
after a collision, based on the severity. The signal 
from the SIM to the TCU is passed on over a dedicat¬ 
ed circuit. Refer to the ISIS chapter for more detail. 

Audio System Controller (ASK) 




The Audio System Controller controls the entire 
audio system. During hands-free operation, all audio 
signals are suppressed (muted) and the audio signals 
from the caller are delivered to the front left and right mid-range speakers. 


Speech Processing System (SVS) 

The microphone signal supplied by the TCU on the MOST bus can be used by the SVS. 
The Speech Processing System provides control for different telephone functions. For 
details, see the module on the Speech Processing System. 

Compensator 

A compensator is installed in-line between the vehicle antenna and the Telephone 
Control Unit. The compensator ensures that the antenna signal is not degraded before 
reaching the TCU. The compensator is located in the left side of the luggage compart¬ 
ment. 


6 

E65 Telephone 




Telephone Control Unit 

The telephone control unit is located in the left side of the luggage compartment. It is 
responsible for: 

• Executing the automatic and manual emergency call (integrated with navigation). 

• Controlling charging and cycling of the handset batteries when plugged into the 
vehicle. 

• Providing the microphone signal as a MOST bus telegram. 

• Integration of the telephone into the vehicle iDrive system via the MOST network. 



7 

E65 Telephone 











Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. From what control device can a hands-free call be initiated or accepted? 
Describe the signal path necessary for that function to occur. 


2. How is the hands-free microphone made available to the SVS? 


3. What is the purpose of the antenna compensator 


4. What is the TCU responsible for? 


8 

E65 Telephone 



















