Table of Contents 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 

Subject Page 

Purpose of the System .3 

System Overview .3 

Components.4 

Interior Protection Sensor with Integrated DWA Control Unit.5 

Emergency Siren with Integrated Tilt Sensor (SINE) .6 

DWA LED .7 

DWA K-Bus.7 

Principle of Operation .8 

Monitoring.8 

Arming the DWA .8 

Deactivation of the Tilt Sensor and Interior Sensor .9 

Disarming the DWA.10 

Unlocking the Luggage Compartment.10 

Forced Disarming .10 

Hotel Setting .10 

DWA LED .11 

Alarm Triggers .11 

Door Contact Signals.11 

Trunk Lid .11 

Hood.11 

Interior Sensor.12 

Tilt Sensor.12 

Battery Switch.12 

Self-Monitoring of Siren .13 

Monitoring of the DWA K-Bus.13 

DWA Alarm.13 

Acoustic Alarm .13 

Visual Alarm.14 

Independent Alarm.14 

Panic Alarm .14 

Vehicle Horn Emergency Operation Function .15 

Alarm Abort.15 

Diagnosis.15 

Initial Print Date: 12/04 Revision Date: 




































E65 Driveaway Protection System (DWA) 


Model: E65/E66 
Production: All 

■Biiermis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand DWA operation on E65 

• Locate and Identify DWA components 


• Understand arming and disarming criteria 


2 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 


Purpose of the System 

The anti-theft alarm system (DWA) has the purpose of indicating attempts to break into 
the vehicle, or to tamper with it. Acoustic and visual alarms are used to draw attention to 
the vehicle and frighten off any would be car thief or vandals. 

A distinction must be made between the DWA and the Electronic Immobilizer System 
(EWS). The purpose of the anti-theft alarm system is to deter a thief from entering the 
vehicle. The purpose of the EWS system is to prevent a thief from driving the vehicle off 
under it’s own power. 

System Overview 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

MHK 

Hood Switch 

DWA 

Anti-Theft Alarm 

CAS 

Car Access System 

DWA-K-BUS 

Local data bus for DWA 

LM 

Light Module 

SINE 

Emergency siren with integrated tilt sensor 

K-CAN-S 

K-CAN-System 




3 


E65 Driveaway Protection System 
























The DWA control unit with integrated interior sensor (1) is located in the rear lights roof 
console housing in the center of the headliner. This central location allows the entire vehi¬ 
cle interior to be monitored very effectively. 

The emergency siren with integrated tilt sensor (2) is installed in the left rear wheel arch 
where good protection is provided against tampering with the emergency siren or DWA 
K-Bus. 


1 2 



Components 

The new DWA system of the E65 consists of the following components: 

• Interior protection sensor with integrated DWA logic (DWA control unit). 

• Emergency siren with integrated tilt sensor (SINE). 

• DWA LED under the rearview mirror. 

• Integration with vehicle electronics (e.g. hood or door contacts). 

The interior sensor with integrated DWA logic and the emergency siren with integrated 
tilt sensor are new developments combining the functions of the previous systems. 

Both components now have diagnostic capability. The interior sensor is connected 
directly to the K-CAN system. The tilt sensor (with emergency siren) is connected to the 
interior sensor via a sub-bus line (local data bus). 


4 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 





Interior Protection Sensor with Integrated DWA Control Unit 



The interior protection sensor is an ultrasound-based (USIS) motion detector which 
detects all movements inside the vehicle interior and evaluates them using the DWA 
logic. 

The DWA generates an alarm if the interior sensor detects a movement which meets the 
triggering criteria, or if alarm triggers are indicated via the K-CAN SYSTEM or DWA 
K-Bus. ' 

The DWA control unit is supplied voltage by the Power Module (KL 30). 

An electronic fuse for the DWA is inside the Power Module. 

For reasons of safety, KL 30 is not disconnected for the DWA by the Power Module when 
consumer cutoffs are performed. 

If the DWA detects a drop in the battery voltage below a certain value, then line monitor¬ 
ing of the DWA K-Bus is deactivated in order to avoid a false alarm. This limit value is set 
to 8.5 V. 


Arming of the DWA is not possible at KL R or KL 15. 


5 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 



Emergency Siren with Integrated Tilt Sensor (SINE) 

The emergency siren communicates with the DWA over a bi-directional line (DWA K- 
Bus). The emergency siren is flashable and has diagnostic capability. 



If the alarm is triggered, the emergency siren issues an acoustic signal. A short acoustic 
signal is also triggered when locking/unlocking. 

Detected alarm triggers are communicated to the DWA control unit, which then activates 
the alarm. 

The emergency siren has an independent voltage supply and additionally monitors the 
voltage supplied of the vehicle battery. It also monitors tampering with any of its own 
connector leads. 

The independent voltage supply allows the emergency siren to generate an alarm when 
the vehicle voltage supply is disconnected. 

The independent voltage supply is provided by rechargeable lithium cells. 

The emergency siren can detect: 

• A voltage drop in the vehicle battery due to a break in the wiring 

• A voltage higher than 16 V 

• A voltage drop from a value of 7.5 V to 6.5 V in less than 40 minutes 


6 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 





When armed, the emergency siren monitors the vehicle voltage over the range 6.5 V < 

+U b < 16 V. If the actual voltage value drops below or exceeds these values, the inde¬ 
pendent alarm is generated immediately. 

The emergency siren monitors the connecting lines +U b , GND (ground) and DWA K- 
Bus. If these line are cut, the independent alarm is sounded immediately. 

The tilt sensor monitors the horizontal position of the vehicle and also has the task of 
detecting tire and wheel theft as well as attempts to tow away the whole vehicle. 

The present parked position of the vehicle is stored together with the components "longi¬ 
tudinal angle" and "transverse angle". If a defined change of angle is exceeded in the 
longitudinal direction and/or the transverse direction, an alarm telegram is sent to the 
DWA interior sensor. 

After the initial alarm is generated, the alarm sensitivity is raised, the result is that a sec¬ 
ond alarm is triggered with less movement. 


DWA LED 

The DWA LED is activated directly by the DWA con¬ 
trol unit. The LED is located in the rearview mirror 
and is not replaceable separately. 

DWA K-Bus 

The DWA K-Bus is a local Sub-Bus. Communication 
uses K-Bus specifications. 

The DWA communicates with the emergency siren or 
the tilt sensor over the DWA-Bus. 



AHM 


PDC 


CON 

m 


BZM 


RDC 


BZMF 


CIM 


RLS 


K-Bus 

LM 



SHD 

W 



SINE 1 

DWA 



SH 





IHKA 



WIM 


K-CAN S 


7 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 



















Principle of Operation 

Monitoring 

The DWA monitors the following signals: 

• Door and lid signals (trunk lid and hood contact) 

• Vehicle interior (USIS) 

• Vehicle inclination tilt 

• DWA-Bus line leading to emergency siren (SINE) 

• Voltage supply for vehicle electrical system (SINE) 

• Voltage level at the emergency siren (SINE) 

• Battery distribution switch 

The DWA continues to evaluate the following vehicle operating states 
so that it can adapt its sensitivity to increase safety against false alarms. 

• Status of independent ventilation (parked car ventilation) 

• Position of windows 

• Position of sunroof 

Open windows, for example, lower the sensitivity of the operating threshold. 

Arming the DWA 

The DWA is armed from the driver's door or by the Remote Control when the vehicle is 
double-locked. The DWA is armed as soon as the locked status sent by the CAS over 
the K-CAN-S is confirmed. The following phases are involved: 

Immediately after arming: 

• The emergency siren is armed and monitors its voltage supply. 

• The DWA commences line monitoring on the local DWA K-Bus. 

3 Seconds after arming: 

• Each of the door and lid contacts to be monitored is included in the alarm table 
after having been in the rest position for 3 seconds. 

• Faulty contacts are evaluated as closed, but are not included in the alarm table. 


8 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 




3 seconds after double-locking the vehicle or after locking the last door or lid: 

• The referencing phase of the tilt sensor and interior sensor starts. 

• The sensitivity level is set depending on the window and sunroof position. 

• If the trunk lid is opened during the referencing phase, the referencing phase is 
interrupted and re-started after the trunk lid is locked. 

20 seconds after locking the last door or lid: 

• The interior sensor is included in the alarm table when its referencing period is 
completed. 

30 seconds after locking the last door or lid: 

• The tilt sensor is included in the alarm table when its referencing period is 
completed. 

• If no acknowledgement telegram is received from the tilt sensor within 60 seconds 
of arming, this signal is deleted. 

• If at least one input signal is not in idle state or if a sensor is defective, this is 
signalled by the flashing LED. 

Deactivation of the Tilt Sensor and Interior Sensor 

The interior sensor and the tilt sensor can be deactivated to prevent the alarm from being 
triggered by the tilt sensor during transportation by ship or train when the anti-theft alarm 
system is armed. 

It also helps to prevent animals left in the vehicle from triggering the alarm via the interior 
sensor. This can be done by again double-locking the vehicle within 10 seconds of arm¬ 
ing the vehicle. 

The LED comes on for 1 second to acknowledge the deactivation. It is possible to 
deactivate the tilt sensor and the interior sensor using VKM. 


9 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 



Disarming the DWA 

The DWA is disarmed when the central locking system (CAS master) telegrams: 

"locked" and "selectively unlocked." 

The emergency siren with tilt sensor is disarmed. If an alarm situation occurs during the 
period in which the DWA was armed, this is acknowledged via a flashing DWA LED. 

Unlocking the Luggage Compartment 

If the luggage compartment in an armed vehicle is opened using the Remote Control, the 
tilt sensor and the interior sensor are deleted from the alarm table (the tilt sensor is deac¬ 
tivated via the DWA K-Bus by telegram). 

If the luggage compartment is unlocked and opened during the referencing phase of the 
interior sensor and the tilt sensor, the referencing phase is aborted, since loading the 
vehicle can produce new vehicle operating states. The referencing phase for the interior 
sensor and the tilt sensor is restarted 3 seconds after locking the trunk lid. 

Unlocking the luggage compartment using the emergency lock cylinder does not 
disarm DWA. 

Forced Disarming 

The DWA is automatically disarmed if a person located in the vehicle double-locks the 
vehicle and then inserts the key into the ignition. The CAS evaluates this action and 
sends a "locked" telegram. The DWA is then disarmed. 

Hotel Setting 

The vehicle can be armed in "hotel setting active" status. This is done by moving the 
hotel slide switch to the locked position and then locking the center console storage area 
with the mechanical key. 

If the vehicle is unlocked with "hotel setting active" status, the DWA is not disarmed com¬ 
pletely. The trunk lid, hood contact and line monitoring triggers for the emergency siren 
are still monitored. 

Since the DWA is not disarmed completely, no acoustic acknowledgement is given. 

To disarm the hotel setting, the hotel switch must be moved to the un-locked position 
and the vehicle must be locked and then unlocked so that the DWA will receive the 
change in status message from the CAS. Otherwise the alarm will sound when the trunk 
or hood is opened. 


10 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 



DWA LED 

The DWA LED indicates the state of the DWA to the vehicle user. 


DWA State 

DWA LED 

Disarmed 

OFF 

Armed 

ON 

Armed, input is not in rest position 

Flashes rapidly for 10 seconds max and then remains on 

Interior sensor/tilt sensor off 

Lights up for 1 second and then remains on 

Alarm triggered 

Flashes rapidly for 5 minutes and then remains on 

Disarm 

Goes off 

Disarm after alarm 

Flashes for 5 minutes 


Alarm Triggers 
Door Contact Signals 

The status of the door contacts is evaluated by the CAS and transmitted by K-CAN-S 
telegram. The status of the individual door contacts is included in the alarm table 3 sec¬ 
onds after the status signal "door closed" is generated. 

It is possible to trigger an alarm via a closed door even if another door contact is still 
open. 

In the case of faulty or implausible lid signals, the CAS assumes that the contact is 
closed. 

Trunk Lid 

The status of the trunk lid contact is evaluated by the CAS (from the PM) and transmitted 
to the DWA by telegram. 

If the trunk lid is unlocked when the DWA is armed, then signals from the trunk lid con¬ 
tact, interior sensor and tilt sensor are deleted from the alarm table. 

Three seconds after the trunk lid is locked, the trunk contact is re-included in the alarm 
table and the referencing period of the interior sensor and tilt sensor commences (provid¬ 
ed no other door or lids are opened). 

Hood 

The status of the hood contact is evaluated by the CAS and transmitted by telegram. 

The status of the hood contact is included in the alarm table 3 seconds after the status 
signal "hood closed" is generated. 


11 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 





















Interior Sensor 

The interior sensor monitors movements in the passenger compartment of the vehicle. 
The referencing phase of the interior sensor begins 3 seconds after locking the last doors 
and lids. 

The interior sensor is ready 20 seconds after the referencing period begins. The trigger is 
included in the alarm table. 

Tilt Sensor 

The referencing phase of the tilt sensor is started by a telegram from the DWA 3 seconds 
after locking the last doors and lids. The tilt sensor is ready 30 seconds after commence¬ 
ment of the referencing period and indicates this to the DWA. The trigger is now includ¬ 
ed in the alarm table. 

If no acknowledgement telegram is sent from the siren/tilt sensor, this is registered in the 
memory of the DWA and the tilt sensor is not included in the alarm table. 

If the ready tilt sensor detects an alarm trigger situation, it informs the DWA using a DWA 
K-Bus telegram. The DWA decides whether to generate the alarm or not based on the 
pre-defined criteria. 

The tilt sensor alarm is stored in the DWA interior sensor. To prevent a false alarm from 
triggering caused by a rocking motion of the vehicle, the angular data for the longitudinal 
arm and control arm are detected every 90 ms. An alarm is only triggered if the vehicle 
remains at a certain inclination for a sustained period of time (approx. 1.5 seconds). 

Battery Switch 

If the DWA receives the "Storage mode" telegram from the Power Module (change of sig¬ 
nal edge from inactive to active) in the armed state, an alarm is triggered. 

If the DWA receives the "Storage mode" telegram in the disarmed state, the DWA can be 
armed as usual. The tilt sensor and interior sensor remain active. 


12 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 



Self-Monitoring of Siren 

The self-monitoring function is implemented in the siren. The siren triggers an indepen¬ 
dent alarm under the following conditions: 

• An independent alarm may be triggered only once for each arming cycle. 

• The self-monitoring of the emergency siren is started as soon as the DWA is armed. 
The emergency siren monitors its own power supply and identifies under-voltage, 
overvoltage and open circuits. 

• If the emergency siren recognizes an attempted manipulation, it indicates this to the 
DWA by telegram regardless of whether the DWA K-Bus is affected. 

Monitoring of the DWA K-Bus 

The DWA communicates with the emergency siren and the tilt sensor over the DWA 
K-Bus. Monitoring is started as soon as the DWA is armed. 

The DWA sends the telegram to the Monitoring device cyclically (every 2 s) and expects 
a reply telegram from the emergency siren within a max. permissible reply time of 100 ms. 

If the reply telegram is not received within this period of time, the telegram is sent to the 
monitoring device another two times. If the reply telegram is still not received after this, 
the DWA triggers an alarm using the Light Module and the vehicle horn. 

DWA K-Bus monitoring is deactivated when the DWA measures a vehicle voltage of 
8.5 Volts. 

DWA Alarm 

If a triggering criterion is met when the DWA is armed, the alarm is generated both 
acoustically and visually. 

Acoustic Alarm 

After a triggering criteria is met, the DWA sends the telegram to the DWA K-Bus. 

The emergency siren acknowledges the alarm telegram. 

If the DWA receives no confirmation from the SINE (siren), it repeats the alarm telegram 
up to 8 times. If it still receives no reply, the emergency operation horn (vehicle horn) is 
activated. 

When the DWA is disarmed, the acoustic alarm is cancelled immediately and without 
acknowledgement. 


13 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 



Visual Alarm 

The visual alarm is triggered at the same time as the acoustic alarm for a period of 
5 minutes. The visual alarm is indicated by the hazard-warning lights flashing with 
the high beams. 

This alarm cannot be extended by another trigger during the alarm cycle. 

When the DWA is disarmed, the visual alarm is cancelled immediately and without 
acknowledgement. 

Independent Alarm 

If an attempt to manipulate one of the emergency siren wires is detected, an independent 
alarm is triggered by the siren. 

If the DWA K-Bus is also disconnected, the interior sensor identifies this by the failure of 
the siren to reply and triggers a visual alarm. 

Panic Alarm 

The panic alarm allows the vehicle user to draw attention to a threat outside the vehicle 
or to an accident by generating an alarm. 

The panic alarm can be activated by pressing the special panic function button on the 
Remote Control regardless of the state the DWA (armed/disarmed). 

The alarm is not terminated by a time-out but can be stopped by pressing any button 
on the remote control. The alarm is not stored in the counter. 

The DWA sends the alarm telegram every 33.5 seconds. When the panic alarm begins, 
the siren line monitoring function is started. 

Monitoring takes place during the entire duration of the panic alarm. If a break in the 
wiring or a defect signal from the emergency siren is detected, the horn emergency oper¬ 
ation function is activated. 

The state of the DWA (armed/disarmed) is unaffected by the activation or the termination 
of the panic alarm. If a panic alarm is requested while a normal alarm is generated, the 
DWA immediately changes over to panic alarm mode. If an alarm trigger is detected 
while a panic alarm is generated, the panic alarm continues. 


Panic Button 



14 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 






Vehicle Horn Emergency Operation Function 

If the siren indicates a defect while an alarm is generated or if the DWA is unable to check 
the wiring to the siren, then the vehicle horn is activated. 

A telegram is sent to the Steering Column Switch Center (SZL) every 500 ms. The time 
seguence of the alarm corresponds to the pulsing of the horn alarm. 

On account of the time conditions which apply during line monitoring, a time delay of up 
to 2.3 seconds can occur. 

Alarm Abort 

An alarm activated for test purposes or by accident can be terminated by disarming the 
DWA or by generating the telegram "status_key_inserted". The alarm is aborted immedi¬ 
ately. The abort is not acknowledged acoustically or visually. 

Diagnosis 

The alarm memory of the USIS stores all alarms except the independent alarm. The 
alarm memory contains information on initial triggers, as well as subseguent triggers, 
date, time and environment related conditions (ambient temperature, window and 
sliding/tilt sunroof position, heating system etc.). 

The alarm termination mode (alarm abort by disarm or expiration) is also registered. The 
last 10 alarms are stored in a register. The alarm memory is designed to provide sufficient 
information on alarm trigger mode, time and vehicle condition so that the sources of false 
alarms can be detected and corrected. 

The alarm memory in the emergency siren stores only the data of the independent 
alarms. The last 5 alarms are stored. 


15 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 



^ Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. Which component contains the master functions (logic) for the DWA system? 


2. Where is the SINE located? 


3. How does the DWA receive the request for arming and how does it receive the 
status of the alarm triggers? How is the emergency siren informed that the 
system is armed? 


4. What is the effect that placing the hotel switch to “lock” has on the DWA? 


5. What does the DWA do, if communication is no longer possible with the 
emergency siren? 


16 

E65 Driveaway Protection System 





















