Table of Contents 

E65 Active Cruise Control 

Subject Page 

Purpose of the System .3 

System Components.3 

Instrument Cluster Display.4 

Principle of Operation .4 

Operation.5 

Deceleration .6 

Side Visual Range .6 

Lane Prediction .7 

Limitations.7 

Activation Conditions .8 

Deactivation.8 

Lens Heater.8 

Alignment .9 

Preconditions .9 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 Revision Date: 

















E65 Active Cruise Control 


Model: E65/E66 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand ACC operation 

• Locate and Identify ACC components 

• Understand displays and control for ACC 


2 

E65 Active Cruise Control 




Purpose of the System 

Active Cruise Control (ACC) is an extension of conventional cruise control. ACC is a 
comfort system which assists the driver when traveling on open highways. A radar sen¬ 
sor monitors the distance, angle and speed of moving objects in front of the vehicle and 
strives to maintain a fixed distance behind the object. Vehicle ranging and speed control 
are achieved by means of engine management (Cruise Function of DME) and brake inter¬ 
vention (DSC). 

The driver can preselect a desired speed and choose between 4 following distances 
(expressed in time intervals). 

Note: Vehicles with ACC do not have “Normal” Cruise control. If the ACC sys¬ 
tem fails or enters a fault mode the vehicle does not default to 
“Normal”Cruise. 


Safety Notice!!! 


ACC is not an impact protection system and CANNOT 
warn against or prevent collisions.The driver must con¬ 
tinue to intervene in critical situations. 


System Components 

The ACC system consists of the following components: 

• Sensor-Control Module Unit 

• Steering Column Stalk Switch 



• Instrument Cluster Display 


3 

E65 Active Cruise Control 











Instrument Cluster Display 

The instrument cluster display is responsible for visual indication of ACC operation. 


1. Indicator for stored desired speed 

2. Indicator for detected vehicle 

3. Indicator to show selected following distance 

4. Digital speed display 


Note: 1, 2 and 3 are shown when the system is 
active. 4 is shown for a short time when 
the desired speed in input. 




Vehicle display is outlined: 

System is active and no vehicle in 
front is detected. 

Principle of Operation 



Vehicle display is solid: 

System is active and vehicle is front is 
detected. 



Take over request: 


Vehicle is display is in triangle and 
flashes: 

Driver should intervene by braking or 
taking evasive action as required. 
ACC cannot set following distance. 


ACC is a Comfort function and NOT a Safety function. 


The driver alone is responsible for the use of the ACC system including: 

• Speed Selection 

• Following Distance 

• Acceptable weather conditions including visibility and road conditions 
for cruise operation 


4 

E65 Active Cruise Control 
































The system can be overridden at any time by the driver. Accelerating does not deactivate 
the system. Braking results in system deactivation. 

All stored information, speed and following distance, are reset with every key activation. 
ACC is also reset in the case of non ACC requested DSC intervention. 

The ACC system controls the following distance and cruise speed when the vehicle is 
traveling between 20 mph and 110 mph. 

Operation 

If there is no object in front of the vehicle, the ACC system operates as a normal cruise 
control. The desired speed input by the driver is regulated. 

When an object is detected within the lane the ACC illuminates the object sensed indica¬ 
tor. If the object being followed is traveling at a slower speed than is set by the cruise 
control, the vehicle speed will be adapted (slowed) through either DME or DSC interven¬ 
tion to maintain the requested follow distance (timed in seconds). 

The distance to the lead object will vary with the time interval chosen by the driver and 
vehicle speed. The speed of the vehicle will never exceed the preset cruise request of 
the driver. 

When the object is no longer in front of the vehicle, the preset speed request will be 
resumed. 

Note: The ACC will only detect moving objects. Objects that are stationary 
(stopped) will be ignored. 


35 MPH 



55 MPH 



Constant interval based on seconds, distance changes based on speed 


5 

E65 Active Cruise Control 























To maintain proper follow distance the ACC system must be able to perform the following 
tasks: 

• Detect lead objects by radar sensing up to a distance of approx. 120m. 

• Measure the distance, angle and relative speed of the lead object. 

• Calculate in advance the presumed vehicle course. 

• Select the relevant lead object for vehicle to object ranging. 

• Adapt the actual vehicle speed to that of the lead object by: 

Accelerating (Maximum acceleration rate 1.2 m/s2. 

Decelerating (Maximum deceleration rate 2.0 m/s2. 

• Monitor Lateral Acceleration (Maximum lateral acceleration 3.0 m/s2. 

Deceleration 

The ACC is only able to make limited relative speed corrections. The Maximum deceler¬ 
ation rate is 2.0 m/s 2 (about 20% braking capacity). When the system has reached its 
function limits, the driver is requested to intervene by the flashing indicator. 



Side Visual Range 

Because of the limited side visual range, the leading object may be lost around curves. 
The ACC vehicle will not accelerate to the preset requested speed as long as the steer¬ 
ing wheel is turned and curve recognition is active. After exiting the curve a time delay is 
in effect to prevent rapid overtaking of the lead object. 



6 

E65 Active Cruise Control 
































Lane Prediction 


In order to select the correct lead object for vehicle to vehicle ranging, the ACC must pre¬ 
dict the future lane or path of the vehicle (ACC vehicle). 

Lead objects are then relevant to a control operation when they are located in the actual 
lane. Lane prediction is an advance calculation of the actual lane of travel. 

The DSC unit provides vehicle speed and the Yaw sensor driving dynamics for the 
advance calculation. 

Limitations 

The following limitations are in effect during ACC operation: 

• Operation possible only between the speeds of 20 mph and 110 mph. 

• Maximum deceleration rate 2.0 m/s2. 

• Maximum acceleration rate 1.2 m/s2. 

• Maximum transversal acceleration rate 3.0 m/s2. 

ACC reaches its limitations in the following situations: 

• The sensing range of the radar sensor limits the detection of objects that are 
traveling in front in different lanes or around curves. 

• An object cutting in results in delayed ACC responses. Do not use ACC on 
winding roads or if frequent lane changes occur. 

• High speed differences cannot be corrected. 

• ACC cannot brake the vehicle to a complete standstill. The driver must assume 
control of the vehicle by braking. 

• ACC must only be used when visibility is adequate. 

• If the time gap to the lead object is less than 1 second, especially in the case of the 
lead object cutting in close to the front of the vehicle, ACC may not sense the lead 
object in time for intervention, driver intervention is required. 


7 

E65 Active Cruise Control 



Activation Conditions 

The following preconditions must be met for ACC to become operational: 

• Engine speed >512 RPM 

• No failure of Irreversible faults present in ACC 

• ACC system “ON” 

• Driving Speed > 20 MPH 

• Park, Reverse or Neutral not engaged 

• Parking brake not engaged 

• DSC not active 

Deactivation 

The ACC is deactivated in several ways: 

• Raising or lowering of the Stalk Switch 

• Pressing the brake pedal 

• Placing the transmission in Neutral 

• Deactivating the DSC System 

• Failure of one of the subsystems (Automatic Deactivation) 

• Sensor Blindness (Automatic Deactivation) 

• Vehicle speed drops below the minimum operating range (Automatic Deactivation) 

• The DSC is active beyond a preset time threshold (Automatic Deactivation) 

Lens Heater 

The lens of the ACC sensor is heated to ensure better operation in winter and adverse 
conditions. The heating coil is integrated into the plastic lens body. 

Lens heating is temperature dependent as measured by an internal temperature sensor 
in the ACC unit. 

Despite the heater it is not possible to prevent sensor “Blindness” in all conditions. 
Faults with the lens heating system are registered in the ACC unit fault memory. 


8 

E65 Active Cruise Control 





Alignment 

It is essential that the sensor be correctly aligned for proper system operation. Horizontal 
mis-alignment will result in erroneous reaction to objects in a neighboring lane or a 
delayed reaction to objects in the same lane. 

ACC can compensate for minor horizontal misalignments up to 10, with slight function 
impairments. In the event of more serious deviations, ACC will shut down and not be 
available for operation. 

The alignment procedure is only possible with the DISplus or the GT1 and the special 
tools for ACC adjustment (PN 81 -10-0-021 -292). Also needed is 90 88 6 361 100 KDS 
adapter. 

Note: The tool is used in conjunction with other BMW special tools. Refer to 
SIB B04 03 02. Always refer to the latest bulletins and repair instruc¬ 
tions. 

ACC sensor requires alignment if customer complaints are received regarding target 
acquisition, an alignment error is stored in the fault code memory or the sensor has been 
replaced. 

Preconditions 

Before the alignment procedure may be carried out, certain preconditions must be met. 

• Guides Rails mounted to floor for mirror positioning. 

• ACC is ONLY aligned with the BMW special tool package for ACC alignment. 

• Vehicle must be proper distance from mirror, 

• Vehicle chassis must be in proper alignment (Particularly in case of accident repair). 

• Tire pressures must be set to proper specification. 

• Ride height must be in nominal specs. 

• ACC sensor must be clean. 

• Guide Rails must be free of dirt. 

• Battery charger must be connected to vehicle. 


9 

E65 Active Cruise Control 




Workshop Hints 


• Mark the floor for the vehicle positioning with lines for the front tire, both fore and aft 
and side to side. This will save time and trouble. 

• Floor rail should be mounted carefully with flat head screws not round head. Round 
head screws interfere with the mirror unit. 

• Slotted target is adjusted by the rear wheel with the slot adjusted to the height of the 
wheel center (using the BMW cross-hairs). 

• Make certain that the alignment holes in the BMW wheels are clean and free of 
debris. 

• If aftermarket wheels are mounted on the vehicle that do not have the alignment 
holes, stock BMW wheels and tires must be mounted on the vehicle prior to ACC 
alignment. 

• All 4 wheels and tires must be factory spec sizes. 

• All tires must be inflated to factory specs. 

• Mount the wheel adapter securely and make sure it is straight. 

• Any time the mirror unit is moved it must be leveled. 

• The directions in the software refer to "front, middle and rear" mirror positions. This 
refers to the top mirror adjustment, which tilts the mirror. 

• Read the scales carefully. A mistake here will require a complete re-do. 

• Only use DISplus or GT1 CD32 and newer. Older versions will not operate correctly. 

• The track must be clean for the process, which allows the mirror unit to sit properly. 

• Adjustment of the sensor requires a long handled T15 torx driver. 

• Adjustment increments are in 0.1 of a turn. Small adjustments work best. 

• Do not lean on the vehicle at any time during the process. This could alter the results 
of the procedure. 

• To start the test, select Service Functions, Active cruise control, Adjust ACC sensor 
and Test Modules. 

• When asked to enter values the return (enter) button must be pressed to accept the 
value. 

• Do not let the language of the text confuse you. The top scale is for the vertical axis 
and the side scale is for the horizontal axis. The test may ask you to read off the top 
scale, which "swivels about horizontal axis". Simply put this means that the vertical 
axis is adjusted by swiveling about the horizontal axis. 


10 

E65 Active Cruise Control 




• Adjustment of the ACC sensor is the last step of the procedure. It takes 3 or 4 
"Loops" to adjust the sensor to a 0 reading on the vertical and horizontal axis. A 
"Loop" is defined as one complete adjustment of both the vertical and horizontal 
axis. 



1. Coarse setting device 

2. Rail 

3. Mirror 

4. Slotted cover 

5. Wheel laser 

6. KDS Clamp 


Note: 

The coarse setting tool is no 
longer used for the coarse 
adjustment 



1. On/Off laser switch 

2. Outlet aperture for laser 

3. Locking screw 

4. Screws for battery compartment 



1. Axle for clamp 

2. On/Off laser switch 

3. Cover for battery 

4. Outlet aperture for laser 

5. Projection surface with crosshairs 



1. Height adjustable slotted cover 

2. Setscrew for cover 

3. Baseplate 


E65 Active Cruise Control 















































































Workshop Exercise - ACC Alignment 


Alignment Procedures 

Note: The function of the ACC system depends greatly on the exact setting of 
the ACC sensor. Meticulous care must be taken when carrying out the 
setting according to the instructions provided in the Test Plan. The per¬ 
missible tolerance in the horizontal and the vertical direction is 0.2 
Degrees. 

Once the procedure has begun DO NOT lean on the vehicle. 

With the vehicle properly positioned in the service bay, measure the distance from the 
mirror to the ACC sensor. 

What is the specification for this distance? _ 

Record the tire pressure specification and actual tire pressures below: 


Tire Pressure 

Specification 

Actual 

Left Front 



Right Front 



Left Rear 



Right Rear 




Adjust the laser and mirror as directed and begin making measurements. 


Checklist Left Side of Vehicle 

Mirror Level Set 


Slot shutter set to 
correct level 


Measurement of slot 
shutter level 


Measured from? 


Value on top scale 


Value entered 


Value on side scale 


Value entered 



12 

E65 Active Cruise Control 





















Measuring Right Side of Vehicle 


Checklist Right Side of Vehicle 

Mirror Level Set 


Slot shutter set to 
correct level 


Measurement of slot 
shutter level 


Measured from? 


Value on top scale 


Value entered 


Value on side scale 


Value entered 



Adjusting the Mirror 


Mirror Adjustment 

Mirror in front of ACC sensor 


Mirror leveled 


Setting on top scale 


Setting on side scale 


Mirror position set properly 




Adjustments required (vert) 


Adjustments required (horiz) 



13 

E65 Active Cruise Control 






















■I Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. How many following distances can be set with ACC? 


2. Why should ACC NOT be used on roads with tight winding curves? 


3. What are some of the pre-conditions for ACC alignment? 


4. What special tools are need for ACC alignment? 


5. What are the maximum/minimum acceleration/deceleration rates? 


14 

E65 Active Cruise Control 




























I 


Classroom Exercise - 


Questions 





6. What do the above symbols indicate? 


Symbol A: 


Symbol B: 


Symbol C: 


15 

E65 Active Cruise Control 





































