Table of Contents 


Head-Up Display (HUD) 

Subject Page 

Head-Up Display.3 

Advantages of the Head-Up Display .3 

HUD System Overview.4 

Components.5 

HUD Display.6 

Windshield.8 

HUD Switch .9 

Principle of Operation .10 

Mirrors.11 

Eyebox .12 

HUD Image Layout.13 

HUD Function and Operation.14 

Switch-on Response.14 

Projection of virtual image in front of the vehicle.14 

Automatic adaptation of display brightness.14 

Prioritization of Displays.15 

Operation .15 

Switch-on Conditions.15 

Workshop Hints.16 

Test Functions .16 

Enabling and disabling the test functions .16 

Replace Windshield.17 

Replace Rain/Light Sensor .17 

Replacing Head-Up Display.17 

Setting Head-Up Display (Adjustment).18 

Image Defects .19 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 





























Head-Up Display 


Model: E60, E61, E63, and E64 
Production: Start of Production MY 2004 

■micnnis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• List the advantages of the HUD 

• Name the components of the HUD 

• Explain HUD operation 

• Perform HUD self test 

• Align HUD with special tools 


2 

HUD 


Head-Up Display 

The HUD, now available on the E60, E61, E63 and E64, is used to display relevant 
information needed for driving the vehicle. The information is displayed as a virtual image 
on the windshield. The image is projected into the driver’s field of vision which creates 
the illusion that the image is at the front edge of the hood. 

The relevant driving information is still available in the instrument cluster and CID. 



Depending on the eguipment installed in the vehicle, this virtual image contains informa¬ 
tion that is of relevance to the driver, such as: 

• Cruise control FGR 

• Active Cruise Control ACC 

• Navigation 

• Check Control messages 

• Road speed 

The size of the virtual image is approximately. 200 mm x 100 mm. 

The HUD of the E60 and E61 are identical. Due to the angle of the the windshield on the 
E63 and E64, the HUD is slightly modified. The mounting position in the instrument 
panel and the mirrors in the HUD unit are altered to allow integration of HUD into the 6 
series. 

Advantages of the Head-Up Display 

The virtual image in the driver's field of vision allows the driver to concentrate more on 
the road ahead than previously. Driving is thus rendered less fatiguing. For example, the 
driver switches his vision between the instrument cluster and road traffic less freguently. 
This makes driving more relaxing, the eyes do not have to re-focus as freguently. 

3 

HUD 




HUD System Overview 



0310CL03 































































Legend for System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Power distribution, rear 

9 

Rain and Light Sensor (RLS) 

2 

HUD Switch 

10 

Controller 

3 

Light Module (LM) 

11 

Instrument Cluster 

4 

Active Cruise Control (ACC) 

12 

Central Information Display (CID) 

5 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

13 

M-ASKorCCC 

6 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

14 

Head-up Display (HUD) 

7 

Digital Motor Electronics (DME) 

15 

Head-Up Display Projection Image 

8 

Steering Column Switch Cluster (SZL) 

16 



Components 

The HUD system is comprised of the following components: 

• Head-up Display unit 

• Windshield 

• HUD Switch 

The following components are networked together for Head-up display functions: 

• Light Module (LM) - The light module controls and monitors all vehicle lights. 
Information is received and transmitted via the K-CAN. 

The LM provides the terminal 58g signal via K-CAN. The LM also transmits the 
dimmer signal to the HUD. 

• Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) - The SGM provides the gateway between 
the relevant bus systems for HUD operation. The SGM also provides the means for 
diagnosis via the D-Bus/SGM pathway. 

• Digital Motor Electronics (DME) - The HUD receives signals from DME regard¬ 
ing cruise control or ACC. The signals are provided via the K-CAN and PT-CAN. 

• Car Access System (CAS) - The CAS provides inputs relating to terminal status, 
the HUD is operational when KL15 is switched ON. 

• Rain/Light Sensor (RLS) - The RLS has been slightly modified to ensure optimal 
ambient brightness of the virtual image. The viewing angle of the RLS has been 
altered to view the area closer to the virtual image. This allows the ambient light near 
the virtual image to be monitored. This information is provided to HUD via the 
K-CAN. 


5 

HUD 






































• Instrument Cluster - The instrument cluster provides vehicle road speed and 
check control messages via the K-CAN. 

• Cruise Control/Active Cruise Control - The cruise control or ACC sends the 
selected driving speed (set speed), distance (ACC), object detection (ACC), 
regulation display (ACC), and the transfer prompt (ACC) via the K-CAN. 

• Steering Column Switch Cluster (SZL) - The SZL sends the Cruise Control or 
ACC reguests from the stalk switch via the byteflight I SGM/K-CAN pathway to the 
HUD. 

• M-ASK/CCC - The navigation information is sent to the HUD. This includes the 
next road, driving direction arrow, distance to intersection and the bar gauge. These 
signals are sent via the MOST bus pathway. 

HUD Display 

The head-up display is installed above the steering column in the instrument panel. 

The key components of the head-up display are: 

• 4 mirrors - The 4 mirrors ensure that the contents of the projection display appear 
at the distance and in the size reguired, and that deformations caused by the wind¬ 
shield are largely compensated for. 

• Light source - The light source is the back lighting of the projection display. This 
light source is a number of colored LEDs laid out in rows over a certain area. 

The light source is actuated by the electronic circuitry in the head-up display, which 
also controls the brightness of the display content. 

• Projection display with cover panel - The projection display with TFT 
technology (TFT = thin-film transistor) is used to show the display contents. The 
projection display is activated by the electronic circuitry of the head-up display. 

A cover panel protects the projection display when it is switched off. 

A stepper motor folds the cover panel out of or into the beam. The stepper motor is 
actuated by the electronic circuitry in the head-up display. 

• Electronic circuitry - The electronic circuitry has the task of evaluating and pro¬ 
cessing incoming image information, generating display content, and the activation 
of the projection light source and the stepper motor for the cover panel. 

The electronics include a temperature sensor which protects the head-up display from 
overheating. The projection light source is switched off if the temperature exceeds 
approximately 105°C. 

A power supply in the head-up display provides the light source with a voltage of 42 volts, 
transformed from the on-board supply voltage. 

A 12-pin connector on the head-up display creates the connection to the vehicle electri¬ 
cal system. 

The MOST data bus is connected to the head-up display via a 2-pin connector. 

6 

HUD 




03093.03 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

HUD finisher 

12 

Light well 

2 

Cover glass 

13 

Fixture, TFT projection display 

3 

Housing frame 

14 

TFT projection display 

4 

Curved mirror 

15 

Shutter 

5 

Flat mirror (glass) 

16 

Main board, activation of LEDs 

6 

Mounting points, front bulkhead 

17 

Housing frame 

7 

Adjusting device 

18 

Curved mirror 

8 

Curved mirror 

19 

Secondary board, activation of shutter 

9 

LED power supply 

20 

Housing section 

10 

Heat sink 

21 

Housing 

11 

LED array 




The image is formed on the projection display and is illuminated by the light source. The 
curved mirrors and the flat mirror determine the shape and the size of the projected 
image. 

If the projected image is not level, this can be corrected by turning the projection display 
with the flexible shaft. 

The virtual image appears to float in the air at the end of the hood, approximately. 2.2 
meters away from the observer. The size of the virtual image is approximately. 20 x 10 
cm (width x height). 


HUD 


































Windshield 

The windshield is a "special" windshield and is an integral component vital to projecting 
the displays. The outer and inner glass panes are connected to a plastic film, which is 
wedge-shaped over the entire length of the windshield. 

The wedge-shape prevents double displays (ghosts) of the HUD by positioning both 
images one above the other. The wedge tip points downward and starts at a distance 
of approximately. 10 cm to the bottom edge of the windshield. 

The end of the wedge is located at approximately. 2/3 windshield height. In the top third 
of the windshield, the plastic film runs parallel to the outer and inner glass panes. The 
thickness of the wedge tip is 0.8 mm. The thickness of the end of the wedge is 1 mm. 



f\ 

1 FRANKFURTER 
|ring 

\ 

]f@@m 

160 



Example of “double image” from use of improper 
windshield 


If a non-specified (normal) windshield is used, the image is reflected on both the outer 
and inner glass panes. Overlapping causes the image to be displayed twice. The plastic 
wedge in the windshield places the images of the outer and inner pane over each other 
thus preventing double displays (ghosts). 


8 

HUD 












HUD Switch 

The HUD switch is located next to the headlight switch. 



The switch provides two possible functions dependent upon the length of time that the 
switch is pressed: 

• Pressing the button for less than 10 seconds, switches the Head-up display on or 
off. 

• Pressing the button for more than 10 seconds, activates the test functions for ser¬ 
vice personnel. 

• Once the test functions are accessed, the additional functions can be activated by 
briefly pressing the button. 

• To re-activate the head-up display, press the button again and hold it for longer than 
two seconds. 

The HUD switch is a direct input to the HUD unit. The switch is resistance coded allow¬ 
ing the HUD to identify button faults. 


9 

HUD 




Principle of Operation 

The HUD can be compared to a projection device. An LED field is required as the light 
source for the purpose of projecting the HUD information. The image content is created 
by the TFT projection display. 

The TFT projection display can be compared to a filter which admits or blocks light. An 
optical imaging element determines the shape and size of the HUD images. The image 
is projected onto the windshield and appears freely suspended over the road surface. 



FRANKFURTER 

RING 


500 m 

i_, 

km/h \ 





n 


FRANKFURTER 

RING 

500 m 


160 km/h \ 

=C3 


<=5 

2 


1 

03207_03 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

LED array 

6 

Curved mirror 

2 

TFT projection display 

7 

Windshield 

3 

Curved mirror 

8 

Observer’s point of vision 

4 

Curved mirror 

9 

Projected image 

5 

Flat mirror (glass) 




10 

HUD 

















Mirrors 

The HUD incorporates 4 mirrors. These mirrors reflect the display content onto the 
windshield. Three of the mirrors are curved. These mirrors adapt the display content 
onto the screen. 

This flat mirror determines the size and distance of the HUD projection. The curved 
mirrors are made of plastic while the flat mirror is made of glass. 

The projected HUD image content appears at a distance of approximately 2.2 meters 
(7.2 feet) from the eye. 


4 



03102.03 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Head-up display 

3 

Projected image 

2 

Windshield 

4 

Projection distance 


11 

HUD 











Eyebox 

The eyebox is the movement space in which the driver can move without his view 
of the image in the HUD being impaired. 

The freedom of movement within the eyebox is roughly: 

• 130 mm horizontally 

• 90 mm vertically 

Outside the eyebox limits the image in the HUD is no longer clearly visible. 


1 FRANKFURTER 
RING 

500 m 

JT (FRANKFURTER 
A | RING 

1 500m 

Jf I FRAN' 

A Bring 

1 500 

»/h 

160 km/h \ 

160 km/h 


i) 

3 . 



1. Point of vision inside the eyebox HUD - image OK 

2. Point of vision displaced to the left HUD - image distorted to the left 

3. Point of vision displaced to the right HUD - image distorted to the right 


I r500m 

160 km/h \ 

FRANKFURTER 
RING 

500 m ij 

160 km/h \ 

■ FRANKFURTER 
RING 

500 m 2 j 






03553_03 


1. Point of vision inside the eyebox - HUD image OK 

2. Point of vision displaced downward - HUD image distorted downward 

3. Point of vision displaced upwards - HUD image distorted upwards 


12 

HUD 


HUD Image Layout 

The HUD background color is transparent. 

Symbols (such as e.g. warning symbols) are specified by the individual control units. 

This color specification is adopted for the display in the HUD. 

Two dimensional symbols are used for optimum visibility and legibility. 

The colors are: 

• Orange as the standard color 

• Red or yellow for warning messages 

• Green for the set speed 

The 4 colors are generated by the layout of the LED’s and the corresponding actuation of 
the LED’s by the electronic circuitry of the Head-up display. 

The size of the virtual image display range is approximately. 20 x 10 cm (width x height). 
To make the contents of the display easier to read, the display range is divided into an 
upper section and a lower section. Navigation instructions and Check-Control messages 
are displayed in the upper section. Speed-related information is displayed in the lower 
section. 


1. Current road speed 

2. Navigation instructions consisting of: 

• Driving direction arrow 

• Bar graph 

• Next road 

• Distance to next intersection 

3. Set speed 

4. Object detection and distance set (ACC) 


|» I FRANKFURTER 

A Iking 

U U500 m 

< _ 

160 km/h 140 


TI203031 


The signals used to generate the image in the head-up display are input from the corre¬ 
sponding control units, e.g. multi-audio system controller (M-ASK) via the K-CAN and 
MOST data buses to the electronic circuitry in the head-up display. The electronic circuit¬ 
ry evaluates the incoming signals and forwards the prepared image information to the 
components in the head-up display. 


13 

HUD 




HUD Function and Operation 

The head-up display comprises the following functions: 

• Switch-on response 

• Projection of virtual image in front of the vehicle 

• Automatic adaptation of display brightness 

• Prioritization of displays 

Switch-on Response 

The head-up display is partially operational when terminal R is switched ON. This means: 

• The projection display is initialized but information is not yet displayed. 

• The head-up display is able to communicate with other bus-elements via the MOST 
and K-CAN data buses. 

The head-up display is operational when terminal 15 is switched ON. This means: 

• The light source is switched on when the button for switching the head-up display 
on and off is pressed. 

• The projection display cover panel is folded out of the beam by the stepper motor. 

• The automatic adaptation of the display brightness is activated. 

Projection of virtual image in front of the vehicle 

The head-up display projects a virtual image, i.e. an image that appears to hang in mid-air 
without a fixed image carrier (e.g. projection screen or similar). The image is generated on 
the projection display in the head-up display and is projected forwards through the wind¬ 
shield to a point in front of the bonnet. 

The virtual image is approximately 20 x 10 cm (width x height) and can only be seen from 
the driver's side. 

Automatic adaptation of display brightness 

The automatic adaptation of display brightness prevents major sudden changes in the 
brightness of the head-up display when the vehicle moves between different ambient 
lighting conditions (e.g. from light to dark and from dark to light when driving through a 
tunnel). 

The automatic adjustment of the display brightness depends on; 

• the ambient lighting conditions, 

• the brightness adjustment setting, 

• the dimmer setting for instrument lighting (only when the lights are on). 

14 

HUD 



The surrounding brightness (day, night, twilight, sunshine, etc.) is recorded by the 
rain/light sensor. The value of the brightness adjustment (difference between base setting 
and individually set display brightness) is stored in the head-up display. When the lighting 
is switched on (terminal 58g, lights ON) the brightness of the head-up display is also 
influenced by the dimmer setting of the instrument lighting. 

Prioritization of Displays 

The information in the head-up display is classified according to priority (= importance for 
the driver). Displays with low priority are overwritten by displays with higher priority. 


Priority 

Function 

1 

Warnings from Active Cruise Control (ACC) 

2 

Check Control Messages 

3 

Test functions 

4 

Navigation Instructions 


Operation 

The head-up display is controlled using the following control elements: 

• Button for switching head-up display on and off 

• Dimmer for instrument lighting 

• Controller for selecting brightness of head-up display in the CID 

Switch-on Conditions 

The conditions required to switch the head-up display on are: 

• Terminal 15 switched on 

• Button for switching head-up display on and off switched on 


15 

HUD 













Workshop Hints 

The following general information is provided for service staff: 

• Test functions 

• Replace windshield 

• Replace rain/light sensor 

• Replace head-up display 

• Set head-up display 

Test Functions 

The test functions are useful fortroubleshooting without the DISplus/GT-1. 

The test functions are displayed in the head-up display. 

Note: Test function replaced when driving. At road speeds greater than 5 km/h, 
a warning given by the Active Cruise Control or a Check-Control mes¬ 
sage will replace the test function. 

When terminal R or terminal 15 is ON, the test functions will be called up if the button for 
switching the head-up display is pressed and held for more than 10 seconds. When the 
first test function is displayed, other test functions can be activated by briefly pressing the 
button. 

Enabling and disabling the test functions 

Some test functions are not freely accessible, but rather have to be enabled. 

Enabling is only possible in the test function "Enable". 

An Enabling is effected by entering the sum of the last 5 digits of the vehicle identifica¬ 
tion number. 

Test functions are disabled again when they are ended. 

A test function is, e.g. the system test, which comprises the following sequence: 

• The projection display cover panel is folded out of the beam. 

• The light source lights up with maximum brightness. 

• A series of test patterns appears in the head-up display to check for optical errors. 
The test patterns make it possible to test readability (focus) and color reproduction. 

Test patterns contain: Lines, colors, characters and symbols 

• The light source is deactivated. 

• The projection display cover panel is folded into of the beam. 

16 

HUD 



The test functions are terminated by the following conditions: 

• Terminal R OFF 

• Button pressed for longer than 2 seconds 

• Test function "Reset" called up 

Replace Windshield 

Important: A special windshield is needed for the head-up display! 

When changing the windshield, please note that vehicles eguipped with FIUD reguire a 
special windshield. 

This windshield is marked with the letters "HUD" at the bottom right edge. 

Replace Rain/Light Sensor 

Important: When replacing the rain/light sensor, use only the rain/light sensor for the 
head-up display! 

The head-up display reguires a special rain/light sensor so that the display brightness can 
be adjusted optimally. 

Replacing Head-Up Display 

A faulty HUD must be completely replaced. A new HUD must be adjusted once it has 
been installed. The CID must be removed for this adjustment work. 

This adjustment is performed at a screw on the supporting tube. This screw incorporates 
an eccentric which serves to adjust the angle of the HUD in relation to the windshield. 

A special tool is reguired for adjustment. 


17 

HUD 



Setting Head-Up Display (Adjustment) 

There is a 2-piece adjustment tool (62 11 20) 
for setting the head-up display. 

62 11 20 consists of: 

1. Projection gauge (62 1121) 

2. Adjustment spanner (62 11 22) 

Note: The central information display must be 
removed to adjust the head-up display. 

To access the head-up display adjusting 
screw with the adjustment tool, the CID must 
be removed. 

Access to the flexible shaft is also only possi¬ 
ble once the CID has been removed. 

The projection gauge is engaged on the retainers of the sun visors. 

With the DISplus orGT-1, the test pattern for setting is called up and projected by the 
projection display through the windshield and onto the scale of the projection gauge. 

1. Screw for height adjustment 

2. Flexible shaft 




The head-up display can only be adjusted vertically using the adjustment spanner on the 
adjusting screw. 

If the projected image is not level, this can be corrected by manually turning the projec¬ 
tion display with the flexible shaft (as of 12/2003). 

Important. Rotate the flexible shaft in a clockwise direction only! 

Rotate the flexible shaft in a clockwise direction only, as otherwise the display adjustment 
may break. 


18 

HUD 





Image Defects 

Incorrect installation of the HUD or of the windshield may result in faulty HUD projections. 

The incidence of light onto the windshield or into the HUD in an inconvenient situation 
causes the image to fade. Excessive heat in the HUD will also cause the image to fade. 




HUD image showing distortion for improper 
installation or adjustment 


* I FRANKFURTER 

> | FRANKFURTER 

/ Irin§ 

f Iring 

1 Df00m 

1 D500m 

160 ^ 'r 

160 km/h / \ N 


HUD image showing “double image” from incorrect “Normal” HUD image 

windshield or incorrect windshield installation 





03107_03 

HUD image showing excessive heat or incidental light 


19 

HUD 








^j ji Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. What information is displayed on HUD? 


2. What vehicles are currently available with HUD? 


3. What are the three main components of the HUD system? 


4. What is different about the RLS in HUD equipped vehicles? 


5. What special tools are needed to make adjustments to HUD? 


20 

E63/64 HUD 





























Workshop Exercise - HUD Adjustment 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, perform the following adjustment procedures 
on the Head-up Display (HUD). Using Web TIS access the repair instructions for the 
HUD adjustment. 

Access the HUD test functions. 

Describe the method/pathway for accessing the HUD test functions: 


Activate the System Test. 

What is the access number for the tests (sum of VIN)? 


What can be found in the system tests? 


How can the correct windshield be identified? 


Using the DISplus/GT 1, perform a short test on the HUD. Perform the HUD adjust¬ 
ments as specified by the repair instructions. 

Note: Do not activate longer than 30 minutes to avoid overheating of the HUD! 
Deactivate Test Picture as soon as the adjustment is complete. 

What component(s) must be removed for HUD adjustment? 


What special tools are needed for the HUD adjustment? 


How many adjustments are possible on the HUD? 


21 

HUD 



