Technical training. 

Product information. 


101 Product Presentation 



Edited for the U.S, market by: 
BMW Group University 

Technical Training 

ST1403a / SB026 4/1/2014 

V___/ 


BMW Service 




General information 


Symbols used 

The following symbol is used in this document to facilitate better comprehension or to draw attention 
to very important information: 

A 

Contains important safety information and information that needs to be observed strictly in order to 
guarantee the smooth operation of the system. 


Information status and national-market versions 

BMW Group vehicles meet the requirements of the highest safety and quality standards. Changes 
in requirements for environmental protection, customer benefits and design render necessary 
continuous development of systems and components. Consequently, there may be discrepancies 
between the contents of this document and the vehicles available in the training course. 

This document basically relates to the European version of left hand drive vehicles. Some operating 
elements or components are arranged differently in right-hand drive vehicles than shown in the 
graphics in this document. Further differences may arise as the result of the equipment specification in 
specific markets or countries. 

Additional sources of information 

Further information on the individual topics can be found in the following: 

• Owner's Handbook 

• Integrated Service Technical Application. 

Contact: conceptinfo@bmw.de 
©2013 BMW AG, Munich 

Reprints of this publication or its parts require the written approval of BMW AG, Munich 

The information contained in this document forms an integral part of the technical training of the 
BMW Group and is intended for the trainer and participants in the seminar. Refer to the latest relevant 
information systems of the BMW Group for any changes/additions to the technical data. 

Information status: August 2013 

BV-72/Technical Training 




101 Product Presentation 

Contents 


1. BMW i Brand.1 

1.1. BMW i.1 

1.1.1. Introduction.1 

1.1.2. BMW i3.2 

1.1.3. Development.3 

1.1.4. Production.5 

1.1.5. Usage.7 

1.1.6. Recycling.7 

1.1.7. The BMW i sub-brand.7 

1.1.8. 360° ELECTRIC.8 

1.1.9. BMW i Technical Training.12 

1.1.10. Repair costs.13 

1.1.11. Mobility services.13 

2. Technical Data.15 

3. Overview of Body.18 

3.1. Introduction.18 

3.2. LifeDrive concept.18 

3.2.1. Life module.20 

3.2.2. Drive module.22 

3.3. Outer skin concept.23 

3.4. Door concept.27 

3.5. Passenger compartment concept.28 

3.5.1. Luggage compartment.29 

3.5.2. Seats.30 

3.5.3. Materials.30 

3.6. Equipment specifications.31 

3.6.1. Giga World.31 

3.6.2. Tera World.31 

3.7. Notes on body damage.32 

3.7.1. Notes on body damage.32 

4. General Vehicle Electrical.34 

4.1. Vehicle electrical system.34 

4.1.1. Bus overview.34 

4.1.2. K-CAN.36 

4.1.3. Installation locations of control units.37 

4.1.4. Control units.38 

4.2. Voltage supply.42 

4.2.1. Overview of the 12V voltage supply.42 









































101 Product Presentation 

Contents 


4.2.2. Components.43 

4.2.3. Terminal control.51 

4.2.4. Emergency charging.52 

4.2.5. Diagnosis and programming.52 

4.3. Exterior lights.53 

4.3.1. Front lights.53 

4.3.2. Rear lights.54 

4.4. Wash/wipe system.55 

4.4.1. System components.56 

4.4.2. System components.57 

4.5. Heating and air-conditioning system.57 

4.5.1. System functions.57 

5. IKT System Overview.68 

5.1. System components.68 

5.1.1. Headunits.68 

5.1.2. External devices.69 

5.1.3. Telephone Systems.70 

5.1.4. Telematic Communication Box.70 

5.1.5. Touch controller.71 

5.1.6. Speaker Systems.71 

5.2. Functions.71 

5.2.1. Display and operating concept.71 

5.2.2. BMW i specific navigation.72 

5.2.3. BMW ConnectedDrive.73 

6. Chassis and Suspension Overview.74 

6.1. Introduction.74 

6.1.1. Overview of chassis and suspension.74 

6.2. Wheels.75 

6.2.1. Wheel sizes.75 

6.3. Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS).77 

6.3.1. Wheel electronics teach-in process.78 

6.3.2. Functional prerequisites.78 

6.3.3. Initializing the tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS).79 

6.3.4. Information in Central Information Display.79 

6.3.5. Information in the instrument cluster (KOMBI).82 

6.4. Brake.83 

6.5. Dynamic handling control systems.84 

6.5.1. Dynamic traction control, DTC.84 









































101 Product Presentation 

Contents 


7. Overview of Electric Motor.85 

7.1. Components of the electric motor.85 

7.1.1. Electrical machine.87 

7.1.2. Transmission.87 

7.1.3. Electrical machine electronics.88 

7.1.4. High-voltage battery.89 

7.2. Role and components of the range extender.89 

7.3. Power transmission.90 

7.4. Operating strategy of the electric motor.92 

7.5. Operating strategy of the range extender in the 101.93 

7.5.1. Overview.93 

7.5.2. Automatic engine start/stop function.94 

7.5.3. Automatic service.94 

7.6. Refueling with range extender.95 

8. Charging the High-voltage Battery.97 

8.1. Introduction.97 

8.2. Charging plug.99 

8.3. Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment.99 

8.3.1. Mobile solution.100 

8.3.2. Fixed charging station.101 

8.4. Charging status display.103 

8.5. Charging in Service mode.105 

9. Maintenance.107 

9.1. Service.107 

9.2. Maintenance work for range extender.107 

10. Assessing the vehicle after an accident.108 

10.1. Electrical assessment.108 

10.2. Visual assessment.109 
































101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 

1.1. BMW i 


1.1.1. Introduction 

As the world's most successful manufacturer of premium cars, the BMW Group will also play a leading 
and pioneering role in the future in the design of individual mobility. The foundations for sustainable 
mobility solutions were laid with the research and development work carried out since 2007 within 
the framework of the i project, which takes into consideration the ecological, economical and social 
change. The BMW Group strikes the necessary balance between individual needs and the global 
requirements of future mobility with a comprehensive approach, which is portrayed by the new 
BMW i brand. BMW i represents future-oriented vehicles and mobility services whose premium 
character is consistently defined using sustainability. Now this vision is becoming a reality. The BMW 
i3 (development code 101), the first series model of the new brand, allows emissions-free mobility in a 
premium car. 



View of the BMW i3 from rear left 


The BMW i3 is the world's first premium electric vehicle which was designed from scratch for this type 
of drivetrain. A car which conveys the typical BMW driving pleasure was thus developed - emissions- 
free and more intensive than ever before in an electrically powered vehicle. As well as the unique 
vehicle architecture with LifeDrive structure, including the carbon passenger compartment and the 
aluminium module for the electric motor, high-voltage battery and chassis and suspension, within the 
framework of BMW eDrive the electrical machine, power electronics and the high-voltage battery are 
also developed independently by the BMW Group. The Ultimate Driving Machine characteristic also 
becomes an elementary product feature of the BMW i3. 

The use of the lightweight, long-life and crash-resistant high-tech carbon material on this scale is 
unique for the mass production of a vehicle. Thanks to the optimized weight, the BMW i3 is not heavier 
than a comparable vehicle with a traditional engine and full fuel tank. Its vehicle curb weight i.a.w. 
German Standardization Institute (DIN) is 1195 kg/2634 lbs, including a high-voltage battery, which 
enables sporty vehicle performances and day-to-day range. 


1 



101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 


An additional range of mobility solutions, which can be used independently of the vehicle, is also an 
element of BMW i. The holding company BMW i Ventures was founded for this purpose. The New- 
York-based company My City Way is the first company in which BMW i Ventures is involved. It offers a 
mobile app for over 40 cities in the USA with information on public transport, available car parks and 
entertainment. Another 40 cities, including Munich, will be added in the course of the global market 
introduction. 


1.1.2. BMW i3 

The BMW i3 with the electric motor is designed vehicle for urban traffic: With a purely electric motor 
and customized to the requirements of sustainable and emissions-free mobility, it incorporates an 
intelligent method of mobility in the city or for commuting. 

The high-voltage battery of the BMW 101 only has to be charged every two to three days when used 
for the typical commute between the place of residence and work. This corresponds to a range of 130 
to 160 km (80 to 100 mi). The BMW 101 is thus ideal for driving requirements in the city and, at the 
same time, allows comfortable cross-country journeys. The voltage supply of the electric motor and 
all other vehicle functions is powered via a specially developed high-voltage battery. This sets even 
more standards in terms of the energy efficiency. The intelligent heating/cooling system of the high- 
voltage battery ensures that the energy performance (and also the range of the vehicle) is not affected 
as much by temperature fluctuations as is normally typical with such batteries. Furthermore, during the 
development of the BMW 101 particular importance was attached to low energy consumption of the 
electrical components. 

The standard range can be increased by up to 25 percent by using the different driving modes and the 
distance travelled using purely electric means can be extended comfortably to 200 km (125 mi). 

Drive system 

The electrical machine of the BMW 101 is primarily designed for use in urban traffic and delivers 125 
kW/170 bhp at a peak torque of 250 Nm (184 Ib-ft). The full torque is already available from standstill, 
which is typical for electric motors, and does not have to be built up first over the engine speed like in 
combustion engines. 

This gives the BMW 101 particularly high agility and delivers impressive acceleration values. 

The high torque is also available over a very large engine speed range, thus enabling very 
homogeneous power development. The single-stage transmission ensures optimal power 
transmission to the rear wheels and accelerates the BMW 101 by means of an electronic control 
without the loss of power up to 150 km/h (93 mph). The electric motor also offers the option of braking 
using the accelerator pedal. If the driver takes his foot off the accelerator pedal, the electrical machine 
assumes the function of an alternator, which returns the current converted from the kinetic energy to 
the high-voltage battery. A braking torque is generated by this so-called energy recovery, which leads 
to effective deceleration of the vehicle. 

This unique "one pedal control", acceleration and braking only using the accelerator pedal, is even 
more comfortable with freewheeling. If the driver takes his foot off the accelerator pedal, the zero 
torque control of the electric motor disconnects the transmission as long as the accelerator pedal is in 
this position. The vehicle then continues to roll without energy consumption and uses its own kinetic 
energy for the electric motor. 

In contrast to the MINI E, the BMW 101 has a more pronounced "intermediate setting" of the 
accelerator pedal. This allows the vehicle "to roll". The vehicle does not recover straight away when 
the driver releases his foot off the accelerator pedal, but in principle disengages. The electrical 


2 



101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 


machine then rotates load-free so that the BMW 101 rolls without energy consumption. Within the 
framework of a proactive driving style "rolling" offers a very comfortable option to generate a slightly 
larger range. 

Range extender 

As many customers would like an even larger range or a high degree of flexibility, an optional range 
extender (REX) in the BMW 101 enables the range to be increased by a further 130 km (80 mi) 
approximately. The range extender (REX) is a small, very smooth-running and quiet gasoline engine, 
which drives an electrical machine, in order to maintain the state of charge of the high-voltage battery 
so that the vehicle can continue to drive using electrical energy. 

1.1.3. Development 

The BMW i LifeDrive architecture means less weight and an extended range. Two separate function 
units, a Drive module made from aluminium and a Life module made from carbon, result in the 
interaction of an ultralight and stable design. The result: improved energy efficiency, higher range and 
enhanced safety. 



LifeDrive architecture in the 101 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Life module 

2 

Drive module 


The LifeDrive architecture comprises two independent units. The upper module: the passenger 
compartment made from carbon fibre reinforced plastic - also called CFK or simply carbon. On the 
one hand, it offers the occupants the best possible protection in the event of accidents thanks to its 
stability, and, on the other hand, it is still light enough to offset the additional weight of the high-voltage 
battery. 


3 





101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 


The lower module which is made entirely from aluminium has space for the high-voltage battery. The 
suspension, structure and impact elements, as well as the electric motor, are housed here. With the 
location of all drive components in the lower module the occupants now have more space because 
there is no center console dividing the passenger compartment. The LifeDrive architecture is thus an 
innovation which not only balances the weight of the high-voltage battery, but also lowers the center of 
gravity of the vehicle and thus lends every BMW i the agility which is expected of a BMW. 

As the carbon passenger compartment is particularly robust, driving pleasure and comfort go hand 
and hand with enhanced safety for the occupants. The result: less weight, enhanced safety and 
spacious and comfortable passenger compartment. 

First-class aerodynamics is an important element of efficient electric mobility. In the BMW i the fully 
cladded vehicle underbody prevents recirculation under the vehicle. At the same time, so-called 
AirCurtains and AeroFlaps improve the aerodynamics at the wheel arches and in the side sill area 
behind the front wheels. 

The passenger compartment of the BMW 101 is characterized by its high-quality equipment features 
made from renewable raw materials such as natural fibers and naturally tanned leather. 25% of the 
plastic used for the passenger compartment of the BMW 101 and 25% of the thermoplastic parts at 
the body either come from recycled materials or renewable sources. 

Carbon era 

It is a breakthrough achievement and one of the most innovative developments of BMW i: the standard 
production of passenger compartments made from carbon (CFK). To date, the weight of the high- 
voltage battery restricted the range of electric vehicles. The larger the high-voltage battery, the heavier 
the vehicle - and thus the more energy that was required to get from A to B. 

Thanks to the intensive use of carbon components in the 101 additional weight of the high-voltage 
battery has now been successfully offset. For a long time it was only possible to use these carbon 
components in a restricted manner, as they were very expensive (hand-made). BMW i has now 
rewritten this standard with the first passenger compartment made from carbon originating from 
standard production. 

However, carbon components not only revolutionizethe lightweight construction. They also enable 
new moulds in the design as the plastic reinforced with carbon fibers is just as easy to process when 
dry as textile material. On the one hand, bodies made from carbon offer more space in the passenger 
compartment, and, on the other hand, also enable complex styling which is optimized in terms of 
aerodynamics. Last but not least, carbon is a high-strength material and increases the safety of all 
occupants of a BMW i. After over ten years of intensive research and experience in production, the 
BMW Group, together with SGL Automotive, is now developing and producing carbon fibers, as well as 
carbon fiber boards. 

Interior 

The LifeDrive architecture with the carbon passenger compartment also allows greater freedom in 
the design of the passenger compartment of the BMW i3. Doors which open in the opposite direction 
and the omission of B-pillars are the basis for the exceptionally high degree of spatial comfort and 
freedom of movement in relation to the outer dimensions. Thanks to the direct location of the electrical 
machine at the rear axle and also the omission of the normal center console in conventional vehicles, 
there is a direct link between the right and left footwell. 


4 



101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 



Interior in the 101 

Line management and surface design in the area of the cockpit and the door trim panels highlight 
the impression of lightness and modern functionality. Defined lines, strong contours and small radii 
characterizethe geometric shapes. The design of the dashboard is defined by the layering structure 
also used in the interior equipment. It is divided into three levels, which are designed depending on 
the equipment specifications in different colors and materials. A central design element is the curved 
decor area which runs from the air vents on the left cockpit side behind the steering column and 
up above the glove box. It can also be optionally maintained in bright, porous gum wood. The other 
material selection with a mix of naturally processed leather, wood, wool and other renewable materials 
makes the premium characteristics of the BMW i3, which are complemented with the sustainability 
aspect, visible and noticeable. 


1.1.4. Production 

Because the production of carbon fiber demands a large amount of energy; it’s produced in Moses 
Lake in the USA. This facility can be operated using clean energy from one of the world's largest 
hydroelectric power stations (the Grand Coulee Dam). This means 100% electricity from renewable 
sources is used for the production of carbon fiber. 

BMW has been leading the ranking list of the Dow Jones Sustainability Index (since 2005) as the most 
sustainable automobile manufacturer in the world. The BMW i plant in Leipzig is the first to exceed this 
standard. In comparison to the production of the industry leader BMW, 70% less water and 50% less 
energy on average is required for the production of the i models. 


5 







101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 



Plant in Leipzig 


The new pressing plant in Leipzig boasts state-of-the art technology for carbon components in 
automotive manufacture. In this plant (which is designed for large-scale industrial production) BMW 
now manufactures its own carbon fibre composites. The formula, i.e. the composition, of resistance 
and geometry of the carbon components, can be adapted variably to the design specifications in the 
pressing plant. The customized non-woven carbon fibre fabric delivered from the Wackersdorf plant 
is first subjected to the so-called preform process where it obtains its subsequent mold. A heating 
tool gives the layered package its stable, 3D shape. Several of these preform moulding blanks can be 
joined to form a larger component. For example, large body components can be manufactured, which 
are extremely difficult to produce in aluminium or sheet steel. 

The newly produced carbon composite components from the new pressing plant in Leipzig, as well 
as the carbon components supplied from the pressing plant in Landshut, are joined together to form 
the new body construction hall. The basic shape of the Life module of a BMW i3 is created from 
approximately 150 parts, which only represents one third of the parts in conventional sheet steel 
construction. There is no noise pollution from screws or rivets and no flying sparks when welding. 

Only state-of-the-art bonding technology is used (100% automated). A technology which only the 
BMW Group possesses. In the unique joining process developed by BMW the individual components 
are joined contactlessly up to an adhesive gap of 1.5 millimeters, in order to guarantee optimal 
resistance after the bonding process. The precision in the bonded connection ensures optimal power 
transmission between the individual carbon components and thus the highest quality standard in mass 
production. 

The production of the BMW i3 is setting new standards in terms of environmental protection. In 
comparison to the already highly efficient average values in the production network of the BMW 
Group, energy consumption is approximately 50 percent less and water consumption roughly 70 
percent less. The power for the production of BMW i cars in the Leipzig plant stems exclusively from 


6 














101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 


wind power, i.e. 100 percent from renewable energy sources. For this purpose, wind power stations 
were erected locally for the first time in Germany on the grounds of an automobile manufacturer for the 
direct power supply for production. 

The production of the electrical machine and the high-voltage battery for the BMW i3 is done within 
the production network of the BMW Group. The company also uses its leading global position in the 
area of drive technology for future-oriented innovations in the area of electric mobility. The BMW 
Group has created a competence network for electric mobility at the Lower Bavarian production plants 
located in Dingolfing and Landshut. 

1.1.5. Usage 

Consistent sustainability also means that carbon dioxide emissions generated outside the vehicle 
are avoided. This is why BMW i is cooperating with producers of renewable energy such as 
NATURSTROM AG to make electricity from renewable sources easily accessible to BMW i drivers. 

Overall, in comparison to a vehicle of a similar size and with a very efficient combustion engine, a 101 
(including production, usage and recycling) generates approximately 30% less C0 2 with the use of 
conventional electricity (EU-25 Mix) and even approximately 50% less C0 2 during operation using 
renewable electricity. 

1.1.6. Recycling 

There are many options for reusing the high-performance lithium-ion cells of the high-voltage battery 
after the usage in the vehicle. For example, a simple and effective use would be as a temporary storage 
device for solar or wind power plants. 

The remains from carbon production and the production of carbon components are valuable materials 
for the BMW Group. They are either fed back into production directly or reused in other areas. Ten 
percent of the quantity of carbon fibers required for the production of a 101 already comes from reused 
materials. 


1.1.7. The BMW i sub-brand 

The BMW i sub-brand stands for innovation, inspiration, design and visionary mobility. It creates a 
successful balance between the BMW M sub-brand, which is oriented towards a sporting character 
and performance, and the parent group BMW. 

The advantage of a sub-brand in comparison to an individual brand is that the corresponding product 
is automatically associated with the main brand, in this case BMW, and thus benefits from the image 
and feeling communicated by this brand. BMW i should therefore not only convey the innovation, 
sustainability and design of the i models, but also the quality and the driving pleasure and the aesthetic 
features of BMW models. 

BMW i should reach new target groups and thus generate growth for the company. In addition, 

BMW i intensifies the image of the BMW Group as a sustainable company, thus ensuring a future- 
proof portfolio. With the BMW i sub-brand BMW is clearing setting itself apart from other vehicle 
manufacturers and with the sports car BMW i8 is creating a vehicle which is designed not only for 
performance, but also for BMW EfficientDynamics, innovation and sustainability. 


7 



101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 

1.1.8. 360° ELECTRIC 

The objective of the design of the range for the BMW i3 was to ensure that the customers can cover 
their typical energy requirements with two to three charges per week. The studies conducted within 
the framework of the i project with over 1000 participants and over roughly 20 million kilometers 
revealed that the average distance covered per day is roughly 45 kilometers/27 miles. In addition to the 
wallbox provided by BMW i, a conventional household socket can also be used for charging. BMW i 
already has a comprehensive product and service offering under the designation 360° ELECTRIC for 
all individual customer requirements in the areas of power supply and mobility planning. The extent 
of the services ranges from the installation of the BMW i wallbox in the customer's garage to special 
offers for the supply using regenerative energy sources to the charging map for the convenient use of 
the public transport infrastructure and additional assist services of BMW ConnectedDrive. And where 
a mobility requirement cannot be fulfilled using the vehicle concept of the BMW i3, 360° ELECTRIC 
offers solutions with alternative vehicles from the model range of BMW and DriveNow under the key 
word Flexible Mobility. 

With the complete 360° ELECTRIC package the advantages of electric mobility in day-to-day life 
can be experienced reliably, conveniently and flexibly. The portfolio of 360° ELECTRIC is based 
on four pillars and essentially includes the areas charging at home, charging at public charging 
stations, mobility security, as well as integration in innovative mobility concepts for overcoming range 
restrictions. 

Several technical properties distinguish electric vehicles from conventional vehicles. A growing 
selection of "360° ELECTRIC" products and services ensures simple and comfortable electric mobility 
in almost every situation. 


8 



101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 



Service and product offer of 360° ELECTRIC 


Global partnership 

BMW i is constantly implementing its strategy for customer-friendly electric mobility. An extensive 
partnership with Schneider Electric and the electric mobility service provider The Mobility House 
(TMH) was formed. 

The agreement includes services such as checking house installations at the customer's home, the 
delivery and installation of charging stations (wallboxes), as well as maintenance and other services. 
Future owners of a BMW i3 or i8 can connect their vehicle safely and charge it quickly at home or at 
the place of work. 


9 


101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 

Convenient charging at home 



If one has a fixed parking space at home, then the high-voltage battery can be charged using the 
standard charging cable supplied and the connection at a typical household socket. Charging is even 
quicker and more conveniently using the charging station offered by BMW i for wall installation in the 
house. This "wallbox" is not only the ideal design add-on for BMW i vehicles: The reliable installation 
service organized by BMW i is part of the overall package and is adapted to the special requirements 
of the customer. And because BMW i is responsible for complete sustainability in E-mobility, one can 
obtain clean power on request also from BMW i in cooperation with providers of regenerative energy 
sources. 


Charge on the road 

Those who do not want to charge their BMW i3 at home or at the work place have the option of 
individual solutions with 360° ELECTRIC. In cooperation with car park operators and providers 
of public charging stations BMW i offers the customer reliable access to the public charging 
infrastructure. Together with its partners, BMW i supports the networking between vehicle, driver 


10 



101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 


and surrounding area in order to provide users with convenience features, and the display of available 
charging stations in the navigation system and on the customer's smartphone, as well as simple, 
transparent payment processes using the ChargeNow card. The ChargeNow card gives the customer 
comprehensive access to charging stations and enables cashless payment. As a result, in all BMW 
i markets it concentrates the largest possible number of providers of charging infrastructure in the 
public sphere so that the customer only has to use the one card to access the charging stations of 
different providers and receives a standard invoice from BMW i. 

In Germany alone there are over 70 different providers of public charging stations, which currently use 
various payment and service concepts. It is necessary to harmonize this landscape. The ChargeNow 
card is a BMW i product which is an intelligent solution for customers. The challenge now lies in 
further expanding and harmonizing the comprehensive offers with all partners involved. 

A current example for the networking of public charging infrastructure is the recently presented 
solution portfolio from Hubject GmbH, a joint venture of the BMW Group, Bosch, Daimler, EnBW, 

RWE and Siemens. The company allows providers of electric mobility services to extend their offer 
by the so-called eRoaming. Drivers of electric vehicles thus obtain access to every public charging 
point of an existing European network, which the BMW i customer can use with the ChargeNow card 
- all this with just one supplier agreement. This means charging electric vehicles in the future will be 
simple and there will be no need to withdraw cash at an ATM. Access to the charging station is done 
using a standard QR code, which starts and ends the charging procedure by means of scanning and a 
smartphone app. 

Assistance services 

Drivers of a BMW i3 will be able to rely on their vehicle at all times and can obtain around-the-clock 
assistance and support if required. A comprehensive service system and mobility guarantees, as well 
as intelligent convenience functions, make this possible. 

Using the smartphone the status and state of charge of the battery, range, as well as the function 
of the heating and air-conditioning system, can be conveniently monitored or pre-programmed. A 
navigation system with extended options supports the driver when planning his journey and selects 
the most economical route upon request. In addition, charging stations along the route are displayed 
to the customer to optimally use the range of the BMW i3. In this connection, BMW i actively supports 
networking of the public charging infrastructure in cooperation with partners in order to provide 
electric mobility customers with further convenience features such as advance reservation of charging 
stations and simple and transparent payment processes. 

So that the BMW i3 always functions reliably in day-to-day usage, the high-voltage battery and the 
other electrical systems are also constantly monitored during the journey. In the unlikely situation of a 
fault the BMW Service and Mobile Service or workshops are able to identify faulty components within 
the framework of the diagnosis and re-establish driving ability of the BMW i3 within the shortest time. 
With regard to the scope and quality of the service, there are no differences to conventional BMW 
vehicles. 

All necessary service or repair work is completed within the framework of a comprehensive Service 
package of the BMW i service partner. A wide range of replacement vehicles are available to the BMW i 
customer. 


11 



101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 



BMW i in Service mode 


Flexible mobility 

In the situation where the range of a BMW i3 is insufficient, the customer can resort to additional 
mobility modules, with whose help larger distances can also be covered - for example by temporarily 
using a BMW with a combustion engine or hybrid drive. For this purpose, individual annual quotas 
can be added via 360° ELECTRIC. The car sharing option DriveNow is also available to the BMW i 
customer. 


1.1.9. BMW i Technical Training 

Two new Instructor Led courses were created for the BMW i sub-brand for the US market. The 
courses are divided into the two different areas of responsibility based on the safety risks and the 
necessary professional knowledge required for handling high-voltage batteries: 

• ST1403a 101 Complete Vehicle 

ST 1403b 101 High Voltage Battery and Maintenance 

ST1403b 101 High Voltage Battery and Maintenance includes all services including the repair of the 
high-voltage battery by replacing the cell modules except the repair of the carbon structure. The 
service format BMW i Full Service includes all services previously mentioned, as well as repair to 
the carbon structure. Therefore a BMW i Full Service facility must also be a BMW i CCRC (Certified 
Collision Repair Center) 

In addition, the BMW i Routing service makes it easier for the customer to hand over his vehicle for the 
repair. The Routing service is responsible for forwarding the respective vehicle to a workshop with an 
appropriate service format and assuming the arising costs for the customer. This should ensure an all- 
inclusive service for the BMW i customer. 


12 




101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 

1.1.10. Repair costs 



Plastic parts of the outer skin of the 101 


According to investigations conducted by car insurance companies and the BMW Accident 
Research Department, it is mainly minor losses which are sustained in most accidents. In the case 
of approximately 90 percent of all accidents registered involving conventional vehicles the accident 
results in damage to the outer skin. The BMW i3 takes into account this fact and therefore has a robust 
plastic plating around the vehicle which is screwed/clipped on. Minor knocks are absorbed without 
causing dents as is typical for sheet metal parts. Damage to the paintwork does not cause corrosion. 

If components at the outer skin of the BMW i3 need to be replaced, the component is replaced quickly 
and at a reasonable cost - the repair costs are roughly 40 percent lower than for the conventional 
design. Overall, the accident repair costs are the same amount as for a BMW 1-Series. 

1.1.11. Mobility services 

BMW i provides innovative mobile solutions which improve urban mobility - inside and outside the 
vehicle. With the aim of helping to shape the city of the future, BMW i offers intelligent services and 
seamless mobile solutions. These are the first apps which can already be downloaded today - further 
apps are currently being developed and will be available in the near future: 


13 


101 Product Presentation 

1. BMW i Brand 


ParkNow 

Using this service drivers can locate the nearest free car parks - both at ParkNow locations and also in 
other multi-storey car parks. At the same time, users receive real-time information about inexpensive 
parking fees and can also use other useful services. These include, for example, information on car 
wash facilities and the availability of rental bikes at the respective ParkNow locations. 

DriveNow 

The new car sharing service of BMW i, MINI and SIXT. 

With DriveNow, BMW i together with MINI and SIXT offers the possibility to rent a car when and where 
you need it. You no longer need your own car! Usage is charged on a per minute basis and payment is 
made afterwards. Parking fees and fuel costs are included. Available cars can be found on the BMW 
website, the mobile app and locally. 

DriveNow is already available in San Francisco. Other international locations are currently being 
planned. 

The programme started in San Francisco with a fleet of 80 brand new, fully electric vehicles from the 
BMW ActiveE series. With its high-performance electric motor, the aerodynamic body and the modern 
lithium-ion battery technology, the BMW ActiveE offers the ultimate driving experience - all without 
pollutant emissions. 


14 



101 Product Presentation 

2. Technical Data 


With a body length of 3,999, a width of 1,775 and a height of 1,578 millimeters, the BMW i3 has 
discrete proportions which with its dynamics and compact design accentuate the agility of the vehicle 
in urban traffic. The extremely short overhangs at the front and rear are also clear indicators of the agile 
drivability of the BMW i3. 


The key technical data of the 101 is listed in the following table. 



Unit 

BMW i3 (BEV) 

BMW i3 (REX) 

Body 

Doors/Seats 


5/4 

5/4 

Length 

mm/ 

in 

3999/157.5 

3999/157.5 

Width 

mm/ 

in 

1775/69.9 

1775/69.9 

Height (* with roof fin) 

mm/ 

in 

1578(* 1597)/62.1 
(* 62.9) 

1578 (* 1597)/62.1 
(* 62.9) 

Wheelbase 

mm/ 

in 

2570/101.2 

2570/101.2 

Turning radius 

m/ft 

9.9/32.3 

9.9/32.3 

Front/Rear overhang 

mm 

(in) 

707/722 (27.8/28.4) 

707/722 (27.8/28.4) 

Ground clearance 

mm/ 

in 

140/5.5 

140/5.5 

Luggage compartment 
volume 

m 3 

0,260-1,100 

0,260-1,100 

Fuel tank capacity 

liter/ 

gal 

0 

7/2.4 

Vehicle curb weight i.a.w. 
DIN/EU 

kg (lb) 

1195/1270 

(2534.5/2799.9) 

1315/1390 

(2899/3064.4) 

Perm, total weight/payload 

kg/kg 

1620/425 

1730/415 



Unit 

BMW i3 (BEV) BMW i3 (REX) 

Drive 

Drive concept 


Rear-wheel drive 

Transmission 


Single-stage with fixed transmission 


15 















101 Product Presentation 

2. Technical Data 



Unit 

BMW i3 (BEV) 

BMW i3 (REX) 

Electrical machine 

Power output 

kW/ 

hp 

125/170 

125/170 

Torque 

Nm / 
Ib-ft 

250/184 

250/184 

Recovery 

kW 

50 

50 



Unit 

BMW i3 (BEV) 

BMW i3 (REX) 

High-voltage battery 

Nominal voltage 

V 

360 

360 

Energy capacity (gross) 

kWh 

22 

22 

Storage technology 


Lithium-ion 

Lithium-ion 



Unit 

BMW i3 (BEV) 

BMW i3 (REX) 

Combustion engine 

Torque 

Nm/ 

Ib-ft 

" 

55/40 

Engine design/cylinders/ 
valves per cylinder. 



In-line engine/2/4 

Displacement 

cm 3 

- 

647 

Stroke/bore 

mm/ 

mm 

" 

66/79 

Power/At engine speed 

kW/ 

HP/ 

rpm 


25(34)/4300 

Torque at speed 

Nm/ 

rpm 

" 

55/4300 

Compression/Poss. fuel 
(recommendation) 


" 

10.6/ROZ87-98 (RON 95) 

Exhaust emission standards/ 
Fuel 


" 

SULEVII 



Unit 

BMW i3 (BEV) 

BMW i3 (REX) 

Chassis and suspension 

Front wheel suspension 


Single-joint McPherson spring strut axle in aluminium 
design with anti-dive control 

Rear wheel suspension 


Five-joint axle with direct connection to the Drive module 

Standard Front/Rear tires 


155/70 R19/155/70 R19 

155/70 R19/175/60 R19 

Front/Rear wheel rims 


5x19/5x19 

5x19/5.5x19 


16 






















101 Product Presentation 

2. Technical Data 



Unit 

BMW i3 (BEV) 

BMW i3 (REX) 

Vehicle performances 

Power-to-weight ratio (DIN) 

kg/kW 

9.6 

10,5 

Acceleration 0-100 km/h 

s 

7.2 

7.9 

Acceleration 0-60 km/h / 

100 mph 

s 

3,7 

3.9 

Acceleration 80-120 km/h / 
50 - 75 mph 

s 

4.9 

5,5 

Maximum speed 

km/h 

(mph) 

150(93.2) 

150(93.2) 

Range in day-to-day 
operation (Comfort mode) 

km 

(mi) 

130 to 160 (80 to 100) 

240 to 300 (150 to 186) 

Range in day-to-day 
operation (in the most 
efficient driving mode) 

km 

(mi) 

up to 200(124) 

up to 340 (211) 

Fuel consumption in EU 
cycle 

Electrical energy 

kWh/ 
100 km 

12,9 

13,5 

Fuel 

liter 

0 

0.6 (i.a.w. EU cycle, 
calculation rule for vehicles 
with range extender) 

CO 2 emissions 

g/km 

0 

13 (i.a.w. EU cycle, 
calculation rule for vehicles 
with range extender) 


17 










101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 


3.1. Introduction 

In the BMW i3 with the development code 101 new standards are set in the body construction. 

The design and production of the 101 were already redefined in the basic approach. This vehicle 
architecture is therefore the first such architecture designed especially for electric vehicles. 

Thanks to the selection of the materials and the innovative use of different materials the mobility of the 
future is already being realized today. 

The high-voltage battery is fully integrated in the vehicle underbody of the vehicle, thereby creating 
optimal axle-load distribution and a lower center of gravity. 

In order to compensate for the additional weight of the high-voltage battery the focus is on an 
intelligent lightweight construction. 

The combination of carbon, aluminium and plastic make this body concept unique. 



3.2. LifeDrive concept 

The vehicle structure of the 101 comprises two independent units. 


18 


101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 


The LifeDrive concept of the 101 is a material combination of carbon and aluminium alloys. 



LifeDrive concept 


Index Explanation 

1 Life module 

2 Drive module 

A 

The Life module and Drive module are joined together in the production process using screws and a 
bonded connection and can only be ordered in Service as a bodyshell (entirety). 



101 bodyshell 


19 









101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 


In the 101 Drive module crash-proof structures made from aluminium are installed in the front and rear 
area, which absorb the kinetic energy in the event of a crash, thus ensuring additional safety in the 
event of an accident. 

The battery is located in the vehicle underbody for the best possible protection as a vehicle suffers the 
least amount of deformation in this area in the event of a crash. 

In crash tests the LifeDrive concept is even sometimes superior to the previous steel constructions 
thanks to this special vehicle architecture. 



101 LifeDrive concept 


A_ 

Owing to the product-specific special features of the LifeDrive module, there will be repair centers 
(BMW i Full format dealers) where specialist employees are authorised to repair BMW i vehicles with 
damage to the aluminium or carbon structure. 


3.2.1. Life module 

The passenger compartment of the 101, the so-called Life module, is mainly made up of carbon. 


20 




101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 


Carbon is used in industry for the manufacture of carbon fibers. The combination of the carbon fibers 
and the fibre material, such as epoxy resin (thermosetting plastic), gives carbon fibre reinforced plastic, 
CFK for short. 

Carbon is the lightest material that can be used in the body construction without compromising safety. 
The material is also very weatherproof and has, despite its light weight, very high strength and stability. 

The use of the lightweight and crash-proof high-tech material carbon on this scale is unique for the 
mass production of a vehicle. 

An advantage of the use of carbon is that the body can be reinforced specifically at the necessary 
points on the structure and therefore offers excellent impact resistance and occupant safety, i.e. the 
best possible protection in the event of accidents. 



101 Life module 


A 

For more information on carbon please refer to the "Fundamentals of Carbon" product information 
bulletin. 


In the carbon structure of the Life module reinforcements made from high-strength steel, aluminium 
and plastic are also used. 

For example, the attachment points of the door hinges in the inside of the side frame are made from 
steel. 


21 




101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 


The seat cross members are made from aluminium. 

In the side sills of the carbon structure honeycombed deformation elements made from plastic 
(thermoplastic) are also integrated, which help absorb some of the impact energy in the event of an 
accident. 


© 



i01 Life module 


Index 

Explanation 

Material 

1 

Seat cross member (front) 

Steel 

2 

Seat cross member (rear) 

Aluminium 

3 

Cowl panel 

High-strength steel 

4 

Deformation element at 
side sill, outer 

Plastic 

5 

Carrier support 

Die-cast aluminium 

6 

Life module structure 

Carbon 


3.2.2. Drive module 

The chassis of the 101, the so-called Drive module, is made from aluminium alloys and forms the stable 
base in which the high-voltage battery unit is securely integrated. 

The Drive module also contains the entire chassis and suspension and the drive components. 

Thanks to clever solutions, the electric motor, the transmission and the drive electronics are located 
here in a very small area above the rear axle. 


22 










101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 


For the Drive module of the 101 aluminium alloys are used according to component requirements such 
as strength and crash performance. The material properties of aluminium achieve roughly the same 
properties of steel through alloy additives such as magnesium or silicon. 



Index 

Material 

Abbreviation 

A 

Aluminium alloy (die-cast) 

AISilOMnMg 

B 

Aluminium alloy 

AIMg4.5Mn0.4 

C 

Aluminium alloy (extruded profiles) 

ALSi0.6Mg0.8 

A 


For more information on aluminium and its alloys please refer to the "Fundamentals of Aluminium" 
Body and Paint training information bulletin. 


3.3. Outer skin concept 

The outer skin of the 101 is made almost entirely of thermoplastic plastics (material designation: PP 
+EPDM). The outer skin components cannot corrode and are considerably lighter than equivalent 
components made of steel. 

The outer skin of the tailgate has another special feature - for the first time it is manufactured 
from glass. The rear lights can therefore be integrated below the outer skin which lends a unique 
appearance. 


23 








101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 



101 outer skin 


Index 

Explanation 

Material 

1 

Bumper, front 

Thermoplastic 

2 

Engine compartment lid (outer skin) 

Thermoplastic 

3 

Trim panel, A-pillar front 

Thermoplastic 

4 

Roof 

Carbon 

5 

Roof frame trim panel 

Thermoplastic 

6 

Tailgate outer skin 

Glass 

7 

Rear bumper 

Thermoplastic 

8 

Rear side panel 

Thermoplastic 

9 

Rear door outer skin 

Thermoplastic 

10 

Front door outer skin 

Thermoplastic 

11 

Frontside panel 

Thermoplastic 


The outer skin components are clipped in using additional base tracks made from plastic and screwed 
in or bonded using connecting elements to the 101 body. 


24 















101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 



Rear side panel with base tracks 


Index 

Explanation 

Material 

Abbreviation 

1 

Side frame 

Carbon 

CFK 

2 

Rear base track 

Thermoplastic 

PC+ABS 

3 

Insert 

Thermoplastic 

PP+EPDM 

4 

Base track, rear side panel 

Thermoplastic 

PC+ABS 

5 

Outer skin 

Thermoplastic 

PP+EPDM 


Because the plastic outer skin is clipped in or screwed on, smaller impacts are absorbed without 
causing dents, which is typical of sheet metal parts. Also paint damage to the outer skin does not 
cause corrosion. 

The vehicle structure is far behind the outer skin so that it does not suffer damage in the event of 
smaller knocks. In the event of impacts, the deformation elements screwed in up to the vehicle 
structure in the front and rear area help to intercept these specifically. 


25 









101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 




B 


101 body concept 

The roof of the 101 is made of carbon and is permanently bonded to the body. It is thus part of the body 
structure of the Life module. 


26 


srixi 


101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 



101 roof 


TK12-111 


Index 

Explanation 

Material designation 

Abbreviation 

1 

Roof outer skin 

Carbon (painted) 

CFK 

2 

Roof outer skin with 
slide/tilt sunroof 

Carbon (painted) 

CFK 


A_ 

Work belonging to the 101 Body Repair Stage Level 1 must only be performed by authorized BMW i 
dealers that have completed the training ST 1403a 101 Complete Vehicle. If the damage to the vehicle 
cannot be repaired during the course of the 101 Body Repair Stage Level 1, the vehicle must be passed 
on to a BMW i dealer with the relevant service format. Please observe the current procedure that 
applies in your market. 


3.4. Door concept 

The Life module of the 101 is designed without a B-pillar and thus offers convenient access. However, 
the necessary reinforcement (B-pillar) is integrated in the rear door. The doors can be opened from 
the center of vehicle to the left and right. The rear door can only be opened after the front seat belt has 
been released and the front door was opened. 


27 









101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 



101 doors opened 


3.5. Passenger compartment concept 

Thanks to the wide-opening doors which work in the opposite direction and the almost flat floor 
assembly in the passenger compartment, a unique space offering is created with a lounge ambience. 

The new passenger compartment concept ensures more space in the passenger compartment and 
offers additional freedom of movement to the occupants. 

The 101 is equipped with four seats, a luggage compartment capacity of about 200 I, as well as an 
additional function compartment in the front area below the engine compartment lid. 


28 


K13-0670 


101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 



101 passenger compartment concept 


3.5.1. Luggage compartment 



101 luggage compartment, rear 

In addition to the rear luggage compartment, there is a useful storage compartment in the area below 
the engine compartment lid 


29 






101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 



101 storage compartment at the front with towing eye 


3.5.2. Seats 

With the model introduction of the 101 a mechanically adjustable seat is available. Electrical 
adjustment is not offered for weight reasons. In order to facilitate entry into the rear passenger 
compartment, the seats of the 101 have a convenient entry function. The entire seat is folded towards 
the front. The operating lever is located at the head restraint. 

3.5.3. Materials 

The interior equipment of the 101 is characterized by the visual use of natural raw materials such as 
European gum wood. The natural fibers accentuate the premium claim of BMW i. 

Recycled and renewable raw materials are used throughout the 101. For example, for the seats in the 
standard equipment recycled plastics are used. 

The leather used in the interior equipment is tanned using a natural tanning agent made from olive 
leaves. The extract from the leaves of the olive tree naturally protect the leather against fading and 
wear and, at the same time, lend it a unique appearance and a distinctive character. 

The leather made from South-German cowhide is not only environment-friendly, but also has the 
longest life. 

For the dashboard only wood which is grown in Europe and comes from certified, responsible forestry 
(100%) is used. Processing in Europe means short delivery routes and ensures sustainability in all 
stages of production. The treatment with natural materials also give the components an elegant 
appearance and individual color. 


30 







101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 

3.6. Equipment specifications 

Three different equipment specifications are offered for the 101 for the US market: 
Mega is the standard equipment level for the i3. 

3.6.1. Giga World 

Optional equipment "Giga World" with interior design (SA 7KY). 




101 "Giga World" interior design 

3.6.2. Tera World 

Optional equipment "Tera World" with interior design (SA 7KZ). 


31 


TK13-0311 






101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 



101 "Tera World" interior design 


3.7. Notes on body damage 


3.7.1. Notes on body damage 

As new materials and new fastening concepts are being used, thus resulting in new repair methods, 
the following notes must be observed: Special care must be taken when carrying out work at the 
vehicle due to the use of high-voltage components in the 101. 

To ensure that the 101 is repaired professionally and safely, special procedures and methods have 
been developed. These are, as is already known, communicated via the usual workshop information 
system. 

Please also find out about the work that your dealership is permitted to carry out. The Service formats 
referred to at the outset must be observed without fail. 

A_ 

Danger to life! 

When carrying out work, observe the detailed procedure and sequence specified in the repair 
instructions that are valid at the time of repair. 


32 







101 Product Presentation 

3. Overview of Body 


A 

Danger to life! 

Before repair work on a vehicle that has been involved in an accident can be carried out, it must be 
ensured (by appropriately qualified personnel) that the vehicle is intrinsically safe. 


A_ 

When assessing damage at a 101, the current procedure in the repair instructions must be observed. 

The procedure is markedly different to the procedure followed up until now. Please familiarize yourself 
with the relevant contents beforehand. 


Based on current information, the following elements are subject to a special inspection following 
damage which must be carried out without fail: 

• Carbon body components (Life module) 

• Surfaces of body components made of carbon 

• Retaining elements at body components made of carbon (e.g. rivet nuts, holders for mounting 
the outer skin, attachment points of hinges) 

• Structural components made of aluminium (Drive module). 


33 






101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 

4.1. Vehicle electrical system 


4.1.1. Bus overview 



GB 

1 


1 

i 

ACSM 

1 


s 


2 


3 


iMMM 




0® 


i 

a 





- 1 


If—H- 



II 

1 J 

. ®L 


flD 

z 

2 


15 


EB [g B ® 


■© 





®B0 


if] 




ius overview 





























































101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Index 

Explanation 

ACSM 

Crash Safety Module 

AMP 

Amplifier 

BDC 

Body Domain Controller 

CON 

Controller 

CSM 

Car Sharing Module 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

EDME 

Electrical Digital Motor Electronics 

EME 

Electrical machine electronics 

EPS 

Electronic Power Steering 

FLER 

Frontal Light Electronics Right 

FLEL 

Frontal Light Electronics Left 

FZD 

Roof function center 

GWS 

Gear selector 

HEADUNIT 

Head unit 

IHKA 

Integrated automatic heating / air conditioning 

KAFAS 

Camera-based driver support systems 

KLE 

Convenience charging electronics 

KOMBI 

Instrument cluster 

LIM 

Charging interface module 

PDC 

Park Distance Control 

PMA 

Parking manoeuvring assistant 

RDME 

Range Extender Digital Engine Electronics 

REME 

Range Extender Electrical Machine Electronics 

SAS 

Optional equipment system 

SME 

Battery management electronics 

TFE 

Hybrid pressure refueling electronic control unit 

TBX 

Touchbox 

TCB 

Telematic Communication Box 

TRSVC 

Top rear side view camera 

ZGM 

Central gateway module 

1 

Control units also connected at terminal 15WUP 

2 

Control units with wake-up authorisation 

3 

Start-up node control units for starting and synchronizing the FlexRay bus 
system 

4 

Charging socket at the vehicle 


35 





















101 Product Presentation 

4. General Vehicle Electrical 


All bus systems in the 101 are known from the other F-series. 
There is no MOST in the 101. 


4.1.2. K-CAN 

In the 101 the following K-CAN are used: 

• K-CAN2 

• K-CAN3 

• K-CAN4. 

All K-CAN data buses have a data transfer rate of 500 kBit/s. 

The K-CAN with 100 kBit/s data transfer rate is not used in the 101. 


36 



101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


4.1.3. Installation locations of control units 



Installation locations of control units 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Vehicle Sound Generator (VSG) Not for the US market 

2 

Frontal Light Electronics Right (FLER) 

3 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

4 

Body Domain Controller (BDC) 

5 

Integrated automatic heating / air-conditioning system (IHKA) (IHKR not 
available in the US market) 

6 

Instrument cluster (KOMBI) 

7 

Gear selector switch (GWS) 

8 

Roof function center (FZD) 


37 



































101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Index 

Explanation 

9 

Touchbox (TBX) 

10 

Parking Manoeuvring Assistant (PMA) or Park Distance Control (PDC) 

11 

Headunit 

12 

Optional equipment system (SAS) 

13 

Charging interface module (LIM) 

14 

Range Extender Electrical Machine Electronics (REME) 

15 

Range Extender Digital Engine Electronics (RDME) 

16 

Top Rear Side View Camera (TRSVC) 

17 

Convenience charging electronics (KLE) 

18 

Electrical machine electronics (EME) 

19 

Amplifier (AMP) 

20 

Telematic Communication Box (TCB) 

21 

Battery management electronics (SME) 

22 

Crash Safety Module (ACSM) 

23 

Controller (CON) 

24 

Hybrid pressure refueling electronic control unit (TFE) 

25 

Electrical Digital Motor Electronics (EDME) 

26 

Camera-based driver support systems (KAFAS) 

27 

Electronic Power Steering (EPS) 

28 

Frontal Light Electronics Left (FLEL) 


The Car Sharing Module is connected to the base plate of the eject box instead of a snap-in adapter. 


4.1.4. Control units 

Information on control units 

• which are used for the first time in the 101 

• which are adapted for the 101. 


38 














101 Product Presentation 

4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Body Domain Controller. 



Body Domain Controller 


The Body Domain Controller (BDC) replaces the control units known from the F30: 

• Front Electronic Module (FEM) and 

• Rear Electronic Module (REM). 

BDC functions 

The Body Domain Controller is responsible for the following functions: 

• Gateway 

• Electronic immobilizer 

• Terminal control 

• Comfort Access 

• Central locking system 

• Power window regulator 

• Lighting 

• Wash/wipe system 

• Horn 


39 









101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Head unit 



The Headunit High does not have a DVD drive. 


• BMW Assist with eCall (emergency-call function) 

• BMW Online 

• BMW Internet using a SIM card integrated in the vehicle (P-SIM) 

• Remote functions (reception and controller) 

• "Text-to-speech" function in Office area 

• BMW TeleServices via P-SIM. 


Camera-based driver support systems 



Camera-based driver support systems 


40 

















101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


The control unit camera-based driver support systems KAFAS is required for the following optional 
equipment: 

• Camera-based cruise control with Stop&Go function 

• Road sign recognition 

• Tailgate warning 

• Person recognition with city braking function 

• Collision warning with city braking function. 

The camera-based driver support systems control unit is connected to the PT-CAN and to the optional 
equipment system via a Local Controller Area Network. 

Optional equipment system 



Optional equipment system 

The optional equipment system control unit provides a variety of driver assistance functions. 
Possible functions: 

• Collision warning with city braking function 

• Cruise control with braking function 

• Person recognition with city braking function 

• Parking manoeuvring assistant 

• Camera-based cruise control with Stop&Go function 

• Active driving assistant. 

The image information required by the optional equipment system is provided by the camera-based 
driver support systems. 


41 









101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


The optional equipment system is not an element of the standard equipment. It is only installed if 
the customer orders a corresponding optional equipment. In the 101 there is no Integrated Chassis 
Management (ICM). The data required for the driver assistance functions is made available via the 
FlexRay. 

Not all possible functions are offered in all national-market versions. 


4.2. Voltage supply 

4.2.1. Overview of the 12V voltage supply 



Overview of the 12 V voltage supply 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Power distribution box, front 

2 

Body Domain Controller 

3 

Power distribution box in the passenger compartment 

4 

Integrated supply module (only for vehicles with range extender) 

5 

Electrical machine electronics 

6 

Safety battery terminal 


42 






















101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Index 

Explanation 

7 

Battery 

8 

Intelligent battery sensor 

9 

Electronic Power Steering 

10 

Dynamic Stability Control 


4.2.2. Components 

The voltage supply of the 101 comprises the following components: 

• 12V battery 

• Intelligent battery sensor (IBS) 

• Safety battery terminal (SBK) 

• Integrated supply module (only for vehicles with range extender) 

• Power distribution box, front 

• Power distribution box in the passenger compartment 

• DC/DC converter in the electrical machine electronics for supplying the 12V vehicle electrical 
system with power 

• Ground connections. 


Battery 

For the voltage supply of the 12V vehicle electrical system a 12 V battery is used in the 101. 
Battery: 


• 20 Ah AGM battery 

In contrast to a vehicle with a combustion engine, the requirements of the 12V battery in the 101 
with regard to an engine start are different. In the 101 the job of the 12V battery is only to ensure the 
powering up of the high-voltage system. What is required of the 12V battery is no longer a minimum 
SoC to ensure engine starting, but rather a minimum SoC to protect the 12V battery against freezing 
at temperatures below 0 °C and to power up the high-voltage system. 

The voltage supply of the 12V vehicle electrical system (and also the charging of the 12V battery) is 
not done by the conventional alternator, but via the DC/DC converter in the EME. 


43 







101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Power distribution box, front 


I 

n 

Power distribution box, front 

The power distribution box at the front is powered by the 12 V battery. 

The following components are supplied with voltage via the power distribution box at the front and 
protected accordingly: 

• Power distribution box in the passenger compartment 

• Electronic Power Steering (EPS) 

• Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) (valves) 

• Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) (pump) 

• Electric fan 

• Body Domain Controller 



44 









101 Product Presentation 

4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Body Domain Controller 



Body Domain Controller 


The Body Domain Controller (BDC) is responsible for the terminal control. 

In the 101 there are 2 relays for terminal 30F and 2 relays for terminal 30B. 

There is a relay for terminal 30F in the Body Domain Controller. 

The following relays in the power distribution box in the passenger compartment are activated by the 
BDC: 


• Terminal 30F 

• Terminal 30B 

• Terminal 15N. 

The voltage supply and protection of the following components is done by the BDC. 

Components at terminal 30 

• Power distribution box, passenger compartment. 

Components at terminal 30F 

• Steering column switch cluster (SZL) 

• Operating facility for assist systems 

• Operating unit for light 

• OBD2 connection 

• Integrated heating / air-conditioning regulation or IFIKA 

• Outside door handle electronics. 

The following components are switched by a relay in the BDC and are protected accordingly: 


45 









101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


• Power window regulators 

• Central locking system 

• Horn 

• Heated rear window. 

Power distribution box in the passenger compartment 


© ® ® 



Power distribution box in the passenger compartment 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Relay, terminal 30B 

2 

Relay, terminal 30B 

3 

Relay, terminal 15N 


46 

















101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 

Electrical machine electronics 



Electrical machine electronics 

The function of the electrical machine electronics is to activate and control the permanently excited 
electrical machine in the high-voltage electrical system. This necessitates the use of a bidirectional 
inverter which converts the high direct current voltage of the high-voltage battery into a three-phase 
alternating current for the electrical machine. The high-voltage battery is charged again by the 
alternator operation of the electrical machine. 

The EME also incorporates the DC/DC converter which is responsible for the voltage supply to the 
12V vehicle electrical system. 

The power electronics for charging with AC voltage at 3.7 kW is also located in the EME. 


47 


101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Ground connections 



Ground connections 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Ground Drive module at the right spring strut 

2 

Ground Life module in the area of the power distribution box in the passenger 
compartment 

3 

Ground Drive module at the rear cross member 

4 

Ground Drive module at the front cross member 


Other ground connections can also be located at the Drive module corresponding to the vehicle 
equipment and national-market version. 

In the 101 the ground connections for the consumers cannot be connected to the body because of the 
use of carbon for the Life module. The grounding cables of all consumers are connected to ground 
support points. 

The ground support points are located: 

• Directly at the ground for the Drive module 

• In the case of the Life module via a ground cable at a ground distribution block, which in turn is 
connected to the Drive module. 

Electrical characteristics of carbon 


48 








101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Carbon is used in industry for the manufacture of carbon fibers. If these carbon fibers are also 
introduced to a resin, carbon fibre-reinforced plastic, which is also referred to as CFRP, is obtained. For 
the sake of simplicity, this product is referred to as "carbon" in this document. 

A differentiation is made between short fibers (0.1 - 1 mm long), long fibers (1 - 50 mm long) and 
endless fibers (> 50 mm long). The fibers are used for different processing technologies, according to 
their length. 

The short and long fibers are suitable for fibre spraying. During this process, the fibers are sprayed 
with a resin in a mould. Endless fibers are processed further to obtain rovings (bundles), or other semi¬ 
finished textile products such as woven fabrics. 

The resin fixes the carbon fibers in the required arrangement and transmits the applied forces to and 
between the fibers. The material carbon ultimately only exists once the carbon fibers are introduced 
into the resin. 



Structure of carbon 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Carbon fiber 

2 

Resin 


The electrical and thermal conductivity of the carbon fibers themselves is extremely good. However, as 
soon as they are introduced into the resin, the resin defines the conductivity properties. The electrical 
and thermal conductivity is then extremely low as the carbon fibers are encased in resin. The carbon 
fibers are not covered entirely in resin, but can also be exposed at the component surface. 

The passenger compartment made from carbon is connected to the aluminium frame. The aluminium 
frame is connected to ground. As the carbon fibers establish contact with this aluminium frame, the 
passenger compartment has an undefined potential similar to ground. 

A 

If the insulation of a live electrical line becomes damaged as a result of an incident, such as: 


49 









101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 

• Accident 

• Crushed cable 

• Improper repair 

and if the electrical conductor touches the carbon passenger compartment, a current may flow 
through the carbon fibre depending on the circumstances. 


With a vehicle voltage of 12 V the current level is in the range of a few amperes. This means a fuse 
installed for the protection of the electrical line would not activate under certain circumstances. 

The current flow through the carbon fibers would also cause a thermal event at the contact points for 
the carbon fibers. Due to the good thermal conductivity this thermal event would also spread to other 
parts/components in the event of continued current flow. The resulting gases are harmful and have an 
unpleasant odor. 

A_ 

Exercise extreme caution when working on electrical lines. 

Lines or connectors which are not insulated cannot touch the carbon body components. 

In each case follow the general and special information on electrical characteristics of the carbon body 
in the repair instructions! 


50 





101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


4.2.3. Terminal control. 



Terminal control 101 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Terminal 30B 

2 

Driving readiness is activated by simultaneously pressing the START-STOP 
button and the brake pedal 

3 

"Ready to drive" with terminal 15 

4 

Driving readiness is activated by simultaneously pressing the START-STOP 
button and the brake pedal 

5 

By pressing the START-STOP button when the N gear is engaged the terminal 
status switches to car wash mode 

6 

When the START-STOP button is pressed the terminal status changes from 
terminal 15 to terminal R 

7 

Driving readiness is activated by simultaneously pressing the START-STOP 
button and the brake pedal 

8 

Terminal R 

9 

When the START-STOP button is pressed the terminal status changes from 
terminal R to terminal 30B 


51 






















101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Index 

Explanation 

10 

When the START-STOP button is pressed the terminal status changes from 
terminal 15 to terminal 30B 

11 

Terminal 30 

12 

Vehicle is woken up by a wake-up event 

13 

By pressing the START-STOP button the terminal status switches from 
terminal 30B to terminal 15. If the START-STOP button is pressed again within 

10 seconds, the following Check Control message "Press brake for engine 
start" is displayed 

14 

Terminal 15 


Terminal 15 is switched off if the vehicle has been locked or the state of charge of the battery is too 
low. 

The driving readiness is deactivated by pressing the START-STOP button when the vehicle is 
stationary. The drive position "P" is automatically engaged in the process. The car wash function is an 
exception to this: If the driver engages the drive position "N" when the driving readiness is switched on 
and then presses the START-STOP button, the drive position "N" remains engaged and terminal 15 
remains switched on. 


4.2.4. Emergency charging 

It is not possible to operate the vehicle if the high-voltage battery and 12V battery are not charged. 

In order to put the vehicle back into operation, the charging cable for charging the high-voltage battery 
must be connected. If necessary manually unlock the charging socket cover and connect the charging 
cable. Emergency charging is started automatically. The charging status is not displayed. 

The 12V battery is charged somewhat after a few minutes. The 12V vehicle electrical system is ready 
for operation again. The high-voltage system can be started, the high-voltage battery can therefore be 
charged. The charging status of the high-voltage battery can be displayed again. Continue to charge 
the vehicle until the state of charge for the desired range is reached. 

An additional AC/DC converter is located in the electrical machine electronics (EME) for the 
emergency charging function. This supplies the electronics of the EME if the 12V battery is 
discharged, thus enabling the start-up of the high-voltage system. With an active high-voltage system 
the 12V battery is charged using the DC/DC converter in the EME by the high-voltage battery. 

4.2.5. Diagnosis and programming 

So that the high-voltage and the 12V battery are not discharged during diagnosis and programming, 
these have to be charged accordingly. The procedure for charging is different during diagnosis and 
programming. 

Diagnostics 

For diagnosis work at the vehicle the high-voltage battery can be charged using a charging cable. 

With terminal 15 switched on the 12V vehicle electrical system is supplied with power via the DC/DC 
converter and the 12V battery charged. 


52 







101 Product Presentation 

4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Programming 

During programming the 12V battery must be charged using an external 12V charger. 

It is not possible to charge the high-voltage battery via the 12V vehicle electrical system. During 
programming the high-voltage system is switched off if necessary. 

4.3. Exterior lights 

The 101 is equipped with LED headlights as standard (for the US market). 

For all variants 

• halogen bulbs are installed for the high-beam headlight 

• bulbs are installed for the front turn indicator 

• LEDs are installed for the side lights and daytime driving lights. 

4.3.1. Front lights 

LED headlights 



LED headlights 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Side lights and daytime driving lights 

2 

Low-beam headlight 


LEDs are used for the low-beam headlight, side lights and daytime driving lights (LEDs in icons). 

The control units for the Frontal Light Electronics Left (FLEL) and Frontal Light Electronics Right 
(FLER) are installed in the left and right headlight for the LED headlights. 

The Frontal Light Electronics includes: 

• The activation of the LEDs in the corresponding headlight 

• The activation of the stepper motor for the headlight beam throw adjustment. 


53 







101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 

High-beam headlight and turn indicator 



High beam headlight/Turn indicator 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

High-beam headlight 

2 

Turn indicator 


Bulbs are used for the high-beam headlight and turn indicator for all model versions. 
The bulbs have the following power: 


• High-beam headlight 55 W H7 

• Turn indicator 21 W. 

4.3.2. Rear lights 

So that the vehicle can also be identified when the tailgate is opened, the 101 has a two-part rear light. 
One part is located in the tailgate, the other in the bumper panel. The following lights in the bumper 
panel are only active when the tailgate is open: 

• Tail light 

• Brake light 

• Turn indicator. 


54 






101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


© ® ® 



Lighting, rear 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Tail light 

2 

Brake light 

3 

Turn indicator 

4 

Tail light/Brake light 1 

5 

Turn indicator 2 

6 

Reverse light 

7 

Rear fog light (not US) 


^he tail light and brake light in the bumper panel are only active when the tailgate is open. The tail 
light of the tailgate is switched off when the tailgate is open. 

2 The turn indicator in the bumper panel is active when the tailgate is open. 

LEDs are used for all lights for the rear lighting. 

4.4. Wash/wipe system 

The 101 is equipped with two windshield wipers and a rear wiper. 


55 














101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 

4.4.1. System components 

In the 101 a windshield wiper system which works in the opposite direction is used for the first time. 
This takes up significantly less space than a wiper system with mechanics working in the same 
direction known from one of the previous models. 



101 system components of wash/wipe system 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Washer jet, right 

2 

Wiper motor, right 

3 

Power distribution box in the passenger compartment 

4 

Body Domain Controller (BDC) 

5 

Rain-light-solar-condensation sensor (RLSBS) 

6 

Instrument cluster (KOMBI) 


56 


TE13-0287 


















101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Index 

Explanation 

7 

Steering column switch at steering column switch cluster (SZL) 

8 

Rear wiper with electric motor 

9 

Washer fluid level switch 

10 

Wiper motor, left 

11 

Washer jet, left 

12 

Electric motor, windshield washer pump 


4.4.2. System components 

In the 101 a wiper motor with integrated control unit electronics including two Local Interconnect 
Network interfaces is used. The wipe request and driving speed is transmitted to the control unit of the 
wiper motor on the driver's side (master) via Local Interconnect Network by the BDC. Via another LIN 
bus the master control unit then activates the control unit of the wiper motor on the passenger's side. 


4.5. Heating and air-conditioning system 

4.5.1. System functions 

IHKA 

Automatic integrated heating / air-conditioning is offered as standard equipment on the i3. The IHKA 
with display in the temperature selector wheel has automatic temperature, air flap and blower control. 
The automatic air recirculation control sensor, which enables the automatic air recirculation function, is 
only installed. The button for the air recirculation function has a dual function. 

The illuminated blue ECO PRO or also ECO PRO + display can only be seen on the IHKA controls and 
also indicates the activated operating mode. 

Control panel and control unit 


57 







101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 



Combined audio and heating and air-conditioning control panel in the IHKA 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Button for seat heating, left 

2 

Temperature selector wheel automatic control of the temperature for the 
driver's side and passenger's side with display 

3 

Display for temperature, air distribution and propeller symbol 

4 

Button for manual air distribution 

5 

Button for automatic program 

6 

Button for maximum cooling power 

7 

Defrost function button 

8 

Heated rear window button 

9 

Button with dual function: Air recirculation function and automatic air 
recirculation function 

10 

Button for seat heating, right 

11 

Knob for center vent on passenger's side 

12 

Display of ECO PRO or ECO PRO + mode by blue writing upon activation 

13 

Shift paddle, blower output 

14 

Knob for center vent on driver's side 


Automatic function 


• Automatic air distribution, no range of adjustment, the automatic mode assumes the control. 

Manual operation 

• The air distribution can be changed by pressing the button for manual air distribution several 
times. The selected air distribution (top, center, bottom) is displayed by an arrow symbol on 
the display. 


58 






























101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Heating and air-conditioning unit 

A new heating and air-conditioning unit is used in the 101. 

Properties of the heating and air-conditioning unit: 

• 1-zonelHKA 

• No left-right separation 

• No rear-seat area ventilation 

• No adjustable stratification (this happens automatically) 

• Air switches via flaps 

• No variants: Only differentiated by different expansion valves depending on equipment 

• 2-part microfilter. This can be replaced from the right passenger compartment via a Service 
flap. 



Heating and air-conditioning unit (driver side view) 


59 










101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Air vent, top 

2 

Temperature sensor, center vent 

3 

Temperature sensor, footwell air outlet 

4 

Discharge of condensation from the heating and air-conditioning unit 

5 

Heat exchanger 

6 

Connector at the IHKA control unit 

7 

Sleeve, bulkhead 

8 

Blower motor 

9 

Blower output stage 



Heating and air-conditioning unit (passenger side view) 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Temperature sensor, center vent 

2 

Stepper motor for footwell ventilation, left and right 

3 

Stepper motor for defrost function 

4 

Recirculated air flap 

5 

Ambient air intake area at the bulkhead 

6 

Stepper motor for recirculated air flap (with kinematics control) 


60 



























101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Index 

Explanation 

7 

Service flap of two microfilters 

8 

Stepper motor for blending flap 

9 

Evaporator temperature sensor 

10 

Air flaps, footwell ventilation 

11 

Temperature sensor for footwell ventilation 

12 

Air flaps, center vent 



Heating and air-conditioning unit, replacement of microfilter 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Upper microfilter 

2 

Lower microfilter 


61 











101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 



Heating and air-conditioning unit, replacement of microfilter 


Heat pump 

The highly complex system of the heat pump, adapted to the heating and air-conditioning system of 
the vehicle, places high demands on the workshop personnel during diagnosis, but when it comes 
to its application the customer is unable to distinguish it from the conventional heating and air- 
conditioning system in the standard equipment. 

Due to weight saving reasons the heat pump is only offered in the BEV (Battery Electric 
Vehicle) as standard equipment (i.e. in vehicles without range extender). 


62 


101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 



Complete system with heat pump equipment 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Electrical expansion valve (EXV) at the high-voltage battery unit 

2 

EKK 

3 

Blower, passenger compartment 

4 

Electric heating 

5 

Electrically controlled expansion valve (EXV) for the evaporator in the 
passenger compartment 

6 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between condenser and dryer flask 

7 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between EKK and heat pump heat exchanger 

8 

Heat pump heat exchanger 

9 

Dryer flask 


The heat pump is responsible for helping increase the range with the same heating and air- 
conditioning comfort of a system without this device. From an ambient temperature of -10 °C (14 °F) 
and a mean set-point value of the heating and air-conditioning system (22 °C (71.6 °F) in automatic 
function) an interior air temperature control without the additional heating is realized by the electric 
heating. The heat pump is no longer operated below -10 °C (14 °F). 

BEV Refrigerant circuit with heat pump in cooling 


63 



















101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 



Refrigerant circuit with heat pump in heating mode 


Index 

Explanation of heating mode of heat pump 

1 

Capacitor 

2 

Electric fan 

3 

EKK 

4 

Dryer flask 

5 

High-voltage battery unit 

6 

Electrically controlled expansion valve (EXV) for the cooling loop in the high- 
voltage battery unit 

7 

Cooling loops in the high-voltage battery 

8 

Blower for passenger compartment 

9 

Electrically controlled expansion valve (EXV) for the evaporator in the 
passenger compartment 

10 

Evaporator, passenger compartment in the heating and air-conditioning unit 

11 

Heat exchanger 

12 

Electric heating 


64 


TE13-0389 





























101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Index 

Explanation of heating mode of heat pump 

13 

Heat pump heat exchanger 

14 

Electrically controlled expansion valve (EXV) for the heat pump heat exchanger 

15 

Electric coolant pump 

16 

Coolant expansion tank 

17 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between EKK and condenser. This valve is open 
and currentless. 

18 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between condenser and low-pressure battery (dryer 
flask). This valve is closed and currentless. 

19 

Refrigerant non-return valve 

20 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between EKK and heat pump heat exchanger. This 
valve is open and currentless. 

21 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between electrically controlled expansion valve at 
the heat pump heat exchanger and the low-pressure battery (dryer flask). This 
valve is open and currentless. 


The heat is therefore no longer emitted unused at the condenser, but is emitted at the coolant for the 
heater circuit via the heat pump heat exchanger. The energy consumption for the electric heating can 
thus be reduced or saved entirely. 

BEV Refrigerant circuit with heat pump in mixed operation 


65 








101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 



Refrigerant circuit with heat pump in mixed operation 


Index 

Explanation of mixed operation of heat pump 

1 

Capacitor 

2 

Electric fan 

3 

EKK 

4 

Dryer flask 

5 

High-voltage battery unit 

6 

Electrically controlled expansion valve (EXV) for the cooling loop in the high- 
voltage battery unit 

7 

Cooling loop in the high-voltage battery unit 

8 

Blower for passenger compartment 

9 

Electrically controlled expansion valve (EXV) for the evaporator in the 
passenger compartment 

10 

Evaporator, passenger compartment in the heating and air-conditioning unit 

11 

Heat exchanger 

12 

Electric heating 


66 


TE13-0390 
































101 Product Presentation 
4. General Vehicle Electrical 


Index 

Explanation of mixed operation of heat pump 

13 

Heat pump heat exchanger 

14 

Electrically controlled expansion valve (EXV) for the heat pump heat exchanger 

15 

Electric coolant pump 

16 

Coolant expansion tank 

17 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between EKK and condenser. This valve is open 
and currentless. 

18 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between condenser and dryer flask. This valve is 
closed and currentless. 

19 

Refrigerant non-return valve in the pressure line from the cooling loop in the 
high-voltage battery unit to the dryer flask 

20 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between EKK and heat pump heat exchanger. This 
valve is open and currentless. 

21 

Refrigerant shutoff valve between electrically controlled expansion valve (EXV) 
at the heat pump heat exchanger and the dryer flask. This valve is open and 
currentless. 


In mixed operation this results in a division of the hot, high-pressure refrigerant. 

On the one hand, cooling of the high-voltage battery unit and dehumidification of the passenger 
compartment can be realized by the cooling at the evaporator, on the other hand, the divided heat 
transported with the refrigerant is used for the heat pump heat exchanger. 

Another advantage in comparison to a vehicle without a heat pump is that in the event of strong 
sunlight, and hence the necessary blowing of cold air from the ventilation grille is also not necessarily 
an advantage for the footwell. The vehicle without a heat pump must be slightly heated using the 
electric heating in order to acclimatize the footwell to a pleasant temperature. 

In mixed operation with a heat pump the footwell can therefore be heated without using energy using 
the heat pump heat exchanger. 


67 








101 Product Presentation 

5. IKT System Overview 

5.1. System components 

5.1.1. Headunits 

The 101 is available with 2 navigation headunit options. The Entry NAV or option SA606 Business 
Navigation system is the standard equipment. It offers the new Basic Headunit, a 6.5” screen and most 
of the basic navigation features needed for the functions of the i3. And the optional equipment variant 
option SA609 Navigation Professional with the HU-H headunit which offers a 10.25” screen and adds 
a split screen, media hard drive, 3D maps, etc. 

The telephone and multimedia functions are integrated in the Headunit. The Telematic 
Communication Box (TCB) is installed for telematics functions. 


Optional equipment 

Headunit 

CID 

Controller 

Navigation 

DVD drive 

Navigation Business 
(SA606) is the 
standard equipment at 
the series launch. 

Basic 

Headunit 

6.5” 

Standard 7- 
button 

Yes 

(Basic) 

No 

Navigation 

Professional (SA609) 
SA609 is offered 
as part of the ZTD 
Technology + Driver 
Assistance Package. 

Headunit 

High 

10.25" 

7-button with 
touchpad 

Yes 

No 


The hardware structure of the Entry Navigation Basic Headunit is similar to Headunit High. Therefore 
the hardware contains the necessary components for the navigation system. With the exception of 
the yaw rate sensor, which in the 101 is housed in the Crash Safety Module (ACSM) and is transferred 
to the headunit via a bus signal. A non removable flash memory with 32 GB is installed for the Entry 
navigation system for permanent storage of the map data. 

Vehicles with the Entry navigation (SA606) Business system are equipped as standard with a 7-button 
iDrive controller. The Touch controller is only available with SA609 Navigation Professional. 



68 






101 Product Presentation 

5. IKT System Overview 

The Headunit High known from other BMW models is used. 



Headunit Installation location (Headunit High 


5.1.2. External devices 

AUX-IN connection with USB interface 

With the use of the Headunit High the USB interface in the glove box is largely discontinued. This also 
relates to the 101. 

The interface for USB audio/video and data import/export is located at the center console. This 
connection is then used both to play external media and for data import/export such as when updating 
navigation data for example. 



AUX-IN connection with USB interface 


69 














101 Product Presentation 

5. IKT System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Cigarette lighter socket/12 V power socket 

2 

AUX-IN connection with USB interface 


5.1.3. Telephone Systems 

In the 101 two telephone systems are used in conjunction with the Headunit High: 

• Basic version of telephone with hands-free system and USB interface (included in the basic 
equipment) 

• Comfort telephone with extended smartphone connection. 

5.1.4. Telematic Communication Box 

The Telematic Communication Box (TCB) is a permanently installed speech and data modem for the 
Headunit High. As there is automatic activation upon series launch, the 101 already has a Telematic 
Communication Box (TCB) in the basic equipment. 



Telematic Communication Box TCB 


• BMW Assist with eCall (emergency-call function) 

• BMW Online 

• BMW Internet using a SIM card integrated in the vehicle (P-SIM) 

• Remote functions (reception and controller) 

• "Text-to-speech" function in Office area 

• BMW TeleServices via P-SIM. 


70 











101 Product Presentation 

5. IKT System Overview 


5.1.5. Touch controller 

The controller introduced with the headunit CIC High with rotary adjuster/knob and seven keys is 
replaced in the BMW 5-Series LCI worldwide with a touch controller with an additional touch control 
panel at the top at the rotary adjuster/knob. The 101 has the touch controller from series launch. 



Touch Controller 


5.1.6. Speaker Systems 

Overview 

The speaker systems in the 101 are available in two specification levels: 

• Stereo system (standard) 

• Harman Kardon HiFi loudspeaker system (SA 674). 


The following table gives an overview of the possible speaker systems in the 101: 


Stereo system 

Harman Kardon HiFi loudspeaker system 

Activation by headunit (4 x 25 W) 

4 speakers 

7-channel AMPH (360 W) 

12 speakers 


5.2. Functions 

5.2.1. Display and operating concept 

The familiar user interface of the iDrive was adapted to the requirements of the 101 and the design was 
revised. 

The following diagrams reflect a comparison between BMW and BMW i: 

Main menu of Headunit High BMW 


71 









101 Product Presentation 

5. IKT System Overview 



og Hauptmenii \ 18:25 

.niKLASSIK TP 



Multimedia 

Radio 




Telefon 


_ 

% 

Navigation 

Office 




ConnectedDrive 




Fahrzeuginfo 

Einstellungen 



Main menu of Headunit High BMW 


Main menu of Headunit High BMW i 



^ o§j HauptmenU \ — 

91.5 MHz 


\ Multimedia 



Radio 

% Telefon 


T Navigation 


IV 

Kontakte 

ConnectedDrive 



Fahrzeuginfo 



Einstellungen 



Main menu of Headunit High BMW i 


5.2.2. BMW i specific navigation 

The Headunit High is activated automatically in the 101 upon series launch. The 101 in the basic 
equipment therefore has the optional equipment Professional navigation (SA 609), which was 
customized to the specific requirements of electric mobility. 

A dynamic range display is the core element of this navigation. It takes into consideration all relevant 
factors such as state of charge of the high-voltage battery, driving style, topographical preconditions 
and even the current traffic situation. A nearby charging station is displayed upon the driver's request. 
The system also informs the driver about how much charging time is required in order to be able to 
complete the return journey or the journey to another destination. 



72 










101 Product Presentation 

5. IKT System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Recommendations 

2 

Outside the range 

3 

Search for charging stations 


5.2.3. BMW Connected Drive 

In addition to the navigation system, the BMW i ConnectedDrive Services are fully customized to the 
specific requirements of electric mobility. 

Via the ConnectedDrive Internet portal or a smartphone the customer has the option of establishing a 
connection to his vehicle and having important information for his planned route displayed, for example 
the state of charge of the high-voltage battery. 

Thanks to this intelligent networking the customer is able to comfortably plan his route or upcoming 
journeys from home. 

BMW i Remote app 

The BMW i Remote app is a further development of the familiar My BMW Remote app, which was 
tailored especially for the specific requirements of electric mobility. 



BMW i Remote app. Example: Activation of the charging procedure 


73 







101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 

6.1. Introduction 

6.1.1. Overview of chassis and suspension 



101 chassis and suspension, complete overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Drive module 

2 

Five-link rear axle (HA5) 

3 

Suspension/dampers 

4 

Electromechanical Parking Brake (EMF) 

5 

Brakes 

6 

Electronic Power Steering (EPS) 

7 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

8 

Single-joint spring-strut-type front axle 

9 

Wheels 


74 













101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 


A significant difference when compared to current BMW vehicles is the omission of a unitary body. In 
the 101, the Drive module constitutes the supporting structure that connects the various chassis and 
suspension components. The Drive module is made of aluminium and is permanently connected to 
the Life module which constitutes the passenger compartment, among other things. This architecture 
has been chosen so that the large energy accumulator can be positioned optimally in the vehicle. The 
battery cells are fully integrated into the vehicle underbody and fill the entire central area of the Drive 
module; a favorable location in terms of dynamic handling characteristics. This positioning guarantees 
optimum axle-load distribution and a low center of gravity. 


6.2. Wheels 

Forged aluminium rims are used with the basic and optional equipment. 

Four different wheel sets in total are available. The vehicle can be equipped with 19" or 20" wheel 
rims, depending on the customer request. 



101 Overview of aluminium rims 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Basic equipment, star spoke 19" (427) 

2 

Optional equipment, turbine styling 19" (428) 

3 

Optional equipment, turbine styling 19" (429) 

4 

Optional equipment, double spoke 20" (430) 


6.2.1. Wheel sizes 

The following table provides an overview of the various wheel sizes with reference to the two versions 
with and without range extender. 


75 






101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 


Tires 

101 without 
range extender 

Rim size 

101 with range 
extender 

Rim size 

Basic 
version, 
summer tire, 
front 

155/70 R19 

5x19 

155/70 R19 

5x19 

Basic 
version, 
summer tire, 
rear 

155/70 R19 

5x19 

175/60 R19 

5.5x19 

Basic 
version, 
winter tire, 
front 

155/70 R19 

5x19 

155/70 R19 

5x19 

Basic 
version, 
winter tire, 
rear 

155/70 R19 

5x19 

155/70 R19 

5x19 

OE summer 
tire, front 

155/60 R20 

5x20 

155/60 R20 

5x20 

OE summer 
tire, rear 

175/55 R20 

5.5x20 

175/55 R20 

5.5x20 


The front and rear axles of the (standard) 101 without range extender are equipped with the same tires 
and rim size (mixed tires are available as an option). If the vehicle is equipped with a range extender, 
mixed tires are standard in order to satisfy the higher demands in relation to driving dynamics due to 
the increased rear axle loads. By using 175/60 R19 tires, it has been possible to ensure that the driving 
dynamics of the 101 with range extender remain on a par with the driving dynamics of the 101 without 
range extender. This means that the drivability of the 101 is the same for each customer, irrespective of 
which vehicle version they drive. 

If the 101 with range extender is converted for winter tires, R19 tires are also used at the rear axle 
155/70. 

Reasons for using the low tire width: 

• It was only possible to ensure sufficient freedom of movement when using snow chains with 
tire size 155/70 R19 

• Improved traction and braking deceleration on smooth or wet roads is achieved using 155/70 
R19 tires. 

Winter tires are not available for the optional equipment 20" wheel rim, also due to freedom of 
movement of the snow chains. 

The vehicle is equipped in all dimensions with rolling resistance optimized tires without emergency 
running properties. 

There is no spare wheel recess in the 101 therefore compact spare wheel for use in the event of 
a puncture is not provided. All US market vehicles come with a Mobility Kit included as standard 
equipment. 


76 







101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 


Overall the omission of the spare wheel and use of tires without emergency running properties 
provides benefits in terms of reducing the vehicle weight and thus increasing the range. 


6.3. Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS) 



101 Overview of tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS) 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Remote control receiver (FBD) 

2 

Tire pressure sensor, front right 

3 

Central information display (CID) 

4 

Tire pressure sensor, rear right 

5 

Tire pressure sensor, rear left 

6 

Instrument panel (KOMBI) 

7 

Tire pressure sensor, front left 

8 

Body Domain Controller (BDC) 

9 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 


77 



















































101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 

Tire pressure monitoring is a system for monitoring the actual tire pressure of all four wheels. The 
latest version of TPMS is used in the 101. It is integrated into the DSC control unit (9). This means that 
a separate TPMS control unit is not required. 

The tire pressures and temperatures of the air in the tires are calculated by the tire pressure sensor 
(2, 4, 5, 7) at all four wheels and forwarded via radio signals. The radio signals from the tire pressure 
sensor are received by the remote control receiver (FBD) (1) and sent to the DSC control unit via 
FlexRay Bus signal the Body Domain Controller (BDC) (8). The evaluation function of the tire pressures 
takes place in the DSC control unit. The tire pressures can be displayed via the Central Information 
Display (CID). Warnings due to insufficient tire pressure are output via the CID or KOMBI (6). 

6.3.1. Wheel electronics teach-in process 

For the measured tire pressures to be displayed at the Central Information Display (CID), the TPMS 
must have successfully completed a wheel assignment with the assistance of a teach-in operation. 
The teach-in operation comprises the following two phases. 

Phases of the teach-in operation: 

• Checking and storing the ID numbers of the tire pressure sensors assigned to the vehicle. 
Once the ID numbers have been successfully stored, the system is capable of issuing 
warnings. However, tire pressures still cannot be displayed. 

• Determine and store the various installation positions of the tire pressure sensors. 

Once the installation position has been successfully stored, the system is capable of issuing 
warnings and displaying tire pressures via the (CID). 

The teach-in operation starts automatically when the journey commences providing a standstill period 
of 8 minutes has been exceeded and cannot be influenced manually. The DSC control unit launches 
a program as soon as the teach-in operation is active and serves to assign the wheels to the wheel 
electronics. In doing so, the wheel speed signals from the wheel speed sensors are compared with the 
messages sent from the wheel electronics. As both signals are only available during the journey, this 
process must be performed dynamically. It is not possible to teach in when the vehicle is at a standstill. 

A_ 

When changing a wheel of the 101, make sure that the vehicle is stationary for at least 8 minutes 
before initializing the tire pressures. 


6.3.2. Functional prerequisites 

To ensure that the TPMS issues correct a warning in the event of a pressure drop, an initialization with 
the tire pressures set correctly must be performed manually. 

Prerequisites for an initialization are: 

• All four wheels equipped with correct version of tire pressure sensor 

• Sufficient energy in the batteries of the tire pressure sensors 

• Prescribed tire pressures at all four wheels. 


78 




101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 


An initialization can be started at any time. However, it is only performed upon completion of the wheel 
assignment by the TPMS . 

The following threshold values are stored in the system: 

• Initialization threshold; when the minimum pressure of 2.0 bar is undercut during initialization 
the “Tire pressure too low” warning is issued 

• First warning threshold value with a pressure drop of 20 % compared to the initialized nominal 
pressure 

• Second warning threshold when 1.6 bar is undercut. 


6.3.3. Initializing the tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS) 

The TPMS is initialized via the Drive menu. 

The tire pressures must be initialized if: 

• The tire pressures have been changed 

• A tire change has been carried out 

• The tire pressure sensor have been exchanged. 

The initialization ends with a journey that can be interrupted at any time. When the journey continues, 
the process is automatically resumed. In order to complete it, a speed of more than 30 km/h /18 
mph must be attained. If no measuring results are available, the wheels in the Central Information 
Display will be displayed grey. A progress bar appears in the CID during the initialization process. Once 
the initialization has been completed successfully, all four wheels will be displayed green with the 
corresponding tire pressures. 

A 

To ensure the system works reliably, an initialization must be performed following each wheel change 
or tire pressure adjustment. 


6.3.4. Information in Central Information Display 

As the tire pressure sensor are in sleep mode when the vehicle is at a standstill, the actual tire 
pressures cannot be queried via the Central Information Display. As soon as the vehicle is in 
motion and exceeds a speed of roughly 30 km/h, the tire pressure sensors start transmitting. If the 
identification numbers ID are stored in the DSC control unit, the tire pressures can be displayed in the 
CID. 

The tire and system statuses are indicated by different colors of wheels and a text message. The 
following illustration shows how the different system statuses are displayed in the CID. 


79 




101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 




low of tyr# pmi taftatt lyrt. 


0 


u 


V/ 

A 

ASM 


Tyre Pressure [POO KIM 


101 TPMS messages in the CID 






J .'ill 

i m r 

A 

’A 


(jst. 

[V * 

0 


^ PtMtflng Tyr* Pi 

«iur» Mormor (W)C>... 


— 


«-1 







J /m 





1 *-* 

\ * 

o 

C ; 




TVrtProttor# Monitor (W>0 

_ 






Index 

Explanation 

1 

Loss of pressure in one or several tires 

2 

Loss of pressure in all tires 

3 

Tire pressures within the permissible tolerance 

4 

Tire pressures OK 

5 

Tire pressures are being initialized 

6 

Loss of pressure in front left tire 

7 

TPMS dropped out 


1 All wheels orange, without tire pressure 

The identification numbers of the tire pressure sensor are known 

The positions of the tire pressure sensor have not been taught in 

The tire pressures are not displayed 

Text message: tire pressure loss. Fill tires correctly 

Loss of pressure in one or several tires. 


80 














101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 

2 All wheels orange, with tire pressure 

The identification numbers of the tire pressure sensor are known 

The positions of the tire pressure sensor have been taught in 
The tire pressures are displayed 
Text message: “Tire pressure loss”. Fill tires correctly 
Loss of pressure in all tires. 

3 All wheels green, without tire pressure (teach-in operation active) 

The identification numbers of the tire pressure sensor are known 

The positions of the tire pressure sensor have not been taught in 

Tire pressure monitoring active 

Tire pressures within the permissible tolerances. 

4 All wheels green, with tire pressure 

The identification numbers of the tire pressure sensor are known 

The positions of the tire pressure sensor have been taught in 
Tire pressure monitoring active 
Tire pressures OK. 

5 All wheels grey (teach-in operation active) 

The identification numbers of the tire pressure sensor are being taught in 
The positions of the tire pressure sensor are being taught in 
Text message: TPMS reset is being performed. 

6 Three wheels green, with tire pressure 

The identification numbers of the tire pressure sensor are known 
The positions of the tire pressure sensor have been taught in 
Text message: “Tire pressure loss front left. Fill tires correctly” 

Loss of pressure in one tire. 

7 All wheels grey 

Text message: “Tire pressure monitoring dropped out”. 

When installing new tire pressure sensor IDs, an initialization must be started manually. If this 
initialization has not been performed, the driver will be prompted via the Drive menu to do so once the 
journey has started. 

A_ 

Possible factors that prevent the tire pressures being displayed in the Central Information Display: 

• Wheel standstill before a journey starts 

• Incorrect version of tire pressure sensor 

• Battery capacity depleted 


81 



101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 

• Wheel assignment of tire pressure sensor not complete 

• Tire pressure sensor faulty 

• Internal fault in DSC control unit. 


6.3.5. Information in the instrument cluster (KOMBI) 

The yellow warning light on the puncture display informs the driver about various system statuses. 



101 Yellow warning light of puncture display 

If the warning light lights up continuously, this indicates that there may be problems with the tire 
pressure. 

This could be due to one of the following causes: 

• A puncture or more significant loss of pressure 

• The system has not been initialized and its warning is based on the old status. 

If a warning light flashes then lights up continuously this indicates a malfunction. 

This could be due to one of the following causes: 

• Wheel mounted without tire pressure sensor 

• TPMS could not complete the initialization process 

• Faults in transmission frequencies of tire pressure sensor. 


82 




101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 


6.4. Brake 



101 Overview of brake system 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Brake fluid expansion tank 

2 

Brake servo 

3 

Brake pad wear sensor, rear axle 

4 

Wheel speed sensor, rear axle 

5 

Electromechanical parking brake actuator 

6 

Brake pad wear sensor, front axle 

7 

Wheel speed sensor, front axle 

8 

Vacuum pump 

9 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 


By harmonizing the accelerator pedal operation with the 101, in normal operation braking decelerations 
of up to 1.6 m/s 2 can be performed purely electrically and thus wear-free via the electrical machine. 
When the accelerator pedal module is released, there is a noticeable deceleration by the alternator 
activation of the electrical machine. The energy generated is stored in the form of electrical voltage 
in the high-voltage battery unit. This means that the wear of the brake discs and brake pads will be 
extremely low, providing a “forward-thinking” driving style is adopted. 


83 
















101 Product Presentation 
6. Chassis and Suspension Overview 

6.5. Dynamic handling control systems 


6.5.1. Dynamic traction control, DTC 



Control Display 
✓ ^ Traktionskontrolle 
Uhrzeit/Datum 
Sprache/Einheiten 
Touchpad 
Verbindungen 
Klang 




101 Activating the DTC function 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central information display (CID) 

2 

"Settings" menu 

3 

Dynamic Traction Control 

4 

Controller 

5 

Instrument cluster (KOMBI) 

6 

DSC indicator and warning light 


The Dynamic Traction Control cannot be activated or deactivated using a button as before, but 
must be selected in the central information display using the controller. The activation of the DTC is 
confirmed with a tick box. Then all functions of the Dynamic Traction Control are only available to a 
limited extent. This is shown to the driver by the DSC indicator and warning light. The DTC can be 
reactivated using the controller or by a terminal change. 


84 
















101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 

7.1. Components of the electric motor 

The electrical machine, electrical machine electronics and the high-voltage battery developed by the 
BMW Group for the 101 are elements of the BMW eDrive technology. The BMW eDrive technology 
identifies all concepts which enable purely electric, and therefore emissions-free, driving and thus 
becomes another pillar of BMW EfficientDynamics. The components of the electric motor are shown 
below. 



Components of the electric motor (without range extender) 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Transmission 

2 

Electrical machine electronics 

3 

Bearing for engine support arm 

4 

Engine support arm 

5 

Rear axle module 

6 

Electrical machine 

7 

Anti-roll bar link 

8 

Output shaft, right 


85 
















101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 



Installation location of the high-voltage battery 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Aluminium frame (Drive module) 

2 

High-voltage battery 


The 101 has the perfect package for sporty driving pleasure in urban traffic. With a DIN vehicle curb 
weight of 1195 kg/ 2634 lbs it is lighter than most vehicles of the compact segment and, at the same 
time, offers significantly more space for up to four occupants. The spurt from zero to 100 km/h / 62 
mph is done in 7.2 seconds and the range of 130 to 160 kilometers 80 to 100 miles is sufficient for 
everyday operation to conveniently cover the mobility requirements of the target group customers. 

The low and central position of the high-voltage battery benefits the agility of the vehicle and 
the harmonised axle load distribution in the ratio 50:50 achieved through the arrangement of all 
components in the Drive module. Also in terms of crash safety the high-voltage battery which is 
covered by aluminium sections is positioned in a particularly favorable location. The electrical machine 
and transmission are housed in direct proximity to the rear axle. Thanks to the rear-wheel drive the 
front axle remains free of drive influences. 


86 







101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 

7.1.1. Electrical machine 



Electric motor in the 101 


In a conventional passenger car a combustion engine is used to generate the drive torque. In the 
101 this task is performed by an electrical machine. The electrical machine is a so-called hybrid 
synchronous machine. It has a maximum power of 125 kW /170 hp and a maximum torque of 250 
Nm /184 Ib-ft. The electrical machine of the 101 is significantly smaller than a combustion engine with 
comparable power. The electrical machine also holds advantages over the combustion engine in terms 
of weight. For example, while a N52 engine weighs about 160 kg /352 lbs, the electrical machine of 
the 101 only weighs in at roughly 49 kg /108 lbs. It is thus possible to secure the electrical machine of 
the 101 directly to the rear axle module. The electrical machine has a speed range of over 11,000 rpm 
in comparison to the combustion engine. The maximum torque of 250 Newton meters /184 Ib-ft is 
available from the first revolution. The electrical machine can be operated not only as an engine, but 
also as an alternator. The electrical energy recovered from the kinetic energy of the vehicle can then be 
used to charge the high-voltage battery during the journey (brake energy regeneration). 

7.1.2. Transmission 

As the electrical machine offers a large usable engine speed range, the transmission of the 101 also 
only has to provide one gear, i.e. a fixed gear ratio. A combustion engine cannot deliver torque when 
the engine speed is zero. Unlike the electrical machine of the 101: Its high torque is already available 
when the engine speed is zero meaning a clutch in the transmission of the 101 is not required - not for 
driving off or for shifting gears. 

The transmission has an overall ratio of 9.7:1. The engine speed at the transmission input is 9.7 times 
greater than at the transmission output. 

The transmission in the 101 is operated using a monostable rotary gear selector switch. The gear 
selector switch offers the option of selecting the familiar drive positions "P", "N", "R", "D". 


87 


101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 


The parking lock is responsible for securing the vehicle against rolling away, just like in a conventional 
vehicle with automatic transmission. Even on steep inclines/downhill gradients up to 32% the parking 
lock is able to safely hold the 101 at a standstill. Nevertheless, just like for conventional vehicles it is 
recommended to also secure the vehicle against rolling away using the parking brake. 

The driver can engage the parking lock in the 101 using the P button at the gear selector switch. It 
is, however, automatically engaged and under the same conditions known from BMW vehicles with 
an electronic gear selector switch. For example, the parking lock is automatically engaged when it 
is detected that the driver has left the vehicle (driver's door open, seat belt open and the pedals not 
operated). In contrast to conventional vehicles, there is a further precondition, where disengaging the 
parking lock in the 101 is not possible: A current charging procedure. This precondition prevents the 
driver taking off unintentionally as long as a charging cable is connected. 

7.1.3. Electrical machine electronics 



Electrical machine electronics EME 

The electrical machine electronics EME of the 101 is the central link between the high-voltage battery 
and the electrical machine. It also makes possible the voltage supply of the low-voltage vehicle 
electrical system from the high-voltage vehicle electrical system. The EME is installed above the 
electrical machine. As a result, the electrical connection between the EME and the electrical machine 
is very short and enables energy transmission almost without any losses. A compact, joint cooling 
circuit was also able to be realized thanks to the proximity of both components. The EME and the 
electrical machine are firmly connected. Power electronics within the EME convert the direct current 
voltage of the high-voltage battery to three-phase voltages for the electrical machine. Energy flow in 
both directions is possible. The high-voltage battery is charged during brake energy regeneration and 
discharged during acceleration. 

The EME is also connected to the low-voltage vehicle electrical system. Via a DC/DC converter in the 
EME energy is transmitted from the high-voltage electrical system to the low-voltage vehicle electrical 
system. The DC/DC converter thus assumes the function of the alternator and supplies the low- 
voltage vehicle electrical system with energy. 


88 


101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 


7.1.4. High-voltage battery 

The high-voltage battery unit is the energy storage device for the electric motor of the 101. It is the 
equivalent to the fuel tank of a conventional vehicle with a combustion engine. Also in BMW active 
hybrid vehicles there is already a high-voltage battery unit, which supplies the electric motor with 
energy. In the BMW active hybrid the high-voltage battery is charged when the electrical machine is 
operated as an alternator. This happens during brake energy regeneration or by a load point increase 
of the combustion engine. In the 101 the high-voltage battery can also be partially charged during 
brake energy regeneration. However, it is mainly charged using energy from an external power 
network. An optional range extender can also provide electrical energy using a gasoline engine and 
another electrical machine. However, this is primarily used for maintaining the state of charge when the 
high-voltage battery is already heavily discharged. The range of the 101 can be increased. 

The battery cells used in the high-voltage battery of the 101 are lithium-ion batteries. The battery 
cells are supplied by the Samsung SDI to the BMW plant in Dingolfing. There the cell modules are 
assembled from the battery cells and mounted into complete high-voltage battery units with the other 
components. 


7.2. Role and components of the range extender 

The 101 is equipped with a purely electrical drive system. The energy required to operate the electrical 
machine is stored in the high-voltage battery. As a result, the range is restricted. As soon as the state 
of charge of the battery reaches a critical level 6.5%, the range extender ensures enough energy 
is available to reach the destination. The range extender is therefore only started by the vehicle 
electronics if required. The 2-cylinder engine is a small, very smooth and quiet gasoline engine, which 
powers a range extender electrical machine and thus delivers the necessary energy for the onward 
journey. As a result, the state of charge of the battery can be kept constant so that the vehicle can 
continue to drive using the electrical machine. The range of the vehicle can thus be extended. In order 
to realize the lowest possible fuel consumption and thus reduce C0 2 emissions, the gasoline engine 
also has an automatic start-stop function and other intelligent operating strategies. 

The key components which are also installed in the 101 with range extender are shown in the following 
graphic. 


89 



101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 


0 fl ® 




(W fJjM ft 

^1 r/ii 

101 installation location of components of range extender 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Range extender, combustion engine 

2 

Range extender electrical machine 

3 

Range Extender Electrical Machine Electronics (REME) 

4 

Range Extender Digital Engine Electronics (RDME) 


7.3. Power transmission 

The energy/power flow between the individual drive components is shown in the following graphic. 


90 











101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 



Energy/Power flow in the 101 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

High-voltage battery 

2 

Energy flow (electrical) via the two-pin high-voltage cable in both directions 

3 

Electrical machine electronics 

4 

Energy flow (electrical) via the three-phase high-voltage cable in both 
directions 

5 

Electrical machine 

6 

Power flow (mechanical) from the electrical machine to the transmission and 
vice versa 

7 

Transmission 

8 

Power flow (mechanical) from the transmission via the output shafts to the rear 
wheels and vice versa 

9 

Rear wheels 

10 

W20 Combustion engine 


91 








101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 


Index 

Explanation 

11 

Power flow (mechanical) from the combustion engine to the range extender 
electrical machine in both directions 

12 

Range extender electrical machine 

13 

Energy flow (electrical) via the three-phase high-voltage cable in both 
directions 

14 

Range Extender Electrical Machine Electronics 

15 

Energy flow (electrical) via the two-pin high-voltage cable in both directions 


7.4. Operating strategy of the electric motor 

The operating strategy has the task of maximizing the service life of the high-voltage battery and 
protecting it against damage during operation. All customer requirements when driving and during 
charging should also be fulfilled. The behavior of the electric motor in the event of a fault is also an 
element of the operating strategy. The EDME is the master control unit for the operating strategy. 


© © ® 



Diagram for the operating strategy of a 101 without range extender 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Range in which driving without restrictions is possible 

B 

Range in which driving with restricted drive power takes place 

C 

Range in which driving is not possible 

1 

Calculated state of charge of the high-voltage battery (State of Charge = SOC) 

2 

Warning for range of 20 km /12 mph 

3 

Warning for range of 10 km / 6 mph 

4 

Warning for range of less than 1 km / .6 mph 

5 

Axis for relative SOC values 

6 

Axis for absolute SOC values 


92 



















101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 


Index 

Explanation 

7 

SOC of the high-voltage battery 0% absolute 

8 

SOC of the high-voltage battery 10% absolute, or 0% relative 

9 

SOC of the high-voltage battery 14.2% absolute, or 4.9 % relative 

10 

SOC of the high-voltage battery 100% relative 


In the diagram the relative and the absolute state of charge values (SOC values) of the high-voltage 
battery are shown. The absolute values correspond to the actual state of charge of the high-voltage 
battery. The relative SOC values are the values which are displayed to the driver in the instrument 
cluster or in the central information display. In range "A" driving without power restriction and full 
functionality of the convenience functions are available. If the SOC value of the high-voltage battery 
drops to about 5%, the Check Control messages for ranges between 20 km /12 mph and 10 km / 6 
mph are issued. 

In range "B" the performance of the drive train is reduced due to the low state of charge of the high- 
voltage battery. The heating and air-conditioning system is switched off here. 

If the absolute SOC value falls below 10%, driving the vehicle is no longer possible. The reserve of 
10% is required to give the customer adequate time to charge the high-voltage battery and prevent 
deep discharge. 


7.5. Operating strategy of the range extender in the 101 

7.5.1. Overview 

The optional range extender powers a range extender electrical machine, where current is supplied 
to the high-voltage intermediate circuit. Depending on requirements the current flows directly to the 
motor of the electrical machine or to the high-voltage battery unit. The aim is to keep the state of 
charge (SOC) at a constant level. 

The operating strategy of the range extender in the 101 is shown in the following graphic. The available 
power and thus the state of charge of the high-voltage battery is defined between 0 and 100 %. It 
is important to note that these are relative values and not absolute values. When driving without a 
combustion engine (4) the energy required is taken from the high-voltage battery. The state of charge 
(1) drops continuously and reaches the switch-on threshold (2). The combustion engine is now started 
and powers the range extender electrical machine. Depending on the driving style it is now possible 
to keep the state of charge of the high-voltage battery constant or even increase it (3). If the state of 
charge rises again above the switch-on threshold (2), the combustion engine is switched off. 

The driving style has a direct influence on the discharge of the high-voltage battery and thus also on 
the range. A comparison of the performance data at full load should highlight this: 

• 25 kW mechanical output power of the combustion engine 

• 23.5 kW electrical output power of the alternator 

• 125 kW power diversion by the electrical machine. 


93 






101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 


Using this example at full load it is clear that this driving style leads to a further drop in the state of 
charge of the high-voltage battery. The output power of the combustion engine and thus the range 
extender electrical machine is not sufficient to keep the state of charge of the high-voltage battery 
constant. 


[SOCJ 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

State of charge of the high-voltage battery 

2 

Switch-on threshold, SOC 6.5% relative 

3 

Internal combustion engine running, SOC 6.5 - 0 % relative 

4 

Electrical driving without combustion engine 

5 

Electrical driving with combustion engine 

6 

Charging, external 


7.5.2. Automatic engine start/stop function 

The combustion engine also has an automatic engine start-stop function. To activate the automatic 
engine start-stop function the presence of the driver must be detected using the seat belt and door 
contact. As long as the seat belt is inserted and the door is closed, the driver is considered present 
and the range extender is operated with automatic engine start-stop function. 

The combustion engine is switched off under the following conditions: 

• SOC 3.5 - 6.5% 

• Speed < 10 km/h / 6 mph. 

If the speed of the vehicle is greater than 20 km/h /12 mph, the combustion engine is restarted. 

During the warm-up phase of the combustion engine or if the state of charge drops below 3.5% the 
automatic engine start-stop function is deactivated. 

7.5.3. Automatic service 

After a period of roughly eight weeks the combustion engine is automatically started. An automatic 
start is required to guarantee the operational reliability of the range extender. 


94 














101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 


The process is indicated to the driver via a Check Control message during driving. The duration of 
the engine running is dependent on the starting temperature of the combustion engine. The driver 
is informed about the duration of the service via a time bar in the central information display. If the 
service of the range extender is carried out at an unfavorable time, this can be stopped by pressing the 
START-STOP button. 

The following prerequisite must be satisfied so that the combustion engine is started: 

• State of charge of the high-voltage battery < 75% 

• Fuel tank content > 0.8 I 

• No fault code entry in the RDME control unit. 


7.6. Refueling with range extender 

For the operation of the range extender the vehicle is equipped with a pressurized fuel tank made from 
stainless steel. As a result during purely electric driving it is guaranteed that the gasoline fumes remain 
in the pressurized fuel tank. Only through the operation with range extender are the gasoline fumes 
directed via the purge air line and the tank vent valve to the differentiated air intake system and thus 
into the combustion chamber of the engine. 

The pressurized fuel tank must be bled for refuelling. The refueling request is indicated by operating 
the button for refueling at the A-pillar. The hybrid pressure refueling electronic control unit TFE 
monitors the current operating condition via a pressure temperature sensor in the fuel tank and then 
controls the pressure reduction by opening a valve. The actuator drive for locking the fuel filler flap is 
activated and the fuel filler flap with fuel filler cap can be opened manually. 

At the same time, the driver receives the status of the tank readiness displayed in the instrument 
cluster and in the central information display. If the fuel filler flap is not opened within 10 minutes after 
the fuel filler cap has been released, it is automatically locked again. 

After the refueling procedure and the closing of the fuel filler cap the fuel filler flap is automatically 
locked again. The displays in the instrument cluster and central information display are removed. 


95 



101 Product Presentation 

7. Overview of Electric Motor 



101 components of the fuel system 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Emergency operation of the fuel filler flap 

2 

Fuel filler flap with electrical lock 

3 

Stainless steel pressurized fuel tank 

4 

Fuel tank button 

5 

Purge air line 

6 

Feed line 

7 

Tank vent valve 

A 

No charging and refueling at the same time! When the charging cable is inserted do not initiate a 
refueling procedure and keep a safe distance from highly flammable materials. Otherwise, in the event 
of incorrect connection or removal of the charging cable there is a risk of personal injury or material 
damage by burning fuel for example. 


96 
















101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 

8.1. Introduction 

The "charging" procedure for an electric vehicle corresponds to "refuelling" a conventionally driven 
vehicle. Accordingly, in this chapter "charging" means: 

• Charging the high-voltage battery in the vehicle 

• while at standstill (not through brake energy regeneration) 

• by supply of electrical energy 

• which is provided by an AC voltage network outside the vehicle 

• and is fed to the vehicle via a charging cable. 

As a charging cable is used, one also refers to conductive (grid-bound) charging. The inductive 
charging is not possible with the 101. It is still undergoing research and development. 

Components inside and outside the vehicle are required for charging. In the vehicle a charging socket 
and power electronics are required for the voltage conversion. Outside the vehicle a device which 
performs the protection and control functions is needed, in addition to the AC voltage network and a 
charging cable. This device is called an "Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE)" in the standards 
and in development. The following graphic shows the components for the charging of the high-voltage 
battery inside and outside the electric vehicle and compares them to the components needed for 
refueling in a conventional vehicle. 

® ® ® ® ® © © 

iiwi«® j> 

^ 

Components for refueling the vehicle and charging the high-voltage battery 




Index 

Refueling the vehicle 

Charging the high-voltage battery 

1 

Filling station 

AC voltage network 

2 

Gasoline pump 

Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (e.g. 
wall box) 

3 

Fuel line between fuel pump nozzle 
and gasoline pump 

Charging cable 

4 

Fuel pump nozzle 

Vehicle connector at charging cable 

5 

Fuel filler neck 

Charging socket 

6 

- 

Power electronics 

7 

Fuel tank 

High-voltage battery 


97 











101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 


The Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment can either be integrated in the charging cable or be an element 
of a fixed charging station (also called "wallbox"). The EVSE establishes the connection to the AC 
voltage network and serves for the fulfilment of requirements for electrical safety when charging the 
vehicle. Communication to the vehicle can also be set up via the so-called pilot line. As a result, it is 
possible to safely start the charging procedure and exchange the charging parameters (e.g. maximum 
current level) between vehicle and EVSE. 

The voltage of the AC voltage network can be in the range of 110 V to 240 V. It is fed to the vehicle 
via a single-phase supply. From the AC voltage network side, in theory a maximum charging power of 
Pmax = U m a X x l max = 240 V x 32 A = 7.7 kW is possible. 

Many of the components mentioned for charging the 101 are standardized in terms of their structure 
and functions. The components for charging the 101 satisfy charging mode 2 (connection to standard 
household socket with additional pilot line) and charging mode 3 (connection to fixed wallbox with pilot 
line). The standard valid for America is SAE J1772. Charge Level 1 and 2 are comparable to charging 
modes 2 and 3. Most components for charging the 101 only satisfy both standards with one technical 
version. A national-market or standard-specific version is required for Europe and America only by the 
"Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment". 

For the employees in BMW Service the following important safety rules must be observed in relation to 
charging: 

A_ 

Refueling the vehicle while the high-voltage battery is charging is not permitted! 

When the charging cable is inserted do not initiate a refueling procedure and keep a safe distance from 
highly flammable materials. Otherwise, in the event of incorrect connection or removal of the charging 
cable there is a risk of personal injury or material damage by burning fuel for example. 


A_ 

While the 101 is connected to the AC voltage network for charging, no work may be performed at the 
high-voltage system. 


A 

During the charging procedure the electric coolant pump and the electric fan can be switched on 
automatically for cooling the power electronics. This is why no work can be performed at the cooling 
system of the electric motor and at the electric fan when a charging cable is connected to the 101. 


A_ 

Work at the charging cable, at the Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment, at household sockets or 
charging stations can only be performed by qualified electricians, and not by BMW Service employees 
without this additional qualification. 


98 










101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 

8.2. Charging plug 

In general, the high-voltage battery can either be charged using alternating current (AC charging) or 
direct current (DC charging). The charging options of the high-voltage battery in the 101 are generally 
specified by the equipment for charging in the vehicle, as well as the national-market charging 
infrastructure. 

The charging plugs used are also standardized (IEC 62196-2). Depending on the vehicle equipment 
two different charging sockets in the US are used. 


USA (Type 1) 



Combo charging plug (DC 

charging) 

option 4U7 



SAE J1772/ 
IEC 62196-3 
Combo 1 


8.3. Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment 

The EVSE establishes the connection to the AC voltage network and serves for the fulfilment of 
requirements for electrical safety when charging the vehicle. Communication to the vehicle can also be 
set up via the so-called pilot line. As a result, it is possible to safely start the charging procedure and 
exchange the charging parameters (e.g. maximum current level) between vehicle and EVSE. The EVSE 
can either be integrated in the charging cable (mobile solution) or be an element of a fixed charging 
station (also called "wallbox"). 

In both cases the EVSE contains the following subcomponents: 


99 







101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 


• Ground leakage circuit breaker (FI) 

• Display whether the AC voltage network is connected and available 

• Electronic disconnect switch for phase (LI) and neutral conductor (N) 

• Electronic switching for generating the pilot signal 

• Continuous protective earth (PE). 

8.3.1. Mobile solution 

The version integrated in the charging cable is also called "In-Cable box" and is designed for mobile 
use. The volume and weight of this solution are low and the charging cable and EVSE can be easily 
transported in the vehicle. 



EVSE for mobile use 


100 








101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

BMW i mobile EVSE 

2 

Display for the availability of the voltage supply 

3 

Display for charging 

4 

Display for fault in the voltage supply 

5 

Display for fault during charging 


As a household power socket is used for the connection of this EVSE to the AV voltage network, the 
maximum current level is restricted for charging. A product of this kind offered for the AC voltage up to 
a charging power of 3.7 kW. The duration until a fully discharged high-voltage battery of the 101 is fully 
charged up again (18.8 kWh net) would be roughly 8-10 hours in optimal conditions. 

A_ 

Please consult the operating instructions of the respective manufacturer for the operation and use of a 
charging cable with an integrated EVSE. 

Employees in BMW Service cannot perform any maintenance or repair work on the charging cable 
or the EVSE. In the event of a defect with or a malfunction of the charging cable or the EVSE, the 
manufacturer must be contacted. 


8.3.2. Fixed charging station 

This version of the Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment must be installed permanently owing to its size 
and electrical requirements, e.g. at the house or in the customer's garage. Such a charging station can 
also be built at public places, e.g. car parks. 

A 

The installation, maintenance and repair of fixed charging stations can only be performed by suitably 
qualified electricians. Employees in BMW Service are not authorized to perform this work as they 
generally do not have this training. 


For the fixed charging stations (also called "wallbox") a distinction is made between AC charging 
stations and DC charging stations. 

AC charging stations 

The connection of the AC charging stations to the AC voltage network can be done via a two-phase 
(USA) supply - the connection to the 101 is, however, always designed as a single-phase supply. In 
comparison to the mobile solution, a maximum current level of 32 A or a maximum charging power of 
7.4 kW is possible. These maximum values are, however, still dependent on the size of the line cross- 
section, which was used in the electrical installation at the erection site. The electrician configures the 
charging station during installation according to the line cross-section so that the applicable maximum 
current level is transmitted to the vehicle using the pilot signal. 

AC charging stations from other manufacturers or the versions for other countries may differ from the 
versions shown up to now. The following graphic shows an AC charging station for the US market. 


101 










101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 



AC charging station for the US market, manufactured by AeroVironment 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Display of the operating condition 

2 

Button for starting and stopping the charging procedure 

3 

Charging cable with connector for the connection at the vehicle (stored in the 


AC charging station) 


In the USA a plug connection between the charging cable and AC charging station is not permitted. 
This is why the charging cable cannot be separated from the AC charging station for the customer. 

DC charging station 


102 








101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 



The DC charging is optional on all 101 vehicles with the option code 4U7. DC charging stations form 
the second group of the fixed charging stations. In comparison to the AC charging station, the AC 
voltage is already converted to direct current in the DC charging station. Therefore, power electronics 
for the conversion of the AC voltage to direct current voltage in the electric vehicle are not required. 


As the weight of the power electronics in the DC charging station plays a minor role, large 
transformers and a rectifier can be installed there to use the full network power. For this reason, DC 
charging stations generally deliver a much higher charging power than AC charging stations. Using a 
DC charging station the high-voltage battery can thus be charged much quicker. 


8.4. Charging status display. 

A C-shaped fibre-optic conductor runs around the charging socket at the vehicle and is illuminated 
using two LEDs. With this C-shaped fibre-optic conductor it is possible to show the status for 
charging. At the same time, this fibre-optic conductor is used as locator lighting for the charging 
socket. 


103 





101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 



Locator lighting: 

The locator lighting of the charging socket is used as an 
orientation aid by the driver for the connection and disconnection 
of the charging plug. 

The two LEDs light up in white as soon as the charging socket 
cover has been opened. The locator lighting remains switched on 
as long as the bus systems are active. As soon as a charging plug 
has been identified as correctly connected, the locator lighting is 
switched off and the initialization status is displayed. 



Initialization: 

The initialization starts immediately after the correct connection 
of the charging plug. The initialization phase takes up to 10 
seconds. 

The LEDs flash in an orange color at a frequency of 1 Hz. 

After successful initialization the charging of the high-voltage 
battery can be started. 



Charging active: 

The currently active charging procedure of the high-voltage 
battery is displayed by flashing blue LEDs. The flashing 
frequency is about 1.42 Hz. 

Charging interval: 

Charging interval or charging readiness present when the 
initialization phase was completed successfully and the charging 
start is sometime in the future (e.g.: charging at a less expensive 
time). 


104 








101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 



Charging complete: 

The state of charge of the high-voltage battery "fully charged" is 
indicated by permanently green LEDs. 



Fault during charging: 

If faults occur during the charging procedure, then this status is 
displayed by flashing red LEDs. The LEDs flash three times at 
a frequency of about 2 Hz and an interval of about 0.8 seconds 
between the three groups. 


The LEDs for these displays are activated after the charging plug is connected or after unlocking/ 
locking the vehicle for 12 seconds. If during this time the vehicle is unlocked/locked again, the display 
lasts for another 12 seconds. 


8.5. Charging in Service mode 

The "Charging Data Information System" (CDIS) is a system developed especially for the requirements 
of BMW i. It supports the user in the dealer organization to be able to better plan and control the 
charging of electric vehicles. It has two essential functions: 

• Charging Time Calculator (CTC), 

which allows an estimation of the charging time until the state of charge desired by the 
customer is reached. The calculated charging time can be taken into consideration directly 
during scheduling and ensures exact and reliable appointments. 

• the State of Charge Monitoring (SoCM), 

which shows the current state of charge of all BMW i vehicles in operation in an overview 
and draws attention to possible problems such as charging interruptions. As a result, the 
satisfaction of the charging request by the customer can be provided without timely manual 
control at the vehicle, thereby creating an efficient process for charging high-voltage batteries. 


105 







101 Product Presentation 
8. Charging the High-voltage Battery 


The CDIS application can be started at the beginning via DCSnet and later directly from ISPA Light 
and ISPA Client using the corresponding buttons. A prerequisite for the usage in all cases is a BMW 
contract. 

The Service Advisors of the BMW i Service dealerships are trained accordingly for this application. 


106 



101 Product Presentation 

9. Maintenance 

9.1. Service 

An intelligent service already starts in the vehicle. This is why the maintenance system Condition 
Based Service (CBS) is also used in the 101. The instrument cluster automatically provides information 
in advance about what servicing must be performed. 


9.2. Maintenance work for range extender 

As the combustion engine in the 101 is not permanently used, the servicing is reduced to a minimum. 
In the US market version a change of the engine oil with filter is only required after a time interval of 
10,000 miles/12 months. 

A 

During an oil change care should be exercised to ensure no oil is spilled when filling. A suitable funnel 
must be used. The repair instructions must be followed. 


Only use a flat bed to transport vehicle is vehicle is not able to move on its own power. 
Pushing vehicle at walking speed for short distances is permitted. 

No fast mobile charging is permitted. 


107 




101 Product Presentation 

10. Assessing the vehicle after an 
accident 


It is necessary to assess this vehicle to further process the vehicle involved in an accident. No 
more than four weeks should be left between the identification of intrinsic safety of the 101 and the 
evaluation of the high-voltage battery. After this period the intrinsic safety check must be performed 
again. The responsibility for the observance of this deadline, as well as the observance of intrinsic 
safety during this period, lies with the qualified individual. 

This chapter describes the main procedure in order to identify the intrinsic safety of vehicles involved 
in an accident. How this measure must be performed in detail depends on the individual situation 
locally and is not an element of this chapter. These procedures must be defined according to local 
regulations/laws and included in the locally applicable work instructions. 

Note the following repair instructions: 

• 61 00 ... "Safety information when handling electric/hybrid cars" 

• 61 25 ... "Visual inspection of high-voltage battery unit after accident" 

• 61 25 ... "Assessment of the suitability for transportation of the high-voltage battery unit in 
Service workshops". 

A_ 

The analysis and assessment of the vehicle must be performed by e-mobilty expert (a person that has 
been certified by the BMW Technical Training department to work on BMW ActiveHybrid and Electric 
vehicles). The e-mobility certification allows that person to work only on de-energized high-voltage 
system. This is ultimately the responsibility of the qualified individual. 


10.1. Electrical assessment 

The electrical assessment of the high-voltage battery unit is done using a diagnosis and procedure. 
Disconnect the high-voltage system from the supply! 

Then answer the following questions: 


A de-energized state could not be identified. 

yes 

no 

Intrinsic safety not met according to diagnosis or procedure 

yes 

no 


108 






101 Product Presentation 

10. Assessing the vehicle after an 
accident 

10.2. Visual assessment 

For the visual assessment of the vehicle involved in an accident it is important to identify the 
deformation depth. The deformation depth was not defined at the time of the editorial deadline. The 
graphic with the penetration depth can be found later on in the ASAP portal. The following graphic 
only shows the rough area which cannot be deformed (area shaded in red). 



Area that cannot be deformed 


Smoke formation? 

yes 

no 

Are there scorch marks on the vehicle? 

yes 

no 

Suspected water damage including water used for firefighting 
(vehicle and high-voltage battery unit) 

yes 

no 

Does the vehicle have mechanical damage in the area of the 
red shaded area? (see graphic above) 

yes 

no 

Crack or opening at the housing of the high-voltage battery 
unit 

yes 

no 

Dents in the housing, deformations, changes (scratch marks 
up to 0.5 mm deep or 5 cm long are allowed) to the high- 
voltage battery unit 

yes 

no 

Connections of the high-voltage battery unit loose or 
damaged 

yes 

no 

High-voltage cables dangling freely from the vehicle. 

yes 

no 


109 






















101 Product Presentation 

10. Assessing the vehicle after an 
accident 

A 

The result of the electrical and visual assessment must be recorded in writing! 


If one or several points are answered with yes, the further course of action must be clarified with 
Technical Support! The vehicle must also be locked and restricted using barrier tape. 

If all points are answered with no, the vehicle is intrinsically safe. Here the vehicle can be repaired in a 
normal workshop process (for intrinsically safe vehicles). 


110 






Bayerische Motorenwerke Aktiengesellschaft 
Qualifizierung und Training 
RontgenstraBe 7 

85716 UnterschleiBheim, Germany 


