Table of Contents 

Basic Suspension Geometry 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

Alignment Angles.4 

Caster.4 

Caster Offset.5 

Camber .6 

Positive Camber .7 

Negative Camber .7 

Toe .8 

Toe Out on Turns.9 

Steering Roll Radius (Steering Offset) .10 

Steering Axis Inclination (SAI).12 

Included Angle (IA) .13 

Geometric Axis.14 

Thrust Line/Thrust Angle.15 

Positive Thrust Angle.15 

Negative Thrust Angle.15 

Alignment Procedures.15 

Wheelbase .16 

Track Width.16 


Initial Print Date: 3/06 Revision Date: 






















Basic Suspension Geometry 

Model: All 

■IJICTllffS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand basic suspension geometry. 

• Understand the relationship between alignment angles and ride quality. 

• Understand the effect of alignment angles on tire wear. 


2 

Basic Suspension Geometry 



Introduction 


The safety, stability, handling and performance of a vehicle depends on many factors. 

0 ne of the most important aspects of these characteristics is the design of suspension 
and steering systems. BMW vehicles are known fortheir superior handling and road 
holding performance. 

The design of the BMW suspension systems is a key factor in achieving these goals. 
Suspension geometry is defined as: "The angular relationship between the suspension, 
the steering linkage and the wheels - relative to the road surface." 



There are several alignment geometry angles which relate to the suspension 
components and steering linkages including: 

• Caster 

• Camber 

• Toe-ln/Toe-Out 

• Steering Roll Radius (steering offset) 

• Steering Axis Inclination (SAI) and Included Angle (IA) 

• Toe Out on Turns 

• Thrust Line and Thrust Angle 
All ofthese angles influence: 

• The ease with which the vehicle can be steered 

• The overall vehicle stability (handling, tracking and safety) 

• Tire wear 

The suspension geometry for any given vehicle is a result of the design engineers 
development of the vehicle and the design criteria forthat particular vehicle. 


3 

Basic Suspension Geometry 














Alignment Angles 


Caster 

Caster is the forward or rearward tilt of the steering axis centerline, as viewed from the 
side of the vehicle, and is measured in degrees. When the steering axis centerline is 
exactly perpendicularto the road surface, the Caster is considered to be at zero degrees. 



When the top of the steering axis centerline is tilted rearward (toward the bulkhead), the 
caster is considered to be "positive”. When the top of the steering axis centerline is tilt¬ 
ed forwards, the caster is considered to be negative. 

Most vehicles have a caster angle from zero degrees to a positive angle. Negative caster 
is not very desirable because is reduces the vehicle stability especially at high speeds. 
BMW vehicle always have a positive caster angle. Positive caster promotes high speed 
stability and provides feedback to the driver. 

Positive caster also promotes "steering return” which increases driver comfort and safe¬ 
ty. Caster angles which are more negative (or not very positive) can increase the effect 
of wheel "shimmy", create sensitivity to high winds and creates poor steering return. 

When the caster angle differs greatly from side to side, the vehicle may "pull" to the side 
which has the "least positive" caster. 


4 

Basic Suspension Geometry 





















One of the main characteristics of positive caster is the positive effect on high speed 
steering stability. However, low speed steering effort is increased. This characteristic is 
counteracted bythe power steering system and in particular the Servotronic system. 
Servotronic will be discussed in latertraining modules. 

Caster is not a directly measured angle. It can only be measured by sweeping the 
steering through an angle of 20 degrees in both directions. This is important to know 
during the alignment procedure. 

On BMW vehicles, caster can only be measured, there is no adjustment. However, caster 
measurement can be used to detect and diagnose alignment concerns. Caster which is 
out of specification could indicate damaged or worn components. 

Caster Offset 

Caster offset is the distance between the centerline of the wheel contact point and the 
intersection point of the extended pivot axis. This greaterthe offset, the more effort 
required to turn a moving wheel. The negative effects of more increased offset are 
counter-acted bythe BMW double pivot suspension system and the Servotronic steering 
system (if equipped). 




1. Caster Angle 

2. Caster Offset 


5 

Basic Suspension Geometry 






Camber 


Camber is the inward or outward tilt of the wheels when viewed from the front of the 
vehicle. The amount of tilt is measured in degrees from the vertical and is called the 
camber angle. 

The camber angle is the angle between the wheel center point and a perpendicular line 
(in the wheel contact point) with respect to the road surface. Camber angle is considered 
positive (+) if the upper part of the wheel is angled outward from the wheel center point 
and negative (-) if it is angled inward. 



Wheels running at a camber want to follow a circular path, like an overturned cone. 
Therefore, vehicles which have excessive camber angles will tend to pull to one side. As 
a general rule, the vehicle will tend to pull to the side of the vehicle which has the most 
positive camber. 


6 

Basic Suspension Geometry 









Front camber angle on most current BMW vehicles is set at a slightly negative value. 

This promotes good straight line stability. This is due to the fact that slight negative 
camber causes the wheels to "track inward". As long as the side-to-side camber is 
roughly equal, the vehicle will track in a straight line. 

Camber angle also has an effect on component wear. For instance, the wheel bearings 
will perform well and last longer as long as the camber is within specification. Camber 
which is out of specification will cause undue load on the wheel bearings. Excessive 
camber angle also causes wear on the outer edges of the tire. The outside of the tire will 
wear if the camber is too positive and the reverse is true with excessive negative camber. 
The same holds true forthe rear camber angle. 



POSITIVE CAMBER 



ZERO CAMBER 



NEGATIVE CAMBER 


Positive Camber 

Older vehicles often had a positive camber on the front axle. The design made this 
necessary, as the tapered roller bearings would not withstand any othertype of load. 

In a steering maneuver, the front axle wheel on the outside of the turn is shifted to the 
negative camber range by the caster angle and the spread. The desired cornering 
stability is achieved in this way. When cornering, no positive camber should arise at the 
outer wheel of the steered axle. 


Negative Camber 

On modern BMW chassis, it is possible to set a negative camberforthe straight-ahead 
position on the front axle as well. This has been made possible by using two rows of ball 
bearings. The rear wheels on BMW vehicles have always had a negative camber. 

This is a compromise. The wheels on the rear axle cannot be shifted to the negative 
camber range by steering movements. To improve cornering stability, a negative camber 
has to be pre-set. 


7 

Basic Suspension Geometry 





Toe 


The total toe of an axle is the difference in the distance between the front of the wheels 
and the rear of the wheels on the same axle. 

Toe is measured at the center of the wheels from one wheel rim to the other. When the 
distance is greater at the rear of the wheels, it is called toe-in. When the distance is 
greater at the front of the wheels, it is called toe-out. 

Rear wheel drive vehicles generally will have a small amount of toe-in at the front wheels. 
This will allow the wheels to toe out when rolling to achieve a zero running toe. 

Toe is measured in Degrees when using BMW specifications. Front toe is adjustable on 
all BMW vehicles. Reartoe is only adjustable on some models. 



Toe has a major influence on vehicle handling, straight line stability and the position of the 
steering wheel. An incorrect toe setting will have a negative effect on tire wear. A toe 
angle which is out of specification will cause the tires to wear in a relatively short time. 


8 

Basic Suspension Geometry 














Toe OutonTurns 

Also referred to as "Turning Angle" or "Toe 
differential angle". Toe out on turns results 
from the different angles (arcs) taken by the 
front wheels when driving through a corner. 
When turning a corner, the outside wheel 
must travel a greater distance than the inside 
wheel. The additional toe angle is determined 
by the steering arm design. 

Deviations from the specified value could 
indicate possible bent steering linkage. 

A typical complaint that would be associated 
with this condition would be excessive tire 
squeal or "scrubbing" on turns. When looking 
forthis specification in TIS, lookforthe "Track 
Differential Angle" specification. 




9 

Basic Suspension Geometry 










Steering Roll Radius (Steering Offset) 

The steering roll radius is the distance between the point of contact of the projected line 
drawn through the steering axis to the road surface and the center point of the tire 
contact area (foot print). The roll radius is the distance between these two lines. 

The roll radius can be positive or negative: 

• A positive roll radius exists when the steering axis line is inside the centerline of 
the tire (in other words, the imaginary intersection of these two lines is below the 
road surface). 

• A negative roll radius exists when the steering axis line is outside of the tire center 
line (in other words, the imaginary intersection of these two lines is above the road 
surface). 





K- 


h 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Camber 

3 

Steering Roll Radius 

2 

Steering Axis Inclination 




The steering roll radius influences the steering by means of a "torque effect". During 
braking, uneven brake forces will influence the steering towards the side with the most 
braking force. This becomes more evident when the roll radius is excessively positive. A 
positive roll radius also provides more feedback to the driver regarding road surface 
conditions. 


10 

Basic Suspension Geometry 












A steering roll radius which is excessively positive, reduces vehicle stability during braking. 
However, when roll radius is excessively negative, the directional stability is reduced 
(when not braking) and there is reduced feedback to the driverthrough the steering 
wheel. This is why BMW vehicles are designed with a steering roll radius which is slightly 
positive. This gives the driver a better "road feel" without compromising braking stability. 

Steering Roll Radius is not adjustable, but can be influenced by camber, SAI and rim 
offset. This can become evident by installing impropertire and wheel combinations. 
Wheels with incorrect offsets can compromise handling characteristics. 



Note: The term "Steering Roll Radius" is also known as Scrub Radius, 
Steering Offset or King Pin Offset. 


11 

Basic Suspension Geometry 










Steering Axis Inclination (SAI) 

Steering Axis Inclination is the inward tilt (angle) of the strut assembly with respect to a 
vertical line to the road surface. SAI raises the vehicle when the steering wheel is turned, 
which results in the self-correcting forces that cause the front wheels and steering wheel 
to return to a straightahead position after cornering. 

SAI is not adjustable, but is affected by damaged suspension components. 

M ost current alignment equipment can measure SAI and can aid in the diagnosis 
of damaged parts. Bent strut or spindle assemblies are common causes of incorrect 
SAI readings. 



12 

Basic Suspension Geometry 










Included Angle (IA) 

Included angle is the Camber angle and SAI combined. IA is also helpful when trying 
to diagnose bent suspension components. Knowing the IA and SAI is helpful when 
adjusting Camber. If the desired Camber angle cannot be achieved, then looking at 
SAI and IA could help determine the cause. 



1. Camber 
2.S.A.I. 

1+2 = Included Angle 


Depending on the type of alignment equipment used, S .A.I. and I.A. can be measured 
by raising the vehicle. Look for any excessive deviations from side to side. This could 
indicate possible chassis (frame) damage or bent components (strut/spindle). 


13 

Basic Suspension Geometry 




Geometric Axis 


The Geometric Axis (Centerline) is an imaginary line that is drawn between the midpoints 
of both front and rear wheels. The Axis is perpendicularto the axis of the front and rear 
axles at 90 degrees. This is an imaginary angle that is not adjustable. 



14 

Basic Suspension Geometry 









Thrust Line/Thrust Angle 

The Thrust Line is represented by an imaginary line that bisects the reartoe angle. This 
angle represents the overall "direction" in which the rear wheels are pointing. The thrust 
angle is the difference between the Geometric Axis and the Thrust Line. The optimum 
Thrust Angle is Zero Degrees, any deviation from this will affect the position of the 
steering wheel. 



Positive Thrust Angle 

A positive thrust angle is formed when the thrust line is to the right of the Geometric Axis 
(Centerline). When this situation occurs, the steering wheel position will be off to the 
right as well. The rear of the vehicle will tend to move to the right which will cause the 
front of the vehicle to steer left, the driver will move the steering wheel to the right to 
compensate. 

Negative Thrust Angle 

A negative thrust angle is formed when the thrust line is to the left of the Geometric Axis 
(Centerline). When this situation occurs, the steering wheel position will be off to the left 
as well. The rear of the vehicle will tend to move to the left which will cause the front of 
the vehicle to steer right, the driver will steerthe vehicle by moving the steering wheel to 
the left to compensate. 

Alignment Procedures 

When performing a wheel alignment, make sure that the thrust angle is as close to zero 
as possible. Failure to do so can result in a steering wheel that is not centered. 


15 

Basic Suspension Geometry 














Wheelbase 

Wheelbase (1) is the distance between the centerline of the two wheels on the same side 
of the vehicle. This is a static measurement which will change when the suspension 
travels on a moving vehicle. 

A vehicle with a long wheelbase is of course larger and more spacious. The ride comfort 
is improved due to less "pitching" motion. In contrast, a vehicle with a shorter wheelbase 
is capable of tighter "cornering". 



Track Width 

Track Width (1) is the distance between the centerline (wheel contact point) of two 
wheels on the same axle. This is also a static measurement which will change during 
vehicle movement. 

A vehicle with an increased "track width" can corner at higher speeds. 




16 

Basic Suspension Geometry 


























17 

Basic Suspension Geometry 




Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What is the main benefit of positive caster? 


2. How is Caster angle measured? 


3. What influence does Camber angle have on tire wear? 


4. Why are Toe angles different on turns? 


5. How does steering roll radius affect directional stability? 


18 

Basic Suspension Geometry 



























Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


6. How is the Included Angle (IA) helpful in diagnosis? 


7. What is the difference between SAI and Camber angle? 


8. What influence will a positive thrust angle have on steering wheel position? 


9. What effect does excessive positive Camber have on directional stability? 


10. What is the toe setting on a rear wheel drive vehicle and why? 


19 

Basic Suspension Geometry 
























