Table of Contents 


BMW Suspension Systems 

Subject Page 

Introduction . .4 

FrontAxle .6 

Single-J oint Spring Strut Axle.6 

E46/E85 Front Suspension.7 

Adjustments .8 

Double Pivot Spring Strut Axle .9 

Double Pivot Operation.11 

Double Pivot Front Axle Configurations.12 

E38 Front Suspension.13 

Front Suspension E6X Vehicles.14 

Sport Activity Vehicles (X3 andX5).15 

3 Series (E9X).16 

Suspension Adjustments (Double pivot front axle) .16 

Rear Axle.18 

Development of BMW Rear Axles .19 

Semi-Trailing Arm Axle (HA I) .20 

Semi-Trailing Arm Axle (with track link - HA II).21 

Adjustment .21 

Central "C" Link Rear Axle (HA-III).22 

E46 Rear Suspension .23 

E85 Rear Suspension .24 

E83 Rear Suspension .25 

Rear Suspension Adjustments (Central Link Axle).26 

RearToe.26 

Rear Camber.26 

Integral Axle (III and IV).27 

E31 Rear Suspension .27 

E 38/E 39 Rear Axle.28 

E39 Sportwagon and X5 (E53) .29 

E6X Rear Suspension .31 

Suspension Adjustments (integral rear axle).32 

HA 5 Rear Axle.33 

HA 5 Axle Layout .34 

HA 5 Links.35 


Initial Print Date:3/06 


Revision Date: 





































Subject 


Page 

Top View of Left Rear Axle.35 

Advantages .36 

Manufacturing Costs.36 

Light Construction .36 

Production .36 

Kinematics.36 

Crash Requirements .37 

Rigidity/Acoustics.37 

Setting .38 












BMW Suspension Systems 

Model: All 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify BMW Suspension Systems 

• Understand BMW Suspension System design 

• Locate suspension adjustments on the front and rear axle 


3 

BMW Suspension Systems 



Introduction 


One of the most overlooked features on a vehicle is the chassis and suspension system. 
Most of the time, people who buy new vehicles are initially attracted to the style of the 
body. Some buyers are interested in the performance of the engine or the convenience 
features such as the audio system etc. 

BMW vehicles are well known for having "cutting edge” engine technology. However, in 
order to be known as the "Ultimate Driving M achine”, it is the chassis that must provide 
the driver with comfort, safety and superior "road-holding” performance. 

Since the most early development period of the automobile, chassis designs have had to 
keep up with the demands of the engine. The chassis and suspension system designs 
have also evolved with increasing demands of the driver and the road conditions. 



4 

BMW Suspension Systems 




























As vehicles get more powerful and demands for ride comfort and driving safety rise, so 
do the demands placed on the modern chassis. 

Requirements of a modern steering system: 

• To ensure steerability in accordance with the driving conditions 

• To provide function, comfort and safety 

• To dampen vibration 

• To convey a confident "road feel” by transferring road surface information to the 
driver 

• To allow sufficient steering wheel return after cornering 

The focus of this training module will be on BMW steering and suspension systems. 
This will include all front and rear axle designs as well as adjustments where applicable. 



5 

BMW Suspension Systems 


Front Axle 


There are two basic front axle designs used on BMW vehicles: 

• Single-J oint Spring Strut Axle 

• Double-Pivot Spring Strut Axle 


Single-J oint Spring Strut Axle 


The "Single-J oint” design has been in use since the introduction of the E30. It is used 
on the E30, E36, E46 and the E85. The design includes a steel axle carrier which allows 
the mounting of the engine mounts, steering rack, sway bar and lower control arm 
mount. 


The axle carrier is bolted to the body structure via 4 bolts. There are two locating dowels 
which provide proper axle location as well as added strength. The "sickle-shaped” lower 
control arm is attached to the axle carrier via a ball joint, there is also an additional rubber 
mount which is attached to the body. The lower control arm also provides the "single¬ 
pivot” point for the steering knuckle. 


The single-joint design has advantages due to it's low weight and compact design. The 
geometry of the single pivot allows fora small positive steering offset, but the size of the 
brake rotor is ultimately limited. However, it is ideally suited for smaller cars such as the 
3-series. 



CD1LS SPRING AND STRUT ASSEMBLE 


LOWE R CONTROL Afl MS 
IWjftH SONE. “Q m ARM, 
BOOMERANGS. ETC) 


FHONTAXLEBEAM 


RACK AND PINION 
STEERING ASSEMBLY 


ANTI-ROLL EAR 


6 

BMW Suspension Systems 






E46/E85 FrontSuspension 

The front suspension on the E46 and E85 is based on the single-joint front suspension 
used on the previous 3-series models (E30/E36). There have been some design 
changes to enhance ride quality and handling characteristics. The changes to the front 
suspension are as follows: 

• A new forged aluminum lower control arm (except Xi). The lighter arm offers a lower 
unsprung mass. 

• The rear lower control arm bushing is hydraulic. 

• Hollow strut piston rods for reduced weight. 

• The steering knuckles are "press-fit” to the strut tubes. 

• The overall caster angle has been increased to improve "straight-line" stability. 

• The track has been widened for improved cornering ability. 

• The brake dust shield are made from aluminum. 

Altogether there is a weight reduction of 5.72 pounds. The is "un-sprung" weight which 
enhances ride comfort and handling. 



E46 FrontSuspension 


7 

BMW Suspension Systems 



■ Adjustments 

There are some limited adjustments on the "Single-J oint” front suspension. Front toe 
is adjustable on all models via the threaded outer tie rod. This can be achieved using 
standard hand tools. 

There are no provisions for Caster adjustment. However, Caster should always be 
checked during the wheel alignment to ensure that there is no damaged components. 

Camber is only adjustable on the E46 and E85. There is a slot in the upper strut tower 
which will allow small camber changes of up to .5 degrees. If the camber adjustment 
cannot be achieved, check for proper ride height and inspect for any suspension damage. 



The illustrations above show the camber adjustment slots and special tool. The proper 
instructions for the camber adjustment can be found in WebTIS Repair Instructions under 
group 32. 

To adjust the camber, loosen 2 of the nuts on the upper strut mount and remove the 
remaining nut. Drive out the pin in the strut plate. Install special tool # 323 140. Turn 
the adjusting nut as needed on the special tool to make camberthe adjustment. 

Note: It may be necessary to unload the suspension to make the needed 
camber adjustment. The weight of the vehicle on the strut plate may 
prevent movement while making the adjustment. Damage to special 
tool can result. 


8 

BMW Suspension Systems 









Double Pivot Spring Strut Axle 

The double-pivot front axle configuration has been in use since the earliest 6 and 7 series 
vehicles were in production (E23/E24). This design is ideally suited for larger cars due to 
its rugged construction. 

The double-pivot front axle is used on the following vehicles: 

• 8 Series - E31 

• 7 Series - All models from the E23 to the current E65/E66 

• 6 Series - Both the E24 and the new E63/E64 

• 5 Series - From the E28 through the current E60/E61 

• 3 Series - This axle is used for the first time starting with the E90 (E91/E92 etc.) 

• X Vehicles - Both the E83 and E53 use this axle with slight modifications forAWD 

One of the primary features that separates this design from the single-joint front axle is 
the lower pivot point. This suspension design consists of one upper pivot (strut bearing) 
and two lower pivot points. The lower pivot is actually two separate points. These two 
points together create an imaginary pivot point or "axis”. 

The design eliminates a single pivot (ball joint), which limits the size of the brake rotor and 
the amount of steering offset (scrub). The steering offset still remains positive, but less 
than that of the single pivot design. 



9 

BMW Suspension Systems 











Additional advantages of double pivot system are: 

• Ability to reduce body roll while cornering. 

• Reduces front end dive tendencies during severe braking situations. 

• Utilization of a small positive steering offset, which offers improved handling. 
This is more evident when the friction levels differ while braking. 

• Improved caster position, improving straight line stability at higher speeds, plus 
better steering return after small steering inputs. 



10 

BMW Suspension Systems 
































































Double Pivot Operation 

The true benefits of the double-pivot suspension become more evident during turns. 

On a traditional single-pivot design, the camber and caster remain static during steering 
maneuvers. On a vehicle with positive caster, the wheels tend to "flop over" during turns. 
This situation reduces the tire contact area with the road and increased the effort required 
for steering wheel return. The steering offset (scrub) also remains fixed which has a neg¬ 
ative impact on steering wheel return as well. 

The double-pivot design allows the the "imaginary" lower pivot pointto change relative 
location during turns. The tire which is on the outside of the turn is carrying the majority 
of the load. Therefore it is the outside tire which must have the most contact area with 
the road surface. 

On a turn, the double-pivot design causes the caster and camber on the outside wheel to 
become closer to zero. This allows the "contact patch" between the tire and the road to 
become optimized. This greatly enhances handling characteristics. 

The body roll is also reduced by the caster change towards zero. One of the other 
benefits of this arrangement is the variable steering offset. The variable steering offset 
during turns provides for better "returnability" of the steering wheel. 

LEFT FRONT WHEEL AS SEEN FROM TOP 

IMAGINARY 
AXIS INTERSECT 



STRAIGHT 


RIGHT TURN 


LEFT TURN 





11 

BMW Suspension Systems 














































■ Double Pivot Front Axle Configurations 

The double pivot axle features an axle carrier, to which the suspension components are 
attached. The carrier also provides the mounting points forthe steering rack, stabilizer 
bar and engine mounts. The carrier is either steel (on the earlier models), or aluminum. 

The aluminum carrier was first used on the E39 six-cylinder (528i) from 1997. The E39 
was the first and only models to have both steel and aluminum carriers. The E39 540 
featured a steel carrier with a steering box (instead of a rack and pinion. Aluminum 
components were used wherever possible on the 540i, except the suspension carrier. 

On the other hand, the E39 528i was equipped with an aluminum carrier and a steering 
rack. 

Since then, all vehicles equipped with the double-pivot suspension utilized the aluminum 
carrier and steering rack configuration. 



12 

BMW Suspension Systems 




















































E38 Front Suspension 

The E38 uses an updated version of the double-pivot suspension as compared to the 
previous 7 series designs (E23/E32). The features of the E38 suspension are as follows: 

• Suspension carrier is made from tubular steel as opposed to stamped steel. 

• Suspension carrier is lighter and can be removed as a complete unit. 

• Design changes allow for largerfront brake rotors. 

• Slight difference in the configuration of the lower control arms. 

• Lower forward control arms are made from forged aluminum. 

• Variable diameter coil springs provide lower profile. 



13 

BMW Suspension Systems 


































Front Suspension E6X Vehicles 

The double-pivot front suspension has been further enhanced since initially introduced. 
The materials used in the front axle carrier offer high tensile strength to support extreme 
loads. The front axle carrier is also manufactured entirely from aluminum. It consists of 
cast alloy preformed sections which are welded into the extruded sections. The front axle 
carrier accommodates the steering gear, control arms and tension struts, engine mounts, 
stabilizer bar, heat shield and the underbody panels. 

An "thrust zone" panel is bolted on to increase the transverse rigidity of the front of the 
vehicle. This reinforcement has a positive effect on the handling, sound level and crash 
performance. The benefits as a result of the improved front axle include increased agility, 
improved comfort by the reduction of unsprung weight, a reduction in fuel consumption 
by lowering the gross vehicle weight and better axle load distribution. 

The front double pivot suspension used since the introduction of the E65/66 includes the 
following: 

• Aluminum front axle carrier 

• "Thrust zone" panel for increased rigidity 

• Aluminum suspension components 

• Aluminum strut tubes 

The front suspension on the E6X vehicles also includes accommodations forthe Active 
Roll Stabilization (ARS) system. 


2) 2) & t) (b b 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stabilizer link 

5 

Tension strut 

2 

Hydro-mount 

6 

Swivel bearing 

3 

Front axle carrier 

7 

Reinforcement plate 

4 

Stabilizer bar 

8 

Control arm 


14 

BMW Suspension Systems 



























Sport Activity Vehicles (X3 and X5) 

The X3 and X5 vehicles use a modified version of the double-pivot front suspension. 
There are modifications to accommodate the front drive axle components. Both the X3 
and X5 use the rack and pinion configuration. There is an aluminum thrust panel which 
helps protect the oil pan and also provides additional stiffening properties for the front 
suspension carrier. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Swivel bearing 

5 

Tension arm 

2 

Anti-roll bar link (attached to strut tube) 

6 

Anti-roll bar 

3 

Thrust panel 

7 

Front axle carrier 

4 

Control arm 

8 

Axle carrier rear mounts 


15 

BMW Suspension Systems 





















3 Series (E9X) 

The E9X vehicles also take advantage of the double-pivot front suspension. Traditionally, 
the 3-series was associated with the single pivot design. This marks the first time that 
the double-pivot design has been used in the 3-series platform. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Front Axle Carrier 

7 

Stabilizer Bar 

2 

Wheel Hub 

8 

Swivel Bearing 

3 

Stabilizer Link 

9 

Hydro-Mount 

4 

Control Arm 

10 

Spring Strut 

5 

Rack-and-Pinion Steering 

11 

Reinforcing Strut 

6 

Tension Strut 




Suspension Adjustments (Double pivot front axle) 

As with all BMW front suspensions, Caster angle is not adjustable. However, during an 
alignment, Caster should always be checked to rule out any damage to the chassis or 
suspension components. 

Camber is adjustable by a slotted strut mounting holes. This adjustment is only 
available on newer vehicles from E53 production. Vehicles which are capable of this 
adjustment include, E53, E65/E66, E60, E63/E64, E90, E91, and E92. 

As with other models, toe is adjustable via the threaded tie rod assembly. 


16 

BMW Suspension Systems 















17 

BMW Suspension Systems 



Rear Axle 


As requirements for improved performance continue to increase, rear axle technology 
must also be continually enhanced. Throughout the development of various BMW 
Group vehicles, the rear axle has continually evolved to meet the overall needs of chassis 
design. 

Throughout the various design changes, rear axles have allowed improvements in trac¬ 
tion and stability. The rear axles have also been "weight optimized” which allows for an 
overall balanced chassis. 

The rear axle designs have also made it possible to decrease changes in rear camber 
and toe during suspension travel. By limiting camber and toe changes, the tire can 
maintain a better contact patch, thereby improving rear end stability and improved tire 
wear. 

E65/E66 Rear axle (Integral IV) shown with ARS and rearair suspension. 



Some of the other improvements to rear axle design include the complete isolation of 
the rear axle through rubber bushings. This decreases the incidence of the transmission 
of road noise to the vehicle occupants and provides superior ride smoothness. 

The chart on the opposing page list the various rear axle designs on BMW vehicles 
through the last few decades of production vehicles. 


18 

BMW Suspension Systems 








Development of BMW Rear Axles 


Rear Axle Designation 

Rear Axle Features 

Models 

HA 1 

Semi-trailing arm axle 

E12, E21, E28, E30, E36/5, E36/7 

HA 2 

Semi-trailing arm axle 
(with track-link) 

E23, E24, E32 and E34 

HA 3 

Central "C" link rear axle 

E36 (Except E36/5 and E36/7), E83 
and E85 

HA 4 

Design Study 

Not used in production vehicles 

N/A 

HA 5 

5-link rear axle 

(Dispersed double control arm axle) 

E90 (E91, E92) 

Integral 1 

Design Study 

Not used in production vehicles 

N/A 

Integral II 

Design Study 

Not used in production vehicles 

N/A 

Integral III 

Integral design with multi-link (5-link) 

E31 

Integral IV 

Steel carrier, with spring on damper 

E38 

Integral IV 

Aluminum carrier, spring on body, 
damper on axle carrier. 

E39 

Integral IV 

Aluminum carrier 

E39/2 (Touring) 

Integral IV 

Steel axle carrier, aluminum link with 
steel wheel carrier, spring and damper 
separated, but still supported on body. 

on body. 

E53 

Integral IV 

Aluminum axle carrier, spring and 
damper on wheel carrier. 

E65/E66 

Integral IV 

Aluminum axle carrier, spring and 
damper on wheel carrier. 

E6X 

(E60, 61, 63 and 64) 


19 

BMW Suspension Systems 


















































Semi-Trailing Arm Axle (HA I) 

The illustration below shows a semi-trailing arm axle used on some of the early BMW 
models. As with all of the rear axle designs covered in this training module, this is a type 
of independent rear suspension. The suspension consists of two trailing arms connected 
to rear axle beam (subframe). 

The final drive and rear axle beam are connected to the unibody structure via three 
rubber mounts. These mounts serve to insulate drivetrain and suspension noises from 
the body structure. 

There are coil springs which are mounted on the trailing arms. The upper portion of the 
coil springs use a rubber insulating pad which rests on the body structure. 

The dampers are mounted to the hub carrier and the upper end attaches to the body. 
There is an "anti-roll” bar which attaches to the control arms via links. 

The trailing arms on this type of suspension travel in a circular path. This causes 
changes to rear camber and rear toe as the suspension travels through "jounce and 
rebound” motions. 

Future variations of BMW suspension system improve this action resulting in less camber 
and toe changes. 



20 

BMW Suspension Systems 














Semi-Trailing Arm Axle (with track link - HA II) 

This rear suspension design is mostly similar to the previous Semi-trailing arm axle. It is 
sometimes referred to as the "screw-link" or "helical-link" axle. The primary change is the 
installation of a "track-link". This limits the total travel arc of the trailing arm from 20 
degrees to 13 degrees. This reduces the camber and toe changes. 

Also, the spring and damper arrangement has been modified. The spring has been 
moved from the trailing arm to the damper. This rear axle is used on the E23, E24, E32 
and E34. 



Adjustment 

Both versions of the semi-trailing arm axle cannot be adjusted via standard methods. If a 
toe correction is required, there are offset bushings available through parts. For more 
information, refer to repair instructions in WebTIS or the Alignment portion of this training 
course. 


21 

BMW Suspension Systems 
















Central "C" Link Rear Axle (HA-III) 

The Central-Link (HA 3) rear axle was introduced on the E36. Some of the other models 
which incorporate this design include the E46 (all), the E85 and E83. This suspension is 
a "multi-link” arrangement which consists of a cast-iron central arm on each side. The 
arm is connected to the body via a rubber bushing for noise and vibration dampening. 

The hub carriers are connected to the suspension system via upper and lower lateral 
links. On the E36, the upper and lower lateral links are made from stamped steel. These 
links connect the hub carriers to differential carrier (subframe). 

The coil springs and anti-roll bar are supported by the upper lateral link. 

The design of this suspension allows for individual tuning of longitudinal and lateral forces 
acting on the vehicle. Longitudinal forces during acceleration and braking are absorbed 
by the central arm. Lateral forces during cornering, are absorbed by the lateral links. 

This suspension design virtually eliminates toe changes while driving. Camber changes 
has also been greatly reduced over previous designs. 


FORWARD CENTRAL 
ARM BUSHINGS 


SPRINGS AND SHOCKS 



22 

BMW Suspension Systems 















E46 Rear Suspension 

The rear suspension design on the E46 is a further development of the "Central Link " 
rear axle. The optimize weight reduction and improve noise characteristics, the following 
modifications have been carried out: 

• The upper lateral link is now made from aluminum 

• The subframe (rear axle carrier) is now made from tubular steel. 

• The differential is mounted to the frame with a hydraulic mount 



23 

BMW Suspension Systems 



E85 Rear Suspension 

The rear suspension on the E85 is taken from the E46 with some minor changes forthe 
roadster. The track width has been increased by 30mm. A reinforcement plate has been 
added to increase rigidity. Due to underbody aerodynamics, a duct has been added to 
direct airflow to the differential. The differential cover has cooling fins to help keep the 
differential within the proper temperature range. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear subframe section 

5 

Reinforcement plate 

2 

Left upper control arm (lateral link) 

6 

Reinforcement support bracket 

3 

Central arm (left) 

7 

Rear subframe mounting bushings 

4 

Lower lateral link (left) 

8 

Central arm bushing (right) 


24 

BMW Suspension Systems 























E83 Rear Suspension 

The Central Link rear suspension has been adapted to the E83. The rear suspension is a 
further modification of the design used on the E46A6 (AWD/xi). 

The E46A6 rear suspension has been adapted to the E83 as follows: 

• Anti-roll bar secured to the rear axle carrier by clamps. 

• Front of rear axle carrier suspension converted to special bolts with additional thrust 
washer. 

• Thrust brace and tension arms. 

• Surface of control arms are galvanized steel plates. 

• Anti-roll bar link with ball joint attached directly to the control arm. 

• Dampers with three point flange (bolt) plate. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Tension arm 

4 

Rear axle carrier (subframe) 

2 

Central arm (right) 

5 

Lower lateral link (left) 

3 

Upper lateral link (right) 

6 

Thrust brace 

4 





Note: When removing or lowering the rear axle, the handbrake cables (routed 
through the rear axle carrier and the body console) must be disengaged 
before the rear axle is lowered. This is to prevent shearing of the hand¬ 
brake cables. 


25 

BMW Suspension Systems 

















Rear Suspension Adjustments (Central Link Axle) 



■ RearToe 

Toe is adjusted by moving the forward central arm bushing mount with a special tool. The 
tool part number varies between models. Tool number 32 3 080 is usedforthe E36. 

The E46, E85 and E83 use tool # 32 3 030. These tools are not used forthe 318ti and 
Z3 as the rear suspensions on the vehicles are different (HA-1). 



Rear Camber 

Rear Camber is adjusted by rotating an eccentric bolt located at the outer end of the rear 
lower lateral link. No Special tools are required to make the Camber adjustment. 


26 

BMW Suspension Systems 

















































Integral Axle (III and IV) 

The "integral axle” is a multi-link rear suspension which was introduced on the E31. 
Subsequent variations of this design have been utilized on the 5 and 7 series vehicles 
including the X5 (E53) and E39 Sportwagon. These suspensions incorporate what is 
called "elastokinematics” that allow each wheel to move and flex individually without loads 
and forces through the subframe to the opposing wheel. 

The integral axle has been used on the following vehicles: 

• E31 (8-series all models) 

• E38 (7-series all models) 

• E39 (5-series all models) 

• E53 (X5 all models) 

• E52 (Z8) 

• All E6X vehicles (including E65, E66, E60, E61, E63 and E64) 

E31 Rear Suspension 

The first BMW vehicle to use the "multi-link” integral rear suspension was the E31. The 
E31 version of this suspension uses a 5-link design ratherthan the subsequent 4-link 
design of later models. 

The "fifth-link” was the trailing arm which was deleted as of the E38 and E39 models. 
The E31 design placed the rear springs between the body and the upper lateral link. 
When introduced, this suspension was very innovative for it's time and provided improved 
directional stability and marked an advance in driving comfort. Future models reaped 
many benefits from this suspension design. 



27 

BMW Suspension Systems 








E38/E39 RearAxle 

The E38 and E39 models use a modified version of the E31 multi-link rear suspension 
system. The system was modified to be more compact yet provide the same handling 
and ride characteristics as the E31 system. 

The trailing arm was eliminated and all suspension mounting is to the sub-frame of the 
vehicle. The springs were moved to the dampers. The changes from the E31 provided 
further improvements to the integral rear axle including weight savings and improved 
noise characteristics. 



HEAR LINK 


WHEEL - HUB 
cab men 


LgAOTNC 

UNK 


LOWER ARM 
CWI5HBQNEJ 

INTEGRAL LINK 


28 

BMW Suspension Systems 





E39 Sportwagon and X5 (E53) 

The rear suspension is the "integral" multi-link design taken from the E38/E39 vehicles. 
Several components are made from aluminum to reduce the unsprung weight. The X5 
has the optional EHC or EHC II dual axle air suspension. 

The rear axle sub-frame is mounted to the body through four bushings (larger than E38) 
for increased load and comfort. The rear differential is mounted through three rubber 
bushings two in the front and one hydromount in the rear. The wheel bearings are similar 
to the E39 but incorporate different seals - designed for off-road use. 



29 

BMW Suspension Systems 

















The E39 Sportwagon shares the same basic rear suspension design as the E53 X5. 

The standard rear suspension of the E39 Sportwagon follows the design characteristics 
of the four link elasto kinematic system of the E 38/E 39 sedan vehicles. 



COIL 

SPRING 


UPPER SHOCK 
ABSORBER MOUNTS 


COIL 

SPRING 


WHEEL 

CARHlER 


SUBfhamE 


SUB FRAME 
HYDRO-MOUNTS KX| 


The main design difference is the separation ofthe coil springs and dampers. 

• The coil springs are positioned between the perches ofthe wheel carriers and the 
underside ofthe rearfloorpan. 

• The shock absorbers are positioned diagonally between the lower lateral control arm 
and the rear axle sub frame. 

This configuration provides the wide, uniform load space in the cargo area. 

Since the shock absorbers are now mounted directly to the sub frame, the sportwagon 
requires unique subframe hydro mounts. The hydro mounts contain a fluid that helps to 
suppress road/suspension noise and vibrations from transmitting into the vehicle body. 

The hydro mounts require new special tools for removal and replacement. Refer to the 
special tools section ofWebTIS for more information. 


30 

BMW Suspension Systems 




E6X Rear Suspension 

The rear suspension of the E6X vehicles which include the 5, 6 and 7 series vehicles has 
remained mostly unchanged. The design is a slightly modified version of the Integral IV 
rear axle from the previous generation 5 and 6 series. 

Provisions have been made to accommodate the Active Roll Stabilization System, the 
rear air suspension system (EHC) and the Electronic Damping Control System (EHC). 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear subframe assembly 

3 

Front differential mounting 

2 

Rear differential mounting 

4 

Thrust plate 


The subframe assembly continues to be made from aluminum. Otherwise, the rear 
suspension is very similarto previous designs. 


31 

BMW Suspension Systems 












Suspension Adjustments (integral rear axle) 

The integral rear axles (III and IV) have accommodations for the adjustment of both rear 
toe and rear camber angle. The adjustments consist of eccentrics that can be adjusted 
using standard hand tools. The only exception is the E53 X5, which due to space limita¬ 
tions needs special wrenches to access the toe eccentric. 



E53 Camber Adjustment E 53 Toe Adjustment 

(other integral axles similar) (other integral axles similar) 



E53 Rear toe adjustment tools 


32 

BMW Suspension Systems 









HA 5 Rear Axle 


The new HA 5 rear axle is the newest development in rear axle technology. This design 
was first introduced on the new 3-Series (E90). Actually, the HA 5 axle was introduced 
on the E87 (1-Series). The E87 is currently not a model sold in the US market. It is 
designed as a multi-link independent rear suspension axle with 5 different link arms. 

The designation "HA 5" does not referto the five links but rather represents the consecu¬ 
tive development designation used at BMW. 

As compared to the HA 3 and HA 4 rear axle, which were made mostly from aluminum, 
the HA 5 rear axle is made primarily from high strength steel. The wheel carrier is cast 
from GGG 40. 



M inor differences exist between the HA 5 versions being used on the E90 variants. 

• On the AWD version the wheel carrier is modified slightly as it utilizes bigger wheel 
bearings. 

• In all variants the rear axle transmission mounting is matched to the relevant 
drivetrain. 


33 

BMW Suspension Systems 



HA 5 Axle Layout 



Z) L '!) 1 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear axle carrier 

6 

Stabilizer link 

2 

Thrust rod 

7 

Toe link 

3 

Traction strut 

8 

Semi-trailing arm 

4 

Wheel hub 

9 

Camber link 

5 

Control arm 

10 

Wheel carrier 



34 

BMW Suspension Systems 
























HA 5 Links 



Top View of Left Rear Axle 

The two upper links (blue in the illustra¬ 
tion) form a triangle in the top view as do 
the two lower links (purple in the illustra¬ 
tion). 

The rear link (orange in the illustration) 
represents the toe rod. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Semi-trailing arm 

4 

Toe link 

2 

Traction strut 

5 

Camber link 

3 

Control arm 




35 

BMW Suspension Systems 














Advantages 

Compared to previous rear axles the HA 5 offers the following advantages: 

Manufacturing Costs 

The lower costs are attributed to the fact that the use of high strength steel has made it 
possible to reduce the wall thicknesses of the rear axle carrier and the links. 

Compared to the integral IV, a considerable cost saving measure has been utilized by 
manufacturing the entire axle from high strength steel plus the weight of the HA 5 rear 
axle is not excessively high. 

Light C onstruction 

A bending moment occurs only in the camber link, as it provides the support function for 
the spring and damper. The remaining four links are not subjected to moments of force 
thereby enabling a lightweight and rigid design. 

Thanks to the straight design of the links and the connection by means of ball joints, 
except for the camber link, the wheel control with this axle is subject to only minimal elas¬ 
ticity and is very precise. 

Production 

The HA 5 rear axle can be completely preassembled and adjusted with the brake system 
as well as the suspension and damping. 

Kinematics 

The very small positive kingpin offset guarantees less sensitivity to longitudinal forces 
even in connection with wide tires. 

The relatively large caster ensures a defined degree of lateral force understeering and 
therefore improves vehicle handling/stabilization and offers faster response. 

The change in toe as part of the suspension action enables outstanding directional stabil¬ 
ity with a relatively short wheelbase and exceptional self-steering characteristics while 
cornering. 

The change in camber as part of the suspension action is selected in orderto establish 
an optimum camber with respect to the road surface while cornering. 

The long toe link has a positive effect on the toe-in characteristics overthe spring 
travel range. 

A low roll center has a particularly beneficial effect on the rolling motion. 

The "propping" effect while cornering has been largely minimized by improving the 
roll center change rate. 


36 

BMW Suspension Systems 



The braking support has been set to 70%. Racing cars generally have a support angle of 
0% in orderto constantly achieve maximum contact force. On these vehicles, the disad¬ 
vantage of a dive motion while braking and starting off is compensated by the taut sus¬ 
pension. The braking support (anti-dive) realized on the E90 represents an optimum 
compromise between comfort, safety and driving dynamics requirements. 

The use of five links enables free selection of the pivot axle forthe design layout. This 
means that the movement of the wheel in interaction with the suspension can be opti¬ 
mized without compromise under braking, acceleration and lateral forces. This largely 
determines all important variables such as toe, camber, brake support (anti-dive) angle, 
roll center and roll center change rate. 

Crash Requirements 

The HA 5 rear axle permits a considerably more favorable progression of the side 
member, resulting in specific advantages particularly at low impact speeds. 

Added to this, the large rear axle carrier is connected directly to the rigid frame side mem¬ 
ber, allowing it to transmit the applied crash forces more favorably. The semi-trailing arm 
features crash beading (in the semi-trailing arm of the HA 5 rear axle) to ensure the fuel 
tank is not damaged. 

Rigidity /Acoustics 

The rear axle carrier of the HA 5 rear axle extends up to the rigid frame side members of 
the body with its axle mounting points and even up to the sill with its thrust rods. This 
provides a very large support face forthe applied forces and moments. The resulting 
advantages include, considerably lower stress and strain on the body (rear axle break¬ 
away) and the option of designing the rear axle bearing mounts relatively soft. This 
arrangement and the double flexible mounting, provide outstanding insulation against 
road noise and tire rolling noise. 


37 

BMW Suspension Systems 



Setting 

Toe and Camber adjustment points: 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Toe adjustment eccentric (no special tools needed) 

2 

Camber adjustment eccentric (no special tools needed) 


38 

BMW Suspension Systems 



























Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. Name some of the disadvantages to the single-pivot front axle? 


2. Of the vehicles that use the single-pivot front axle, which of these have camber 
adjustment capabilities? 


3. On the front axle, which alignment angle is NOT adjustable? 


4. Which suspension systems (front and rear) are used on the new 3-Series (E9X)? 


5. On the HA 5 rear axle, what special tools needed for camber and toe adjustments? 


39 

BMW Suspension Systems 





























40 

BMW Suspension Systems 



