Table of Contents 


Road Force Balancing 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

Basic Tire Balancing.4 

Static Imbalance.4 

Dynamic Imbalance.5 

Residual Imbalance .6 

Balance Weights .6 

Weight Conversion .7 

Runout .8 

Wheel Runout.8 

Lateral Runout (Rim).9 

Tire Runout.10 

Radial Runout (Tire).10 

Lateral (Axial) Runout.11 

Component Runout.11 

Radial Force Variation.12 

Vibration Diagnosis .14 

Harmonics.16 

First Order Harmonics.16 

Second Order Harmonics.17 

Third Order Harmonics .17 

Tips on using the GSP9700 Wheel Balancer.18 


Initial Print Date: 3/06 


Revision Date: 
























Road Force Balancing 

Model: All 

Production: All 

■MICTIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the Causes ofVibration 

• Diagnose and Correct Wheel Balancing Concerns 

• Operate the GSP9700BM W Road Force Wheel Balancer 


2 

Road Force Balancing 


Introduction 


Today, there are ever increasing expectations by the driver regarding ride quality and 
smoothness. Every BMW vehicle is well known for it's superior handling and ride quality. 
So, when this ride quality is compromised by vibration, an accurate diagnosis and timely 
repair is the primary goal. 

To improve fuel economy and reduce emissions, many of the vehicle components have 
been weight optimized. Some of these weight reduction techniques involve suspension 
components such as strut housings and control arms. These components are now 
made from aluminum ratherthan steel or cast iron. The aluminum components work 
well for reducing weight, but they do not have the same dampening properties as the 
iron or steel components. 

Therefore, procedures such as wheel balancing have become much more important in 
recent years. The GSP97BMW wheel balancer features "Road Force Measurement” 
technology which allows the tire and wheel assembly to measured while "loaded". This 
allows "radial force" variations to be measured and corrected. 

This training module is designed to help the technicians understand the potential causes 
of vehicle vibration as well as the best methods to correct these concerns. 



3 

Road Force Balancing 















Basic Tire Balancing 


Static Imbalance 

"Static Imbalance”, as the name implies , indicates that the tire and wheel assembly is in 
a state of imbalance when standing still. Therefore, there is a "heavy spot” which would 
cause the tire to come to rest in the same position. M any years ago, tires were balanced 
using a "bubble balancer" and weight was added to restore the tire to a "statically bal¬ 
anced" condition. 

When a tire and wheel assembly is statically imbalanced, the tire and wheel assembly will 
tend to travel in an "up and down" motion. This causes the tire and wheel to "bounce" 
on the pavement when the vehicle is moving. In extreme cases the wheel assembly can 
leave the road surface. This causes a vibration which is transferred to the drivervia the 
chassis and suspension components. Also, the tire will wear and create a "cupping" 
pattern on the tire tread surface. 

As far as balancing is concerned, static balancing procedures are no longerthe accepted 
method for balancing tire and wheel assemblies. Static balancing can only correctfor 
imbalances on one plane. This is only effective if the imbalance were only nearthe 
centerline. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

40 gram static imbalance 

2 

20gram (x2) balance weight for correction 


4 

Road Force Balancing 








Dynamic Imbalance 

As compared to static imbalance, dynamic imbalances pertain to situations present 
during vehicle movement. Also, two planes of weight correction are considered. When 
mass (weight) is unevenly distributed across two planes, the resulting force tends to 
cause the tire and wheel assembly to "wobble". This motion is in a lateral direction which 
causes a steering wheel "shimmy". 

Aside from the obvious potential customer complaint, the "shimmy" caused by a dynamic 
imbalance can cause wear and tear on the tires and suspension components including 
wheel bearings and steering linkage. 

If a wheel and tire assembly with a dynamic imbalance is installed on the front of the 
vehicle, the effect is usually noticed right away. When installed on the rear of the vehicle, 
the vibration is somewhat dampened by the rigidity of the rear axle. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

25 gram dynamic imbalance 

3 

30 gram dynamic imbalance 

2 

25 gram balance weight for correction 

4 

30 gram balance weight for correction 


5 

Road Force Balancing 









Residual Imbalance 


Fortechnical reasons, a tire and wheel assembly cannot be "perfectly" balanced. 
Therefore, there is a maximum allowable residual imbalance which is acceptable for 
smooth running performance. The maximum values are as follows: 

• Less than 15 grams (1/2 ounce) for residual static imbalance 

• Less than 7.5 grams (1/4 ounce) per plane for residual dynamic imbalance 

These values are usually the default values programmed into most wheel balancers. 
Depending upon the type of wheel balancing equipment used, these values can be 
altered (low or high). This is usually not recommended unless required due to a specific 
concern. 

Balance Weights 

In orderto correct imbalances, balance weights must be used. Today there are many 
types of balance weights used doe to the different wheel rim styles in use. M ost wheel 
weights are made from lead, but due to recent legislation regarding lead safety, many 
wheel weights available through the BMW parts system are be made from zinc. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

One-piece clip-on (hammer-on) balance weight 

2 

Clip (clamp) 

3 

2-piece wheel weight for use with above clip (#2) 

4 

Adhesive Weight 

5 

Adhesive Weight 


6 

Road Force Balancing 









When installing wheel weights, be aware that there are various mounting procedures for 
different weights. Do not try to install incorrect wheel weights, cosmetic damage to the 
wheel may occur. Also, the weights may come loose and cause an unnecessary return 
visit. 

For example, wheels which have a smooth rim flange should only use adhesive weights. 
Depending on the rim style and offset, the adhesive weights can be installed on the inner 
and/or outer area of the rim. 

Clip on weights can only we used on steel wheels or aluminum wheels which have the 
necessary flange configuration. Two-pieces weight need to be installed with a special 
tool to prevent rim damage. 

Weight C onversion 

Wheel weights available from BMW are marked in grams and range in size from 5 to 60 
grams. Forthe purposes of weight conversion, 1000 grams is equal to 2.2 pounds (or 
approximately 35 ounces). The chart below represents some conversion values. 


Weight in Grams 

Actual Weight Conversion 

Comparable Wheel Weight 

(decimal ounces) 

Fractional Ounces (rounded off) 

5 grams 

0.176 ounces 

1/4 ounce 

7.5 grams 

0.2645 ounces 

1/4 ounce 

10 grams 

0.3527 ounces 

1/4 ounce 

12.5 grams 

0.4409 ounces 

1/2 ounce 

15 grams 

0.5291 ounces 

1/2 ounce 

17.5 grams 

0.6172 ounces 

1/2 ounce 

20 grams 

0.7054 ounces 

3/4 ounce 

22.5 grams 

0.7936 ounces 

3/4 ounce 

25.0 grams 

0.8818 ounces 

3/4 ounce 

27.5 grams 

0.970 ounces 

1 ounce 

30 grams 

1.058 ounces 

1 ounce 

32.5 grams 

1.146 ounces 

1 ounce 

35 grams 

1.234 ounces 

1 1/4 ounce 

40 grams 

1.410 ounces 

1 1/2 ounce 

45 grams 

1.587 ounces 

1 1/2 ounce 

50 grams 

1.763 ounces 

1 3/4 ounce 

55 grams 

1.940 ounces 

2 ounces 

60 grams 

2.116 ounces 

2 ounces 


7 

Road Force Balancing 






























































Runout 


Another method for checking tire and wheel irregularities is by checking runout. Runout 
is an indication of an out-of-round condition or a variation in the projected movement of 
an object. 

Runout can be checked using a dial indicator orthe GSP97BMW Road Force Wheel 
Balancer. As far as wheel and tire assemblies are concerned, radial and lateral runout can 
be checked on the wheel and tire individually or as an assembly. 

In orderforthe tire and wheel assembly to be optimized for smooth running, it is very 
important that the wheel (rim) is within specification. Once the tire is mounted to the rim, 
the tire will conform to the shape of the wheel. In other words, if the wheel is "egg- 
shaped", then the tire will be egg-shaped. 

The wheel can be checked for lateral and radial runout using a dial-indicator. 

Wheel Runout 

When checking for radial runout on a wheel rim, the maximum specification is 1.1 mm for 
one-piece aluminum wheels. The radial runout should be checked on both bead seating 
areas. The most accurate method for checking radial runout on a wheel is to dismount 
the tire. However, if the wheel has a sufficient flange area, the radial runout can be 
measured as shown below. 

Note: Always check the runout specifications in WebTIS forthe most accurate 
specification. 



8 

Road Force Balancing 




Excessive radial runout can caused conditions similarto a static imbalance. Radial force 
variations are also affected. 

Lateral Runout (Rim) 

The maximum lateral (axial) runout on a one-piece aluminum wheel is 1.3 mm. This can 
also be checked using a dial indicator as shown below. Referto Technical Data and 
Repair Instructions in Group 36 for more information on checking wheel and tire runout. 



9 

Road Force Balancing 




Tire Runout 

Once the tire has been mounted to the wheel, tire runout can be checked radially and 
laterally (axially). This is an "unloaded" measurement which does not take into account 
radial force variation (or lateral force variation). Radial force variations can only be 
measured when the tire is loaded which is only possible using the GSP97BM W wheel 
balancer. 

Radial Runout (Tire) 

On a tire mounted on a one-piece aluminum wheel, the maximum radial runout is 1.1mm. 
The tire and wheel assembly should be mounted on a "spin-type" balancer or on the 
vehicle. Be aware that any wheel bearing or hub irregularities may affect this measure¬ 
ment. Be sure the check for wheel bearing play or hub runout. 

Note: Referto Technical Data and Repair Instructions in Group 36 for more 
information on checking wheel and tire runout. 



10 

Road Force Balancing 




Lateral (Axial) Runout 

Lateral runout measurements are an indication of possible broken belts in the tire. Aside 
from possible vibration issues, excessive lateral runout can cause a pull to one side. The 
maximum allowable lateral (axial) runout is 1.3 mm. 

Note: Referto Technical Data and Repair Instructions in Group 36 for more 
information on checking wheel and tire runout. 



Component Runout 

In addition to tires and wheels, there are other components which can contribute to 
vibration issues. Wheel bearings, hub assemblies and rotors should be checked for 
excessive play and runout. 



11 

Road Force Balancing 






Radial Force Variation 


Radial force variations are caused by non-uniform stiffness in the tire sidewall. This varia¬ 
tion can be best illustrated by imagining a series of springs around the circumference of 
the tire sidewall. If these "springs" were of equal force, the tire would roll evenly across 
the road surface when underload. However, if one or more of these springs were "stiffer" 
than the rest, the tire would not roll evenly. This would cause a noticeable vibration. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

"Soft spots” in the tire sidewall 

2 

"Hard spots" in the tire sidewall 


The causes of radial force fluctuation lie in the manufacturing and processing of the many 
different components in the tire. Components such as casing plies, belt plies and con¬ 
tact surfaces, etc. are combined in a tire press to make the tire blank. 

Manufacturing and assembly differences arise during this process. If the differences are 
too large, harder and softer spots occur along the tire periphery. As a result, the tire does 
not flex evenly around the entire circumference. 

When radial force fluctuations occur, this will have the same effect as a static imbalance. 
However, tire irregularities not only cause steering wheel wobble and vibrations, they also 
contribute to noises such as drumming, rumbling and jolting. 


12 

Road Force Balancing 








Radial force variations cannot be detected by standard wheel balancing equipment. This 
is due to the fact that standard wheel balancing equipment only measures the tire and 
wheel assembly in an "unloaded" state. When a tire and wheel assembly is dynamically 
balanced, this does not mean the the radial force variation is within specification. 



Also, checking the radial runout of the tire (when unloaded) does not give and indication 
of radial force fluctuations. The only method to accurately check for radial force variations 
is to use the GSP97BM W wheel balancer. 

The GSP97BM W wheel balancer uses a load roller assembly to apply pressure to the tire 
and wheel assembly to simulate "on the road" conditions. The radial force variation is 
calculated during this process. 



Lateral as well as radial force fluctuations occur. These can be traced through the side¬ 
ways wobble of the wheel. Lateral means sideways. Lateral force fluctuations have less 
of an effect on harmonics than radial force fluctuations. 

Tire which have excessive radial force variations must be replaced. However, tires which 
have small amounts of radial force fluctuations can be optimized by using the Hunter 
GSP97BM W Road Force Wheel Balancer. (This will be covered in more detail laterin this 
training course). 


13 

Road Force Balancing 








Vibration Diagnosis 

Vibration, by definition is a recurring motion which is referenced to a central position. In 
the case of a tire and wheel assembly, a wheel with excessive radial runout rotates around 
a fixed central point (wheel bearing). If the wheel is somewhat "egg-shaped", the tire will 
conform to this shape. When traveling on the road, the tire assembly will cause a vibra¬ 
tion at a frequency proportional to road speed. For example, the vibration frequency will 
increase with road speed. 

In automotive applications, vibrations can be classified into two basic categories: 

• Forced Vibrations - A forced vibration is caused by an object which is rotating. An 
example of forced vibration is any engine driven component, the wheel and tire 
assemblies or any electric motors. 

• Free Vibration - This is usually caused by an irregularity in the road surface. A 
pothole, crack or expansion joint in the roadway can cause a momentary jolt which 
stimulates an oscillation. This oscillation can affect suspension components, sheet 
metal in the body, exhaust system components orthe steering wheel. The notable 
characteristic of this type of vibration is that the vibration (or noise) dissipates quickly. 
This type of vibration is not a common as a forced vibration. 

When diagnosing forced vibrations, there are some helpful terms which pertain to how to 
classify the frequency or intensity of the vibration. These terms include: 

• Cycle - A cycle is an event or disturbance. Using an example of a static imbalance, 
every time the imbalance creates a vibration, this is considered one cycle. 

• Frequency - The common unit of measurement forfrequency is Hertz (Hz). Hertz 
indicates how many cycles per second an event occurs. Therefore, an event that 
occurs at a rate of 50 cycles per second is otherwise known as 50 Hertz. 

• Amplitude - The intensity or harshness level of a vibration. 

• Natural Frequency - This is the frequency at which a given object will vibrate most 
easily. For example, a tuning fork will vibrate when struck at a certain frequency. 

This will be very consistent. A vehicle chassis can vibrate at a rate of 10 to 50 Hz. 
Some of the factors that contribute to the natural frequency are the type of suspen¬ 
sion, the tires and the weight of the vehicle. 


14 

Road Force Balancing 



When diagnosing vibration complaints, there are three basic components of a vibration 
which should be considered. Not all vibrations are caused by imbalanced wheel and tire 
assemblies. Some of these vibrations could originate from engine, flywheel or driveline 
irregularities. 

The three components of a vibration are as follows: 

• Source - The vibration source, usually pertains to the rotating component. This 
includes tire and wheel assemblies, engines or engine driven accessories. 
Sometimes, the source is not the root cause of the complaint. For example, some 
engine have characteristic vibrations which should be dampened by the engine 
mounts. Therefore, a defective engine mount can be the root cause, not the engine 
itself. 

• Transfer Path - Transfer path is the pathway between the source and the respond¬ 
ing component. For example, the engine mount can be considered, the transfer 
path. As given in the example above, the transfer path must be considered during 
the diagnosis of a "rough" running engine. Other examples of transfer paths 
include; the center support bearing on the driveshaft, the strut assemblies, transmis¬ 
sion mount orthe steering column. 

• Responding Component - The responding component is the item that the driver 
notices. For example, a dynamic imbalance on one of the front wheels would cause 
a steering wheel vibration. So, in this case, the steering wheel is the responding 
component. 




Vibration Source - Wheel with dynamic imbalance 


Transfer Path - 
Through steering linkage, 
rack and pinion unit to 
steering column 


Responding component- 
Steering wheel exhibits 
"shimmy" condition. 


15 

Road Force Balancing 



Harmonics 

Harmonics refers to the number of occurrences per revolution. They are classified as 
First Order(RlH), Second Order (R2H) and Third Order (R3H) harmonics. The complete 
spectrum of harmonics can be measured from R1H through R15H, howeverthis requires 
special equipment. Forthe purposes of vibration diagnosis in a workshop environment, 
the GSP97BMW Road Force Wheel balancer is only capable of R1H through R4H. The 
major source of concerns regarding vibration occur in R1H through R3H range. 

First Order Harmonics 

Harmonics in the first order occur once per revolution. An example of this would be a 
wheel with a static imbalance or excessive radial force variation. Imagine a tire with a 
"hard spot" rotating on a vehicle. The hard spot would have an effect only once per 
revolution. A tire or wheel with an excessive "unloaded" radial runout can also influence 
first order harmonics. 


IMBALANCE 


RADIAL RUNOUT 



RADIAL 



UPWARD 

FORCE 





16 

Road Force Balancing 




















Second Order Harmonics 

Second Order vibrations occurtwice per revolution. For example, a tire which is "egg- 
shaped" would have two occurrences per revolution. This can be caused by tire and/or 
wheels which excessive radial runout. Also, loaded tires with excessive radial force 
variation (RFV) can cause 2nd order harmonics. 


RADIAL RUNOUT 




Third Order Harmonics 

Harmonics in the third order occurs 3 times per revolution. Damaged wheels with 
excessive radial runout (triangular shaped) can cause this condition. Tires which are 
"flat-spotted" in multiple locations can show up during the Road Force balancing 
procedures. Usually, 3rd order harmonics are caused by damaged wheel assemblies. 


RADIAL RUNOUT 


OUT-OF-ROUND 


TIRE 

2 



OUT-OF-ROUND 


RIM 

2 



RADIAL FORCE 
VARIATION 


FORCE VARIATION 



17 

Road Force Balancing 





















Tips on using the GSP9700 Wheel Balancer 

The GSP 9700 BMW Road Force Wheel Balancer is capable of solving many vibration 
issues related to tire and wheel assemblies. However, certain concerns must be 
observed to get the most out of this equipment. 

The following is a list of hints and tips to ensure accurate results: 

• Tires should be warmed up to remove temporary flat spots priorto balancing. For 
example, of a vehicle is left overnight fortesting, it is possible to have temporary flat 
spots on the tire. This would show up as excessive radial force variation. Always 
warm up the tires by road testing for a least 5-10 minutes at highway speed. 

• Verify that the wheel is mounted on the wheel balancer properly. T he balancer has a 
"centering check" feature if needed. 

• Use the proper mounting hardware for the balancer. Use only the specified cones 
and adapters provided by the manufacturer. 

• BMW wheels are “hub-centric". This means that the primary reference for the wheel 
centering is the hub. Use of the improper wheel with excessive hub tolerance can 
result in an vibration which is not correctable. 

• Tire and wheel assembly must be free of debris. M ud and rocks should be removed 
from the tire tread before balancing. 

• If it is not possible to measure the runout on the bead seating area of a wheel due to 
wheel design, then the tire should be removed from the rim. 

• Do not replace a tire based on the radial force measurements alone. Use the Force 
Matching and Matchmaker features ofthe GSP97BMW Wheel balancerto optimize 
the tire and wheel assemblies and reduce vibration. There is no set specification for 
Road Force which will condemn the tire. 

• Always be sure to check for correct tire mounting. Ifthe bead ofthe tire in not 
seated correctly, the Road Force measurements may be affected. When mounting 
the tire to the wheel, be sure to use sufficient lubrication. Do not use silicone, this 
could cause the tire and wheel to slip on the rim during hard braking. 

• M ake sure that the tire is inflated to the correct specification as per manufacturers 
guidelines. Check the b-pillar inflation placard for exact tire pressure. 

• Bure sure to keep the wheel balancer maintained in proper working order. Clean 
cones, adapters and balancer shaft according to maintenance schedule. Replace 
any damaged accessories with Hunter approved components. 

• Periodically perform calibration checks on the wheel balancerto achieve the most 
accurate and consistent results. 


18 

Road Force Balancing 




19 

Road Force Balancing 




Workshop Exercise - Road Force Balancing 


Go to the "calibration screen" and perform calibration. 

Mount a designated tire and wheel assembly using proper procedures. 
Which cone (adapter) should be used on BMW wheels? (and why?) 


Perform "centering check" and adjust as necessary. 

Once the "centering check" is complete access the "balance mode" using the soft 
keys. 

Select tire configuration (P, SUV, LT etc.) using the control knob. Make sure the load 
roller is enabled. 

Enter the wheel weight configuration and complete the chart below: 


Weight 

type 

(circle one) 
Clip on 
Tape 



Weight 

type 

(circle one) 
Clip on 
Tape 


20 

Road Force Balancing 













Workshop Exercise - Road Force Balancing 


Continue by entering rim dimensions using the "dataset" arms. 


Check and adjust tire pressure. 


Where can the correct tire pressure specifications be found? 


Why is it important to set the tire assembly to correct pressure? 


Lower the hood and proceed with balancing procedure. Record results below: 

Road Force lbs 



21 

Road Force Balancing 


















Workshop Exercise - Road Force Balancing 


Install needed weight and re-check. 

Remove weight and re-install using the "Split Spoke" feature. Also, use the 
servo-aided weight installation feature. 

Re-check balance. 

What does the "road force” number indicate? 


Is there a specific specification for road force? NO 


Continue with balancing procedure on additional tire assemblies (4) using the 
"S traightT rak® " feature. 

After checking all 4 tires using the "StraightTrak® " feature, select the "vehicle Plan 
View" and note the recommended tire placement. 

Select all of the possible placements, such as "Least Pull", "Least Vibration" and 
"Alternate Placements". 

Which tire (tag number) has the most road force? 


Is there anything that seems consistent regarding the tire with the most road force? 


22 

Road Force Balancing 



Workshop Exercise - Road Force Balancing 

Install a bare rim assembly on the balancer and perform the runout measurement. 
What is the maximum runout on the left and right tire bead? 

Does this rim assembly have any excessive runout or harmonics? (if so, what are they) 

Is this rim a candidate for "Force M atching"? 

When would it be necessary to measure the runout on a bare rim? 


Is it possible to measure rim runout with a tire installed? 



23 

Road Force Balancing 





Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What is the difference between a static and a dynamic imbalance? 


2. How are BMW wheels centered on the vehicle (hub or lug-centric)? Explain 
answer. 


3. Why is the "loaded" radial runout measurement of a tire considered more 
conclusive than an "unloaded" radial runout measurement? 


4. What is meant by residual imbalance? What are the maximum thresholds for 
residual imbalance? 


5. What is "Force M atching"? 


24 

Road Force Balancing 



























Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


6. What are the specifications for "maximum road force" on a BMW? 


7. When balancing tires on a vehicle, should the vehicle be driven to warm up the 
tires or should the tires be balanced cold? Explain answer. 


8. What is the purpose of the "M atchmaker" (feature on the GSP97BM W? 


9. Where can the correct tire inflation pressures be found? 


10. What is the purpose of the "StraightT rak ® LFM "feature on the GSP97BM W? 


25 

Road Force Balancing 

























