Table of Contents 


Basic Measuring Techniques 

Subject Page 

Basic Engine Measurements.3 

Vernier Measurement .4 

Micrometer Measurements.6 

Metric Micrometer Construction .6 

Dial Indicator Measurements.10 

Examples of Dial Indicator Measurements .11 

Additional Engine Measurements.14 

Cylinder Head Measurement .14 

Piston Measurements.16 

Piston Ring Measurements.17 

Cylinder Bore .18 

Metric System.20 

Metric System Denominations.20 

Metric Reference Chart .21 

Metric System Conversion Charts.22 

Pressure Conversion Chart .23 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 Revision Date: 



















Basic Measuring Techniques 


Model: All 

IBIICT1UIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Use basic measuring tools 

• Perform basic engine measurements 


• Understand metric measurements 


2 

Basic Measuring Techniques 


Basic Engine Measurements 

During the course of engine repairs some basic engine measurements are reguired to 
verify engine diagnosis as well as to complete proper repairs. These measurements are 
made by precision measuring tools such as micrometers, Vernier calipers, cylinder bore 
gauges and dial indicators. 



Also, a working knowledge of the metric system is also a vital skill that is needed by the 
technician. All BMW engine measurements consist of metric specifications. Some of 
the routine engine measurements performed include: 

• Valve Guide Wear (Tilt Angle K) 

• Cylinder Bore Measurements (Taper and Out-of-Round) 

• Cylinder Head Warpage and Thickness 

• Axial and Radial Endplay Measurements (Crankshaft/Camshaft etc). 

Among all of the skills possessed by a modern technician, basic measuring technigues 
are perhaps the most overlooked and least used. This is why it is important to review 
these skills from time to time as a refresher. 

Also, it is necessary to access technical data to obtain the proper specifications for these 
measurements. This course is designed to review measuring technigues to assist in 
engine diagnosis. 


3 

Basic Measuring Techniques 



Vernier Measurement 


The Vernier scale is used on various measuring tools such as the Vernier caliper and the 
Depth Gauge. The Vernier scale can be used with Fractional (US) and Metric systems. 
For the purposes of this training module we will always refer to the Metric Vernier scale. 


The Vernier scale consists of a fixed scale and a sliding scale. The fixed scale is divided 
with graduations in 1 millimeter increments. The sliding scale has 10 graduations in 
increments of .5. 



In order to read a measurement, use the zero mark on the left end of the vernier scale to 
use as a guide to read a measurement on the fixed scale. 


In the example shown at the right, the zero 
mark is resting between 26 and 27 mm. 
Therefore the base measurement is 26 mm. 

Next, the decimal measurement must be 
taken. For this, find a line on the Vernier that 
most closely matches any line on the fixed 
scale. 

Using the example drawing, the “4” on the 
Vernier scale is lining up directly with a line on 
the fixed scale. 

Combining the previous reading with this read¬ 
ing, the result would be 26.4 mm. 



The designations on the Vernier scale are in increments of .5. For example, if a reading on 
the Vernier scale falls on the .5 (i.e. 2.5, 3.5 etc) designation this would indicate 5/1 OOth’s 
of a millimeter. 


4 

Basic Measuring Techniques 






























































djj Classroom Exercise - Vernier Readings 


Fill in the correct Vernier scale readings in the spaces provided below. 

Vernier 1 Vernier 2 




Vernier 3 




1 

y 




14 

ii mill 


1.5 1.6 

111 1 1111 1 1111 1 in 

,,jL 

1.8 1.9 

.Liiliiiiliiniw 



m r 

i r 


0 12 3 

4 5 6 7 

8 9 10 

L 

\ 


Vernier Reading 3: 


Vernier 4 




i 


1 



7 

liiiliii 


2.8 2.9 

1 111 1 1 111 1 1 111 1 1 11 

3.0 

1 1 1 1 1 1 II 

1 1 1 1111 1 1111 1 1111 1 1111 


1 1 1 

n T r 

i i 


0 12 3 

^ L 

4 5 6 7 

9 10 

\ 


Vernier Reading 4: 


5 

Basic Measuring Techniques 




























































































































































Micrometer Measurements 

Another valuable measuring tool is the micrometer, which can be used for measurements 
such as bearing journal diameter, cylinder head thickness, valve shim thickness and brake 
rotor thickness etc. Micrometers also come in configurations for inside measurements as 
well. 

The micrometer scale comes in both fractional and metric varieties. We will cover only 
the metric micrometer scale in this course. 

First you must familiarize yourself with the construction of the micrometer in order to 
understand how measurements are made. 

Metric Micrometer Construction 

The micrometer is constructed of a few basic parts. The actual item to be measured is 
placed between the anvil and the spindle. The micrometer can be adjusted to the 
approximate size using the thimble. The thimble should only be used for the coarse 
adjustment. In order to make the actual measurement, the micrometer should only be 
turned using the ratchet (a.k.a. the friction stop). Do not attempt to make a measurement 
using the thimble. This will give an inaccurate measurement and ultimately damage the 
micrometer. 



Micrometers are available in various sizes for outside as well as inside measurements. 
The more common variation is the outside micrometer. They are usually available in 25 
millimeter increments such as 0-25 mm, 25-50 mm, 50-75 mm etc.. 


6 

Basic Measuring Techniques 




The metric micrometer can measure in increments of one hundredth of a millimeter 
(.01 mm). One hundredth of a millimeter is equal to 0.0003937 inch which is less than 
one thousandth of an inch. 

The measurement area of the micrometer consists of the sleeve scale and the thimble 
scale. The sleeve scale is used to read whole and half millimeters. The thimble scale 
(which rotates) reads in hundredths (.01) of a millimeter from zero to fifty. Two complete 
revolutions of the thimble equals one millimeter. 

On the sleeve scale, each scale mark above the center line indicates whole millimeters. 
Below the center line, half of a millimeter (or ,5mm) increments are indicated. 



Using the example shown above, the micrometer is a 125-150mm micrometer. To read 
this micrometer, first take the basic reading from the sleeve scale. The thimble is past the 
139 mm mark. Therefore the reading is a least 139 mm. Next, look at the thimble scale 
and note the reading on the centerline. The “10” on the thimble scale is lined up with the 
centerline. This indicates a reading of .10 mm. If you add the two readings; 139 + .10 = 
139.10 mm. 


7 

Basic Measuring Techniques 












- j j i Classroom Exercises - Micrometer Measurements 

Fill in the correct micrometer readings in the spaces provided below. 



Micrometer Reading 1: 


Micrometer Reading 2: 



Micrometer Reading 3: 


Micrometer Reading 4: 


8 

Basic Measuring Techniques 


































Workshop Exercise - Micrometer Measurements 


Using the instructor designated components, take indicated measurements and 
complete the table below using your results. 


Measurement 

Description 

(Application) 

Specification 

Actual Reading 

Main Bearing Journal 




Rod Journal 




Cylinder Head Thickness 




Valve Shim 




Piston Diameter 





9 

Basic Measuring Techniques 















Dial Indicator Measurements 

The dial indicator is used to measure the travel or movement of a specific item. It can 
also be used to measure axial and radial runout. In engine measurement applications, the 
dial indicator can be used to measure valve guide wear, axial movement of the crankshaft 
(thrust), and runout of flywheels and harmonic balancers. 

First, it is important to familiarize yourself with Dial Indicator construction. The face of the 
dial indicator consists of a moveable bezel which is also attached to the large measuring 
scale. This allows the tool be be brought to the “zero point” when needed. 


The main measuring device is the contact 
point. The contact point (1) is placed against 
the object to be measured. Usually, the con¬ 
tact point is rounded or has a ball bearing. 

This allows for a more accurate measurement. 

The measuring face of the dial indicator 
consists of 2 scales. The smaller scale is for 
the ‘coarse” measurement which is in gradua¬ 
tions of 1 millimeter. One revolution of the 
small scale is 10 millimeters. 

The large scale is in graduations of .01 mil¬ 
limeter and the scale goes from zero to one 
hundred. Therefore, one revolution of the 
large scale is one millimeter. 

The dial indicator also needs to be held in 
place when taking a measurement. This 
requires a stand or base. Depending upon 
the application, these stands can be a clamp 
type, magnetic or a threaded base. 

When taking a measurement, place the con¬ 
tact point on the object to be measured. The 
dial indicator must be pre-loaded slightly to 
prevent the measurement from bottoming 
out. 

When reading the scale, be sure to “zero” the 
dial indicator first. If the readings to be taken 
are less than 1 millimeter, you do not need to 
use the small scale. If the readings are larger 
than 1 millimeter, be sure to factor the small 
scale into your measurement. 




10 

Basic Measuring Techniques 





Examples of Dial Indicator Measurements 




S62 Engine - Basic Throttle Setting 



11 

Basic Measuring Techniques 










- j j i Classroom Exercise - Dial Indicator Measurements 

Compare the dial indicator readings, and determine the total travel. Record your 
results below in the spaces provided. 

Dial indicator A Dial indicator B 




What is the difference (total travel) between dial indicator A and dial indicator B? 


Dial indicator C Dial indicator D 




What is the difference (total travel) between dial indicator C and dial indicator D? 


12 

Basic Measuring Techniques 



































































Workshop Exercise - Dial Indicator Measurements 


Using the instructor designated dial indicator, measure the indicated components 
and complete the table below using your results. 


Measurement 

Description 

Specification 

Actual Reading 

Tilt Angle “K” 




Crankshaft Endplay 




Other 




Other 





13 

Basic Measuring Techniques 














Additional Engine Measurements 

During engine repair procedures it is sometimes necessary to assess engine wear to 
make determinations on parts replacement. Also, some engine measurements are need¬ 
ed to verify a previous diagnosis. 

For example, a cylinder leakdown test could indicate a cylinder sealing concern. Once 
the engine is disassembled, it would be necessary to verify this condition by checking the 
piston and piston ring condition. If OK, the next step would be to determine the condition 
of the cylinder bore. At this point, the cylinders should be checked for taper (conicity) and 
for out-of-round. The correct measurements could mean the difference between just 
replacing the rings and/or pistons or replacing the engine block. This is why it is neces¬ 
sary to make accurate measurements when needed. 

Some of the other routine engine measurements include: 

• Cylinder head warpage 

• Cylinder head thickness (on some applications) 

• Piston rings - end gap and axial clearance 

• Cylinder bore - including out-of-round and taper 

Cylinder Head Measurement 

If a repair reguires removal of the cylinder head, a few basic measurements can be 
performed to save time and unnecessary machine shop costs. If an engine has been 
overheated or has an internal or external fluid leakage (coolant/oil), it is a good idea to 
check the cylinder head for warpage. 

This can be done by using a commercially available machinists straight edge and a feeler 
gauge, by sliding the feeler gauge under the straight edge in various locations, it can 
determine if there are any low spots or warpage. The specifications for warpage are 
found in WebTIS under Technical Data. Usually, the specification is about .05 mm. 



14 

Basic Measuring Techniques 




Also, check to see if the cylinder head has a specification for machining limit. If so, it may 
be possible to have the cylinder head re-surfaced. Depending on the amount of material 
removed during the machining process, it may be necessary to install a thicker head 
gasket. There are some “service” head gaskets available through the part s department. 

The cylinder head can be checked for minimum thickness. This is done using a microm¬ 
eter or a vernier caliper. This is not possible on all engines, the example shown below is a 
6-cylinder (M52TU/M54). 

If the minimum thickness is not met, the head will need to be replaced. 



15 

Basic Measuring Techniques 










Piston Measurements 

When replacing pistons and/or piston rings, there are some basic measurements that 
need to be made. When fitting a piston to a cylinder bore, the piston diameter should be 
checked to ensure a proper fit. 

The piston diameter is measured using a micrometer. The measurement is taken at a 
specified point (A) which is 90 degrees from the piston pin axis. Each engine has a spe¬ 
cific location to measure piston diameter. For example, the illustration below shows mea¬ 
suring Point A. The specification for this engine (N62) is 18 mm. So the piston diameter 
is measured 18 mm from the bottom of the piston skirt. 



m 11 05i u 


The piston diameter, when subtracted from the cylinder bore eguals the cylinder wall to 
piston clearance. If the clearance measurement obtained is not correct, re-check your 
readings. 


16 

Basic Measuring Techniques 







Piston Ring Measurements 


There are some important specifications to 
check when installing piston rings. One of 
the measurements in axial clearance. Axial 
clearance is the distance between the 
piston ring and ring land. This prevents the 
rings from binding in the ring land at oper¬ 
ating temperature. Axial clearance is mea¬ 
sured using a feeler gauge. 

Also the piston ring end gap has to be 
checked. This measurement is checked 
using a feeler gauge. 

This clearance is critical in order to prevent 
the end gaps from contacting each other 
when the engine is at operating temp. 



When installing the piston rings, always 
stagger the end gaps as per the repair 
instructions. 



17 

Basic Measuring Techniques 







Cylinder Bore 

In order for the cylinder bore to be considered acceptable, it must not be excessively 
tapered or out-of-round. Once the cylinder has been checked for obvious damage and 
the surface finish is OK, the integrity of the bores must be verified. If cylinder wear is 
suspected, it must be checked using the proper cylinder bore gauge. 

Each cylinder must be checked at three position in the bore - top, middle and bottom. 
Also there must be two opposing dimensions that should be checked. The difference 
between the top and bottom measurements will indicate the taper of the bore. The 
opposing dimensions will indicate the out-of-round specification. 

If these measurements are out of specification, the cylinder bore must be re-finished or 
overbored. New pistons and rings must be fitted as well. 



18 

Basic Measuring Techniques 



Workshop Exercise - Cylinder Bore Measurements 


Using an instructor designated engine block, measure the indicated cylinder bore and 
complete the table below. Calculate the taper and out-of-round measurements. 



Measurement A 

Measurement B 

Out-of-Round 

Cylinder Top 




Cylinder Middle 




Cylinder Bottom 




Cylinder Taper 





19 

Basic Measuring Techniques 













Metric System 

All BMW specifications are metric. Therefore, a thorough knowledge of those areas on 
the metric system which apply to BMW vehicles is vital to a BMW Service Technician. 

The unit of length, and the basis for all other metric units of measurement is the meter. 
The meter (1 meter), as a point of reference, is slightly longer that a yard (39.37 inches). 

The divisions of a meter are hundredths and thousandths. One hundredth of a meter is 
called a centimeter, and is egual to .3937 inch or about half the diameter of a nickel. 

One thousandth of a meter is called a millimeter. The small marks between the centime¬ 
ter increments are each one millimeter, or one tenth of a centimeter. And as a point of 
reference, a standard paperclip is about one millimeter thick. 

Metric System Denominations 

Throughout the metric system, common to all units of measurement, are prefixes which 
designate multiples or fractions of the unit. 

For automotive applications, the most common prefixes are centi; designating one-hun¬ 
dredth; milli; for one thousandth and kilo- for one thousand. 

There are letters uniformly used throughout the system to label the divisions or multiples 
of each unit of measurement. The letter “m” represents milli, “c’ is for centi and “k” is for 
kilo. These are then combined with the letter representing the unit of measurement. 

For example, mm is millimeter, cm is centimeter and km is kilometer. The same applies 
to liter which is the unit of volume and gram which is the unit of weight. 

One kilogram is egual to one thousand grams which is egual to 2.2 pounds. 

All metric measurements are directly related. For example, one thousand cubic centime¬ 
ters, or 10cm x 10cm x 10cm of water weighs one kilogram. The volume of those one 
thousand cc’s is one liter. 


20 

Basic Measuring Techniques 



Metric Reference Chart 


Weight 

1 kilogram 

= 1 kg 

= 1000 grams 

=1000g 

1 hectogram 

= 1 hg 

= 100 grams 

= 100 g 

1 dekagram 

= 1 dag 

= 10 grams 

= 10 g 

1 gram 

= ig 



1 decigram 

= 1dg 

= .1 gram 

= 0.1 g 

1 centigram 

= 1 eg 

= 0.01 gram 

= 0.01 g 

1 milligram 

= 1 mg 

= 0.001 gram 

= 0.001 g 

Length 

1 kilometer 

= 1 km 

= 1000 meters 

= 1000 m 

1 hectometer 

= 1 hm 

= 100 meters 

= 100 m 

1 dekameter 

= 1 dam 

= 10 meters 

= 10 m 

1 meter 

= 1m 



1 decimeter 

= 1dm 

= .1 meter 

= .1 m 

1 centimeter 

= 1 cm 

= 0.01 meter 

= 0.01 m 

1 millimeter 

= 1 mm 

= 0.001 meter 

= 0.001 m 

Volume 

1 kiloliter 

= 1 kl 

= 1000 liters 

=10001 

1 hectoliter 

= 1 hi 

= 100 liters 

= 1001 

1 dekaliter 

= 1 dal 

= 10 liters 

= 101 

1 liter 

= 11 



1 deciliter 

= Idl 

= .1 liter 

= .1 1 

1 centiliter 

= 1 cl 

= 0.01 liter 

= 0.01 1 

1 milliliter 

= 1 ml 

= 0.001 liter 

= 0.001 1 


21 

Basic Measuring Techniques 



















































































Metric System Conversion Charts 


Linear Measure to Metric 

Linear Measure (Metric) to English 

1 inch = 2.54 cm 

1 mm = 0.03937 inch 

12 inches = 1 foot = 30.48 cm 

1 cm = 0.39 inch 

3 feet = 1 yard = 0.91 m 

1 m = 39.37 inch 

5.5 yards = 1 rod = 5.03 m 

1 km = 0.62 miles 

5280 feet = 1 mile = 1.61 km 



Square Measure to Metric Square Measure (Metric) to English 


1 in 2 = 6.45 cm 2 

1 mm 2 = 0.002 in 2 

144 in 2 = 1 ft 2 = 0.09 m 2 

1 cm 2 = 0.16 in 2 

9 ft 2 = 1 yd 2 = 0.84 m 2 

1 m 2 = 1549 in 2 

640 acres = 1 mi 2 = 2.59 km 2 

1 km 2 = 0.39 mi 2 = 247.10 acres 


Cubic Measure to Metric Cubic Measure (Metric) to English 



Liquid Measure to Metric Liquid Measure (Metric) to English 



Weights to Metric Weight (Metric) to English 



Temperature to Metric Temperature to Fahrenheit 


F = 9/5C +32 C = 5/9 (F-32) 


22 

Basic Measuring Techniques 















































23 

Basic Measuring Techniques 








































































































































































































^j ji Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. When using a micrometer, why is it important to only turn the thimble using the 
ratchet (friction stop) when making a measurement? 


2. What are the increments on the thimble scale of a micrometer? 


3. How should the diameter of a piston be measured? 


4. One rotation of the large scale on a metric dial indicator is egual to. 


24 

Basic Measuring Techniques 
























- j j i Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

5. What are some of the measurement that a dial indicator can be used for? 


6. What are some of the measurements that can be performed on a cylinder head? 


7. Explain taper and out-of-round on a cylinder bore: 


25 

Basic Measuring Techniques 




















