Table of Contents 


Engine Diagnosis 

Subject Page 

Engine Diagnosis .3 

Compression Testing .5 

Cylinder Leakage Testing.6 

Workshop Hints on Cylinder Leakage Testing .7 

Cylinder Arrangement and Firing Order .8 

Ignition System Diagnosis .9 

Fuel System Testing .12 

Fuel Volume Testing.16 

Residual Pressure.17 

Engine Adaptation Values .20 

Engine Misfire Diagnosis.22 

Smooth Running Measurement.25 

Valvetronic N62 .26 

N62 Engine Testing .28 

MKA Adapter.28 

Compression Test N62.29 

Manual Compression Test (N62).30 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 03/06 




















Engine Diagnosis 

Model: All 

Production: All 

ibiictiwis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the Operation of New Generation Engines 

• Utilize BMW Diagnostic Eguipmentto Diagnose Engine Related Complaints 

• Understand Engine Diagnosis Using Basic Hand Tools 


2 

Engine Diagnosis 


Engine Diagnosis 

When attempting to diagnose driveability complaints, always consider the basics. 
Regardless of the level of technology employed on an engine, it still needs a few basic 
things to occur in order to run properly. Whether the engine is very basic or uses 
so-called “New Generation” technology always refer to the basic principles first. 

Any engine using four-cycle spark-ignition principles must meet the same fundamental 
conditions to run properly. Most engine related driveability problems fall into a few basic 
categories: 

• No Start/No Crank 

• Extending cranking before engine start 

• Rough Running Cold Idle 

• Rough Running Warm Idle 

• Rough Running Under Load 

• Lack of Power 

• Check Engine Light (MIL) 



3 

Engine Diagnosis 




When referring to engine basics, all engines need fuel, air and spark to run. However, in 
order for a spark-ignition engine to run properly, a few things must be taken into consider¬ 
ation. The fuel, air, spark principle can be broken down further into the the following 
categories: 

• Sufficient engine compression with a leak-free combustion chamber. 

• Sufficient amount of ignition voltage (spark) at the correct time. 

• Proper fuel pressure and volume. 

• Properly functioning fuel injection system (Engine management). 

• Properly functioning air management system (Electronic throttle systems). 

• Correct valve timing (VVT and VANOS). 



4 

Engine Diagnosis 
























Compression Testing 

In order for an engine to run smoothly and efficiently, the combustion chamber must be 
free of leakage. An engine with low compression in one or more cylinders is inefficient 
and will run rough or lack in performance. Low compression may or may not cause the 
MIL to illuminate. 

Low compression can be caused by the following: 

• Leaking valves caused by burned valves or seats. The valve guide can also be worn 
causing the valve not to seat properly. Valves can also be bent from piston contact 
(from over-rev). 

• Piston Rings which can be worn from high mileage or poor maintenance. Also, the 
rings can be damaged from foreign material or improper installation. 

• Cracks in cylinder head or engine block. Cracks can be caused by overheating 
resulting in misfires or rough running. 

• Defective cylinder head gasket. The cylinder head gasket can fail due to overheating 
which can cause cylinder leakage resulting in misfire, low compression and rough 
running. 

• Bent connecting rod. A connecting rod can be bent from a defective fuel injector or 
water ingress into the combustion chamber causing hydrostatic lock. 

Compression testing can be performed using a conventional compression gauge. There 
are some preliminary tasks and safety precautions that must be carried out before starting 
the compression test: 

• Remove the fuel pump fuse and or relay, start the vehicle and allow vehicle to stall 
out on residual fuel 

• Disable ignition by unplugging all ignition coils and remove ALL sparkplugs. 

• Connect battery charger to vehicle 

• Ensure that the throttle is wide open during cranking (see special note for Valvetronic 
equipped vehicles). 

• Crank engine until compression gauge stops increasing. Be sure to crank engine 
equally between cylinders. 

• Continue compression test on ALL cylinders so comparisons can be done. 

• Record readings 

• If necessary, re-check cylinders with suspect readings. 

• If some cylinder readings come up low, add a few drops of oil and re-check. This 
can differentiate between valves/rings. 


5 

Engine Diagnosis 




Cylinder Leakage Testing 

Once a problem cylinder is detected via a compression test or by other means, a cylinder 
leakage test is used to pinpoint the problem area. 

The leakage test uses a gauge and compressed air to indicate the percentage of air loss. 
By listening and observing at key points, the problem can be narrowed down before the 
engine needs to be disassembled. 

The piston (one or more) should be brought to TDC, compressed air should be intro¬ 
duced into the cylinder using the cylinder leakage tester. Be sure the engine does NOT 
rotate, if the engine rotates, the engine was not at true TDC. 

Check the gauge on the tester, it should read in percentage of leakage. Check the 
engine specification for permissible leakdown. A general rule of thumb is 15 % or less 
for a good cylinder. However, some engine have a tighter tolerance. Most BMW engines 
should be at 8 % or less. 



If any cylinder shows excessive leakdown, check for leakage by listening or observing the 
following points: 

• Listen for air (hissing) at the tailpipe. This would indicate leakage at the exhaust 
valves on that cylinder. 

• Listen for air (hissing) at the throttle. This would indicate leakage at the intake valves 
on that cylinder. (Be sure throttle is wide open and listen at throttle opening) 

• Open the oil cap and listen for air. This would indicate air leakage into the crankcase. 
This would be piston rings or cylinder bore concerns. 

• Observe the coolant reservoir and or remove the radiator cap. Bubbles in the 
coolant would most likely indicate head gasket leakage or cracked block/head. 


6 

Engine Diagnosis 










Workshop Hints on Cylinder Leakage Testing 

When performing cylinder leakage tests, the following tips might be helpful: 

• Remove all spark plugs to allow easier rotation of the engine. (If this test is done 
after a compression test, the plugs should already be out). 

• Perform the leakage test on all cylinders, not just the problem cylinder. This would 
indicate any other problems which can be rectified. This eliminates any repeat 
repairs and wasted diagnostic time. 

• Perform the leakage test in cylinder firing order starting with cylinder #1. It takes two 
revolutions of the engine to complete the leakage test. Start at cylinder #1 and 
rotate the engine to the next cylinder in the firing order. Divide the number of cylin¬ 
ders into 720, the result is the number of degrees that each cylinder fires. For exam¬ 
ple, if you divide a 6 cylinder into 720, this eguals 120 degrees. If you start at cylin¬ 
der 1 and rotate the engine 120 degrees in the direction of rotation, you can check 
the next cylinder in the firing order. This process eliminates the need to rotate the 
engine an excessive amount. 






7 

Engine Diagnosis 








Cylinder Arrangement and Firing Order 
4-Cylinder 



6-Cylinder 



M10, M42, M44, SI 4 
Firing Order 1-3-4-2 


M20, M30, M50 (TU), M52 (TU), 
M54, N52, S38, S52, S54 

Firing Order 1 -5-3-6-2-4 


8-Cylinder 



M60, M62, M62TU, N62, N62TU 

Firing Order 1-5-4-8-6-3-7-2 


12-Cylinder 



M70, M73, M73TU, N73, S70 

Firing Order 1 -7-5-11-3-9-6-12-2-8-4-10 


8 

Engine Diagnosis 







Ignition System Diagnosis 

The ignition system on modern BMW engines consist of one ignition coil per cylinder. 
This arrangement is known as RZV, or Direct Stationary Ignition. The ignition coil 
receives fused power usually from the DME main relay or IVM (N62). 

The ignition coil primary circuit is controlled (triggered) by the engine control module 
(ECM). The ECM controls dwell and ignition timing on all cylinders individually. Electrical 
circuit faults on the primary circuit are recorded in the ECM and can be read out using the 
DISplus or GT-1. 



Most new engines use the “pencil” type coil. This design houses the coil windings for 
the primary and secondary circuit as well as the spark plug boot which includes the 
secondary circuit resistance. 



9 

Engine Diagnosis 




























Due to the compact design of the ignition coil, much of the diagnosis is simplified. 

Misfire faults and/or ignition related faults can be easily diagnosed by swapping the coils 
between cylinders. If the fault moves with the coil, then it is obvious that the coil is at 
fault. If the fault stays in the cylinder, then the spark plug can be moved etc. 

This greatly simplifies engine diagnosis. However sometimes, the diagnosis is not always 
as simple as swapping parts. 



This is where the oscilloscope function of the DISplus/GT-1 can aid in diagnosis. A good 
knowledge of fundamental ignition diagnosis can be helpful. The illustration above is 
broken down as follows. 

1. This point represent the start of the ignition process, also known as “transistor off”. 
The ECM turns off the primary circuit causing the magnetic field to collapse. This 
begins the production of the secondary voltage needed to fire the spark plug. 

2. The is called the firing line as it represents the voltage needed to overcome the 
secondary resistance and cross the spark plug electrode gap. This voltage level 
will increase as secondary circuit resistance increases. Also lean mixture will cause 
this line to increase as well. On RZV ignition systems, this line should be around 
3-5kV. 

3. This line indicates the start of the combustion process. This is also referred to as 
the spark line. The line should start relatively level and should be about 1/3 to 1/2 of 
the height of the firing line. Also, there should be no rapid upward or downward 
slope. 


10 

Engine Diagnosis 





4. This period of time represented here is the combustion period. This area indicates 
the integrity of the combustion event. Problems such as low compression, lean or 
rich mixture problem would be indicated here. 

5. This line represent the voltage present during the combustion period. This line 
should be mostly level. Upward or downward sloping can indicate mixture or engine 
compression problems. 

6. This point represents the end of the combustion process. Combustion has ended 
and the remaining voltage available is the coil will start to dissipate. 

7. This is known as the coil or decay oscillation period. Any excess voltage not used in 
the combustion process will “decay” and dissipate. The number and pattern of the 
oscillations is dependent on the coil type. Different types of coils and different coil 
manufacturers will be a factor on this pattern. Anywhere from 2 to 6 oscillations may 
be seen here. If no oscillations are present, this would indicate ignition coil internal 
problems. 

Most newer engine use a “multiple spark” discharge when the ignition coil is triggered. 

This is to aid in startup. When diagnosing these ignition systems, the additional peaks do 

not need to be factored into your diagnosis. 

Referring to the illustration below, the relevant portion of the scope pattern is at point 1. 



11 

Engine Diagnosis 





Fuel System Testing 

Fuel systems need to be checked for proper fuel pressure as well as sufficient volume. 
When diagnosing fuel system complaints, you must take into account the type of fuel 
system and how the fuel is delivered to the engine. 

Malfunctions in the fuel system can cause driveability complaints which include: 

• No start condition 

• Hard start/extended cranking time 

• Lack of power 

• Check Engine (MIL) Light along with mixture related faults 

• Excessive exhaust emissions (High CO and/or HC) 

When a no start condition is experienced, it is important to start with the basics. Does the 
vehicle have any fuel in the tank? Don’t assume that there is fuel, the fuel gauge or 
sender circuit may be faulty. Also, the siphon jet system may be defective. Check the 
fuel level using the instrument cluster test steps if necessary. Check to be sure that there 
is fuel available on the right side of the fuel tank. 



Fuel Paessjre Reg siatcf 


f n.rary' Li rr^'l 



12 

Engine Diagnosis 

































Once is has been determined the there is fuel in the tank. The fuel system can be tested 
for proper pressure. Fuel pressure specifications vary between vehicles. Until recently, 
most fuel systems used a pressure of 3.5 bar. Some of the new systems use up to 5 or 6 
bar. Direct injection systems use 6 bar for the fuel supply system and up to 120 bar 
pressure to the fuel injectors. Refer to appropriate specifications in WebTIS for the 
proper system pressures and testing procedures. 

The fuel supply system should be tested using the appropriate fuel pressure gauge. 
Depending upon the vehicle, the testing methods and connections for the fuel pressure 
testing eguipment differ. 

Some vehicles have testing ports with a Schrader valve for easy hookup. Earlier vehicles 
did not have a test port. Testing fuel pressure reguired the use of a “T” connector to 
connect into the fuel system. 

Most recently, M56 eguipped (SULEV) vehicles have a sealed fuel system which reguire 
the use of a special tool. Refer to the latest service information bulletin. 



Note: Always observe all safety regulations when working on fuel systems. 

Obey all local and state fire safety laws regarding fuel handling. Always 
have the proper fire extinguisher on hand when performing testing and/or 
repair to the fuel system. 


13 

Engine Diagnosis 
































Once it has been determined that what the fuel pressure is, compare your reading to the 
proper specification. If the fuel pressure is low or zero, the fuel circuit must be checked 
over. 

See if the fuel pump is energized. Check the voltage supply and ground to the fuel pump 
using proper electrical testing procedures (i.e voltage drop etc.). Make sure that you 
analyze the fuel pump circuit. Check the fuses, connections and appropriate relays. 

Also, understand the operation of the fuel pump circuit. Older vehicles were somewhat 
straightforward, on the other hand, the newer vehicles are using more elaborate circuits 
for fuel pump operation. 




14 

Engine Diagnosis 












































Some vehicles, now use a control module to control the speed and flow rate of the fuel 
pump. The M3, M5 and vehicles equipped with the M56 engine use a fuel pump control 
module. The E65/E66 uses the SBSR to control the fuel pump. Take this into consider¬ 
ation when performing diagnosis on these vehicles. 


om 




hytefiight 




Always use available resources such as wiring diagrams, SI Bulletins and training material 
to better understand circuit operation. 



15 

Engine Diagnosis 




























Fuel Volume Testing 

Some driveability concerns are related to incorrect fuel volume. Vehicles with lack of 
power complaints and mixture related fault codes may have insufficient fuel volume 
supplied to the fuel injection system. These vehicles may actually pass a fuel pressure 
test. 

Fuel volume issues can be caused by faulty fuel pumps, fuel pressure regulators, clogged 
or restricted fuel filters and/or fuel lines. 

If these driveability concerns are present, then a fuel volume test should be performed. 

A fuel volume test measures the amount of fuel delivered in a specific time frame. 

The fuel pump is activated during this test using the proper test leads to ensure no arcing 
sparks are present. The fuel feed line is directed to a non-breakable (fuel-proof plastic) 
measuring can that has graduations for measurement. 



A general specification for fuel volume would be approximately one liter in 30 seconds. 
Always check WebTIS for the exact specification for the vehicle you are working on. 


16 

Engine Diagnosis 



Residual Pressure 

Fuel injection systems require a residual pressure to present after the engine is switched 
off. This allows the engine to start immediately after the vehicle has been parked. 

If the residual fuel pressure diminishes after the vehicle has been shut off. Upon restart, 
there will be an extended cranking period before engine start. This is due to the fuel 
pump attempting to supply enough fuel for startup. 

When the fuel system is at rest, there a three components which allow the fuel system to 
retain sufficient residual pressure. These items are, the fuel pump check valve, the fuel 
pressure regulator and the fuel injectors. 



Fuel System - E32 with M60 


FUEL RETURN LfiE 


FUFi. EUPPIY 
FROM PuUP 


FUEL RETURN 



If any of these items are leaking and fail to hold pressure in the fuel rail, the vehicle will be 
difficult to start. The cranking time will be excessive and possibly not start at all. For 
example, If the fuel injectors are leaking, the vehicle will exhibit black smoke on startup. 

Diagnosis of these concerns requires a fuel pressure gauge. The residual pressure is 
monitored on the fuel pressure gauge when the engine is shutoff. Diagnosis is deter¬ 
mined by watching the drop in fuel pressure overtime. The fuel pressure should not drop 
more than .5 bar in 30 minutes. If the pressure drops more than .5 bar, the concern 
should be investigated. 


17 

Engine Diagnosis 



Fuel System - E39/E46with M54 



Depending on the type of fuel system used, diagnosis will vary. On older fuel systems, 
diagnosis is simplified due to the ability to clamp off certain components to determine, 
the origin of the leakdown. 



Fuel System - E60 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Fuel Filler Pipe 

4 

Fuel Filter 

2 

Outlet Protection Valve 

5 

Feed Line 

3 

Electric Fuel Pump 

6 

Fuel Injectors/Fuel Rail 


18 

Engine Diagnosis 


















































Newer fuel system use a non-return type fuel system with some components mounted 
externally. Most recently, many of the new vehicle have most of the fuel system compo¬ 
nents mounted in the fuel tank. This includes the fuel pump, fuel filter and fuel pressure 
regulator. The only fuel system component outside the fuel tank is the fuel feed line, fuel 
rail and fuel injectors. 

This makes the diagnosis of residual pressure concerns more difficult. Diagnosis of this 
type of system sometimes reguires process of elimination. 

If one or more of the fuel injectors is suspected as the cause of the loss in residual fuel 
pressure. They can be tested using a special tool to “bubble test” the injectors. 



First the injectors are connected to the test fuel rail supplied with the tool. Then, the fuel 
injectors are subjected to compressed air. The injectors are then triggered by the test 
harness to “blow out” any residual fuel. 

The test harness is disconnected and the tips of the injectors are immersed in water. 

The injector tips are observed for any bubbles overtime. Any excessive bubbles indicate 
a defective injector. 


19 

Engine Diagnosis 


Engine Adaptation Values 

Engine adaptation values can be broken down into two categories: 

• Additive Mixture Adaptation - additive adaptation refers to “long term fuel trim”. 
These adaptation are made by the ECM (DME) at idle during “closed loop” fuel con¬ 
trol. These values are measured in milliseconds and are expressed in negative and 
positive values. 

• Multiplicative Mixture Adaptation - multiplicative adaptation occurs during part 
load conditions and are performed by the ECM during “closed loop” fuel control. 
These values are measured in percent and are also expressed as negative and posi¬ 
tive values. This is also referred to as “short term fuel trim”. 

Additive mixture adaptation corrects for variations in idle mixture. The ECM monitors the 
oxygen sensor signals to evaluate the exhaust mixture. When a lean (or rich) mixture is 
detected, the ECM increases (or decreases) the injector “on-time” to correct accordingly. 

As long as the fuel trim correction is not excessive, the ECM will not register a fault code. 
The ECM will correct in increments of+/- .1 ms. When the fuel trim correction exceeds a 
predetermined threshold value, the check engine light (MIL) will illuminate and store 
appropriate fault codes for additive mixture adaptation. 

Additive values which are excessively positive, would indicate a lean condition. This can 
be caused by: 

• Un-metered air leaks - such as broken vacuum lines or a leaky intake manifold or 
gasket. 

• Faulty crankcase ventilation system - crankcase vent valve stuck open. 

• Low fuel pressure - Faulty fuel pressure regulator or fuel pump. 

• Faulty HFM - can be sending erroneous load signal information which would cause 
the ECM to falsely enrich the mixture. 

Additive values which are excessively negative , would indicate a rich condition. This can 
be caused by: 

• An air restriction - any restriction to airflow such as a clogged air filter would create a 
rich fuel mixture, (this may also be indicated by negative multiplication values) 

• Faulty crankcase ventilation system - crankcase vent valve stuck closed. 

• High fuel pressure - Possible faulty fuel pressure regulator or restricted return line 

• Faulty HFM - can be sending erroneous load signal information which would cause 
the ECM to falsely lean out the mixture. 

Note: Some newer engine management systems use the term mg/stroke or 
milligrams per stroke. Treat these values as you would millisecond values. 


20 

Engine Diagnosis 



Multiplicative mixture adaptation corrects for variations in fuel mixture under part load 
conditions. The ECM monitors the oxygen sensor signals to evaluate the exhaust gas 
mixture. When a lean (or rich) mixture is detected the ECM adjusts the injector “on-time” 
accordingly over a “short term” period to adapt for the existing situation. 

Multiplicative values are expressed in percent and can be negative or positive. Negative 
values indicate a rich mixture and positive values indicate a lean mixture. When the 
Multiplicative values exceed a predetermined threshold value, the check engine light 
(MIL) will illuminate and store relevant fault codes for Multiplicative adaptation. 

When multiplicative values are excessively positive, a lean condition exists. The ECM is 
attempting to add fuel to maintain the proper fuel mixture (close to lambda value 1). This 
situation can be caused by a faulty HFM, low fuel volume, restricted fuel filter or faulty fuel 
pressure regulator. 

When the values are negative, the ECM is attempting to lean out (remove fuel) the fuel 
mixture to compensate for a rich condition. This can be caused by: 

• Excessive fuel pressure - from a faulty fuel pressure regulator or restriction in the 
return line. 

• A faulty HFM - the HFM can be sending erroneous load signal information which 
would cause the ECM to falsely enrich the mixture. 

• An Air restriction - any restriction to airflow such as a clogged air filter would create a 
rich fuel mixture. 

• Any system failure which would cause the mixture to be falsely enriched. This could 
be caused by erroneous signal information from sensors such as the engine coolant 
temperature sensor or intake air temperature sensor. 


21 

Engine Diagnosis 



Engine Misfire Diagnosis 

Engines which have been produced since 1996 are OBD1I complaint. The CARB/OBD 
regulations reguire the ECM to be capable of detecting misfires. Also, the ECM must be 
able to determine if the misfires increase engine emissions and/or are catalyst damaging. 

The ECM detects engine misfires by monitoring crankshaft speed. The ECM receives 
the input from the crankshaft sensor and determines if there is a misfire present by 
comparing crankshaft speed variations between combustion events on each cylinder. 

The crankshaft must rotate 720 degrees (2 rotations) to fire all of the cylinders in an 
engine regardless of the number of cylinders. Therefore each firing event is spaced apart 
and occurs at a specific time. By monitoring the crankshaft signal the ECM can 
determine which cylinder is misfiring and also the severity of the misfire. 

Misfires are classified in 2 levels of severity: 

• Misfires which increase emission levels - These misfires occur within an interval of 
1000 crankshaft revolutions. The ECM counts and adds the detected misfire events 
for each cylinder. If the sum of all cylinder misfire incidents exceeds the predeter¬ 
mined value, a fault code will be stored and the “MIL” will be illuminated. 

If more than one cylinder is misfiring, all misfiring cylinders will be specified and the 
individual fault codes will be stored. The ’’MIL will be illuminated. 

• Misfires which are catalyst damaging - These misfires are determined when the sum 
of the misfiring events occurs within 200 crankshaft revolutions. These misfires are 
considered catalyst damaging and the “MIL” will be illuminated. 

The ECM will take the following measures - the oxygen sensor control will be 
switched to “open loop”, a cylinder selective fault code will be stored for one or more 
cylinders and the relevant fuel injector(s) will be deactivated. 



SMOOTH RUNNING ENGINE 
(NOTE SQUARE WAVE SIGNAL) 


22 

Engine Diagnosis 































30 pulses per segment 



20 pulses per segment 



120 segments 


Internal pulse wheel- M44, 4 cylinder Internal pulse wheel- M52, 6 cylinder 


15 pulses per segment 



10 pulses per segment (X 2 systems) 

onnnnn* 



60 segments 


External flywheel incremental External flywheel incremental 

pulse wheel- M62, 8 cylinder pulse wheel- M73,12 cylinder 

(2 systems monitoring same 
crankshaft) 


23 

Engine Diagnosis 








The causes of engine misfires include: 

• Ignition System - spark plugs, ignition coils, secondary circuit components and 
primary/secondary circuit wiring. 

• Engine Mechanical - piston, piston rings, valves, camshaft and any valvetrain related 
components including Valvetronic. Valvetronic components include eccentric shaft, 
intermediate levers etc. 

The crankcase ventilation system should also be considered. This includes the 
crankcase ventilation valve and if applicable, the hose connections as well. 

• Fuel System - fuel injectors, fuel pump, fuel filter and pressure regulator etc. This 
includes fuel guality as well. Other fuel system components include fuel tank vent 
valve (purge) as well as running losses components such as the 3/2 valve etc. 

• Engine Electronics - any implausible input from a sensor such as the crankshaft 
sensor and camshaft sensor. Also any sensor which affects fuel mixture including 
HFM, coolant/intake air temperature sensors etc. 

• Other items include the catalyst which could be restricted and/or the muffler. 




SMOOTH RUNNING ENGINE ENGINE MISFIRE DETECTED 

(NOTE SQUARE WAVE SIGNAL) 


24 

Engine Diagnosis 








































































































































Smooth Running Measurement 

The DISplus/GT-1 are helpful in pinpointing the cause of an engine misfire. Once the 
short test is completed, the fault memory of the ECM can be read out to determine which 
cylinder or cylinders have set misfire faults. There may or may not be any faults present. 
The engine could be running rough, however no misfire thresholds may have been 
exceeded. 

Engine smoothness can be further evaluated by looking at the smooth running values. In 
the “Control Unit Functions” screen under “Diagnosis Reguests” there is a value indicat¬ 
ed for each cylinder which can be compared for each cylinder. This value is an indication 
of crankshaft speed variations in each cylinder. 



r&ifll©; jimiLOB 


CCC-GW Gateway 


PDC Pm it Dilanse Control 
MPM Micro-power inodiJe 
F5.S Ratay-iving Igl-fa ecitsot 
SBSL Sntelnn. B-pllfif left 
$B5R Satelitc, Q—pilla-. rigid 
SFZ SeteNievetilde center 
5GM-SIM Saletv Bins Gateway Mi 
7MFA Door module, driver 
TMBF DowiraHtijIe, ftoil paaaeng 
SZL S^flch eerier, steeling effiuni 
VTCl Ualveftiono. bank 1 
VTCJ Valvtfronc. bank t 


Rough rtnrin^ 
Rough rmrirrg. 
Rough running. 
Rough mining. 
Pour^i mnnirg. 
Pougn riming, 
Rough running, 
Rough riming, 


cylinder 1 
eyhidci £ 
Eyfrider 3 
cylndei 4 
cyfndei E 
■cyinder & 
cylinder 7 
■z'f in; if D 




iOferUftCFihOr 
Identification long 
Read fault memory 
Clem fault 

Physical I ? d'.vaic nuttier 
Krft cocks 

Clear mixture .adaptation 
Component aettvatsan 


oil 


3 I TH v ■ i"t j? ;'i i \ r *:-/■! Tie 




ivirM. :ii 


EimtsEoiES 


25 

Engine Diagnosis 













































Valvetronic N62 


In addition to the usual valvetrain diagnosis, the Valvetronic system has some additional 
components which need to be taken into consideration during diagnosis. The tolerances 
on the eccentric shaft and intermediate levers are critical in maintaining proper cylinder 
filling especially at idle. Any deviations in tolerances of these components will contribute 
to rough running complaints. 

The intermediate levers are available in 5 classifications, the classification numbers are 
marked on the levers. On the N62, each cylinder head must use intermediate levers with 
the same classification. It is not necessary to have the same classification between 
cylinder heads. 



26 

Engine Diagnosis 



Depending on the engine/vehicle, the minimum valve lift can be set from .3 to .8 mm. 

At these low valve lifts, any variation in tolerance will affect idle quality. When a diagnosis 
determines that there is a problem in the Valvetronic system, the components need to be 
inspected. The intermediate levers or eccentric shaft can be worn. The intermediate 
levers could be of the wrong classification. 

The illustration below shows a worn eccentric shaft. The areas shown should be 
inspected for any wear. Grooves and scoring indicate a worn eccentric shaft which 
should be replaced. 



The following pages contain testing information which will assist in the diagnosis of idle 
quality concerns on the N62. When diagnosing complaints regarding the N62 engine, 
always refer to the latest available Service Information Bulletins on WebTIS. Enter all 
recorded test information regarding these cases into PuMA. 


27 

Engine Diagnosis 














N62 Engine Testing 

The N62 engine features Valvetronic which requires some specialized diagnostic proce¬ 
dures. Due the variable valve lift feature, there are some additional steps regarding 
engine and compression testing. 

MKA Adapter 

The Multi-Channel Adapter (MKA) tool is used in conjunction with the DISplus to diag¬ 
nose ignition and injection system concerns on the N62 engine. The MKA adapter is 
installed (in series) between the ECM and the engine harness at connectors 1, 3 and 5. 
In addition the four cables of MFK 2 are plugged into the MKA as well. 



The MKA test module is found under the path > Service Functions > Drive > Engine 
Management ME9 >Test Runs > Ignition and Injection diagnosis N62. 

The MKA engine test checks the integrity of the ignition system by looking at the primary 
ignition voltage on each cylinder. 

The injection system is also checked by examining the voltage pattern of the injection 
circuit. 


28 

Engine Diagnosis 











Compression Test N62 

The compression can be tested on the N62 
using the DISplus. The DISplus can perform a 
relative compression test and provide a com¬ 
prehensive engine analysis report. 

The compression test can be done at minimum 
valve lift as well as at maximum valve lift. This 
difference between these reading can assist in 
determining the root cause such as wear in 
Valvetronic components. 

When performing this test the following 
connections/cables are needed: 

• Diagnostic head (can be hardwired or wireless) 

• TD Cable connection to diagnostic head 

• 25 Bar Pressure transducer connected to pressure connection #2. 

• Compression adapter (guick disconnect) 

• 1000 Amp clamp 

The test module will prompt you to warm up the engine to 90°C. Once warmed up, you 
will be directed to run the engine at idle to set the minimum valve lift. Follow the on 
screen prompts. Once the minimum valve lift has been obtained (0.2 to 0.4 mm), discon¬ 
nect both VVT motors to lock in the minimum adjustment. 


Once this step in completed, shut the engine off and remove the #1 spark plug. Install 
the compression adapter into the spark plug hole. (Note: any cylinder can be used as 
long as the DISplus is set to the cylinder in use). Follow prompts until test is completed. 




29 

Engine Diagnosis 






l est system Absolute compression 

Cyl. i 5 4 S 

AU. JM 


Ed bar 


16 bar 


17 bar 


8 bar 


A bar 


(r bn- 


13.0. 


HEasuremetir 

rtit 

RgHl4fl*p»if 177, r min 


Jt&L 



£ 

124 


Avs;ragfl 


Jli, 


7 

ii ? 


£ 


tTSi'mir 


Ei»d 


Iflfli'lttin 




iivii.i tshtan 



ttil pwfad 


L 


Date 

pay.M*ft.Vitr 


D2.03.0& 


Tinw 

HriMin Sec 


“““ 1 

Starter current 


t&E A 


Once the test is completed, perform the same steps for the maximum valve lift. Compare 
the results, the results from the test at maximum valve lift should be slightly higher. Any 
cylinders that show low results on the minimum valve lift test which show improvements 
when the maximum valve lift test is performed should be checked for Valvetronic wear 
concerns. 

During the final analysis potion of this test module, there may be on screen recommenda¬ 
tions of repairs involving eccentric shaft or intermediate lever replacement. There may be 
a recommendation of changes to the classification of intermediate levers as well. 

Manual Compression Test (N62) 

Manual compression testing can also be done on the N62. However, the DISplus must 
still be used to set the minimum/maximum valve lift. To access the test module for manu¬ 
al compression testing, go to path > Service Functions > Drive > Engine Management 
ME9 > Test Runs > Compression Test. 


30 

Engine Diagnosis 















31 

Engine Diagnosis 



I- 

' 

Workshop Exercise - Engine Testing 

Using the DISplus and an instructor designated vehicle, perform the engine test 
using the MKA adapter. 

Vehicle:_ Chassis # _ Production Date: _ 

DIS Software Version: _ 

Enter into test plan under - “Ignition and Injection diagnosis. Connect MKA adapter 
and follow on-screen instructions. 

What is the part number of the MKA adapter? 


Which connectors on the ECM are connected to the MKA adapter? 


What DIS test lead is used to connect to the MKA adapter? 


Start engine and warm up to operating temperature as per test module instructions. 

What are the results of the ignition and injection system testing? 


Once the MKA test module is complete, enter into “Compression Test” and follow 
on screen prompts. 

What test cables are needed for this test? 


Note: Be sure to connect battery charger during this test. 


32 

Engine Diagnosis 





Workshop Exercise - Engine Testing 


Set valve lift to minimum adjustment for the first part of this test. 


What is the specified and actual valve lift observed on the test module screen? 


Unplug WT motors when prompted before shutting engine off. Disable fuel supply 
and fuel injection when prompted. Remove spark plug from a cylinder which has 
easy access. 

Is it necessary to use only cylinder #1 during this test? Why or Why not? 


Continue to follow on screen prompts. Install pressure adapter into spark plug hole 
and connect amp clamp? 

What is the average compression results on all cylinders? Are there any cylinders which 
deviate excessively? 


At the end of the test module follow the on screen prompts. Restore engine to 
running condition in order to set maximum valve lift. 

Perform compression test again, setting the engine to maximum valve lift when 
prompted. 

What is the result of the engine test with maximum valve lift? Are there any deviations 
between the readings between the two tests? 


What would the deviations indicate? 


Did the test module recommend any changes to the intermediate levers? 


33 

Engine Diagnosis 




Workshop Exercise - Engine Testing 

Enter into test plan for ‘‘Eccentric Shaft Adjustment”. 

What is the purpose of this test module? 


What were the results of this test? (calibration angle etc.) 


Enter into the test module for “Irregular Operation Check” and follow on screen 
prompts. 

What is meant by“lrregular Operation Check” ? 


Continue with test and record results below: 


Cylinder 

Standard Deviation 

Mean Value 

1 



2 



3 



4 



5 



6 



7 



8 




34 

Engine Diagnosis 














Workshop Exercise - Engine Testing 

What are the maximum allowable values during this test? 


Go to the test module for ‘‘intermediate lever wear” and follow the on screen prompts. 
Record the intermediate lever wear values in the table below: 


Cylinder > 

i 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

Values > 










What is the maximum allowable value for eccentric shaft wear? 


Go to the test module for ‘‘Learning the stop positions” and follow the on screen 
prompts. 

What does this test module do? When should this test module be performed? 


Go to the test module for “Minimum Lift Adjustment” and follow the on screen 
prompts. 

What is the current minimum vale lift? 


What is this test module used for? 


35 

Engine Diagnosis 














^j ji Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. What three fuel system components are responsible for maintain residual fuel 
pressure when the engine is off? 


2. How many different classifications are available in the intermediate levers? 


3. When connecting the MKA adapter, which ECM connectors are used? 


4. What are “decay oscillations”? 


5. Why is it important to test compression on the N62 at both minimum and 
maximum valve lift? 


36 

Engine Diagnosis 


























6 . 


Why is it important to test fuel volume? 


7. When using the DISplus test module to perform the compression test on the N62, 
can you use any cylinder other than one? 


8. What is indicated when the additive mixture adaptation values are excessively 
positive? What are some of the causes of positive additive mixture adaptation 
values? 


37 

Engine Diagnosis 



