Table of Contents 


New Generation 6-cylinder N52 

Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

Power Output .5 

BMW 6-Cylinder Engine History.5 

M20.5 

M30.5 

M50.5 

M50TU .5 

M52.5 

M52TU .6 

M54/M56 .6 

Innovative Solutions.7 

Technical Data (N52B30).8 

Engine Power Output (N52 3.0 Liter) .9 

Engine Designations and Identification.10 

Components.11 

Crankcase.12 

Bedplate.14 

Crankshaft.15 

Piston and Connecting Rod .15 

Cylinder Head.16 

Cylinder Head Cover.16 

Valvetrain.17 

Camshaft.18 

VANOS .18 

Intake Manifold.19 

Crankcase Ventilation .19 

Exhaust Manifold.20 

Gaskets/Seals.21 

Bolts.22 

Oil Pump.23 

Electric Water Pump.24 

Map Controlled Thermostat .25 

Oil-to Water Heat Exchanger (5 Series) .25 

Vacuum Pump .26 

Alternator.26 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 






































Subject Page 

Principle of Operation.36 

Magnesium - new material in engine construction.36 

Electrochemical Properties of Magnesium .36 

Physical Properties of the Materials .37 

VALVETRONIC II .38 

Load Control.39 

Design/Function.40 

VAN OS .41 

Differential Intake Air Control (DISA) .42 

Stage 1 - Idle/lower engine speed range .43 

Stage 2 - Medium engine speed range.43 

Stage 3 - Upper engine speed range .43 

DISA Actuators.43 

Lubrication System.44 

Oil Pump Operation.47 

Electronic Oil Condition Monitoring.48 

Function of the Oil Condition Sensor.49 

Faults/Evaluation.49 

Electronic Oil Level Indicator.50 

Static oil level measurement at engine OFF .50 

Dynamic oil level measurement during vehicle operation .52 

Display Options .53 

Cooling System .54 

Heat Management.54 

Intelligent Heat Management .55 

Cooling System Comparison 

(Belt Driven vs. Electric Coolant Pump).56 

Workshop Hints.58 

Electronically Controlled Coolant Pump .58 

Thread Repair.59 

Engine Repairs.59 

Working Safety.60 

Machining (metal cutting) Magnesium.60 

Special Measures for Grinding.60 

Important Precondition:.61 





































New Generation 6-cylinder N52 


Model: E60, E61, E90, E91 
Production: All 

■BIICTM1S 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand new generation engine systems and concepts 

• Understand the operation of second generation Valvetronic 

• Understand service operations regarding magnesium 

• Understand basic engine repairs on the N52 


3 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 


Introduction 


Beginning with the N62 V-8 engine, 

BMW has introduced a new generation 
of engines with advanced concepts. 

The primary focus of these engines was 
the use of Valvetronic which has revolu¬ 
tionized valvetrain technology. Following 
the N62 engine was the new V-12, the 
N73 in the new 760i/Li. 

To round out the new generation engine 
lineup, it was only natural that the 6-cylin¬ 
der engines were included. This new 
6-cylinder will be referred to as the N52. 

Initially, this engine will be introduced into 
the E60, E61 and E90. Later, the N52 
will be installed in subseguent model 
lines as well. 

Initially, the N52 will be offered in the 330i and will be designated N52B30. The B30 
variant will also be used in the 325i which will be introduced later in 2005. Although 
both vehicles will have a 3.0 liter engine, the power output will differ between models. 
The 330i will receive the 255 horsepower version and the 325 engine will have an 
output of 215 horsepower. 

The engines will be differentiated by the suffix designation. The high output version will 
be designated N52B30 OL and the lower output will be N52B30 UL. The “UL” engine 
will have no DISA and will have changes in the DME programming and exhaust system. 

The design objectives of the N52 include: 

• Increased power output and torgue 

• Reduction of fuel consumption 

• Reduction of overall engine weight 

• Top position in engine class through 
efficient dynamics 

• Innovations for customer benefit 

The simplest way of achieving these objectives is to reduce the weight of the engine. 
Since the development of the M50 engine, the aim has always been to achieve ever 
lowering fuel consumption. The additional benefits from these goals of the 
development process is increased efficiency and improved dynamics. 



4 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



Compared to the previous generation engines (M54/M56), a further reduction in fuel 
consumption of 12% and a 10% increase in dynamics have been achieved with the N52. 
These increases in efficiency allow the N52 to comply with ULEV II standards. 

Power Output 

The terms “power output per liter” and “power to weight ratio” are used for comparing 
individual engine designs with each other. The power output per liter indicates the high¬ 
est effective power output of the engine per liter of displacement (kW/l). 

Compared to the M54 at 55kW/l, the power output of the N52 has been further increased 
to 61.7 kW/l. 

The power to weight ratio indicates the construction weight per kW output (kg/kW). The 
lower the construction weight as a function of power output, the more efficient the power 
yield. The power to weight ration of the N52 also set new standards. Compared to the 
M54 at 1 .Okg/kW, the N52 has been further reduced to 0.82kg/kW. 

BMW 6-Cylinder Engine History 

M20 

BMW 6-cylinder engines have undergone a constant optimization process overtime 
starting with the M20. The M20, which used 2-valves per cylinder, also featured a timing 
belt for the camshaft drive and adjustable valves. Over the years, The M20 was available 
with carbureted as well as fuel injected versions throughout the 1970’s and 80’s. 

M30 

The M30 which also featured 2 valve per cylinder technology and adjustable valvetrain, 
did not use a timing belt. The M30 was available in larger displacements up to 3.5 liter. 
The “big six”, which the top engine in the BMW engine lineup, would later be succeeded 
by the new BMW V-8 engines in 1993. 

M50 

The successor to the M20, the M50 featured many new innovations when introduced in 
1992. The M50 engine technology included 4-valves per cylinder, Dual overhead 
camshafts and direct stationary ignition (RZV). This engine also used fully seguential 
injection controlled by DME 3.1 engine management. 

M50TU 

The M50 was “technically upgraded” with the addition of VANOS in 1993. The new 
VANOS system allowed for intake camshaft timing changes which improved horsepower 
and torgue curves. The “TU” variant also featured cylinder selective knock control, Hot 
Film air mass sensing and secondary ignition monitoring. 

M52 

The M52, which includes many of the features on the M50TU, utilized Siemens engine 
control. It was introduced in 1996 to comply with OBDII regulations. The M52 also 
provided a slight increase in horsepower and a large increase in torgue over the M50TU. 


5 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



M52TU 

In 1999, the M52 was further refined by the addition of Double VANOS and an electroni¬ 
cally controlled throttle. The new “TU” engine also used innovations such as a variable 
intake runner length, “near engine” catalytic converters and secondary air injection. 

The use of aluminum on the M52TU also extended to the crankcase as well. This would 
pave the way for future improvements in engine materials. 

M54/M56 

The M54/M56 variants used much of the technology available at that time, however 
customer and legislative demands would mean that further improvements would be 
needed. 

With these design goals in mind, BMW brought forth the latest engine construction 
technology. The “new generation 6” innovations include a new composite magne¬ 
sium/aluminum engine block, Valvetronic II, electric coolant pump, volumetric flow con¬ 
trolled oil pump and a 3-stage intake manifold. 

The new construction configuration allows a weight savings of 10kg (22 lbs.) over the 
previous generation of six cylinder engines. 

History Overview 

(1/min) 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Nominal engine speed 

3 

2 valves, ohc 

B 

Year 

4 

4 valve, dohc 

C 

Mean values 

5 

4 valve, dohc, VANOS (single - intake) 

1 

2 valves, sv 

6 

4 valve, dohc, VANOS (double E/A) 

2 

2 valves, ohv 

7 

4 valve, dohc, VANOS (double) Valvetronic 


6 


New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 





































Innovative Solutions 

The N52 engine concept allowed for a substantial weight savings of lOKg (22lbs.) over 
its predecessor the M54. The primary contributors to the total weight savings are the 
new composite magnesium-aluminum crankcase and the lightweight exhaust manifold. 
Also, the magnesium bedplate and cylinder head cover also played a significant role in 
overall weight reduction. 

The overall lightweight engine package allows for and improved power to weight ratio as 
well as an improvement in fuel consumption. 

The N52 engine also features several innovations designed to further improve the overall 
engine. Aside from the composite crankcase there is a new Valvetronic II system which 
has been improved from the original version. The new 3-stage DISA intake manifold is 
constructed from a high temperature lightweight material. The belt driven coolant pump 
from previous engines has been replaced by an electric coolant pump. This allows the 
addition of a single belt drive. There is also a volumetric flow controlled oil pump to 
supply the reguired oil forVANOS operation. 





■V 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Valvetronic II 

6 

Basic engine, friction reduced 

2 

Integrated oil-to-water heat exchanger 

7 

Single belt drive 

3 

Composite magnesium crankcase 

8 

Electric coolant pump 

4 

3-stage intake manifold 

9 

Weight-optimized VANOS units 

5 

Volumetric flow controlled oil pump 




7 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 











Technical Data (N52B30) 


Description 

Value 

Engine Type 

6 cylinder in-line 

Displacement (cm 3 ) 

2.996 

Stroke/bore (mm) 

85.0/88.0 

Cylinder spacing (mm) 

91 

Crankshaft main bearing diameter 

6 @ 56mm /1 @ 65mm 

Crankshaft big-end (rod) bearing diameter 

50mm 

Firing Order 

1-5-3-6-2-4 

Power output (kW/hp) 

190/255 

@ engine speed 

6,600 

Torque 

300 

@ engine speed 

2,500 to 4,000 

Maximum rpm (governed cutoff) 

7,000 

Power to weight ratio 

0.84 

Power output per liter 

63.4 

Compression ratio 

10.7 

Valves per cylinder 

4 

Intake valve diameter (mm) 

34.2 

Exhaust valve diameter (mm) 

29 

Minimum intake valve lift (mm) 

0.18 

Maximum intake valve lift (mm) 

9.9 

Exhaust valve lift 

9.7 

Camshaft opening angle, intake (crankshaft degrees) 

255 

Camshaft opening angle, exhaust (crankshaft degrees) 

263 

Camshaft spread, intake (crankshaft degrees) 

120-50 

Camshaft spread, exhaust (crankshaft degrees) 

115-60 

Engine weight (kg.) 

161 

Fuel requirement 

91 (98 RON) 

Engine oil 

SAE 5W-30 

Knock control 

Yes 

Intake manifold 

3 Stage Resonance Intake Manifold (DISA) 

Engine Management 

Siemens MSV70 

Valvetrain System 

Valvetronic II 

Emissions Certification 

ULEV2 


8 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 








































































Engine Power Output (N52 3.0 Liter) 



kW 

190 

ISO 

160 

140 

120 

100 

so 

60 

40 

20 

0 


9 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 

























Engine Designations and Identification 

The N52 engine uses a similar engine designation to past engines. 
The new engine designation is broken down as follows: 

N52 B 30 OL 



2 

1 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

N = New Generation Engine 

4 

30 = 3.0 Liter Displacement 

2 

52 = Inline 6 Cylinder Engine 

5 

OL = Upper Output Stage (High Output) 

3 

B = Gasoline 




The “OL” designation refers to the upper output stage, the “UL” designation refers to the 
lower output engine which is not available in the US market. Both, the N52B30 and B25 
engine will only be available as the “OL” variant in the US. 


The engine identification code is located on the side of the engine block, below the 
intake manifold directly between the knock sensors. The designation “AF” in the engine 
code refers to the upper output stage or “OL” variant. 



10 


New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 

























Components 

The N52 engine consists of the following components/systems: 

• 6-cylinder, 4-valve in-line, friction optimized engine 

• Two-piece crankcase in composite magnesium-aluminum structure 

• Trapezoidal connecting rods (weight optimized) 

• Aluminum silicon (Alusil) cylinder head 

• Timing case integrated in crankcase and cylinder head 

• Cylinder head gasket with silicon sealing lip 

• VALVETRONIC II 

• Weight-optimized double VANOS 

• Volumetric flow-controlled oil pump 

• Electrically controlled coolant pump 

• Crankcase ventilation with integrated heater 

• 3-stage DISA 



11 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 





Crankcase 

Since magnesium cannot be used in all areas of engine construction, the new N52 
crankcase is a composite design. The crankcase consists of an aluminum/silicon insert 

which is cast inseparably in a magnesium alloy. 

The crankcase is a two piece design with a separate bedplate also cast from magnesium. 
Also a notable change from previous designs is the timing cover which is now cast as an 
integral part of the engine block. 

The aluminum silicon insert provides the threaded connections for the transmission 
mounting, cylinder head and crankshaft main bolts. The insert provides the coolant 
passages as well. This is to prevent coolant contact with the magnesium portion of the 

^hhhib 


12 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 










The use of magnesium is a new concept for production passenger vehicles. BMW has 
developed special processes for the development of the N52 crankcase. A special 
magnesium alloy (AJ62) is used which has excellent properties which reduce the possi¬ 
bility of corrosion and allow favorable machining characteristics. 


The cylinder bore consists of an Alusil structure, there are no iron cylinder liners as with 
previous 6 cylinder designs. The cylinder bores cannot be machined, however this 
design still allows for planing of the deck surface if needed. 


13 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 







Bedplate 

The N52 engine uses a split crankcase, the upper section is made from a composite 
magnesium/aluminum structure. The lower portion, which is used to increase rigidity, is 
designed as a bedplate structure made from magnesium. 



There are sintered steel inlays (arrow) for the main bearings to take up forces which would 
not be suitable for magnesium alone. 


Between the bedplate and crankcase, a liguid sealer is injected under high pressure into 
a machined groove This process is critical in service applications. 


1. Bedplate inlays 

2. Bedplate 



14 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 









Crankshaft 


The crankshaft is cast iron with 7 main bearing journals. The trigger wheel for the crank¬ 
shaft position sensor is between cylinders 5 and 6. Due to the design of the timing chain 
module, the crankshaft snout is modified to facilitate removal during service. 



Piston and Connecting Rod 

As with previous engine designs, the 
pistons are manufactured from aluminum 
and have 4 valve reliefs. 

The underside of the pistons are cooled 
with oil spray jets as in the past. 

The connecting rods are weight optimized 
by tapering the “small end” of the rod. This 
method reduces weight without reducing 
strength. 

The “big end” of the connecting rod is 
“cracked” to create to proper centering of 
the bearing cap without the use of dowel 
pins. This further contributes to the overall 
weight reduction. Each connecting rod 
uses pairing codes (1) to allow the correct 
rod cap to be matched to the connecting 
rod. 



The connecting rods are divided into 
weight categories and can only be 
replaced as a set. 


15 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 









Cylinder Head 

The N52 uses an aluminum (AluSil) cylinder head with a cast bridge to mount the VVT 
actuator motor for the Valvetronic II system. 



Cylinder Head Cover 

The cylinder head cover is also cast from magnesium alloy as well. The cylinder head 
cover provides an important mounting point for the VVT motor. The rear of the motor is 
supported by an aluminum bolt which attaches to a bracket on the cylinder head cover. 

All of the bolts which attach the cylinder head cover to the cylinder head are made from 
aluminum. When performing repairs which involve the removal of the cylinder head cover 
be sure to replace the bolts and use the the proper torgue/angle procedure as outlined in 
the repair instructions. 



16 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 




Valvetrain 


The valvetrain on the N52 uses the familiar 4 valve per cylinder arrangement used on 
previous engines. The N52 valvetrain also uses the proven Valvetronic technology which 
was introduced on the N62. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Actuator 

9 

Exhaust Valve 

2 

Worm Shaft 

10 

Roller Cam Follower 

3 

Return Spring 

11 

HVA, exhaust 

4 

Gate Block 

12 

Roller Cam Follower, Intake 

5 

Intake Camshaft 

13 

Intermediate Lever 

6 

Ramp 

14 

Eccentric Shaft 

7 

HVA, Intake 

15 

Worm Gear 

8 

Intake Valve 

16 

Exhaust Camshaft 


17 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



















Camshaft 


The total weight of the N52 is additionally reduced by the lighter camshafts. The total 
weight of the camshafts has been reduced by approximately 25% using “hydroforming” 
technology during the manufacturing process. 

The hydroforming process starts with a steel tube on which hardened camshaft lobe 
“rings” are fitted. The camshaft assembly is then placed into a die. The steel tube is 
then subjected to an internal water pressure of up to 4000 bar. The tube then conforms 
to the inside of the die and achieves the desired shape. The camshaft lobes are then 
polished to the desired finish. 

The weight savings is approximately 600 grams (21 oz) per camshaft. 



VANOS 

Additional weight savings is also found on 
the VANOS system as well. The design of 
the VANOS is similar to that found on the 
N62. 

The VANOS units are compact and use the 
“vane-type” construction which is less 
complex and easier to service than previous 
6-cylinder VANOS designs. The VANOS 
units have integrated sprockets and are 
attached to the camshaft via a central bolt. 

Due to the different spread ranges for the 
intake and exhaust camshaft, the VANOS 
units cannot be interchanged. Doing so 
would cause considerable engine damage. 



18 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 










Intake Manifold 


The intake manifold is manufactured from lightweight thermo-plastic. The manifold 
provides the mounting for the 2 airflap actuators for the three-stage DISA system as well 
as the electronic throttle flap actuator. 



Crankcase Ventilation 


The crankcase ventilation system is attached to the rear of intake manifold. The system 
is now heated to prevent moisture from affecting system operation during low ambient 
temperatures. The heating system is controlled by the MSV70 engine management 
system via a relay. 



19 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



Exhaust Manifold 


The exhaust manifold has been modified to offer substantial weight savings over the 
previous design. The mounting flange has been lightened by using sheet steel with a 
new sealing design. The flange is approximately 2mm thick, as compared to the M54 
design which is approximately 12mm thick. 



The manifold uses a new circular seal which contains graphite. The new design features 
a thin-walled catalyst which reaches operating temperature faster. This eliminates the 
need for secondary air injection on some applications. The catalysts are also mounted 
near the engine as in the past. There are also provisions for the mounting of the pre and 
post catalyst oxygen sensors. 



20 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 






Gaskets/Seals 

In order to prevent contact corrosion, a non-conductive gasket is placed between select 
engine components. This is the function of the oil pan and cylinder head gasket. 

The oil pan separates the aluminum oil pan from the magnesium crankcase (bedplate). 
The cylinder head gasket separates the aluminum cylinder head from the magnesium 
crankcase. 

The cylinder head gasket features a sealing lip which protrudes from the block. This lip 
prevents dirt and splashing water from bridging the sealed joint, which prevents contact 
of these metals. 



Particular care must be taken to ensure that the gaskets are not damaged during service. 
If gasket damage occurs, contact corrosion could form between the aluminum of the 
cylinder head and the magnesium of the crankcase within a relatively short period of time. 

If the damage to the gasket were deep enough, the steel in the the core of the gasket 
could also have an effect on the corrosion process. 


21 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 




Bolts 


Due to the magnesium construction, any ancillary components which are attached to the 
engine exterior are connected by aluminum bolts. 

The aluminum bolts are needed to prevent contact corrosion. Conventional steel cannot 
be used in magnesium for any reason. The aluminum bolts can be identified by a blue 
colored bolt head and their light weight. 



\ 


Also, the aluminum bolts can only be used once and must be replaced after each use. 

When replacing components reguiring aluminum bolts, torguing procedures must be 
strictly followed. 

Torguing procedures include specific guidelines to prevent under or over torguing of the 
attachment bolts. 

The procedures are outlined as follows: 

• The bolt is tightened to a specific application torgue to remove any slack between 
the components to be joined. 

• The bolt is then tightened using the “angle torguing” method using a specific angle 
found in the tightening torgues section of WebTIS. 

Also, during any service procedures which involve coolant such as cylinder head replace¬ 
ment, the bolt holes must be blown dry immediately. Coolant must not be allowed to sit 
in any holes, this prevents any corrosion which could be caused by the coolant coming 
into contact with magnesium components. 


22 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 






Oil Pump 

The high oil volume demands of the VANOS system on the N52 create a need for an oil 
pump that can deliver a high volume of oil when needed. Also, the pump needs to be 
able to cut back on the oil delivery volume when the requirements are not as great. 

This occurs when the VANOS is not as active, for instance during cruise situations. 

This new oil pump is a “volume controlled” design which not only meets the oiling 
requirements, but also contributes to improved fuel economy and emissions. 



The advantages of a volumetric-flow controlled oil pump: 

• Favorable space/efficiency ratio 

• Provides sufficient hydraulic pressure and volume for valve control systems 

• Reduced volumetric flow fluctuations 

• Hydraulic energy not converted into thermal loss 

• Reduction of premature oil ageing 

• Reduced sound emissions 


23 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 




Electric Water Pump 

The coolant pump on the N52 is designed as an electrically driven centrifugal pump. The 
output of the wet-rotor electric motor is controlled electronically by the electronic module 
(EWPU) located under the connection cover of the motor. 



The EWPU is connected via the bit-serial data interface to the DME engine control unit. 
The engine control unit determines the necessary cooling capacity from the engine load, 
operating mode and the data from the temperature sensor and sends the corresponding 
instruction to the EWPU control unit. 

The coolant in the system flows through the motor of the coolant pump, thus cooling 
both the motor as well as the electronic module. 

The coolant also lubricates the bearings of the electric coolant pump. 

Note: Particular care must be taken when performing servicing work to ensure 
that the pump does not run dry. When the pump is removed, it should be 
stored filled with coolant. The bearing points of the pump could seize if 
the pump were not filled with coolant. This could jeopardize subsequent 
start-up of the pump thus rendering the entire heat management system 
inoperative (the pump not starting up could cause serious engine dam¬ 
age). If the pump should ever run dry, the pump wheel should be turned 
by hand before finally connecting the coolant hoses. The system should 
then be immediately filled with coolant. 

Particular care must be taken during assembly to ensure that the connec' 
tor is clean and dry and the connections are undamaged. Diagnosis 
should be performed only with the approved adapter cables. The infor¬ 
mation provided in the repair instructions must be observed. 


24 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



Map Controlled Thermostat 


The map controlled thermostat is located externally near the electric water pump. 
The thermostat is controlled by the ECM an operates in conjunction with the 
N52 Heat Management System. 



Oil-to Water Heat Exchanger (5 Series) 

The oil-to-water heat exchanger is connected both to the oil circuit as well as to the water 
circuit of the engine. This arrangement ensures that the coolant quickly heats up the 
engine oil when the engine is cold and the coolant cools the engine oil when the engine 
is hot. Shortening the warm-up phase contributes to reducing the overall fuel consump¬ 
tion. The engine oil is cooled in order to extend its service life. 



25 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 







Vacuum Pump 

Just as with the N62 engine, the N52 has 
little vacuum available in the intake mani¬ 
fold to operate certain components. 

The N52 engine uses a vacuum pump dri¬ 
ven by the camshaft chain drive. 

The vacuum pump supplies vacuum to the 
brake booster and the exhaust flap damper. 
The exhaust flap damper system no longer 
reguires the vacuum storage reservoir used 
on past models. This is due to the use of 
the vacuum pump. The flap operation is 
no longer affected by variations in intake 
manifold vacuum. 


Alternator 

The alternator is a 180 amp unit manufactured by Valeo. The alternator uses a one way 
clutch on the pulley. The alternator is capable of over-running when the battery is in a full 
state of charge. This prevents the inertia created by the rotating alternator from causing 
belt slippage on deceleration. Also, the service life of the belt tensioner is increased. 

The alternator communicates with the ECM via the BSD line. 

Note: the one way clutch is also used on Bosch alternators as well (N52). 




26 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 








Workshop Exercise - N52 Engine 

Using an instructor designated engine trainer, remove the VVT motor, cylinder 
head(valve) cover and eccentric shaft sensor using proper repair procedures. 

What special precautions must be observed when removing VVT motor? 


Continue to remove valve cover and eccentric shaft sensor. 

Complete the table below and check off which bolts are steel or aluminum: 


Bolt Description 

Aluminum 

Bolt 

Steel Bolt 

Example > 

X 


Valve Cover Bolts 



WT Motor Flange (to cylinder head) 



WT rear support (to valve cover) 



Engine Acoustic Cover (on vehicle) 




What are the special concerns regarding the cleaning of the cylinder head or valve cover 
sealing surfaces? 


What is important regarding the eccentric shaft sensor wheel mounting bolt? 


Once the VVT motor, cylinder head cover and eccentric shaft sensor are removed, 
rotate the engine so the #1 cylinder is at TDC (compression stroke). Install flywheel 
locking tool and camshaft locking tool. 

Before continuing, invert engine on stand and remove oil pan. 


27 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 













Workshop Exercise - N52 Engine 

Once oil pan is removed, continue with removal of oil pump pickup tube and oil 
deflector. 

Complete the table below and check off which bolts are steel or aluminum: 


Bolt Description 

Aluminum 

Bolt 

Steel Bolt 

Example > 

X 


Oil pan bolts 



Oil deflector bolts 




Invert engine back to upright position and continue with removal of VANOS and 
timing chain assembly. 

Remove VANOS solenoids and camshaft sensors. 

Complete the table below and check off which bolts are steel or aluminum: 


Bolt Description 

Aluminum 

Bolt 

Steel Bolt 

Example > 

X 


VANOS solenoid retaining bolts 



Camshaft sensor retaining bolts 




Remove timing chain tensioner. Remove intake and exhaust VANOS units. 

Are the exhaust and intake VANOS adjustment units interchangeable? Why or Why not? 


Are the camshaft sensor gears interchangeable? 


Does the timing chain tensioner have a seal/gasket. Why or why not? 


28 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 




















Workshop Exercise - N52 Engine 


Once the VANOS adjustment units are removed, continue with removal of the timing 
chain assembly. 

Remove upper timing chain guide by unclipping from lower chain guide. Suspend 
timing chain using upper guide bolts. 

Remove screw plugs from timing case to access timing chain guide retaining bolts. 
Remove timing chain guide bolts. 

Remove crankshaft central bolt and remove from crankshaft hub. Remove timing 
chain, chain guides and crankshaft sprocket as an assembly. 

Describe the installation position of the crankshaft sprocket: 


What is unique about the front crankshaft hub assembly? 


Once the timing chain has been removed, invert engine (crank side up) and remove oil 
pump chain module and oil pump. 

Complete the table below and check off which bolts are steel or aluminum: 


Bolt Description 

Aluminum 

Bolt 

Steel Bolt 

Example > 

X 


Oil pump chain module bolts 



Oil pump mounting bolts. 




Proceed with removal of the bedplate assembly. Remove flywheel temporarily to 
facilitate bedplate removal. (Do not rotate engine due to possible piston to valve 
contact). 


Lift out bedplate assembly and note sealant passages in crankcase and bedplate. 
Complete the table below and check off which bolts are steel or aluminum: 


Bolt Description 

Aluminum 

Bolt 

Steel Bolt 

Example > 

X 


Outer bedplate bolts 



Main bearing bolts 




29 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



















Workshop Exercise - N52 Engine 

Re-install bedplate following proper procedures and sequences. (Do not tighten bolts 
to specification. For training purposes, tighten bolts only “hand tight”. 


Bolt Description 

Joining Torque 

Torque Angle 

Outer bedplate bolts (Ml 0X27) 



Outer bedplate bolts (M8X37) 



Outer bedplate bolts (Ml 0 X 41) 



Main bearing bolts 




Complete the chart below using the proper torque specifications: 

Re-install flywheel and crankshaft locking pin. Note correct position of locking pin. 
Re-install oil pump noting correct position of bolts. 

Complete the chart below using the proper torque specifications: 


Bolt Description 

Joining Torque 

Torque Angle 

Oil pump to bedplate (M8 X123) 



Oil pump to bedplate (M8 X 31) 




Re-install oil pump drive using proper procedures. 

What special tool is used to retain oil pump chain tensioner? 


Install bolts on oil pump and vacuum pump sprockets. Re-install oil pump pickup and 
deflector plate. 

Complete the chart below using the proper torque specifications: 


Bolt Description 

Joining Torque 

Torque Angle 

Oil pump chain module to crankcase and oil pump (M6 XI6) 



Oil Pump Sprocket 


Vacuum Pump Sprocket 


Oil deflector bolts 



30 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 




























Workshop Exercise - N52 Engine 


Invert engine to upright position and reinstall timing chain guides and crankshaft hub. 
Be sure to install crankshaft sprocket correctly. 

Temporarily install VANOS actuators and upper timing chain guide. Proceed with 
removal of the exhaust camshaft. 

Temporarily remove camshaft locking tool. 

What special procedures should be observed when removing exhaust camshaft bolts? 

Remove exhaust camshaft and note position of camshaft followers. Re-install 
exhaust camshaft using proper procedures. 

What special tool(s) should be installed before the exhaust camshaft and Why? 


What other precautions should be taken when installing the exhaust camshaft? 


What are the special torguing instructions when installing the exhaust camshaft? 


What special tools are used when performing final torgue on the exhaust camshaft 
mounting bolts? 

Note: Ask instructor to explain access to head bolts and special tools. 


31 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 




Workshop Exercise - N52 Engine 

When the exhaust camshaft installation is complete, continue setting the camshaft 
timing. 

What special tool is used to align the camshaft sensor trigger wheels? 


Do the retaining bolts for the VANOS actuators need to be replaced? 


What special tools are needed to pre-tension the timing chain? 


Complete the chart below using the proper torque specifications: 


Bolt Description 

Joining Torque 

Torque Angle 

VANOS actuator retaining bolts 



Pre-tension of timing chain using 00 9 250 



Crankshaft center bolt 



Timing case plug (Ml 8 xl .5) 



Chain guide rail (cylinder head M8) 



Chain guide rail (crankcase M7) 




Once the camshaft (valve) timing is set, proceed with Valvetronic disassembly. 
Remove and install intermediate levers on one cylinder using proper procedures. 
What special tool is needed to relieve tension on the retaining spring? 


Why is it important to NOT mix up Valvetronic components between cylinders? 


32 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 














Workshop Exercise - N52 Engine 


Why is it important to remove oil from the mounting surfaces of the guide blocks before 
re-assembly? 


What special tool is used to pre-tension the guide blocks during re-assembly? 


Complete the chart below using the proper torque specifications and bolt materials: 


Bolt Description 

Bolt Material 

Joining Torque 

Torque Angle 

Example 

Steel 

10 nM 

90 Degrees 

Guide block bolts 




Retaining spring bolts 





Upon completion of the intermediate shaft R&R, proceed with engine assembly. 
Invert engine and install oil pan (sump). 

Complete the chart below using the proper torque specifications and bolt materials: 


Bolt Description 

Bolt Material 

Joining Torque 

Torque Angle 

Example 

Steel 

10 nM 

90 Degrees 

Oil sump (M8 x 26) 




Oil sump (M8 x 92) 




Oil sump (M8 x 112) 




Oil sump (M8 x 24) All Wheel drive only 





Invert engine to the upright position and continue with re-assembly. Install eccentric 
shaft sensor (if not already done), cylinder head cover and VVT motor. 


33 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 






























Workshop Exercise - N52 Engine 

Re-Install cylinder head cover using proper procedures. 

What is important regarding the VVT mounting bolts? 


Complete the chart below using the proper torque specifications and bolt materials: 


Bolt Description 

Bolt Material 

Joining Torque 

Torque Angle 

Example 

Steel 

10 nM 

90 Degrees 

Cylinder head cover 




WT motor flange to head 




WT motor rear support 





Check over the engine and ensure that all components have been re-installed. 

What special procedures should be observed when cleaning gasket surfaces on a mag¬ 
nesium engine? 


What special procedures should be followed to allow access to the cylinder head bolts? 


34 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 
















Workshop Exercise - N52 Engine 

Fill in the chart below regarding engine materials 


Component 

Material 

Crankcase 


Bedplate 


Cylinder Bore 


Cylinder Head 


Cylinder Head Cover 


Oil Sump (pan) 


Head Bolts 


Crankshaft 


Camshafts 



35 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 
















Principle of Operation 


Magnesium - new material in engine construction 

Until now, magnesium has not been explored as an option for a material for engine 
construction. Recently, the realization is that the weight savings potential of aluminum 
has been exploited to its fullest. This is one of the primary factors in the decision to use 
magnesium as engine building material. The light weight and low density of magnesium 
make it an outstanding option to aluminum. 

Magnesium, which has very good casting properties, makes it possible to manufacture 
large components with high surface guality. Despite the high accuracy of the cast parts, 
subseguent machining of function areas is, however, in the majority of cases unavoidable. 

These excellent properties are, however, offset by several problematic aspects in the use 
of magnesium and its alloys. The former serious problem of corrosion has in the mean¬ 
time been substantially alleviated by the development of distinctly more corrosion resis¬ 
tant alloys. The alloy used for the N52 is designated AJ62. 

Nevertheless, a distinct corrosion risk still exists if the material-specific fundamentals 
described in the following are disregarded.) Non-approved materials that come in contact 
with magnesium must not be installed. 

This means only genuine BMW spare parts must be installed. The materials of the 
add-on parts must either be compatible with AJ62 or shielded by a seal/gasket from the 
magnesium casing. For these reasons, it is important to strictly adhere to the corre¬ 
sponding information provided in the repair instructions. 


Electrochemical Properties of Magnesium 

Metals are divided into noble (precious) 
and base metals. Gold, for example, is a 
noble metal and sodium a very base metal. 

The other metals are distributed over this 
division. When two metals such as iron and 
magnesium in contact with each other are 
placed in an electrically conductive liguid, 
e.g. a salt solution, the base metal will 
break down or dissolve and go into 
solution. 

At the same time, electric current flows 
from the noble metal to the base metal. 

Under certain conditions, the base metal 
will deposit itself on the noble metal. 


9 



Mg 


36 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 







Magnesium is a base metal. Its surface is therefore very susceptible to other materials. 
The magnesium alloy used in the N52, however, is completely different: By mixing other 
metals the negative properties of the pure metal are essentially cancelled out so that it is 
capable of satisfying the demands made of it. 

An electrical voltage occurs between the two metals in the electrolyte. All metals can be 
classified based on this voltage. Iron assumes a mid-position in the voltage range while, 
on the other hand, aluminum and particularly magnesium are base. The greater the 
voltage difference between the metals, the faster electrochemical corrosion takes place. 

The described laboratory situation can also easily occur on the engine when two metals 
make direct contact and the contact surface is moistened by splash water for instance. 
So-called contact corrosion takes place. A gap between the contact surfaces in which 
moisture can collect further promotes the occurrence of contact corrosion. 

Contact corrosion can be avoided by keeping the contact surfaces dry or wetting them 
with electrically non-conductive engine oil. For this reason, all contact surfaces in the 
engine involving magnesium, aluminum and steel pose no problems. 

Physical Properties of the Materials 

Magnesium and aluminum have a virtually identical coefficient of expansion which, how¬ 
ever, is almost double that of steel: 

• Magnesium: 0.0026% per °C 

• Aluminum: 0.0023% per °C 

The melting temperature of magnesium also barely differs from that of aluminum. On the 
other hand, the melting point of steel is considerably higher: 

• Magnesium: 650 °C 

• Aluminum: 660 °C 

• Steel: 1,750 °C 

The electrical conductivity of aluminum and magnesium is considerably better than that 
of steel. These materials are therefore particularly suitable for shielding electromagnetic 
interference (e.g. from the ignition spark). 

No problems are encountered when connecting aluminum and magnesium as both 
materials have the same coefficient of expansion. However, no steel screw/bolts can be 
used on the N52 engine due to the fact that the coefficient of expansion of steel is only 
half as much. When the engine heats up, a steel bolt expands at only approximately half 
the rate of the crankcase. Conversely, there is the risk that a screw connection could 
become loose as the engine cools down. For this reason, aluminum bolts/screws are 
used at the decisive points. 


37 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 







VALVETRONIC II 


With the introduction of the N52, the 6-cylinder, engine is now also equipped with the 
load control system based on the valve timing gear. The VALVETRONIC I system that 
was used on the 8-cylinder and 12-cylinder engines already achieved a substantial 
increase in efficiency. 



BMW has further developed this concept with the VALVETRONIC II. 

The results of this further development are: 

• Increased engine dynamics 

• Increased efficiency 

• Improved emission values 

These results underscore BMW-specific standards. This engine that features the follow¬ 
ing optimizations further enhances the Ultimate Driving Machine. 

• The top engine speed has been increased to 7,000 rpm 

• The specific power output has been increased to 63.4 kW/l (85 hp/liter). 

• The specific engine torque is 100 Nm/I over a broad engine speed range 

• Distinctly increased valve acceleration values and friction-optimized transmission 
elements result in an even more responsive engine 

• C02 emissions reduced 

• The world's most stringent exhaust emission regulations are complied with 


38 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



Load Control 


The illustration on the left below shows the conventional method with the slightly higher 
loss. The reduced loss can be clearly seen in the illustration on the right. The upper area 
represents the power gained from the combustion process in the petrol engine. The 
lower area illustrates the loss in this process. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

OT 

Top dead center 

4 

Exhaust valve opens 

UT 

Bottom dead center 

5 

Firing point 

1 

Intake valve opens 

A 

Gain 

2 

Exhaust valve closes 

B 

Loss 

3 

Intake valve closes 

P 

Pressure 


The loss area can be equated to the charge cycle, relating to the amount of energy that 
must be applied in order to expel the combusted exhaust gasses from the cylinder and 
then to draw the fresh gasses again into the cylinder. Apart from the full load setting, the 
intake of fresh gasses in a throttle valve controlled engine always takes place against the 
resistance offered by the throttle valve to the inflowing gasses. The throttle valve is virtual¬ 
ly always fully opened during intake on the VALVETRONIC-controlled engine. The load is 
controlled by the closing timing of the valve. 


Compared to the conventional engine where the load is controlled by the throttle valve, 
no vacuum occurs in the intake manifold. This means no energy is expended for the 
purpose of producing the vacuum. The improved efficiency is achieved by the lower 
power loss during the intake process. 


A minimum vacuum in the intake system is required for the crankcase ventilation and 
evaporative (purge) systems. The throttle valve is slightly adjusted for this purpose. 


39 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 


















Design/Function 

The VALVETRONIC II consists of the fully variable valve lift control combined with the 
variable camshaft control (double VANOS). The valve lift is controlled only on the intake 
side while the camshaft is adjusted also on the exhaust side. 

The throttle-free load control is implemented by variable valve lift of the intake valve, 
variable valve opening timing of the intake valve and variable camshaft spread of the 
intake and exhaust camshaft. 

In terms of this load control principle, the VALVETRONIC II corresponds to the 
VALVETRONIC I introduced on the N62 engine. 

System optimization includes modification of the valve gear kinematics, a modified 
actuator motor and the adapted spread range of the VANOS units. 

The main differences are: 

• The plain bearing on the intermediate lever to the eccentric shaft has been replaced 
by a roller bearing, thus reducing the friction in the valve timing gear. 

• Guidance of the intermediate lever is more precise. Only one spring is now reguired 
to guide and hold the intermediate lever. 

• The moved mass of the valve timing gear has been reduced by 13%. 

• The lift range of the intake valves has been improved. The maximum lift has been 
increased to 9.9 mm but more importantly the minimum lift has been further 
reduced to 0.18 mm. 

The overall result is supported by further improvements in the intake manifold and 
exhaust dynamics. 



40 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 




VANOS 


The N52 is equipped with a compact, infinitely variable vane-type VANOS unit for the 
intake and the exhaust side. The VANOS units can be easily disassembled and assem¬ 
bled. They are designed as an integrated component in the chain drive and are mounted 
with a central bolt on the respective camshaft. When de-pressurized, a coil spring holds 
the VANOS unit in the base position. 

The VANOS units are controlled by oil pressure from the 4/3 proportional solenoid valves. 
The valves are located in the front of the cylinder head and are controlled by the ECM. 
The ECM regulates the VANOS based on factors such as engine RPM, load and coolant 
temperature. 


The operation of the VANOS units is similar to the N62 engine. 




VANOS unit (front view) 


VANOS unit (rearview) 


When servicing the VANOS units, the repair instructions must be followed precisely. The 
VANOS unit can no longer be dismantled and they must not be interchanged as they 
have different spread ranges for the intake camshaft and exhaust camshaft. Installing the 
wrong VANOS unit can cause considerable engine damage. 


41 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



Differential Intake Air Control (DISA) 

The torque developed in an engine greatly depends on the quality of the fresh gas 
charge during the induction stroke. 

Oscillations are induced in the intake air mass during the induction strokes of the 
individual cylinders, i.e. by the downward movement of the pistons. These oscillations are 
in turn superimposed by oscillations that arise from pressure peaks as soon as the moved 
air mass of an intake cylinder comes up against the closing intake valves. 

When two oscillations are superimposed, the resulting oscillation is known as the 
resonance oscillation or sympathetic vibration. The resonance can be an amplification or 
an attenuation of the initial oscillation or vibration. 

Whether a pressure peak or a pressure hole is applied before the intake valves at the 
cylinder at the start of the induction stroke depends on the path the superimposed oscil¬ 
lations have covered in the intake area and on the engine speed, i.e. the gas speed. 

The desire for high torque over a broad engine speed range necessitates an increasingly 
diverse range of air intake systems for internal combustion engines. The geometry and 
control of the intake manifold therefore have a considerable influence on the quality of the 
charge cycle. An intake manifold with a fixed length would provide an optimum cylinder 
charge only at a certain engine speed. 

For this purpose, the M54 is equipped with a two-stage differentiated intake manifold 
(DISA) with a DISA valve (flap). The DISA valve is activated by means of a solenoid and an 
upstream vacuum accumulator. 

The options of boosting torque over a defined engine speed window are limited. Since 
the N52 reaches a maximum engine speed of 7,000 rpm, the previous 2-stage DISA 
would produce a torque lag in the mid engine speed range. The N52 is equipped with a 
3-stage DISA in order to provide high torque also in the medium engine speed range. 

The result of these three stages is illustrated in the diagram below. The switched stages 
of the DISA achieve a high torque over the entire engine speed range. This principle is 
realized by means of an intake manifold changeover facility with two DISA actuators and 
an overflow pipe in the intake area. 

In contrast to the previous system that was controlled with vacuum, the two DISA 
actuators are now operated by electric motors. 

Low RPM Mid-Range RPM High RPM 





42 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



















































The electric motors and DISA actuators form one unit. The two DISA actuators differ in 
size. The DISA actuator 2 is installed in the overflow pipe and the DISA actuator 1 is 
installed in the intake air manifold ahead of the resonating intake runner. 



DISA Actuator DISA Actuator 


Stage 1 - Idle/lower engine speed range 

The DISA actuators 1 and 2 are closed in the idle speed and lower engine speed range. 
The air drawn in flows past the throttle valve into the resonance pipe. The air mass is split 
in the resonance pipe and is routed further via the collector runner and the intake res¬ 
onating runners into the individual cylinders. In this way, a comparably large air mass is 
made available to three cylinders. 

Stage 2 - Medium engine speed range 

DISA actuator 2 is open in the medium engine speed range. In this example it is assumed 
that the intake valves of the first cylinder are just closing. The gas movement produces 
pressure peaks at the closing intake valves. 

This is continued via the resonating and manifold runners at the next cylinder in the firing 
order thus improving fresh gas charge of the next cylinder to be charged. 

Stage 3 - Upper engine speed range 

Both DISA actuators are opened in the upper engine speed range. Also in this case it is 
assumed that the intake valves of the first cylinder are just closing. The pressure peaks 
ahead of the closing intake valves are also utilized in this case. The intake air mass is now 
routed via the resonance, overflow and manifold runners. 

DISA Actuators 

Together with the drive, the DISA valve (flap) forms one unit. The DISA valve is driven by 
an electric motor and a gear mechanism. 

The electronic control is integrated in the DISA actuator. The DISA actuator is driven by a 
pulse width-modulated signal from the DME MSV70. 

There are only two possible positions: The valves (flaps) can either be closed or opened, 
i.e. when activated, the motor moves the valve to the respective end position. 


43 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



Lubrication System 

To meet the oiling requirements of the N52, a new “volumetric-flow controlled” oil pump 
is utilized. Systems such as VANOS require a large volume of oil, particularly at low 
engine speeds. 

To keep up with the volume requirements, a conventional oil pump would need to be 
3 times as large as the new oil pump design. A larger oil pump would also consume 
excess energy and therefore the new pump design allows: 

• Increased power output 

• Reduced weight 

• Optimized fuel consumption 

• Reduced exhaust emissions 



The savings potential of the new optimized pump system is a 
good reason to employ this new design. 

The tasks of the engine oiling system includes: 

• The lubrication of friction surfaces in the engine 

• The cooling of part subject to high load 

• Carrying away abrasive particles 

• Provides a hydraulic control medium (for VANOS etc) 

• Protection against corrosion 


44 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 


The VANOS requires a large volume of oil particularly for the purpose of adjusting the 
camshaft angle. However, it requires no oil flow when the VANOS retains the set 
camshaft angle. 

The oil requirement therefore depends on the extent of the required adjustment. 

Conventional oil pumps produce the oil pressure necessary for the greatest possible oil 
flow that can occur in the engine. In many operating situations this situation represents 
unnecessary energy consumption through the oil pump and excessive wear of the oil. 

The Valvetronic II and hot idle operation, therefore necessitate a new optimized pump 
system. 

The highest control demands are placed on the double VANOS at idle speed and small 
valve lift rates. The adaptation requirement for the start of opening of the valves is propor¬ 
tionally the greatest under these operating conditions. 

For the oil pump this means that it must deliver a large volume of oil to the VANOS units 
at relatively low engine speeds. 


© © w 

f vi> vi> 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Vane 

5 

Pump Shaft 

2 

Slide Valve 

6 

Rotor 

3 

Control Piston with Pendulum Support 

7 

Pivot 

4 

Compression Spring 




45 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 






















To meet these demands, a conventional oil pump would have to be dimensioned 3 times 
as large as the oil pump used on the N52. It would also take up correspondingly more 
drive energy. 

The N52 is equipped with a volumetric-flow controlled oil pump. This type of pump 
deliver only as much oil as is necessary under the respective engine operating conditions. 
No surplus quantities of oil are delivered in low load operating ranges. This reduces the 
fuel consumption of the engine and slows down the oil wear rate. 

The pump is designed as a slide valve-type vane pump. In delivery mode, the pump 
shaft is positioned off-center in the housing and the vanes are displaced radially during 
rotation. As a result, the vanes form chambers of differing volume. The oil is drawn in as 
the volume increases and, conversely, expelled into the oil channels as the volume 
decreases. 


46 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 





Oil Pump Operation 

The crankshaft drives the pump with a chain. The applied oil pressure acts on the 
control spool with oblique stop face (pendulum support) against the force of a compres¬ 
sion spring. The pendulum support varies the position of the slide valve. The changes in 
volume are small and the delivered volume is low when the pump shaft is positioned 
towards the center of the slide valve. The changes in volume and the delivered quantity 
are greater than the pump shaft is located off center. If the oil required by the engine 
increases, for example, VANOS control intervention, the pressure in the lubricating 
system drops and is therefore also reduced at the control spool. In response, the pump 
increases the delivery volume and re-establishes the pressure conditions. When the oil 
required by the engine decreases, the pump correspondingly reduces the delivery quanti¬ 
ty towards the zero-delivery direction. 



Intake side of pump 


Spring Pressure 


Exhaust (output) side of pump 


47 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 


Electronic Oil Condition Monitoring 

There is no dipstick including the guide tube on the N52 engine. This represents a 
convenience function for the customer while enabling more accurate recording of the 
engine oil level. 

The engine oil level is measured by an oil condition sensor (OZS) and indicated in the 
central information display (CID). The engine oil temperature and the oil condition are 
also registered or calculated by the oil condition sensor. The signal from the oil condition 
sensor is evaluated in the ECM. The evaluated signal is then routed via the PT-CAN, 
SGM and the K-CAN to the instrument cluster and to the CID. 

Registering the engine oil level in this way ensures the engine oil level in the engine does 
not reach critically low levels thus protecting the engine from the associated damage. By 
registering the oil condition, it is also possible to determine when the next engine oil 
change is due. Overfilling the engine with oil can cause leaks - a corresponding warning 
is therefore given. 


TJ 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Housing 

6 

Oil Condition Sensor 

2 

Outer Metal Tube 

7 

Sensor Electronics 

3 

Inner Metal Tube 

8 

Oil Pan 

4 

Engine Oil 

9 

Temperature Sensor 

5 

Oil Level Sensor 




48 


New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 







































Function of the Oil Condition Sensor 

The sensor consists of two cylindrical capacitors arranged one above the other. The oil 
condition is determined by the lower, smaller capacitor (6). Two metal tubes (2 + 3), 
arranged one in the other, serve as the capacitor electrodes. The dielectric is the engine 
oil (4) between the electrodes. The electrical property of the engine oil changes as the 
wear or ageing increases and the fuel additives break down. 

The capacitance of the capacitor (oil condition sensor) changes in line with the change in 
the electrical material properties of the engine oil (dielectric). This means that this capaci¬ 
tance value is processed in the evaluation electronics (7) integrated in the sensor to form 
a digital signal. 

The digital sensor signal is transferred to the DME as an indication of the status of the 
engine oil. This actual value is used in the DME to calculate the next oil change service 
due. 

The engine oil level is determined in the upper part of the sensor (5). This part of the 
sensor is located at the same level as the oil in the oil pan. As the oil level drops (dielec¬ 
tric), the capacitance of the capacitor changes accordingly. The electronic circuitry in the 
sensor processes this capacitance value to form a digital signal and transfers the signal to 
the DME. 

A platinum temperature sensor (9) is installed at the base of the oil condition sensor for 
the purpose of measuring the engine oil temperature. 


The engine oil level, engine oil temperature and engine oil condition are registered 
continuously as long as voltage is applied at terminal 15. The oil condition sensor is 
powered via terminal 87. 



Faults/Evaluation 

The electronic circuitry in the oil condition sensor features a self-diagnosis function. A 
corresponding error message is sent to the DME in the event of a fault in the oil condition 
sensor. 


49 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 


Electronic Oil Level Indicator 

The oil level is measured in two stages: 

• Static oil level measurement while the vehicle is stationary 

• Dynamic oil level measurement during vehicle operation 

Static oil level measurement at engine OFF 

This is only a reference measurement as the oil condition sensor (OZS) is flooded when 
the engine is turned off and can only detect the minimum oil level. The oil level is 
measured correctly only when the engine is running (see Dynamic oil level measure¬ 
ment). 

After switching on the ignition, the static oil level measurement provides the driver with 
the opportunity of checking whether there is sufficient engine oil for safely and reliably 
starting the engine. 

1. It is important that the vehicle is parked horizontally otherwise the oil level 
measurement may be incorrect. 

2. Select on-board computer function "Service" -> "Oil level". 

If there is sufficient engine oil for safe and reliable engine start, a graphic appears in the 
CID in the form of an engine with a green oil sump. 


Text furZustand: 
Keine genaue 
Messung moglich 
Olstand in 
Ordnung 


50 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



If the oil level is close to minimum, the 
graphic appears with a yellow oil sump and 
an oil dipstick that represents the low oil 
level in yellow. 

A top-up request+1 liter additionally 
appears as a text message. The display 
will not change if less than 1 liter of oil is 
topped up. MAX is indicated only after top¬ 
ping up a quantity of 1 liter. 

If the oil level drops below minimum, the 
graphic appears with a red oil sump and an 
oil dipstick that represents the low oil level 
in red. 

A top-up request+1 liter will additionally 
appear as a text message. 

The display will not change if less than 1 
liter of oil is topped up. MAX is indicated 
only after topping up a quantity of 1 liter. 

If the oil level is above maximum, the 
graphic appears with a yellow oil sump and 
an oil dipstick that represents the high oil 
level in yellow. 

A text message is also displayed for the 
driver. 




51 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 










Dynamic oil level measurement during vehicle operation 

Always perform the dynamic oil level measurement (app.. 5minutes driving time) after an 
oil change. The oil level could be misinterpreted as the oil level last stored is initially dis¬ 
played after an oil change. 


No oil level is initially stored after replacing or reprogramming the engine control unit. 

"Oil level below min" is therefore displayed. The correct oil level is indicated after running 
the engine for app.. 5 minutes. 


1. Start engine. 

2. Select on-board computer function - 
“Check oil level". 

3. The oil level is measured. A clock 
symbol may appear while the level 
measurement is running. The clock 
symbol appears for up to 50 seconds 
after starting the engine when there is 
no measured value or the long-term 
value last stored is not within the 
tolerance range of the currently 
measured oil level. 



Dynamic oil level measurement begins when following values are reached: 

• Engine temperature > 60°C 

• Engine speed > 1000 rpm 

• Transverse and longitudinal acceleration < 4-5 m/s2 

The transverse acceleration signal is supplied by the DSC. The longitudinal acceleration 
is calculated from the speed and time factors. 

• Increase < 5% after covering a distance of app.. 200 m. The increase value is 
detected by the ambient pressure sensor in the DME. 

On reaching this value, the oil level indicator is updated approximately 5 minutes after 
starting vehicle operation. The oil level is then continuously measured. The indicator is 
updated at 20 minute intervals. The "Check oil level" menu in connection with the 
dynamic oil level measurement is exited while driving (vehicle speed > 0) app.. 15 sec¬ 
onds after the oil level is displayed. 


52 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



Display Options 


Significance 


Remark 


Display 


Oil OK with engine 
stationary 


The oil level appears in the CID in the form 
of a graphic together with the "OK" 
message, indicating that the oil level is in 
the safe operating range. 


TkpI Tur 7i_n, II i 
Xjiim; Qcnatjc 
UAUUllty ,-niilililJ. 

uL-,' . a in 
tjrdrunn 


Oil level OK at idle speed 


The oil level appears in the CID in the form 
of a graphic together with the "OK" 
message, indicating that the oil level is in 
the safe operating range. 


I 

max 


A further graphic showing a dipstick 
appears above the displayed graphic. It 
shows the oil level in green. 


min 


Oil level too low 


The oil level appears in the CID in the form 
of a graphic together with the request to 
top up with 1 liter of oil. 

If the oil is not topped up, this request is 
repeatedly indicated until the minimum oil 
level is exceeded. 


I ( 

max 

min 


Oil level too 


Service 


high 


The oil level appears in the CID in the form 
of a graphic together with the indication 
that the maximum oil level has been 
exceeded. The excess engine oil must be 
extracted in the workshop down to the 
maximum limit. 

If no oil is extracted, this request will be 
repeated until the oil level drops below the 
maximum limit. This represents an 
advantage that extends beyond the user 
friendliness of the monitoring system. 

Over filling of the engine that can cause 
leaks is indicated as a warning in the instru¬ 
ment cluster. 


max 

min 


There is a problem with the measurement 
system if SERVICE appears in the display. 

In this case, the oil level is forecast from the 
oil consumption last measured and shown 
in the display. It is not necessary to immedi¬ 
ately visit a workshop. The remaining kilo¬ 
meters are shown in the service menu. In 
the event of the instrument cluster failing, 
the oil level can also be read out with the 
diagnosis tester. 


53 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 














Cooling System 

On most engine systems to date, the delivery capacity of the coolant pump has been 
designed with the greatest possible cooling reguirement of the engine. In the majority of 
cases, this large volume of coolant is not reguired. 

As a result, the excess coolant will circulate through the thermostat ina small circuit. The 
new design of the cooling system utilizes an electric coolant pump which minimizes 
engine power losses and allows for increased fuel economy by a more efficient method 
of engine heat management. 


Heat Management 

The engine control unit controls the coolant pump according to reguirements: low output 
in connection with low cooling reguirements and low outside temperatures; high output 
in connection with high cooling requirements and high outside temperatures. 


The coolant pump may also be completely switched off under certain circumstances, e.g. 
to allow the coolant to heat up rapidly during the warm-up phase. However, this only 
occurs when no heating is required and the outside temperature is within the permitted 
range. 



The coolant pump also operates differently than conventional pumps when controlling 
the engine temperature. To date, only the currently applied temperature could be 
controlled by the thermostat. The software in the engine control unit now features a 
calculation model that can take into account the development of the cylinder head 
temperature based on load. 

In addition to the characteristic map control of the thermostat, the heat management 
system makes it possible to use various maps for the purpose of controlling the coolant 
pump. For instance, the engine control unit can adapt the engine temperature to match 
the current driving situation. 


54 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 




















































This means that four different temperature ranges can be implemented: 

• 112°C ECO mode (economy) 

• 105°C Normal mode 

• 95°C High mode 

• 80°C High + mapped thermostat mode 

The coolant control sets a higher cylinder head temperature (112°C) if the engine control 
unit determines ECO mode based on the current operating conditions. 

The engine is operated with relatively low fuel consumption in this temperature range as 
the internal friction is reduced. 

An increase in temperature therefore favors lower fuel consumption in the low load range. 
In HIGH and mapped thermostat mode, the driver wishes to utilize the optimum power 
development of the engine. The cylinder head temperature is therefore reduced to 80° C. 

This results in improved volumetric efficiency, thus increasing the engine torgue. The 
engine control unit can therefore set a certain operating mode adapted to the respective 
driving situation. Conseguently, it is possible to influence fuel consumption and power 
output by means of the cooling system. 

Intelligent Heat Management 

This concept of intelligent heat management opens up potentials for engine functions 
and the vehicle operator. The previous section dealt with the various operating modes in 
connection with heat management. However, an electrically driven coolant pump makes 
available even further options. For instance, it is now possible to warm up the engine 
without the recirculating the coolant or to allow the pump to continue to operate after 
turning off the engine to facilitate heat dissipation. 

The advantage offered by this type of pump are listed in the following table: 


Fuel 

Consumption 

• Faster warm-up as coolant is not recirculated (stationary) 

• Increased compression ratio through greater cooling capacity 
at full load compared to the predecessor engine 

Emissions 

• Faster engine warmup by drastically reduced pump speed and the 
resulting lower volumetric flow of coolant. 

• Reduced friction 

• Reduced fuel consumption 

• Reduced exhaust emissions 

Power output 

• Component cooling independent of engine speed 

• Requirement-controlled coolant pump output 

• Avoidance of power loss 

Comfort 

• Optimum volumetric flow 

- Fleating capacity increased as required 

- Residual heat with engine stationary 

Component 

Protection 

• EWP pump run-on after engine shutoff = more effective heat dissipation from the hot engine 


55 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 
















Cooling System Comparison (Belt Driven vs. Electric Coolant Pump) 

The belt driven coolant pump circulates the coolant as a function of engine speed. The 
circulated coolant can only be influenced by the mapped thermostat for temperature 
control purposes. 

The system switches between the small and large circuit. In other words, between the 
circuit which flows through the radiator (large circuit) and the circuit which flows only 
between the engine block , coolant pump and thermostat. 

This means that the cooling capacity is dependent upon engine speed. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Radiator 

5 

Outlet temp sensor, cylinder head 

2 

Mapped Thermostat (KFT) 

6 

Engine oil to water heat exchanger 

3 

Belt driven coolant pump 

7 

Expansion tank 

4 

Heat exchanger for heating system 




The advantages of the conventional cooling system are still utilized in the cooling system 
with the electric coolant pump. However this system also provides further options. 


56 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 


























































































For instance, the cooling capacity of the system can now be adapted by means of freely 
variable volumetric coolant flow. It is possible to deactivate the coolant pump while the 
engine is warming up or to allow it to continue to operate when the engine has been 
turned off. 


As illustrated in the following graphic, this results in the field in which the speed related to 
the cooling capacity can be controlled independently. This field is limited by the MAX and 
MIN speed of the coolant pump. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Radiator 

5 

Heat exchanger for heating system 

2 

Outlet temperature sensor, radiator 

6 

Outlet temp sensor, cylinder head 

3 

Mapped Thermostat (KFT) 

7 

Engine oil to water heat exchanger (MOWWT) 

4 

Electric coolant pump 


Expansion tank 


Note: Due to the design of this coolant pump, a special filling and bleeding pro¬ 
cedure is implemented for service. Refer to the “Workshop Hints” sec¬ 
tion in this training module for more detailed information. Also refer to 
the relevant repair instructions in group 17. Refer to WebTIS for the most 
updated version of the repair manual. 


57 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 




































































Workshop Hints 


Electronically Controlled Coolant Pump 

Particular care must be taken when performing servicing work to ensure that the pump 
does not run dry. When the pump is removed, it should be stored filled with coolant. 

The bearing points of the pump could seize if the pump were not filled with coolant. 

This could jeopardize subseguent start-up of the pump thus rendering the entire heat 
management system inoperative (the pump not starting up could cause serious engine 
damage). If the pump should ever run dry the pump wheel should be turned by hand 
before finally connecting the coolant hoses. The system should then be immediately 
filled with coolant. 

Particular care must be taken during assembly to ensure that the connector is clean and 
dry and the connections are undamaged. 

Diagnosis should be performed only with the approved adapter cables. The information 
provided in the repair instructions must be observed. Due to this coolant pump, a special 
filling and bleeding procedure must be implemented for servicing: 

1. Fill system with coolant via the expansion tank (AGB). Top up coolant level to lower 
edge of expansion tank. 

2. Close expansion tank. 

3. Switch on ignition. 

4. Set heating to maximum (temperature), switch on blower (lowest stage). 

5. Press accelerator pedal module to floor for at least 10 seconds. The engine must 
NOT be started. 

6. Bleeding via EWP takes app.. 12 minutes. Then check coolant level in expansion 
tank, top up to MAX marking if necessary. 

7. Check cooling circuit and drain plugs for leaks. 

8. If the procedure needs to be repeated several times, allow DME to completely 
de-energize (remove ignition key for app.. 3 minutes) and then repeat procedure as 
from item 3. 

Note: Connect battery charger if battery charge level is low. 


58 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



Thread Repair 

When repairing threads on magnesium or aluminum components, the repair instructions 
recommend the use of Helicoil™ repair kits. These kits are available with aluminum 
repair thread inserts which are available through BMW parts. 

Engine Repairs 

Any engine repair which involves the replacement/removal of the cylinder head reguires 
special attention. The bolt holes must be blown dry immediately after cylinder head 
removal. It is not acceptable to wait until the engine is ready for reassembly. Leaving the 
coolant standing in the head bolt holes until reassembly will increase the possibility of 
contact corrosion. Engine coolant should not come into prolonged contact with magne¬ 
sium engine components. 

Note: Be sure to wear approved eye protection when using compressed air to 
dry the bolt holes. 



59 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 


Working Safety 


Machining (metal cutting) Magnesium 

The jobs that are most frequently carried out in connection with this material as part of 
servicing applications are considered to be non-critical. The small amount of metal chips 
that occurs, e.g. when recutting threads, requires no special extraction systems or special 
facilities. 

If, on the other hand, extensive machining is to be performed on magnesium crankcases, 
particular care must be taken to ensure that no explosive hydrogen can collect in the col¬ 
lection containers for metal chips and moisture can escape from the container. 

Moisture in this context only refers to water or compounds containing water. The following 
information must be observed for metal removing machining processes: 

Although with regard to metal removal or machining properties magnesium alloys offer 
very good prerequisites for dry machining, today wet machining processes are state-of 
the-art, involving the use of either cutting oil or emulsion. The greatest hazard potential in 
metal removal machining processes is posed by the metal chips (swarf). Particularly wet 
or moist metal chips are hazardous while, on the other hand, metal chips moistened in oil 
will not ignite easily. 

Magnesium and water can react to form magnesium hydroxide and hydrogen. For this 
reason, there is a risk of a hydrogen explosion in machining processes involving emulsion 
if the hydrogen that is constantly formed can collect and reach a critical concentration. 

For this reason, it is important to ensure that the moisture in the collection container can 
escape or drain off. 

In addition, metal chips and swarf must be conveyed at a very fast rate out of the emul¬ 
sion otherwise a saponification or hardening process may occur making the emulsion 
unusable. 

The range of cutting materials known from aluminum machining processes can also be 
used for magnesium machining, i.e. high speed steel, hard alloy or carbide and polycrys¬ 
talline diamond (PCD). 

Special Measures for Grinding 

The preconditions for wet machining in grinding processes are to be considered from dif¬ 
ferent aspects than the standard metal cutting machining processes. This is due to the 
fact that fine metal chips (grinding dust) are produced in grinding processes. As from a 
certain mixing ratio with air, this grinding dust can combust explosively following possible 
ignition from spark created from grinding or welding work. If wet grinding is not possible 
or too inconvenient, the grinding dust produced must be extracted and precipitated with 
water in a separator. 


60 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



Important Precondition: 

Any work on magnesium that forms dust must not be performed without a suitable 
extraction facility. 

The specific surface of the respective product, i.e. the surface-to-volume ratio represents 
an important criterion for the hazard potential of the magnesium. Solid components pose 
no problems from a safety point of view. Even when subjected to high temperatures for all 
intents and purposes they cannot combust. 

On the other hand, chips, particles and powder are considerably more reactive. The criti¬ 
cal temperature at which dry, fine metal chips can ignite is at 450 - 500°C. Cutting tools 
that have improper edge geometries or blunt edges can give rise to such temperature 
levels during dry machining processes. Sparks caused by tool collisions or when machin¬ 
ing steel represents a further source of danger. If, despite all precautionary measures, a 
magnesium fire occurs, on no account must water or extinguishing agents containing 
water be used (release of hydrogen, detonating gas explosion!). ABS powder extinguisher, 
carbon dioxide and nitrogen are also unsuitable as extinguishing agents. 

Keep suitable metal fire extinguisher ready at hand! The proper classification for a fire 
extinguisher capable of handling magnesium fire is Class D. DO NOT use class A, B or 
C fire extinguishers in magnesium fires. This could create a more hazardous situation. 


61 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 



^ Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. Where are aluminum bolts used on the N52 and how are they identified? 


2. What type of cylinder bore structure is used on the N52? What is allowable 
regarding cylinder bore repairs? 


3. What precautions must be taken when machining magnesium? 


4. What precautions must be taken when performing engine repairs that involve 
removal of the water pump? 


5. Describe the cooling system bleeding procedures on vehicles with the N52: 


62 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 


























-fl Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

6. Describe the methods used to check the oil level on an N52 engine: 


7. Which engine components are made from magnesium? 


8. What is special about the camshafts on the N52? 


9. What precautions must be taken when removing the cylinder head? 


10. What special service procedures should be observed regarding aluminum bolts 
during service operations? 


63 

New Generation 6-Cylinder N52 





























