Glossary 

A 

ABS 

Anti-lock Braking System - A system which prevents individual wheel lockup by monitor¬ 
ing individual wheel speeds. The braking at each wheel is regulated by a series of elec¬ 
tronically controlled valves which regulate the brake pressure. If the system detects an 
impending lockup at any wheel, the brake pressure is pulsed to prevent lockup. This 
enables the vehicle to be controlled during panic braking situations. This system has 
been on all BMW models since 1986 and is now incorporated into the DSC system. 

ABS systems are manufactured for BMW by Bosch and Teves. 

(German: Antiblockiersystem) 

ACC 

Active Cruise Control - ACC is an enhanced cruise control system consisting of a front 
mounted radar sensor which is used to detect vehicles traveling ahead in the traffic lanes. 
The radar sensor is connected to the PT-CAN bus and communicates with the DME and 
DSC. This system communicates with throttle and braking systems to keep a specified 
distance (by time) between vehicles. Currently, this system is available as an option on all 
E6X vehicles. 

Active Safety 

This is a design philosophy which assists the driver in avoiding potential accidents. Any 
system which helps the driver retain precise control of the vehicle can be part of the over¬ 
all active safety design. Systems such as DSC or ABS is conjunction with steering and 
suspension systems can assist the driver in actively avoiding a dangerous situation. Also 
any system which helps the driver to maintain attention on the road can also be a part of 
the active safety philosophy. The RLS, driving lights, AHL are some of the systems that 
become important during traffic and adverse environmental conditions. 

A/D 

Analog to Digital - This is method of converting analog signal into digital information 
which allows electronic information to be shared electronically between processors. 

AFS 

Active Front Steering - This system consists of an electronically controlled steering rack 
that incorporates a planetary gear set which allows a continuously variable steering ratio. 
The system consists of a special steering rack, control module and support electronics 
which are connected to the F-CAN. AFS is currently installed as an option on the E60, 
E63 and E64. The new 3 series (E90) will utilize AFS as well. 

(Note: as of 2005, AFS will be referred to as AS (US) or AL (German: Activ Lenkung) 


1 

Glossary 



AH PS 

Advanced Head Protection System - This system consists of a tubular airbag similar to 
ITS but with the addition of a fabric sail. This sail adds additional protection by retaining 
the occupant during a side impact and shielding the occupant from debris and glass 
splinters. AHPS II protects the rear passengers in addition to the front passengers. 

AIC 

Automatic Interval Control - This is an intermittent wiper system which is dependent 
upon input from a rain sensor. The rain sensor uses the principle of refraction to deter¬ 
mine the rain intensity. The rain sensor is connected to the relevant bus system (K-bus) 
and sends rain intensity information to the body electronics which in turn controls the 
wiper interval. The wiper interval is also based on sensitivity input from a control knob 
mounted on the wiper stalk switch. AIC has been in use since 1999 and was subse- 
guently installed on all BMW models. (GermamAutomatic Interval! Control/Regensensor) 

AITS 

Advanced Inflatable Tubular Structure - See AHPS 

AKS 

Active Head Restraint System - This system which is used on the E65,E66 and E60 
reduces the risk of cervical vertebrae injuries (whiplash). It consists of a deployable head¬ 
rest which reduces the distance between the occupants head and the headrest. 

German: Aktive Kopfstutze) 

ARS 

Active Roll Stabilization - ARS is a part of the dynamic drive systems introduced on the 
E65/E66. The system consists of hydraulically controlled stabilizer bars that are con¬ 
trolled via the ARS module. ARS is designed to minimize body roll during turns. ARS is 
also now available on the E60, E63 and E64. (German: Aktive Rollstabilisierung) 

ASE 

Advanced Safety Electronics - This is a byteflight based passive safety system which is 
based upon the ISIS network on the E65/E66. Introduced on the E85, it was modified for 
use on the E60, E63 and E64. 

ASK 

Audio System Controller- This is the primary audio system controller used on the 
E65/E66. It is an connected to the MOST bus and acts as the main controller for the 
audio system and the MOST bus. (German: Audio-System-Kontroller) 

AWL 

Airbag Warning Lamp - The AWL is a visual indicator for for faults related to passive safe¬ 
ty systems. It is used on all vehicles eguipped with SRS/Passive safety systems. It is 
located in the instrument cluster. 


2 

Glossary 



B 

BLS 

Brake Light Switch - The brake light switch is used as an input to brake related systems 
such as ASC/DSC. It is also used to actuate the brake lights as well as to control the shift 
lock. (German: Bremslichtschalter) 

BMW 

Bavarian Motor Works (German: Bayerische Motoren Werke) 

BST 

Battery Safety Terminal - This system is used to isolate (disconnect) the main battery ter¬ 
minal connection during an impact. It is a pyrotechnic device which protects the main 
battery cable from short circuits by disconnecting the battery during moderate to severe 
impacts. See Also SBK 

byteflight 

The byteflight is a fiber optic bus network designed for use with passive safety sys¬ 
tems. It is comprised of a star structure which uses a centrally located module 
(SIM/SGM) with a series of satellites arranged in a radial pattern around the central mod¬ 
ule. byteflight can be found on vehicles equipped with ISIS or ASE. The byteflight bus 
is also referred to as the SI (Safety and Information Bus) Bus. 

BZM 

Center Console Control Center- This BZM is on the K-CAN on the E65/E66. it provides 
a connection between the i-Drive controller and the K-CAN. The BZM does not have 
any control over the 1-Drive or controller functions. The seat adjustment and seat heater 
switches are also connected to the BZM. (German: Bedienzentrum Mittelkonsole) 


c 

CAN 

Controller Area Network - This is a bus system which uses a high speed two-wire config¬ 
uration. This bus is capable of transferring data bi-directionally at a rate of up to 500kbps. 
Originally introduced on 1993 models for use on powertrain related systems, the CAN 
bus has evolved into body electronics systems as well. Some of the new CAN bus sys¬ 
tems are K-CAN, PT-CAN and F-CAN. 

CIP 

Coding Individualization and Programming - Beginning with the E65. a new method of 
coding and programming was introduced. It consists of an FA (Vehicle Order) code 
which is used to determine the level of equipment installed on the vehicle. CIP allows 
for easy software upgrades as well as individualization of vehicle features. 


3 

Glossary 



D 

DISA 

Differential Intake Air Control - The DISA system provides for a variable intake runner 
length. The first use of DISA was on the M42B18 engine. There have been numerous 
variants of DISA since introduction. The variable intake provides for low RPM torque 
when needed as well as high torque in the upper RPM range. 

(German: Differenzierte Sauganlage) 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control - This is a system which monitors various vehicle inputs such 
as wheel speed, yaw rate, braking input to dynamically control braking and throttle sys¬ 
tems. It can assist in correcting for oversteer and understeer situations. DSC consists of 
a hydraulic unit and pump along with an electronic control module. There are several 
variations of this system depending upon vehicle application. The systems are primarily 
supplied by Bosch and Teves. (German: Dynamische Stabilitats Control) 

DTC 

Diagnostic Trouble Code - As per SAE J1930 terminology, the term DTC replaces the 
former term fault code or trouble code etc. 

DTC 

Dynamic Traction Control - DTC is a sub-function of DSC. The DTC function can be acti¬ 
vated with the DSC button and provides two subfunctions. They two subfunctions are 
the “sports tuning” of the Automatic Stability Control (ASC) and the Dynamic Stability 
Control (DSC) and improved traction, particularly on ground surfaces with a low coeffi¬ 
cient of friction. 


E 

EBV 

Electronic Brake Force Distribution - This is one of the DSC sub functions which allows 
for equal brake force distribution on turns while braking to compensate for weight shifts 
and unequal suspension loads. (German: Elektronische Bremskraftverteilung) 

ECO 

Electronically Controlled Orifice - This refers to the ECO valve used in conjunction with 
the Active Front Steering System (AFS). This provides for additional power steering fluid 
flow for the AFS when needed. It is part of the power steering pump and is electronically 
controlled by the SGM. 


4 

Glossary 



EDC 

Electronic Damper Control - The EDC system is designed to provide variable damping of 
the shock absorbers during changes in road conditions. The system consists of a main 
control unit, shock absorbers (struts) with solenoid valves, a series of acceleration sen¬ 
sors and input from the steering angle sensor. 

(German: Elektronische Dampfer Steuerung) 

EHC 

Electronic Height Control - EHC provides for a variable rear height control to compensate 
for vehicle loading to maintain proper rear camber settings. The system uses a pneumat¬ 
ic pump with a pair of rear air springs. The system also uses rear height sensors to moni¬ 
tor the ride height which are an input to the EHC control module. This system is used 
exclusively on the E39 Sportwagon, the E53 X5 and the E65/E66. There is also a dual 
axle version (EHC II) which is offered as an option on the X5. 

(German: Elektronische Hohenstands Control) 

EKP 

Electric Fuel Pump - Any electric fuel pump is referred to as EKR For example, The EKP 
relay is the fuel pump relay. In addition, some fuel pumps are variable speed controlled 
by an EKP module. Vehicles such as E46 M3 use a variable speed fuel pump based on 
various inputs from DME. (German: Elektrische Kraftstoffpumpe) 

EML 

Electronic Motor Load Regulation - EML is electronically controlled throttle system. 
Originally introduced on the M70B50 (V-12) engine, the system has been modified for 
use on subsequent BMW models. As of 1999, all engines on BMW vehicle were 
equipped with some form of electronic throttle control. Although all of the other engine 
use a form of EML there are numerous differences in terminology. To reference the other 
systems, see the glossary definitions for MDK, EDKand EDR. 

(German: Elektronische Motorleistungsregulierung) 

EWS 

Electronic Driveaway Protection - EWS is designed to prevent the vehicle from starting by 
using a electronically coded ignition key. The key contains a electronics identification 
code which is changed each time the vehicle is started. There have been numerous ver¬ 
sions of this system which have been in use in BMW models since the 1994 model year. 
(German: Elektronische Wegfahrsperre) 


5 

Glossary 



F 

FA 

Vehicle Order- The vehicle order is an “electronic list” of options which is electronically 
stored within the vehicle. The FA code is used by CIP to determine equipment levels and 
optional systems to facilitate coding and programming processes. 

(German: Fahrzeug-Auftrag) 

FB 

Functional Description - When looking up electrical schematics in the diagnosis program 
(DISplus/GT-1), the FB is used to determine the function and operation of the relevant 
system. As of 2003, the FB has been replaced by SBT (Service Bulletin Technical) which 
can be found in WebTIS. (German: Funktionsbestatigung) 

F.I.R.S.T. 

Fully Integrated Road Safety Technology - This is the corner stone behind BMW’s safety 
philosophy. This strategy is used by BMW to develop all safety related systems. This 
technology consists of various active and passive safety features designed to help the 
driver avoid accidents as well as protect the occupants in the event of an unavoidable 
accident. 


G 

GPS 

Global Positioning System - GPS is a system of used to determine an exact position on 
the Earth. The GPS system is capable of reading positioning data transmitted by a series 
of geosynchronous satellites. GPS work in conjunction with other vehicle systems to 
create a system allowing the customer s to view a road map and a series of audible and 
visual prompts to locate a specific location or address. 

GM 

General Module - The general module is the main controller of the Central Body 
Electronics system (ZKE). This module is responsible for power locks, windows, 
wiper/washers, interior lighting etc. The GM is part of ZKE versions I, II III, IV and V. 
Depending upon application, the GM is also an integral part of the various bus systems in 
use. For example, the GM on the ZKE III system is the main controller for the P-bus and 
provides a gateway between the P-bus and K-bus. (German: Grundmodul) 

GRAV 

GRAV refers to the lightweight front construction concept introduced on the E60. GRAV 
is comprised of using lightweight aluminum materials for the chassis construction. 
Specifically from the bulkhead forward. GRAV is also used on the new 6 series as well. 
(German: Gewichtsreduzierter Aluminiumvorderbau) 


6 

Glossary 



H 

HDC 

Hill Descent Control - This system, which is used on vehicle which have AWD such as 
the E46iX, E53 and E87, allows for controlled descents on steep inclines. HDC regulates 
brake and throttle to allow the driver to concentrate on steering the vehicle rather than 
focusing on brake and throttle controls. There is a console mounted activation switch 
which activates the system only if a specified criteria is met. 

HFM 

Hot Film Air Mass Meter - This is a form of air mass meter which uses a heated film 
rather than the previous hot-wire arrangement on the HLM. The primary benefit of this 
type of air mass meter is the elimination of the burn-off circuit. The surface area of the 
hot film is not prone to effects from contamination, therefore the burn-off cycle is not 
needed. HFM was introduced with the M60 engine in 1993 with DME version M3.3 and 
has been in use since. (German: HeiBfilm-Luftmassenmesser) 

HLM 

Hot Wire Air Mass Meter - This type of air mass meter was the successor to the “vane 
type” airflow meter in use for years with various versions of engine management. The 
HLM uses a hot-wire to measure air mass. This is done by monitoring the amount of cur¬ 
rent reguired to maintain the hot-wire at a specific temperature. Due to the potential con¬ 
tamination of the hot wire from airborne contaminant's, the wire is heated to a high tem¬ 
perature after engine shutdown to clean the wire before the next startup cycle. The HLM 
was used on vehicles eguipped with Bosch LH -Jetronic a.k.a. DME Ml .2 and Ml .7 sys¬ 
tems. (GermaniHitzdraht Luftmassenmesser) 

HPS 

Head Protection System - This system consists of an Inflatable Tubular Structure (Head 
airbag) used to protect occupants head in the event of a side impact. HPS is an integral 
part of the BMW passive safety systems, (see also ITS) 

HUD 

Heads Up Display- This system projects a display on the windshield which provides the 
driver with information such as vehicle speed etc. Originally introduced on the E63 and 
E64, this system is also currently available on the E60. 


7 

Glossary 



I 

IBS 

Intelligent Battery Sensor- The IBS is a mechatronic intelligent battery sensor with its 
own microcontroller. The IBS is connected to the negative battery terminal and is used to 
measure battery terminal voltage, discharge/charge current and battery (electrolyte) tem¬ 
perature. The information collected by the IBS is used to determine battery SoC and 
SoH. This information is sent to the DME via the Bit Serial Data interface (BSD). 

(German: Intelligenter Batteriesensor) 

IKE 

Instrument Cluster Electronics - The IKE is the processing electronics located in the 
instrument cluster. The high version instrument cluster used on the E38, E39 and E53 
contains the IKE. The instrument cluster used on these vehicle (except base kombi) is a 
display unit and performs no processing functions. The IKE contains all of the processing 
electronics. The early version IKE was attached to the back of the instrument cluster and 
connected by a ribbon cable. On later versions, the IKE was integrated into the cluster 
housing. (German: Instrumentenkombination-Elektronik) 

ISIS 

Intelligent Safety Information System - This is a passive safety system which is used on 
the E65/E66. It uses the byteflight fiber optic bus system. 

(German: Intelligentes Sicherheits- und Informations-System) 

ISN 

Individual Serial Number or Individual Control Unit Number- The ISN is a signal which is 
transferred between the DME and EWS systems. This is a “coded” signal which allows 
the vehicle to be started. If the correct key is not inserted into the ignition, the EWS mod¬ 
ule will not send the ISN which will not allow spark and fuel injection to occur. The ISN is 
stored in both the DME and EWS module. When changing either of these modules, the 
ISN must be transferred electronically to the new module using the DISplus or GT-1. 
Failure to do so will prevent the engine from starting. Later models, (from 1999) use a 
“rolling code” ISN which is dedicated to both the DME and EWS modules. This prevent 
modules from being swapped between vehicle which further enhances the security of the 
EWS system. (German:lndividuelle Steuergerate-Nummer) 

ITS 

Inflatable Tubular Structure - This is a tubular shaped airbag which is part of the HPS 
(Head Protection System). It is designed to provide the vehicle occupants with head pro¬ 
tection during side impacts. When deployed the ITS emerges from the roof panel trim 
and stretches across from the A to B pillar at head level. 


J 


8 

Glossary 



K 

KBM 

Body Basic Module - The KBM is the primary control module for the body electronics on 
the E60, E63 and E64. The KBM has the responsibility for the power windows, locks, 
windshield wiping/washing, interior lighting and the consumer shutdown. Located behind 
the glove box, the KBM communicates with other vehicle systems via the K-CAN. 
(German: Karosserie-Basis-Modul) 

Kombi 

The term Kombi literally means “cluster” in German language, it is a short version of the 
word “Instrumentenkombination”. It refers to the instrument cluster. 


L 

LCM 

Lamp Check Module - This is the main controller for the exterior lighting on the E53, E38 
and E39. This module combines the electronics for lamp control as well as the check 
control system. This term should not be confused with LKM (German: Lamp Kontrol 
Modul). The LKM was used on earlier vehicles (E31, E32 and E34) for exterior lighting 
control only. 

LDP 

Leak Diagnosis Pump - This is an engine vacuum controlled pump used to detect evapo¬ 
rative emission leaks. The LDP was used on vehicles with MS42, M5.2.1 to meet OBD 
requirements for evaporative leak detection. 

LED 

Light Emitting Diode - An LED operates like any other diode. It only passes current in 
one direction. But when forward biased, it will emit light. LED’s are used on numerous 
systems on BMW vehicles. Mostly as indicators on switches and controls. 

LEV 

Low Emissions Vehicle - LEV is an emission standard created by CARB/EPA. The LEV 
standard reduced vehicle emissions by 70% and was part of the 1998 vehicle standards. 

LIN 

Local Interconnect Network - The LIN bus is a serial communications bus used in the 
automobile industry. LIN is a single wire, bi-directional bus which used a main controller 
and several server units. It can communicate at a rate of 19.2 Kbps., but most BMW 
applications communicate at 9.6Kbps. Currently the LIN bus is used on the E60, E63 
and E64 for systems such as IHKA, AHL and the SBFA. Also, the E46 has adopted the 
LIN bus for AHL and mirror operation. 


9 

Glossary 



LL 

Idle or Closed Throttle Position - This term is used in various diagnostic programs. It is 
usually seen in the status reguests and refers to the position of the throttle. In this case, 
LL stands for the German term - “leerlauf “or idle. 

LRE 

Steering Wheel Electronics 

LSE 

Steering Column Electronics 

LSZ 

Light Switching Center- This is the primary controller for the exterior lighting on the E46. 
It is connected to the K-bus and provides the lamp control and check control functions. 
(German: Lichtschaltzentrum) 


M 

M-ASK 

Multi-Audio System Controller - The M-ASK is used as the main controller for the audio 
systems on the E60, E63 and E64. It is connected to the MOST bus and provides a 
gateway to K-CAN. The M-ASK contains the ASK, aerial amplifier/tuner and the MOST 
CAN gateway. (German:Multi-Audio-System-Kontroller) 

MBC 

Maximum Brake Control - MBC is a sub-function of the Dynamic Stability Control sys¬ 
tem. The MBC function is designed to support driver initiated braking by building up 
pressure in the rear brake circuit when the front wheels are already in ABS regulation. 

The additional braking pressure is designed to bring the rear wheels up to the ABS regu¬ 
lation point shortening the stopping distance. MBC is mainly effective when the rear of 
the vehicle is fully loaded. The MBC function is triggered when the brakes are applied 
more slowly than the threshold needed fora DBC regulation. 

MDK 

Motorized Throttle Valve - The MDK is an electronically controlled throttle system used 
on the MS42.0 engine electronics. It is a derivative of the original EML but is controlled 
directly by the ECM with no separate control module reguired. The MDK is a self con¬ 
tained unit which houses the electronic throttle motor, PWG and feedback potentiome¬ 
ters. (German: Motorische Drosselklappe) 

MID 

Multi Information Display - The MID is used on the E38, E39 and E53. It acts as a dis¬ 
play and provides controls for the audio system and BC functions. The MID performs no 
calculations but only a means of display and input functions. It is connected to the l/K 
bus. 


10 

Glossary 



MOST 

Media Oriented System Transport - The MOST bus is a fiber optic network, used to 
carry data, voice, audio and video signals. It has a data rate of 22.5 Mbps. MOST was 
introduced on the E65/E66 and is now currently used on the other E6x vehicle. Future 
applications include the E90 and E91. 

MRS 

Multiple Restraint System- Starting with the E39 in 1997, the Multiple Restraint System 
was the new generation of passive safety systems which brought side impact airbags 
along with other subsequent innovations to the BMW model line. 

German: Mehrfach-Ruckhaltesystem) 

MRSA 

Side Impact Sensor - used on MRS systems, this sensor is used to detect side impacts. 
It is installed in a lateral direction near the b-pillar. 

MSR 

Deceleration Slip Regulation or Engine Drag Torque Reduction - This is a sub-function 
of ASC/DSC designed to limit wheel slip during deceleration on low-friction surfaces 
such as ice, snow leaves etc. This system limits slip by increasing idle speed and 
advancing ignition timing during deceleration when wheel slippage is detected. 
(German:Motorschleppmomentregelung) 


N 

NVRAM 

Non-Volatile Random Access Memory- This is a random access memory which is not 
affected by the loss of battery voltage. NV-RAM is used to store fault codes on most new 
systems. 


o 

OBC 

On Board Computer -The OBC is a driver information computer used to calculate fuel 
consumption, fuel tank range, outside temperature etc. It has been used in numerous 
applications over the years. Also referred to as “board computer” or BC, these BC func¬ 
tions are still used on many current BMW vehicles. 

OBD 

On Board Diagnostics - OBD is a standard set forth by CARB/EPA to standardize engine 
management diagnostics. The current OBD standard a.k.a OBD II requires a standard 
diagnostic connector for all vehicle manufacturers as well as a standardized fault code list. 


11 

Glossary 



oc " 3 

Occupant Classifier-3 - This is a new version of the SBE system which is designed to 
determine the approximate weight and size of the passenger. This system detects the 
contact pattern of the occupant to determine whether or not to deploy the front passen¬ 
ger airbag (and side airbag). This system is currently found in the E60 and E83. 

OPPS 

Optic Testing and Programming Systems - This is a modified diagnostic head used to 
expedite programming procedures. OPPS also for checking the MOST bus and byte- 
flight fiber optic systems via separate adapter cables. The OPPS contains software and 
hardware to check to attenuation of fiber optic signals. 

(German: Optisches Pruf- und Programmiersystem) 

OPS 

Optic Programming System - This provides the same capabilities as OPPS but without 
the hardware and software for checking the attenuation of the byteflight bus. 

ORVR 

On Board Refueling and Vapor Recovery - This is a system which allows for excess 
vapors to be contained during vehicle refueling. This system is a part of the OBDII 
emission standards. 


P 

PDC 

Park Distance Control - The PDC system consists of a series of sonar sensors mounted 
on the front and/or rear bumper of the vehicle. The sensors sense the distance of other 
vehicles or obstructions when parking. The sensor send a signal to the PDC module 
which triggers and audible signal to determine the distance between the vehicle and the 
potential obstruction. This information allows the driver to judge distances during parking 
maneuvers. 

PTC 

Positive Temperature Coefficient - PTC refers to a resistance element such as a ther¬ 
mistor in which the resistance properties are proportional to temperature. In the case of a 
PTC thermistor, the resistance will increase as temperature increases. This is in contrast 
to an NTC thermistor in which the resistance will decrease when temperature increases. 

PuMA 

PuMA 

(German: Problem- und MaBnahmenmanagement Aftersales) 


12 

Glossary 



PWG 

Pedal Position Sensor- This is a sensor which is used to measure the position of the 
accelerator pedal on vehicles equipped with electronically controlled throttles. Variations 
of the PWG are used on all versions of electronic throttle control, however they differ 
slightly in construction and function. Some PWG sensors are comprised of a convention¬ 
al potentiometer while other version use a linear hall sensor. (German: Pedalwertgeber) 

PWM 

Pulse Width Modulation - Pulse width modulation is a method of signal transmission 
which varies the time of the signal rather than the voltage. PWM can also be used on a 
motor control circuit or illumination circuit to control the total current. For instance, by 
modulating the on time of an LED or bulb circuit, the brightness can be controlled. Also, 
by varying the PWM of a signal transmission circuit, various commands can be communi¬ 
cated to other systems. An example of PWM of BMW systems would be the dash illumi¬ 
nation circuit (KL58g) or the cooling fan control circuit used on most current engine elec¬ 
tronics systems. (German: Pulsweitenmodulatlon) 


Q 


R 

RAM 

Random Access Memory - RAM is used for the temporary storage of data or programs 
etc. RAM, as the name suggests, permits random access to the stored information. This 
means that all storage locations are equally accessible in the same amount of time. RAM 
has also read/write capabilities. RAM can be volatile or non-volatile. Volatile RAM means 
that data would be lost in the event of a power loss whereas non-volatile RAM (NVRAM) 
would retain data in the event of a power loss. 

RDC 

Tire Pressure Control -The RDC system consists of wheel mounted pressure sensors 
which send tire pressure and temperature information to the central (RDC) module. 

There are individual antennae which are mounted at each wheel well that receives infor¬ 
mation from sensors which are part of the valve stem assembly. This system is used on 
the E65/E66 and as an option on some E46 vehicles. 

(German: Reifen Druck Control) 


13 

Glossary 



RDW 

Tire Pressure Warning System - The RDW system is designed to monitor tire for a loss in 
tire pressure. This system does not measure tire pressure, but uses the wheel speed 
sensors to monitor the rotational speed of the tire and wheel assembly to determine loss¬ 
es in tire pressure. RDW requires no additional sensors or modules. The system is part 
of the DSc system and only requires an input switch to the DSC module for initialization. 
(German: Reifendruckwarnung) 

RLS 

Rain and Light Sensor - the RLS detects rain as well as ambient light. This signals are 
transferred along the bus systems to provide information to the lighting and wiper sys¬ 
tems. The RLS is part of AIC and replaces the former Rain Sensor. For example, when 
rain is present, the wipers are switched to the appropriate intermittent speed to maintain 
a clear windshield. If insufficient ambient light is detected, the lighting system is signaled 
to activate the headlights (if in automatic mode). 

RPS 

Rollover Protection System - This system provides the vehicle occupants with adequate 
survival space in a rollover. It consists of a set of deployable rollover bars which are 
deployed in the event of an imminent rollover. RPS can be found on convertibles such as 
the E36iC, E46iC and E64. BMW roadsters such as the E36/7, E85 and Z52 use rigidly 
fixed rollover bars which provide the same level of protection as RPS. (See also URSS) 

RXD 

Wake-up Diagnosis Line - The RXD line is a part of the diagnosis bus. It is used as a 
wakeup signal to the system under diagnosis. It is a 12 volt digital signal that works in 
conjunction with TXD. As the diagnosis bus evolved into the newer more familiar D-bus, 
RXD was eventually dropped. Later systems used control modules which only needed a 
connection to TXD (D-Bus), which was used to wake up the necessary module. This 
eliminated the need for RXD. Phase out of the RXD line began in 1999 and most vehi¬ 
cles did not have RXD by 2001. 

RZV 

Direct Stationary Ignition - This is a distributorless ignition system which uses one igni¬ 
tion coil per cylinder which is triggered by the ECM (DME). This also allows full timing 
control over each cylinder and for misfire detection as well. RZV was introduced on the 
M42B18 engine and has been used on every subsequent engine system since. The 
only exception being the M73 which continued to use one ignition coil per bank. 

(German: Ruhende Zundspannungsverteilung) 


14 

Glossary 



s 

SAC 

Self Adjusting Clutch - The self adjusting clutch was introduced in approximately 1999 
as a means of eliminating clutch freeplay adjustments. It consists of a special pressure 
plate which reguires the use of special tools for installation. 

(German: Selbstnachstellende Kupplung) 

SAE 

Society of Automotive Engineers - SAE is a US based organization which has more than 
84,000 members - engineers, business executives, educators, and students from more 
than 97 countries - who share information and exchange ideas for advancing the engi¬ 
neering of mobility systems. SAE sets the standards for development, events, and techni¬ 
cal information and expertise used in designing, building, maintaining, and operating self- 
propelled vehicles for use on land or sea, in air or space. For example, SAE is responsible 
for setting the standards for automotive items such as bolts, bulbs and raw materials. 

The German eguivalent of SAE is DIN - German Industrial Standard. 

SASL 

Satellite A-pillar, Left - The SASL is a satellite module which is part of the byteflight bus 
system. It is a remotely mounted satellite which contains accelerometers for detection of 
impacts, but also contains circuits used to deploy airbags and other pyrotechnic devices. 
(German: Satellit A-Saule links) 

SASR 

Satellite A-pillar, Right - See SASL, the SASR is provides the same functionality but is 
located in the right side a-pillar. (German: Satellit A-Saule rechts) 

SBE 

Passenger Seat Occupancy Detection System - This system is used by the various pas¬ 
sive safety systems to determine whether or not the passenger seat is occupied. 

(German: Sitzbelegungserkennung) 

SBK 

This is a German Acronym that stands for Safety Batterie Klemme - This is the German 
term for Battery Safety Terminal. See also BST. 

SBSL 

B-pillar Satellite, Left - This is a satellite module used on the byteflight system. It is used 
on the ASE and ISIS system to collect acceleration data and to actuate airbag ignition cir¬ 
cuits. The function of this satellite is dependent upon application. The ASE and ISIS 
systems use the SBSL differently with regard to function and location. Refer to relevant 
training material for more information. (German: Satellit B-Saule links) 


15 

Glossary 



SBSR 

B-pillar Satellite, Right - See SBSL, this sensor is the same as SBSL. It is installed at the 
right b-pillar. (German: Satellit B-Saule rechts) 

S/E 

Send and Receive - This refers to a module or system which sends and receives 
electronic information and messages. For example, the SIM contains S/E modules which 
are connected to the satellites via byteflight. The S/E modules send as well as receive 
optical signals and convert them to electrical signals with the help of the star coupler. 

SFZ 

Center Vehicle Satellite - This is a satellite module which is used on vehicles equipped 
with byteflight based passive safety systems. It is mounted in the center of the vehicle, 
usually under the center console . (German: Satellite Fahrzueg Zentrum) 

SFZ-R 

Center Vehicle Satellite with rollover protection - Same as SFZ, used on the E64 only. It 
provides the same functions as the SFZ, but with added sensors for rollover protection. 

SG 

Control Unit - (German: Steuergerat) 

SGM 

Safety and Gateway Module - The SGM is the main controller of the byteflight on the 
ASE system (E60,E63,E64). The SGM combines the functions of the SIM and ZGM 
used on the ISIS system. (German: Safety Gateway Modul) 

SGS 

Seat Integrated Belt System - This is a seat belt system which is integrated into the seat. 
There are no outside seat belt connection points to the b-pillar. The entire seat belt sys¬ 
tem is contained within the structure of the seat. This type of arrangement is used on 
vehicles where seat belt attachment to the b-pillar is impractical such as the E31 and the 
E46 and E64 convertibles. (German: Sitzintegriertes Gurtsystem) 

SIA 

Service Interval Indicator-(German: Service-Intervall-Anzeige) 

SIM 

Safety and Information Module - The SIM is the main controller of the byteflight on the 
E65/66 and the E85. (German: Sicherheits-lnformationsmodul) 

SLP 

Secondary Air Pump- An electric air pump used to inject air into the exhaust system 
upstream of the catalytic converter. This reduces startup HC emissions. This system is 
triggered by the DME via the SLP relay. (German: Sekundar-Luft-Pumpe) 


16 

Glossary 



SMBF 

Seat Module, Passenger -The SMBF is a seat control module used on the E65/E66. It 
has the main responsibility for controlling seat functions by actuating the seat motors 
based on reguests from the seat switch blocks. It is connected to the K-CAN-P and is 
located under the respective seat. (German: Sitzmodul Belfahrer) 

SMFA 

Seat Module, Driver- The SMFA has the same functions of the SMBF. The SMFA con¬ 
trols the driver’s side seat functions. See SMBF. (German: Sitzmodul Fahrer) 

SMG 

Sequential Manual Gearbox - The SMG system is a manual transmission which is con¬ 
trolled using electro-hydraulic means. The SMG system uses an electronic control unit. 
The SMG control unit monitors various input parameters. The SMG control unit 
processes this input information and provides the electronic control for the transmission 
via electro-hydraulically controlled actuators. This allows for a “clutchless” manual trans¬ 
mission which can be shifted via a pair a paddle shifters on the steering wheel or by a 
console mounted shifter which is a electronic input to the SMG control unit. This system 
was introduced on the E46 M3 in 2002 and subseguently added to the E85, E46, E60. 
E63 and E64. 

( German: Sequenzielles M Getriebe or Sequenzielles Manuelles (Schalt-)Getriebe) 

SRS 

Supplemental Restraint System - This system refers to the airbag systems used on 
BMW vehicles. It is also a generic automotive industry term for vehicles with airbags. 

SSBF 

Seat Satellite, Passenger - The SSBF is a satellite on the byteflight system used on the 
E65/E66. The satellite is used to actuate igniter circuits for the front passenger airbag 
and the active head restraint. The SSBF also contains the seat occupancy electronics 
and receives input from the SBE sensor electronics. The input for the belt buckle switch 
is also monitored by the SSBF. It is located under the front seat next to the seat module. 
(German: Satellit Beifahrersitz). 

SSFA 

Seat Satellite, Driver - SSFA provides the same functions as the SSBF. The SSFA is 
used for the driver’s side functions. Refer to SSBF. (German: Satellit Fahrersitz) 

SSH 

Seat Satellite, Rear- This is a satellite module which is located under the rear seat on an 
E65/E66. It is only used in conjunction with vehicles which have the rear side airbag 
option. This module communicates with the SIM via byteflight. 


17 

Glossary 



STVL 

Door Satellite, Front Left - this is a satellite module used on byteflight based passive 
safety systems. It is mounted on the door, and contains crash sensing devices as well as 
pressure sensors to detect impacts by measuring pressure in the door cavity. It is used 
on the E65, E85, E60, E63 and E64. The STVL functions are slightly different depend¬ 
ing upon vehicle application. (German: Satellit Tur Vorne Links) 

STVR 

Door Satellite, Front Right - See STVL, this sensor is the same as STVL but installed on 
the right door. (German: Satellit Tur Vorne Rechts) 

SULEV 

Super Ultra-low Emissions Vehicle 

SZL 

Steering Column Switch Center- This SZL is a satellite module used as the interface 
between the steering wheel electronics (and airbag igniter circuits) and the SIM/SGM via 
byteflight. (German: Schaltzentrum Lenksaule) 

SZM 

Switching Center Center Console - The SZM provides switching functions on various 
vehicles. The SZM is connected to the K-Bus and processes switch functions for sys¬ 
tems such as DSC, RDW, Seat Heating etc. The SZM is located in the center console 
below the radio and IHKA control units. The SZM provides switch commands to these 
systems via a bus telegram. (German: Schaltzentrum Mittelkonsole) 


T 

TCU 

Telematics Control Unit - The TCU allows for integration of cellular phones into BMW 
vehicles. Variations of the TCU also have integrated GPS for location of the vehicle in the 
event of an accident. The TCU is used in conjunction with BMW emergency call and 
SOS systems. This term can be used in conjunction with TEL as well. 

TMBF 

Door Satellite, Passenger Door - This is a satellite module which is part of the byteflight 
bus. This module is used on the E60, E63 and E64. In addition to crash detection and 
pressure sensing devices, the TMBF also contains electronics for body electronic func¬ 
tions such as power windows and door locks. (German: Tur Modul beifahrer) 

TMFA 

Door Satellite, Driver- This module performs the same functions as TMBF, but is located 
on the driver’s side. (German: Tur Modul Fahrer) 


18 

Glossary 



u 

URSS 

(German: Uberroll Schutz System) - See Rollover Protection System 


V 

VANOS 

Variable Camshaft Control - The VANOS system allows for variable timing control of the 
camshaft. (German: Variable Nocken-Steuerung or Variable Nockenwellen-Steuerung) 

VVT 

Variable Valve Timing - VVT is an alternative (generic) term for Valvetronic. 

(German: Variable Ventiltrieb) 


w 


X 


Y 


z 

ZAE 

Central Activation Electronics - ZAE is an early passive safety system which succeeded 
the Siemens/Cipro systems in 1993. The main feature of this system is the integration of 
the crash sensing elements into one central housing which eliminates the fender mount¬ 
ed mechanical crash sensors. This system was introduced in 1993 and phased out in 
the 1997 model year and succeeded by the MRS systems. 

(German: Zentrale Auslose Elektronik) 

zcs 

Central Coding Key - This is a special 37-digit code used to code modules to specific 
vehicles. It is usually located electronically in the instrument cluster and in an additional 
module for redundancy. The code contains information about the vehicle options and 
equipment level (i.e. AC or No AC, Auto or manual trans, engine size etc.) This method 
of coding modules will eventually be replaced by the FA code (or vehicle order). 

19 

Glossary 



ZGM 

Central Gateway Module - The ZGM is a gateway module used in the E65/E66. It pro¬ 
vides a gateway between the various bus systems and the diagnostic interface. All D-bus 
communication is tunneled through the ZGM which acts as a “traffic cop” between these 
various systems. On some vehicles such as the E85, E60, E63 and E64. There is no 
separate ZGM, however the ZGM functions have been incorporated into the SIM/SGM. 
(German: Zentral Gateway Modul) 

ZKE 

Central Body Electronics - The ZKE system is responsible for controlling various body 
electronic functions. Systems such as power windows, power locks, wipers, and sunroof 
are some of the items controlled. ZKE systems usually consists of a central module 
referred to as the GM (General Module). The GM acts as the main system controlled and 
bus master. There are numerous variations of ZKE. The systems and sub-systems 
which are part of ZKE will vary between models. (German: Zentrale Karosserleelektronlk) 

ZWD 

Idle Control Valve (two winding) - This is a type of idle control valve which uses two 
opposing windings. The windings are supplied with a common power source and each 
winding has it’s own ground circuit controlled by the ECM. One winding is for closing the 
idle valve while the other is used for the opening of the idle valve. These two opposing 
windings are ground controlled using a PWM signal. In order to control the idle, the ECM 
will apply a greater PWM duty cycle to one of the windings. For example, to increase the 
idle speed, the ECM would apply an increased duty cycle to the opening winding. 
(German: Zweiwlcklungs-(Leerlauf-)Drehsteller) (Translation - Two winding idle rotary 
actuator) 


20 

Glossary 



21 

Glossary 



Index 


ABS. 

ACC. 

Active Safety 

A/D. 

AFS . 

AIC. 

AITS. 

AKS . 

ARS. 

ASE. 

ASK. 

AWL. 

B 

BLS . 

BMW. 

BST. 

byteflight ... 

BZM. 

C 

CAN. 

CIP. 

D 

DISA . 

DSC. 

DTC. 

DTC. 

E 

EBV . 

ECO. 

EHC. 

EKP . 

EML. 

EWS. 

FA. 

FB . 

F.I.R.S.T..... 
G 

GPS. 

GM. 

GRAV. 


1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

4 
4 
4 
4 

4 

4 

5 
5 
5 

5 

6 
6 
6 

6 

6 

6 


22 

Glossary 






































H 

HDC .. 
HFM .. 
HLM .. 
HPS .. 
HUD .. 
IBS ... 
IKE ... 
ISIS ... 
ISN ... 
ITS ... 
J 
K 

KBM .. 
Kombi 
L 

LCM .. 
LDP .. 
LED .. 
LEV .. 
LIN ... 

LI_ 

LRE .. 
LSE .. 
LSZ .. 
M 

M-ASK 
MBC .. 
MDK .. 
MID ... 
MOST . 
MRS .. 
MRSA . 
MSR .. 
N 

NVRAM 

0 

OBC .. 
OBD .. 
OC-3 .. 
OPPS . 
OPS ... 
ORVR . 


7 

7 

7 

7 

7 

8 
8 
8 
8 
8 


. .9 
. .9 

. .9 
. .9 
. .9 
. .9 
. .9 
10 
10 
10 
10 

10 

10 

10 

10 

11 

11 

11 

11 

11 

11 

11 

12 

12 

12 

12 


23 

Glossary 







































O cr 


P 


PDC.12 

PTC.12 

PuMA .12 

PWM.13 


RAM .13 

RDC.13 

RLS.14 

RPS.14 

RXD.14 

RZV.14 

SAC.15 

SAE.15 

SASL.15 

SASR .15 

SBE.15 

SBK.15 

SBSL.15 

S/E.16 

SFZ.16 

SFZ-R.16 

SG .16 

SGM .16 

SGS.16 

SIA.16 

SIM .16 

SLP .16 

SMBF.17 

SMFA .17 

SMG .17 

SRS.17 

SSBF.17 

SSFA.17 

SSH.17 

STVR.18 

SULEV .18 

SZL.18 

SZM .18 

T 

TCU.18 

TMBF.18 

TMFA .18 


24 

Glossary 











































X > N 


u 

URSS .19 

V 

VANOS.19 

VVT.19 

W 


ZAE.19 

ZCS.19 

ZGM .20 

ZKE.20 

ZWD .20 


25 

Glossary 











