Table of Contents 


E60 Driveline 

Subject Page 

E60 Driveline 

Objectives of the Module.2 

Automatic Transmissions 

Purpose of the System .3 

System Components.4 

Principle of Operation .6 

Workshop Hints.10 

Manual Transmissions 

Manual Gearboxes.10 

Sequential Manual Gearbox (SMG) 

Purpose of the System .11 

System Components.12 

Workshop Hints.15 

Propeller Shaft, Final Drive, Output Shafts 

Purpose of the System .17 

System Components.17 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 


Revision Date: 09/03 













E60 Driveline 

Model: E60 - 525i, 530i, 545i 
Production: Start of Production MY 2004 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the changes to the Automatic Transmissions for use in the E60. 

• Identify the two types of Manual Transmissions used in the E60. 

• Explain the changes to SMG Transmission / operation for use in the E60. 

• Identify the correct Driveline components for the different engine / gearbox 
combinations. 


2 


E60 Driveline 




E60 Driveline - Automatic Transmissions GA6HP19Z / GA6HP26Z 


Purpose of the System 

BMW has developed an automatic six speed gearbox together with ZF (Zahnradfabrik 
Friedrichshafen), designated the GA6FIP19Z / GA6FIP26Z for the E60. It represents a fur¬ 
ther development of transmission technology in BMW automatic gearboxes. These gear¬ 
boxes make an important contribution to the features of the E60. 

The mechanical power transmission of the gearbox has been optimized with regard to 
gearshift comfort, quality and reduced fuel consumption. The engine torque is transferred 
to the gearbox by a torque converter with a controlled lockup clutch. The six forward gears 
and the reverse gear are produced by a Lepelletier planetary gear train. The gears are shift¬ 
ed by multi-disc clutches. 

The GA6PIP19Z and GA6PIP26Z transmissions are based on the same design, they feature 
different torque converters and clutches. On the E60, the drive stages and the parking lock 
are controlled directly by the selector lever in the center console. This section addresses 
the changes necessary for the E60. For additional detailed information on the GA6PIP 
operation and workshop hints (repair procedures), refer to the ST042 E65 Part 2 training 
hand out. 



KT-7036 


The E60 automatic gearboxes have the following advantages: 

• Designed as a 6-speed gearbox with an overdrive ratio in 5th and 6th gear, reducing fuel 
consumption. 

• The 6-speed gearbox allows for more gear spread, improving vehicle acceleration. 

• The number of interfaces has been reduced by using the Mechatronics Module for the 
electronic transmission. 

• Lifetime oil fill. 


3 


E60 Driveline 


Technical Data 


Index 

Explanation 

Type 

Passenger vehicle automatic gearbox with 6 
forward gears and one reverse gear in stan¬ 
dard arrangement with adaptive 

Electrohydraulic control 

525i, 530i - GA6HP19Z: 


Max. torque at 4000 rpm 

350 Nm 

Max. power output at 5500 rpm 

180 kW 

545i - GA6HP26Z: 


Max. torque at 4200 rpm 

600 Nm 

Max. power output at 5800 rpm 

320 kW 

Torque converter 

With slip-controlled torque converter lockup 

Max. permissible continuous 

clutch in the gears 1 to 6 

speed 

7000 rpm 

Gear ratio, 1st gear 

4.171 

Gear ratio, 2nd gear 

2.34 

Gear ratio, 3rd gear 

1.521 

Gear ratio, 4th gear 

1.143 

Gear ratio, 5th gear 

0.867 

Gear ratio, 6th gear 

0.691 

Gear ratio, reverse gear 

3.403 

Weight 

GA6HP19Z: 72 to 76.7 kg including oil 
GA6HP26Z: 84 to 89 kg including oil 


System Components 

Parking Lock Operation 

On the E60, the parking lock is operated 
via the selector lever in the center con¬ 
sole. A cable assembly provides the con¬ 
nection to the gearbox (as on the E46 
and E39). 

The drive range switch and the hydraulic 
selector are operated together by the 
selector lever in connection with the cable 
assembly. 

4 



E60 Driveline 










Mechatronics Module 


The mechatronic module is a combination of the hydraulic valve body and electronic con¬ 
trol module which are installed in the oil sump. This offers the advantages of improved shift 
quality, increased driving comfort and increased reliability due to the reduced number of 
electrical connections and interfaces. 

The hydraulic valve body contains valves, springs, dampers and electric solenoid valves. 

The electronic control module manages the complete electronic control of the transmission 
and is an integral part of the valve body (replaceable as a complete unit). The electronic 
control module is completely sealed and oil tight. 




10 





KT-11865 


1. Drive range switch with 4 Hall sensors 8. EDS 3 

2. Hydraulic selector (shaft) 9. EDS 2 

3. Slide 10. EDS 1 


4. EDS 6 

5. Solenoid valve 1 

6. EDS 4 

7. EDS 5 


11. Gearbox electrical connector (to harness) 

12. Electronic transmission control unit (EGS) 

13. Valve body 


5 


E60 Driveline 






















Principle of Operation 

Transmission Control 

The GA6HP19Z / GA6HP26Z gearbox is controlled by the mechatronics module that is 
made up of a combination of the valve body and electronic transmission control unit (EGS). 
The drive range switch (for drive ranges P, R, N and D) is located in the mechatronics mod¬ 
ule. It is operated by the selector lever in connection with a bowden cable assembly. 

The electrical signals of the drive range switch are evaluated in the mechatronics module 
and used for the purpose of controlling the solenoid valves and pressure regulator. The 
hydraulic selector (shaft in the valvebody) is shifted (P, R, N, D) and the parking lock is oper¬ 
ated by the bowden cable assembly. 

The sequential gearshift takes place electrically by a switch on the selector lever mecha¬ 
nism (see automatic and Steptronic mode). 



KT-11807 


1. Ignition lock 

2. Bowden cable assembly for interlock 

3. Selector lever 

4. Lighting of gate pattern on selector lever 


5. Bowden cable assembly (drive range switch/parking lock) 

6. Mechatronics module 

7. Display in instrument cluster 


6 


E60 Driveline 





The electronic transmission control unit is an integral part of the mechatronics module 
(installed in the oil sump of the gearbox). The electronic inputs are evaluated in the control 
unit and electronic output signals control the actuators. The control unit is integrated in the 
E60 PT-CAN system. 

D-Bus 


SGM 



The data that the EGS requires for shifting gears, such as injection timing, engine speed, 
throttle valve angle, engine temperature and engine intervention, are transmitted on the PT- 
CAN bus. The solenoid valves and the pressure actuator are activated directly by the 
Mechatronics Module. Messages that are sent via the PT-CAN bus to the EGS control unit 
and from the EGS control unit are: 


Signals 

Ignition terminal status 
Transmission data 
Engine data 
Wheel speeds 
Display, transmission data 
Check control message 


Transmitter 

CAS 

EGS 

ECM 

DSC 

EGS 

EGS 


Receiver 

EGS 

CAS 

EGS 

EGS 

Instrument cluster 
Instrument cluster 


Hall sensors detect the turbine and output speed of the gearbox. The signal from the drive 
range switch is also routed via 4 Hall sensors to the mechatronics module. Two tempera¬ 
ture sensors are used for acquiring the transmission fluid temperature. 


7 

E60 Driveline 






















































Automatic and Steptronic Mode 


The shift gate pattern is located in the selector lever panel. The 
engaged drive range is highlighted on the shift gate pattern. The 
background highlighting is activated by the sliding contact on the 
selector lever. 

1. Automatic shift gate 

2. Steptronic shift gate 

Selecting Lever Positions in Automatic Mode her 11711 

The gears are shifted automatically as part of the EGS program in the automatic shift gate 
(1) selector lever position D. The display in the instrument cluster shows D. The signal for 
the display in the instrument cluster is provided by the Mechatronics Module. 



Selecting Lever Positions in Steptronic Mode 

The S-program is selected by shifting the selector lever out of position D into the manual 
shift gate (2). The display in the instrument cluster changes to D S. Steptronic mode is 
activated by tapping the selector lever forward or backward and the transmission is shifted 
one gear up or down. 

The display in the instrument cluster changes to Ml - M6. In Steptronic mode, the respec¬ 
tive gear is maintained up to just before reaching the governed engine cutoff speed. An 
upshift then takes place automatically. Automatic downshifts are performed at kick-down 
and speed-dependent to 3rd and 2nd gear. 

If a chosen gearshift is not permitted because of the engine and vehicle speed, the display 
in the instrument cluster initially changes to the chosen gear and then to the actual gear. 
The chosen gear is not shifted before reaching the permissible engine speed or vehicle 
speed. This function prevents engine overrevving. 

The required gear is stored by tapping the selector lever several times and subsequently 
holding the position. The transmission shifts in succession up to the gear indicated in the 
instrument cluster. The selector lever must be held in position until the required gear is 
reached. 

Plausibility Check - Since the selector lever can be moved into the manual shift gate only 
from position D, detection of the "manual shift gate" signal is permitted only together with 
the "position D" signal. Detection of the + or - signals for upshift or downshift is permitted 
in the manual shift gate only. If a fault occurs, a corresponding fault code is entered in the 
fault code memory and the S-program as well as Steptronic mode are deactivated. 

8 

E60 Driveline 









Selector Lever Display in the Instrument Cluster 



KT-10888 


The engaged drive range is displayed in the instrument cluster (same as on the E46/E39) 
and is controlled by the Mechatronics Module. 


Shift Lock 

The shift lock prevents moving the selector lever from the drive ranges “P and N” when the 
service brake (pedal) is not operated. This function is accomplished by an electromagnet¬ 
ic lock on the selector lever. 


Interlock 

A cable assembly is fitted between the selector lever and ignition lock (in the steering col¬ 
umn). It ensures the ignition key can be removed only when the selector lever is in position 
“P” (same as on the E38). 


Notes: 


9 

E60 Driveline 














Workshop Hints 

Checking Oil Level 

• The vehicle must be parked on a flat and level surface 

• Check the oil level corresponding to the Repair Instructions 

• Observe the oil temperature - the permissible operating temperature is between -30 °C 
and +130 °C oil sump temperature 


Diagnosis of this gearbox can be carried out with DISplus/GT 1. Gearbox operation can be 
checked by means of the fault code memory, test programs or control unit functions. 

The processor of the transmission control unit features a 448 KB internal flash memory and 
a 256 KB external flash memory (on the main PCB). Approx. 480 KB of this are taken up 
by the basic transmission program. The remainder of the memory location contains the 
vehicle specific application data (performed during Programming). 


Pressure Adaptation 

Pressure adaptation takes place automatically while driving. After conducting repairs on the 
gearbox or replacing the gearbox, it is necessary to reset the pressure adaptation with the 
DISplus/GTI. A test drive should then be performed for the purpose of driving through all 
gears. 


Manual Transmissions GS6-37BZ / GS6-53BZ 

Manual Gearboxes 

The following 6-speed manual gearboxes are used in the E60: 

• GS6-37BZ for the 525i, 530i 

• GS6-53BZ for the 545i 

For additional detailed information on the 6-speed manual gearbox (including Workshop 
Hints), refer to the ST045 E85 Complete Vehicle Technical Training Handout. 


10 

E60 Driveline 


E60 Driveline - Sequential Manual Gearbox SMG 


Purpose of the System 

The optional Sequential Manual Gearbox (SMG) is an automated manual gearbox with 
which clutching and shifting is assumed by an electro-hydraulic system. The SMG is oper¬ 
ated via two shift paddles on the steering wheel and the selector lever in the center con¬ 
sole. It offers the following functions: 

• Sequential shifting mode and automated Drive mode 

• Ability to choose between two different driving programs: Standard, Sport 

• Operating safety through protection against mis-shifting 

• Automatic upshifts in the Drive mode 

• Automatic downshifts at minimum engine rpm 

• Kick-down function in the Drive mode 

• Acceleration assistant 

There are two sequential manual gearboxes (SMG) that are used for the E60: 

• H-SMG (GS6S37BZ) for the M54B25, M54B30 engine 

• G-SMG (GS6S53BZ) for the N62B44 engine 

The 6-speed manual gearboxes GS6-37BZ, GS6-S53BZ are the foundations for the SMGs 
in the E60. The G-SMG differs from the H-SMG. It uses a more powerful clutch actuator, 
different shaped hydraulic tank and the GS6-S53BZ gearbox. 

In combination with this option, the customer also obtains the Driving Dynamics Control 
function (FDC). This function provides a “Sport” effect on driving by influencing the Engine 
Management, transmission (SMG) and steering control systems. This function is activated 
with the “SPORT” button. 

The SMG gearboxes are already known from the E46 and E85 model series. For addition¬ 
al detailed information on the SMG gearbox, refer to the ST045 E85 Complete Vehicle 
Technical Training Handout. Only the new features of the system are described in the fol¬ 
lowing module. 

11 

E60 Driveline 


System Components 



1. SMG control unit 

2. Current distributor 

3. Brake-light switch 

4. SMG steering wheel with shift paddles 

5. Steering column switch cluster (SZL) 

6. Instrument cluster 

7. Gearshift lever 

8. Illuminated shift lever position indicator 

9. Starter motor 


10. Car access system (CAS) 

11. FDC button 

12. Centre console switch center (SZM) 

13. Gearbox with hydraulic unit, shift-travel sensor, 
Selector angle sensor, Gearbox input speed sensor, 
Clutch travel sensor 

14. Light module (LM) 

15. Powertrain (PT) CAN 


SMG Control Module 

The SMG Control Module is a single-board unit with 
a modular connector system (SKE with 5 sockets) 
and is located next to the ECM in the E box. 



12 


E60 Driveline 
























Gearshift Lever 


The gearshift lever accommodates a Micro-Quadlock system with a 12-pin electrical con¬ 
nector which includes the illuminated gearshift lever position indicator next to the gearshift 
lever on the center console. 


The lever is connected to the gearbox by elec¬ 
tric leads only. The gearshift lever works the 
same as the previously used version (E46, 
E85). 

A downshift is performed when the lever is 
pressed forward. An upshift is performed when 
the lever is pulled backward. 

The signal for the reverse light is routed from the 
SMG Control Module via the PT-CAN > SGM > 
K-CAN to the light module. 



KT-11846 


Driving Dynamics Control (FDC) 

The Driving Dynamics Control function (FDC) is standard with the SMG gearbox. In all other 
transmission systems, it is available with the sport package. By pressing the “SPORT” but¬ 
ton (1 above), the FDC function changes overall vehicle characteristics to a sportier drive. 
The following systems are influenced: 


Control Module 

FDC Effect 

ECM (DME) 

Response characteristic of the accelerator pedal module to the electronic 
throttle is more progressive. 

EGS 

Higher gearshift speeds and a more sport oriented characteristic. 

SMG 

The shift procedure and shift time are shortened. Higher gearshift speeds 
and a more sport oriented characteristic in the automatic mode. 

FGR 

Cruise control accelerates faster. 

Servotronic 

More sport oriented steering characteristic. 

AFS 

Standard characteristic 


13 

E60 Driveline 










The FDC button is located in the center console next to the gearshift or selector lever and 
is identified by the lettering "SPORT". "SPORT" appears in the LC display in the instrument 
cluster when the FDC function is active. 



1. FDC (SPORT) button 5. Digital Motor Electronics 

2. Active steering (AFS) 6. Safety and gateway module 

3. Electronic transmission control 7. Center console switch center 

4. Sequential manual gearbox 


The signals from the FDC (SPORT) button are read by the SZM. The SZM sends the sig¬ 
nals via the K-CAN > SGM > PT-CAN to the Control Modules ECM, EGS/SMG, Servotronic 
and AFS. 

If there are no faults stored in these control modules, the SZM provides a ground and the 
“SPORT” button illuminates. When illuminated, the button indicates that the sport mode is 
activated. 

When the ignition switch is cycled “OFF”, this function resets back to the non-sport func¬ 
tion. “SPORT” must be reselected by the driver the next time the ignition is cycled back 
on. 


14 

E60 Driveline 






















































SMG Steering Wheel with Shift Paddles 


The SMG steering wheel with shift paddles can also perform a 
gear change. 

• To upshift, pull one of the shift paddles 

• To downshift, push one of the shift paddles 

You accelerate from higher gears, e.g. during passing, by man¬ 
ually downshifting. 



Displays/Indicators in Instrument Cluster 

1. Program indicator 

2. Gear indicator 

3. Failsafe indicator 

In automatic mode, the program indicator (1) shows drive 
stage "D" engaged for automatic mode. The gear indicator (2) 
shows the shifted gear. 

KT-11860 

The program indicator (1) is faded out when the manual program is selected. The gear indi¬ 
cator (2) shows the shifted gear. 

The word "SPORT" (3) appears in the display when the FDC function is active. 

A transmission fault is indicated by a corresponding CC message (refer to Instrument 
Cluster, CC messages). 


SPORT 


C\) 288.5 km/h 


888.8 666666 


Workshop Hints 

Working on Hydraulic System 

Prior to any work on the hydraulic system, the system pressure must be reduced with the 
Service Function "Before working on hydraulic system" using the DISplus/GTI. The 
hydraulic pump relay must be removed to prevent the hydraulic pump from starting. 

The Service Function "After working on hydraulic system" must be performed with the 
DISplus/GTI. The hydraulic system is vented. The service function "Teach gearbox" must 
be performed. 

15 

E60 Driveline 




The hydraulic pump must not run dry! The relay must not be reconnected for the entire 
duration of the repair work. After work is completed on the hydraulic system, the hydraulic- 
fluid level must be checked and topped up if necessary. The hydraulic pump relay can be 
reconnected. The hydraulic fluid level must be checked again. 

Teaching Gearbox 

The Service Function "teaching gearbox" must be implemented with the DISplus/GTI when 
the following components are replaced or repaired: 

• SMG Control Module • Clutch 

• Gearbox • Gearbox sensors 


The SMG Control Module learns the clutching characteristic during the drive-off operations. 
There may therefore be impaired comfort during the initial gearshift operations. 


Diagnosis 


Diagnosis of the SMG corresponds to diagnosis of the E85 and includes the following: 

• Read identification • Sensor signals at gearbox 

• Read fault memory • Signals from vehicle 

• Delete fault memory • Bus signals 

• Diagnosis check • Programming 


D-Bus 



K-CAN 


MOST 


byteflight 


PT-CAN 


02994 02b 


16 

E60 Driveline 











































































E60 Driveline - Propeller (drive) shaft, Final Drive, Output Shafts 
Purpose of the System 


In addition to the variations of the manual, SMG and automatic transmissions available in 
the E60, there are two variations of the final drive (rear axle differential). The final drive size 
depends on the engine/gearbox combination: 


Engine 

Manual 

Automatic 

SMG 

Final Drive 

M54B25, M54B30 

GS6-37BZ 

GA6HP19Z 

H-SMG 

188K 

N62B44 

GS6-53BZ 

GA6HP26Z 

G-SMG 

215K 


Various drive trains are used depending on the engine/gearbox combination installed in the 
E60. Either steel, aluminum or hybrid propeller (drive) shafts are fitted. The propeller shafts 
are equipped with deformation elements. 

If displaced in the event of an accident, the engine/gearbox unit or the rear axle cause the 
propeller shaft to compress. This feature enhances the passive safety of the vehicle occu¬ 
pants. The propeller shaft takes up a defined force and transmits it to the engine/gearbox 
unit or the final drive. 


1. Propeller shaft with center bearing 

2. Final Drive 

3. Output shafts 


System Components 

Propeller Shaft 

Steel, aluminum or hybrid propeller shafts are used corresponding to the type of engine/ 
gearbox combination installed. In the case of the hybrid propeller shafts, the front half of 
the shaft is made of steel and the rear half of the shaft is aluminum. 



Engine 

Transmission 

Propeller Shaft 

Weight (kg) 

M54B25, M54B30 

GS6-37BZ 

Aluminum 

8.5 

M54B25, M54B30 

GA6HP19Z 

Hybrid 

8.9 

N62B44 

GS6-53BZ 

Steel 

12.6 

N62B44 

GA6HP26Z 

Steel 

12.3 


17 

E60 Driveline 


















1. Flexible coupling 

2. Front propeller shaft section 

3. Center bearing 

4. Universal joint 

5. Rear propeller shaft section 

6. Constant velocity joint 


KT-11655 

There are three different sizes (hole diameter of 96 and 105 mm) of the flexible coupling (1) 
used on the E60. The flexible coupling features a separate rubber bushing with a softer 
degree of rigidity. At very high torque, this rubber bushing is bridged by an internal stop. 

The rigidity of the flexible coupling changes from soft to hard (as load is increased), thus 
protecting the soft rubber bush from overload or irreparable damage. The function is sim¬ 
ilar to that of a progressive spring. 

The center bearing assembly is comprised of an aluminum bracket with integrated rubber 
fold-type seal. 

The propeller shaft is equipped with a crash element that is located at the center bearing 
on the front section of the propeller shaft. In the event of an accident, the engine/gearbox 
unit or the rear axle is displaced, the bearing journal (3) is pressed into the propeller shaft 
(see item 1) specifically reducing the impact energy. 



1. Deformation travel (approx. 100 mm) 

2. Aluminum tube 

3. Bearing journal (steel) 


The bearing journal (3) serving as a 
mount for the crash element is 
made of steel. 

The bearing journal is secured to 
the aluminum tube (2) by friction 
welding. 

The two parts are spun into each 
other until the heat generated by 
the friction seizes them together. 



18 

E60 Driveline 







The steel and hybrid propeller 
shafts are also pushed together 
(same as aluminum shafts) in the 
event of a crash. 


1. Slip tube (shown after deformation in 
detail view) 


The end of the front half of the 
steel and hybrid shafts is designed 
as a slip tube (1). 

The slip tube (1) collapses if the 
engine/gearbox unit or the rear 
axle are displaced in the event of 
an accident. 



Note: The crash element/slip tube of the propeller shafts may be deformed after an acci¬ 
dent. If so, the propeller shaft must be replaced. After an accident, the propeller shafts 
must always be checked to establish whether the crash element/slip tube is pushed togeth¬ 
er (collapsed). 


Final Drive (Rear Axle Differential) 

Two different final drive sizes are used 
depending on the type of engine/gearbox 
combination is installed. The 6 cylinder 
models use the 188K and the 8 cylinder 
models use the 215K. 

In the 188K, the gear ratio varies between 
2.35 and 4.10 depending on the 
engine/gearbox combination. 

In the 215K, the gear ratio varies between 
2.47 and 3.46 depending on the engine/ 
gearbox combination. 

The aluminum cover features cooling fins (1) to provide adequate cooling for the final drive. 
The cooling fins increase the surface area and therefore increase heat dissipation. This 
achieves a 7 °C reduction in the oil temperature in the final drive. The final drive has a life¬ 
time oil fill. 



19 

E60 Driveline 








Output Shafts 

Various output shafts are used on the E60, for example: 

• With the M54B30 engine, the constant velocity joints are the same size both at the wheel 
and final drive ends. 

• Manual transmission M54 vehicles are equipped with torsionally rigid output shafts to 
improve the load change characteristics. The torsionally rigid output shafts have a larg¬ 
er wall thickness and outside diameter than the standard rigid output shafts. This fea¬ 
ture avoids drumming noises caused by torsional vibration. 

• M54 vehicles with automatic transmission are equipped with "standard" rigid output 
shafts. 

1. Constant velocity joint, wheel end 

2. Constant velocity joint, final drive end 

KT-11653 



Notes: 


20 

E60 Driveline 





















