Table of Contents 

E60 Active Front Steering 

Subject Page 

Active Front Steering.3 

New System Features.3 

Advantages of the System .4 

Mechanical System Overview.4 

System l-P-0 .5 

System Schematic .6 

Components.7 

DSC Sensor.7 

Active Front Steering Control Unit.8 

Input Signals.8 

Total Steering-Angle Sensor.9 

Steering-Angle Sensor .9 

Motor Position Sensor of Actuating Unit.10 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) .10 

Hydraulic Pump .11 

Hydraulic Schematic with ECO Valve .11 

Power-Steering Cooler.12 

Active Front Steering Actuating Unit.12 

Principle of Operation.14 

Functions of Active Front Steering .14 

Variable Steering Gear Ratio.14 

Yaw- Rate Control .14 

Power-Steering Support.15 

System Safety .15 

Service Information.16 

AFS Initialization/Adjustment.16 

Wheel Alignment.17 

Interference in Radio Reception .17 

Diagnosis, Coding.17 

Servotronic.17 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 


Revision Date: 09/03 
































Model: E60 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 
Active Front Steering 

Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand basic AFS operation 

• Locate and Identify AFS components 

• Perform AFS Initialization/Start-up procedure 

• Perform Wheel Alignments on AFS equipped vehicles 


2 

E60 Active Front Steering 




Active Front Steering 

Conventional rack-and-pinion power steering is used in the E60. Two items of options (SA) 
are also available: 

• Servotronic 

• The active front steering system (AFS) 

The active front steering option is only available in conjunction with the Servotronic option. 

The design and operating principle of the Servotronic option have remained the same as in 
previous models. 

The active front steering system is introduced on BMW vehicles for the first time on the E60. 

The electronic controlled steering system assists the driver beyond the usual assist of the 
power steering with a variable steering ratio. The core element of the steering system is the 
so-called superimposing gear. The superimposing gear is a ring gear which is part of a sim¬ 
ple planetary gear set integrated into the steering rack between the steering spindle and the 
pinion gear. An electric motor engages the ring gear via a worm gear drive as a function of 
the vehicle speed. In this way, the steering system can modify the front wheel angle by 
changing the output ratio of the steering rack. The electric motor can be run in fon/vard or 
reverse depending on the needs of the AFS system. When the motor is run in the forward 
direction, the steering is more direct. When the motor is run in reverse, the steering is less 
direct. 

In critical situations, the steering system can specifically modify the wheel angle engaged 
by the driver and thereby stabilize the vehicle more quickly than the driver. The active front 
steering system is integrated in the vehicle electrical system via the Powertrain CAN (PT- 
CAN) and the new Chassis CAN (F-CAN). 

The active front steering system is very closely linked to the Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 
drive-control system. Sensors and signals used by DSC are also used by the active front 
steering control unit. 

New System Features 

The flow rate supplied by the hydraulic pump is adjusted by means of an electrically con¬ 
trollable valve, known as an Electrically Controlled Orifice (ECO). It is controlled as a func¬ 
tion of engine speed, road speed and steering wheel angle. 


3 

E60 Active Front Steering 


Advantages of the System 

The active front steering system assists the driver in steering movements and actively intro¬ 
duces additional steering angles into the steering as a function of driving-dynamic variables. 

When the vehicle is being parked, only minimal steering wheel movements are needed to 
deliver large steering angles. Less than 2 turns are needed to move the steering wheel from 
one lock to the other. 

At high speeds, on highways for instance, the steering gear ratio becomes increasingly 
more indirect right up to the level of conventional steering and even beyond. The simulta¬ 
neously increasing steering-wheel torque level prevents unintentional steering movements 
and the driver can feel the improvement in directional stability. 

Unintentional vehicle motion, e.g. oversteering, is compensated by the active front steering 
system without the driver having to take corrective action to maintain the desired course. 

Mechanical System Overview 



1. Hydraulic fluid reservoir 4. Hydraulic hose 

2. Hydraulic pump with ECO valve 5. Steering gear with actuating unit 

3. Power steering cooler for hydraulic fluid 


4 

E60 Active Front Steering 







System l-P-0 



1. Wheel speed sensor 

2. Brake pad wear sensors 

3. Brake light switch 

4. Brake fluid level switch 

5. DSC button 

6. DSC sensor 1 

7. DSC sensor 2 

8. Summation steering angle sensor 

9. Steering angle sensor 

10. Motor position sensor, actuating unit 

11. Instrument cluster 

12. DSC control unit 


13. AFS Active front steering control unit 

14. Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

15. DME Control unit 

16. Lock, actuating unit 

17. AFS Actuating unit 

18. Servotronic valve 

19. BMW diagnostic system (DISplus/GT-1) 

20. Flydraulic pump with ECO valve 
PT-CAN Powertrain CAN 

F-CAN Chassis CAN 
K-CAN Body CAN 


5 

E60 Active Front Steering 












































System Schematic 



1. Wheel speed sensor, front left 

2. Wheel speed sensor, rear left 

3. Brake light switch 

4. Brake fluid level switch 

5. DSC button 

6. DSC sensor 1 

7. DSC sensor 2 

8. Summation steering angle sensor 

9. Steering angle sensor 

10. Instrument cluster 

11. DSC control unit 


12. AFS Active front steering control unit 

13. Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

14. Wheel speed sensor, front right 

15. Wheel speed sensor, rear right 

16. Brake pad wear sensor 

17. Brake pad wear sensor 

18. DME control unit 

19. Lock, actuating unit 

20. Electric motor, actuating unit 

21. Servotronic valve 

22. ECO valve, hydraulic pump 


6 

E60 Active Front Steering 






























































































































Components 

DSC Sensor 

The lateral-acceleration and yaw-rate sensors are combined in a single housing and desig¬ 
nated the DSC sensor. The active front steering system is also provided with a second DSC 
sensor in addition to the DSC sensor fitted as standard. 

DSC sensor 1 is located under the right front seat. DSC sensor 2 is located under the left 
front seat. 

The two DSC sensors are technically identical but coded by means of the software so that 
they cannot be mixed up. DSC sensor 2 is used for redundant signal acquisition of yaw 
rate and lateral acceleration. 

Both sensors supply yaw-rate and lateral acceleration signals. The use of two DSC sen¬ 
sors makes it possible to perform the plausibility check. 



0 0 0 

02695 


Installation locations of DSC sensors and active front steering control unit 

1. DSC sensor 2 for active front steering 3. Active front steering control unit 

2. DSC sensor 1 for brake system 


7 

E60 Active Front Steering 












Active Front Steering Control Unit 

The active front steering control unit 
is located in the right footwell and 
screwed down to the floorpan. 

The control unit is protected by a 
kickplate housing. 

The kickplate housing incorporates 
a pin for connecting the shielding for 
the 3 phases of the active front 
steering actuating unit. 

The control unit is integrated in the 
vehicle electrical system via the PT- 
CAN and the F-CAN. 

The active front steering control unit 
calculates the signals for activating 
the active front steering actuating 
unit from the various input signals. 

Input Signals 

• DSC signals (wheel speeds, yaw rate and lateral acceleration) 

• Steering angle 

• Total (summation) steering angle 

• Position of electric servomotor of actuating unit 

The active front steering control unit is initialized when the ignition is turned on. 

The active front steering actuating unit cannot be activated during the initialization proce¬ 
dure. The sensor signals are checked and calibrated if necessary. 

If faults are detected, either the "Error" fault status is adopted or yaw rate control is deac¬ 
tivated. In the case of the "Error" fault status, it is not possible to activate the actuating unit. 
The "Drive" status is adopted after successful initialization. 

The active front steering control unit sends the current message corresponding to the 
required flow rate to the SGM via the PT-CAN. 



8 

E60 Active Front Steering 


Total Steering-Angle Sensor 

The total (summation) steering-angle sensor is only fitted in the vehicle if the active front 
steering system is fitted. 

The total steering-angle sensor records the rotation angle of the steering pinion and thus 
the wheel deflection (or actual steering angle) of the vehicle. 

The total steering-angle sensor is flange-mounted at the bottom of the steering gear. 



02639.02 


1. Total steering angle sensor 


Steering-Angle Sensor 

The steering-angle message is directed from the steering column switch cluster (SZL) to the 
active front steering control unit via a serial interface and via the F-CAN. 

The SZL incorporates a second processor for redundant steering-angle calculation. This 
second processor is only fitted if the active front steering system is fitted and serves to 
monitor the plausibility of the signal. 

The steering-angle sensor is integrated in the steering column switch cluster. 


9 

E60 Active Front Steering 











Motor Position Sensor of Actuating Unit 

The motor position sensor of the actuating unit 
is located on the rear side of the electric motor 
of the active front steering actuating unit. 

The motor position sensor consists of a sensor 
chip and a magnet. 

The sensor chip records the position of the 
electric motor according to the magneto¬ 
resistive principle. 

The information on the rotor position is sent to 
the active front steering control unit via a direct 
line in pulse width modulated form. 



Motor position sensor 


Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 


The SGM consists of a combination of the 
Central Gateway Module (ZGM) known from 
the E65 and the Safety and Information Module 
(SIM). 

The SGM is located in the equipment carrier 
behind the glovebox. 

The SGM receives from the active front steer¬ 
ing control unit the specified setpoint current 
for activating the Servotronic valve and the 
ECO. The SGM activates the Servotronic valve 
and the ECO in pulse width modulated form. 

In vehicles without active front steering, the 
software for activating the Servotronic valve 
and the ECO is implemented in the SGM. 



10 

E60 Active Front Steering 


Hydraulic Pump 


The hydraulic pump is a vane pump and is equipped with an electrically controllable valve 
for regulating the flow rate of the hydraulic fluid. This valve is called the Electrically 
Controlled Orifice (ECO). 


The active front steering system can generate 
higher wheel-angle speeds compared with con¬ 
ventional rack-and-pinion power steering sys¬ 
tems. High hydraulic system flow rates must be 
maintained in the hydraulic system for the high 
wheel-angle speeds. In order to deliver the need¬ 
ed hydraulic requirements, a larger power steer¬ 
ing pump would need to be installed. However 
this would increase fuel consumption. An alterna¬ 
tive would be to install a controllable hydraulic 
pump. A conventional pump with the added ECO 
valve has been installed on the E60. 

The hydraulic pump with the ECO regulates the 
flow rate according to requirements and reduces 
the dynamic pressure in the steering system. 


Hydraulic Schematic with ECO Valve 

The low power consumption of the hydraulic 
pump helps to reduce vehicle fuel consumption 
and thus C02 emissions. 

The ECO is sprung closed and powered open by 
the SGM. When the ECO is fully energized, the 
pump can deliver the maximum flow rate of 15 1/ 
min dependent upon engine speed. 

When deactivated and de-energized, the ECO 
valve is closed and pump delivers a reduced flow 
rate of approx. 7 l/min for steering-effort support. 



1. ECO Valve 



1. Hydraulic reservoir 

2. Hydraulic pump 

3. ECO valve 

4. Rack and pinion power steering 

5. Pressure control valve 

6. Pressure limiting valve 

7. Restrictor orifice 


11 

E60 Active Front Steering 




















Power-Steering Cooler 

The power-steering cooler is located on the 
engine-cooling module. This cooler consists of 
4 tubes of rectangular cross-section and sol¬ 
dered fins. The cooler is needed due to the 
increased hydraulic power needed to deliver 
higher wheel angle speeds. 


Active Front Steering Actuating Unit 



The active front steering actuating unit is located on the steering gear. It is integrated in the 
split steering column between the Servotronic valve and the rack. 


This actuating unit comprises a brushless synchronous DC motor and a planetary gear. 

The core component of the active front steering actuating unit is a planetary gear with 2 
inputs. One input is from the driver via the steering spindle, the other is from the ring gear 
via the actuator motor 


1 



1. Summation steering-angle sensor 

2. Rack 

3. Planetary-gear housing 

4. Magnetic lock 


5. Servotronic valve 

6. Steering spindle 

7. Electric motor 


12 

E60 Active Front Steering 






























One input shaft is connected via the 
Servotronic valve to the lower steering 
spindle. This input shaft is connected 
to the “sun” gear of the planetary set. 
The second input comes from the ring 
gear. The ring gear is driven by the 
electric motor via a self-locking worm- 
gear drive as a step-down stage. The 
wormgear drive actuates the ring gear 
which superimposes the steering 
angle of the front wheels specified by 
the driver. 

An electromagnetically controlled safe¬ 
ty interlock is fitted. The safety inter¬ 
lock is spring loaded and engages the 
worm gear drive on the actuator motor 
when no voltage is applied. 

The safety interlock is released at a 
current of approx. 1.8 A. 

The rotor position of the electric motor 
is recorded by the motor position sen¬ 
sor on the motor itself. 

The electric motor is powered by way 
of 3 phases. The 3 phases are ener¬ 
gized alternately by the electronics of 
the active front steering control unit. 

The shielding is furnished by the 
ground connection of the electric 
motor housing to the body. 

However, the actuating forces for the 
steering angle are not applied by the 
electric motor but rather by the power 
steering system. 


1. Lock 4. Worm gear 

2. Worm-gear drive 5. Planetary gear 

3. Electric motor 




1. Motor position sensor 

2. Electric motor 

3. Electro-magnetic lock 


13 

E60 Active Front Steering 







Principle of Operation 

Functions of Active Front Steering 

Active front steering, which specifically changes the steering angle of the front wheels spec¬ 
ified by the driver, sets new standards in terms of agility, comfort and safety. 

The system comprises the following functions: 

• Variable steering gear ratio 

• Yaw-rate control (support of DSC) 

• Power-steering support (assist) 

Variable Steering Gear Ratio 

The variable steering gear ratio adapts the steering gear ratio to the road speed and the 
steering angle requested by the driver. The steering is designed to be indirect at high 
speeds and direct at low speeds. 

Vehicle maneuverability is significantly increased at slow speeds or when parking by the 
active front steering actuating unit. The driver no longer needs to grip the steering wheel 
excessively. When the vehicle is stationary, 2 turns are enough to move the steering wheel 
from one lock to the other. 

At high speeds (> 75 mph), active steering allows a more indirect steering gear ratio than 
do conventional steering systems. The servomotor operates in the opposite direction to the 
steering-wheel angle at high speeds. 

Unintentional steering movements are prevented in conjunction with the increased steering- 
torque level (Servotronic). 

Yaw-Rate Control 

The active front steering system supports the stability functions of DSC. 

In dynamic critical situations, active front steering system can specifically modify the steer¬ 
ing angle of the front wheels specified by the driver and stabilize the vehicle much more 
quickly than the driver. 

The intervention thresholds of DSC are much higher than those of active front steering. If 
vehicle oversteering is detected, the active front steering system intervenes first in order to 
stabilize the vehicle. DSC intervenes only if the steering system is not enough to stabilize 
the vehicle. 


14 

E60 Active Front Steering 


Power-Steering Support 

Power-steering support is implemented by a conventional rack-and pinion power steering 
system. Servotronic is available as an option. The electronics and the software for 
Servotronic are incorporated in the SGM if active front steering is not fitted. 

For the active front steering system, the software for power-steering support is incorporat¬ 
ed in the active front steering control unit. The output stage for activating the Servotronic 
valve and the valve in the hydraulic pump (ECO) is located in the SGM. The ECO regulates 
the hydraulic flow rate in the hydraulic pump in order to provide only the flow rate current¬ 
ly required for the power steering. 

System Safety 

Unintentional system self-steering is classified as safety-critical behavior by the active front 
steering system. 

The safe system status (failsafe) is the lowest-energy status of the actuating-unit servomo¬ 
tor. Regardless of whether the safe status is brought about by a power loss or by intentional 
deactivation by the system, it is essential to ensure that the actuating unit does not engage 
the steering system. The actuating unit is blocked by a lock, which engages the unit's 
worm-gear drive. The lock is preloaded by a spring and held against the preload by the 
voltage supply. An interruption of the voltage supply will thus cause the lock to engage the 
worm-gear drive of the actuating unit. 

The locked superimposing gear ensures that manual steering by the driver via the steering 
column is still possible. The steering then responds like conventional steering. The purely 
mechanical gear ratio between the steering wheel and the front wheels is maintained. 

The electric motor of the active front steering actuating unit is connected with 3 phases. A 
short circuit to ground thus prevents the electric motor from completing a full rotation as 
the motor can only rotate a maximum of 120° (360° : 3). 

The Servotronic valve switches at zero current to the fast-driving curve. Power-steering 
support is reduced accordingly. When the ECO is at zero current, the flow rate is 7 l/min. 

If the active front steering control unit does not send a valid message on the PT-CAN, the 
SGM operates after 100 ms with a road speed-dependent substitute curve. The substitute 
curve ensures sufficient steering properties for the passive active front steering system. 


15 

E60 Active Front Steering 


The driver is alerted to system faults by way of a warning lamp, a variable warning lamp and 
Check Control messages in the instrument cluster. 

The Check Control message runs as follows: AFS failure! Steer with care. 

The following information appears in the control display: 

Steering behavior altered! Possible to continue the journey. Steering wheel may 
be at angle. Have the problem checked by the nearest BMW Service. 

Switch-on Conditions 

The switch-on conditions for the active front steering system are terminal 15 On and a run¬ 
ning engine. 

When the engine is started, the system performs a synchronization of the steering-wheel 
position and the steering angle. This ensures that steering-wheel position and steering 
angle match up after steering wheel movements when the system is deactivated (passive 
status). Steering-wheel movements or movements by the wheels can be discerned. 

Service Information 

AFS Initialization/Adjustment 

The technician must perform the initialization/adjustment procedure after performing the fol¬ 
lowing work: 

• Any alignment adjustments or steering component replacement 

• Steering column work 

• After replacement or programming of the AFS control module 

• After replacement or programming of the SZL control module 

A steering-angle adjustment (offset) must be carried out if the SZL or the steering rack is 
replaced. This must be carried out on the KDS (alignment equipment). 

The total steering-angle sensor on the steering gear is calibrated to the middle of the rack 
at the steering-gear manufacturer. 

The AFS adjustments can be found in the service functions menu of the DISplus/GT-1. 


16 

E60 Active Front Steering 


Wheel Alignment 

If the vehicle requires a wheel alignment, the initialization procedure must be started before 
beginning the alignment. Using the DISplus/GT-1, complete the following steps: 

• Access the test module for “Startup adjustment/AFS. When prompted, answer 
“Yes” to the alignment question. 

• Center steering rack and check alignment marks on the steering gear 

• Install tool # 324150 and lock steering wheel 

• Proceed with alignment 

• After completing the last steps of the alignment (front toe adj), remove 324150. 

• Proceed with the remaining portion of the test module. 

This will set the total steering angle to 0 degrees by locking the superimposing gear (ring 
gear). The AFS control module will de-energize the electromagnetic lock which will hold the 
AFS actuator motor which will in turn hold the superimposing gear stationary. If alignment 
is attempted without performing this procedure, the steering will be off-center by a consid¬ 
erable amount. Special tool # 324150 is used to hold the steering wheel in the center posi¬ 
tion. Failure to use the special tool will result in an off-center steering wheel. 

Interference in Radio Reception 

Interference in radio reception can be caused by there being no connection of the shield¬ 
ing of the 3 phases of the actuating unit to the housing of the active front steering control 
unit. 

Diagnosis, Coding 

Servotronic 

Servotronic is activated in diagnosis as an independent control unit, the output stage for 
Servotronic is located in the SGM. Only the vehicle-specific configuration is entered by way 
of coding. 


17 

E60 Active Front Steering 




Workshop Exercise - AFS Adjustments 


Remove underbody panels and thrust plate from vehicle and install special tool # 324150. 
Why is tool # 324150 needed to perform an alignment? 


Remove special tool # 324150. Leave underbody panels and thrust plate off. 

Using DISplus/GT-1 perform short test. Access test plan for “Startup Adjustment/AFS”. 
Answer “Yes” to alignment question. 

List the sequence of components adjusted during this procedure: 


What is the difference between answering Yes or No at the beginning of this procedure? 


When should the Startup/Adjustment be performed? 


List the steps for performing an alignment on a vehicle equipped with AFS: 


What 2 special tools are specific to the E60 wheel alignment? 


18 

E60 Active Front Steering 



























Workshop Exercise - AFS Adjustments 


With the engine running, How many turns of the steering wheel are required to go from lock 
to lock? 


Under control unit functions page, locate the status request for “Value Steering Angle”. 
With the steering wheel in the straight ahead position, note the values for: 

Driver’s steering angle _ 

Total steering angle _ 

With the engine running, turn the wheel from lock to lock and note the changes in the above 
angles. What is observed regarding the difference between these angles? 


Turn the steering wheel to the left lock position and disconnect the AFS motor connection. 
Turn the steering wheel back to the straight ahead position and note the new steering angle 
values: 

Driver’s steering angle _ 

Total steering angle _ 

Are the values the same for the straight ahead position? Why or Why not? 


Reconnect AFS motor connection, clear fault codes and perform “Startup 
Adjustment/AFS”. 

List the path taken to access the test plan for “Startup Adjustment/AFS”. 


Re-install underbody panels and thrust plate on vehicle. 


19 

E60 Active Front Steering 
















