Table of Contents 


E60 Climate Control 

Subject Page 

E60 Automatic Heating and Air Conditioning System.3 

Purpose of the System.3 

New System Components and Features .3 

Additional System Features .4 

System Components.6 

Components Located in Passenger Compartment.6 

Components Located in (or on) IHKA Housing.6 

Components Located in Engine Compartment.6 

IHKA Control Panel/Module .7 

Condensation Sensor.10 

Solar Sensor.12 

AUC-2 Sensor .12 

CID and Controller .12 

Components Located on IHKA Housing.13 

Stepper Motors .13 

Blower Motor with Blower Controller .14 

Temperature Sensors .14 

Component Layout .16 

A/C System Component Layout.17 

A/C Compressor.17 

Pressure Sensor.18 

Water Valves.18 

Auxiliary Water Pump (ZWP).18 

Microfilter System.19 

Workshop Hints.20 

AC Housing Installation.20 

Compressor Run-in .20 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 


Revision Date: 09/03 





























Model: E60 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 
Climate Control 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify and locate the components of the E60 Climate Control System 

• Understand the differences between E39 and E60 IHKA 

• Understand LIN bus operation 

• Understand Condensation Sensor Operation 

• Operate Features of the E60 IHKA System 


2 


E60 Climate Control 




E60 Automatic Heating and Air Conditioning System 

Purpose of the System 

The E60 IHKA system is designed using the same criteria as the E65. There are techno¬ 
logical improvements as well as new or modified functions. As with E65, the design objec¬ 
tives were to meet the requirements of customers worldwide for heating and cooling 

capacity. 

New System Components and Features 

• Condensation Sensor (Mist Sensor) - The Condensation sensor evaluates the 
humidity level of the windshield area and implements control measures to reduce 
windshield fogging. 

• New Bus System - The Local Interconnect Network (LIN Bus) connects all 9 step 
per motors and the blower controller. 

• Modified Control Concept (As compared to E39) - Similar to E65, there is a reduc¬ 
tion in the number of primary controls. The temperature and air volume are contr¬ 
olled by rotary knobs. Extended air conditioning functions such as air stratification 
are selected and activated by means of the controller in the CID. 



3 


E60 Climate Control 



Additional System Features 


• Modified Display Concept - The Scope of display elements for the extended AC 
functions in the CID are similar to those in the E65. The required fan and tempera¬ 
ture settings are not shown in the CID. The set values for temperature and air vol¬ 
ume can be read from scale rings on the IHKA panel. Air distribution is set by means 
of the controller in the CID. 

• Elimination of LCD Display - The LCD display from the E39 has been eliminated. 

• No Bowden Cables - All flap positions are set by stepper motors which are con¬ 
trolled via the LIN bus. 

• Separate Footwell Flaps for Left and Right 

• Separate Ventilation Flaps for Left and Right 

• New Suction Action Blower arrangement - The new blower arrangement allows for 
a more compact IHKA housing. The blower is arranged behind the evaporator. The 
heat exchanger for the heating system is positioned at right angles with respect to 
the evaporator and is arranged over the blower. The blower motor and blower 
motor housing can be removed without removal of the complete dashboard 
assembly. 

• Clutchless A/C Compressor - The clutchless compressor is externally actuated and 
output regulated. The component and operation are carried over from the E65. 

• AUC-2 Sensor - The AUC sensor is carried over from the E65. 

• Solar Sensor - The solar sensor is located in the center of the dashboard and is also 
carried over from the E65/E66. 


4 


E60 Climate Control 


System Overview 



1. Mist sensor 

2. Mist sensor signal 

3. Ambient temperature sensor 

4. Face vent temperature sensor 

5. IHKA control panel 


6. Not shown 

7. Evaporator and expansion valve 

8. Blower and controller (on LIN bus) 

9. Stepper motors (9 on LIN bus) 

10. Clutchless AC compressor 


5 


E60 Climate Control 





















System Components 

The E60 Climate Control System consists of the following components: 
Components Located in Passenger Compartment 

• IHKA Control Panel/Module 

• Condensation (Mist) Sensor 

• Solar Sensor 

• CID and Controller 

• Face Vent Temperature Sensor 
Components Located in (or on) IHKA Housing 

• 9 Stepper Motors (all on LIN Bus) 

• Blower Motor with Controller (on LIN Bus) 

• Evaporator Temperature Sensor 

• 2 Heater Core Temperature Sensors (Left and Right) 

• Heater Core (Heat Exchanger) 

• Evaporator 

• Expansion Valve 

Components Located in Engine Compartment 

• A/C Compressor 

• AUC Sensor 

• Water Valves 

• Auxiliary Water Pump 

• A/C Condenser (with Integrated Receiver/Dryer) 

• Auxiliary Cooling Fan 

• A/C Pressure Sensor 

• Refrigerant Lines 

• Microfilter System 


6 


E60 Climate Control 



IHKA Control Panel/Module 


The IHKA Control Panel/Module controls the following functions: 

• Desired Temperature Setting, Left/Right 

• Air Volume (Automatic and Manual Blower Settings) 

• A/C On/Off Switch 

• Recirculation Control (Including AUC) 

• Rear Window Defogger 

• MAX A/C 

• Defrost Function 

There are additional functions such as air distribution (defrost, face and footwell) and air 
stratification that are selected and controlled with the controller in the CID. 



10 9 8 


1. Rotary control for left side temperature setting 
with MAX AC button. 

2. Opening for interior temperature sensor. 

3. DEFROST Button 

4. Rotary control for blower setting with OFF button. 

5. A/C Button 


US223_Q2256_02 

6. AUTO Button (Automatic flap and blower function). 

7. Rotary control for right side temperature setting 
with REST button. 

8. AUC recirculating air button 

9. Independent Heating Indicator (Not for US Market) 

10. Rear window defogger button 


7 


E60 Climate Control 
























Workshop Exercise - IHKA Control Panel 



1.26 Pin plug connection to vehicle electrical system 

2. 12 Pin plug connection to heater/air conditioner 

3. 2 Pin plug connection to front of power distribution box 


Remove IHKA panel and connect breakout boxes 

Record the steps and fasteners (if any) used to remove the IHKA control panel/module: 


List part numbers of breakout boxes and cables used: 


List the connector numbers for the following connectors: 

26 Pin _ 12 Pin _ 3 Pin 


8 


E60 Climate Control 


































Workshop Exercise - 


IHKA Control Panel 


List the connector and pin #’s of the power supply and ground connections to the IHKA 
panel: 

KL15 _ 

KL30 _ 

KL31 _ 


List the Bus interface connections to the IHKA control panel: 


How does the IHKA panel receive outside temperature information? 


Can the interior temp sensor fan be replaced as a separate item? 


Describe the AC compressor control circuit (list connectors, pins, etc.): 


9 


E60 Climate Control 
























Condensation Sensor 


The condensation sensor is new to BMW climate control systems. The sensor is used to 
measure air humidity and temperature in the windshield area. 


This information is sent to the 
IHKA control unit via a digital 
signal with a varying frequency. 
This information is evaluated by 
the IHKA control module, which 
then implements a series of 
countermeasures to prevent 
windscreen fogging. The coun¬ 
termeasures are implemented in 
the following sequence: 



Measures 

Action 

1 

Defroster flaps opened further 

2 

Recirculating air/AUC/automatic recirculating air switched to fresh air 

3 

Partial fresh air in connection with recirculating air/AUC/automatic recirculating air 
switched to fresh air 

4 

Minimum evaporator temperature (progressive evap temperature de-activated) 

5 

Blower air volume increased 

6 

Footwell share decreased 

7 

Temperature setpoint increased 


These measures are implemented one after another 
until windscreen fogging is eliminated. Further steps 
are initiated if one measure proves to be ineffective. 
After successfully eliminating windscreen fogging, the 
measures are gradually cancelled in steps. 

The sensor is located beneath the RLS on the wind¬ 
shield below the cover for the base of the rear view 
mirror. A special locating tool is used to install the 
new sensor, this tool is supplied with the replacement 
sensor. The sensor is affixed to the windscreen with 
an adhesive. If the sensor needs to be removed from 
the windshield it must be replaced. 



4 3 

's' 

1. Sensor Electronics 

2. 3 Pin Connection 

3. Moisture measuring cell 

4. Well for laser adjusted resistors 



E60 Climate Control 























Workshop Exercises - Condensation Sensor 


Using the DISPIus or GT-1, record the following information: 

What type of signal is sent from the condensation sensor to the IHKA module? 


What is the pin and connector number for the condensation sensor signal at the IHKA con¬ 
trol panel/module? 


Measure and record the following signal information from the condensation sensor: 
Frequency _ Duty Cycle _ Voltage _ 

What is the observed condensation sensor values on status requests? 

While observing status requests, place a cup of hot water near the condensation sensor 
and observe the new signal information. 

What happens to the value on Status requests? _ 

What other observation can be made when the mist sensor signal changes? 


Is there a test plan available for the mist sensor? 


What is the special tool # used to install the condensation sensor? 



E60 Climate Control 






















Solar Sensor 


The solar sensor is located in the center of the dash¬ 
board to the right of the center speaker grill. 

The solar sensor operation is identical to the past 
models such as E65/E66. 

As on previous models, the solar sensor signals will 
influence blower output, air stratification and ventila¬ 
tion flap operation. 



AUC-2 Sensor 

The AUC-2 sensor is located on the cooling fan 
housing at the top. The sensor operation is identical 
to the E65. The AUC-2 sensor will signal the IHKA to 
activate recirculation mode when the sensor detects 
oxidizable gases such as hydrocarbons, carbon 
monoxide and nitrogen oxides. 

CID and Controller 


AUC-2 

Sensor 



The CID and Controller are used for air distribution adjustments, air stratification and for the 
parked car ventilation features. The air volume for face vent, foot well and defrost can be 
adjusted independently for the driver and passenger. 


1 j 

2 

3 



ozm 02 

1. Air volume, defrost 

2. Air volume, face vent 

3. Air volume, footwell 



E60 Climate Control 







Components Located on IHKA Housing 



1. Heater Core Temperature Sensor (RH) 

2. Stepper Motor, right footwell 

3. Stepper Motor, fresh air/recirc air (RH) 

4. Stepper Motor, right side ventilation 

5. Stepper Motor, air stratification 

6. Stepper Motor, rear compartment (center) 


7. Stepper Motor, left side ventilation 

8. Stepper Motor, fresh air/recirc air (LH) 

9. Evaporator Temperature Sensor 

10. Stepper Motor, defrost 

11. Stepper Motor, left footwell 

12. Heater Core Temperature Sensor (LH) 


Stepper Motors 

These stepper motors are MUX5 motors (multiplex 
motor type 5). 

There are 9 stepper motors used on the E60 IHKA 
system. All motors are connected to the LIN Bus. 
The LIN bus circuit consists of three wires, power 
(B+), ground and the LIN bus signal wire. 

The stepper motors for the fresh air/recirculating air 
flaps are designed as high speed motors. 



vSajKMqjE 



This system does not use any bowden cables for flap 
actuation. 


E60 Climate Control 




















Blower Motor with Blower Controller 


The blower motor for generating the necessary air 
volume is fitted in the heater air conditioner. The 
blower features a symmetrical design and is 
equipped with two dual suction action radial fan 
wheels (four flute blower). 

The blower controller is mounted directly on the 
housing of the blower motor. The controller features 
self diagnosis capabilities and is actuated by the con¬ 
trol unit in the IHKA panel via the LIN bus. It is pos¬ 
sible to replace the fan motor without the need to dis¬ 
assemble the instrument panel. 

Temperature Sensors 

All temperature sensors used in the E60 IHKA system are NTC type. The E60 IHKA 
system uses the following temperature sensor inputs: 

• Interior Temperature Sensor - Located in the IHKA control panel faceplate. 
The IHKA panel also incorporates a sensor fan which is removable and can be 
replaced as a separate part. The temperature sensor itself is not replaceable 
separately. 

• Ambient (outside) Temperature - The ambient temperature sensor is an NTC sensor 
which is an input to the instrument cluster. The temperature signal is then sent to 
the IHKA control module via K-CAN. 

• Two Heater Core Temperature Sensors - The Heater core temperature sensors can 
be accessed by removing the CID. The temperature sensors are used to monitor 
the temperature of the left and right side of the heat exchanger. 

• Evaporator Temperature Sensor - As on previous models, the evaporator temp 
sensor is used to prevent evaporator freeze-up. 

• Face Vent Temperature Sensor - There is one face vent temperature sensor located 
behind the center face vent. It can be accessed by removing the center face vent, 
IHKA panel and M-ASK. 


I 







2) 




1. Blower controller on blower motor 



E60 Climate Control 



Workshop Exercise - LIN Bus 


List the LIN bus connections (Pin # and connector #) at the IHKA control panel: 


How many LIN bus connection are there at the IHKA panel? 


Ground the LIN bus signal wire to the blower controller and record observations: 


Ground the LIN bus signal wire to the stepper motors and record observations: 


Notes: 



E60 Climate Control 


























Component Layout 



1. Heater core 

2. Evaporator core 

3. Blower motor controller 


4. Blower motor with housing 

5. Expansion Valve 



E60 Climate Control 









A/C System Component Layout 



1. Radiator 

2. A/C Compressor 

3. Pressure Sensor 

4. Service Connection, 

5. IHKA Control Panel 


6. Heater/AC Housing 

7. Water Valve(s) 

8. Auxiliary Water Pump 

9. Electric Fan 

10. Condenser with Dryer 


A/C Compressor 


The A/C compressor in the E60 is identical to the clutchless design introduced on the 
E65/E66 




E60 Climate Control 




























Pressure Sensor 


The pressure sensor is located in the high side pres¬ 
sure line between the condenser and the evapora¬ 
tor near the passenger side strut tower. 

The sensor sends the IHKA control module an ana¬ 
log signal between 0.4V and 4.6V as a representa¬ 
tion of system pressure. 

The 5V supply is provided by the IHKA control mod¬ 
ule and the sensor current consumption is < 20mA. 



Water Valves 

The water valves on the E60 are of the same design 
as used on previous models. The valves are nor¬ 
mally sprung open and are pulse width modulated 
by the IHKA control unit. The IHKA control unit con¬ 
trols the valves via the B+ circuit, both valves are 
grounded at a common location. The valves are 
powered closed by the IHKA module when full cool¬ 
ing is needed. They are located on the driver’s side 
strut tower. 



Auxiliary Water Pump (ZWP) 

The auxiliary water pump is mounted on the drivers 
side frame rail near the alternator. The ZWP 
enhances hot water flow through the heater core 
particularly when the engine is idling. 




E60 Climate Control 





Microfilter System 

An activated carbon microfilter is fitted on the E60 IHKA system. Microfilter replacement 
intervals are based on CBS data. Based on operating time and operating parameters, the 
“filter condition detection” system determines the load status of the filter without additional 
sensors. In this way, due dates for filter service are calculated together with other wear¬ 
registering components. After changing the filter, the CBS system must be reset via the 
instrument cluster or in the tester (DISplus/GT-1). 

The following are recorded parameters for determining the filter load status: 

• Blower Voltage • Road Speed 

• Outside Temperature • Rain Intensity 

• Sun Intensity • Day Counter 


• Mileage 



Q2Sm_ 02 

1. Microfilter Compartment 3. Bulkhead/filtered air duct seal 

2. Water Drain 4. Filtered air duct 



E60 Climate Control 











Workshop Hints 


AC Housing Installation 

Particular care must be taken when mounting the air conditioner on the inner side of the 
bulkhead to ensure the seals are fitted correctly. The butyl beading on the seal provides a 
tight seal with the bulkhead. When assembling, make sure the repair instructions are fol¬ 
lowed precisely. Failure to adhere to the procedure could result in interior water leakage. 



1. Bulkhead/filtered air duct seal 

2. Aperture for expansion valve 

3. Aperture for water connections, heating circuit 

4. Aperture for air conditioner and screw mounting 
points and seals 





1. Intake/filter compartment seal 

2. Threaded connection, filtered air duct 

3. Filtered air duct 


In the same way as for the seals, particular care must be taken when installing the filtered 
air duct and the filter compartment covers. Secondary (unfiltered) air may be drawn in from 
the engine compartment if the seal between the duct components is defective. 

Initial Operation After Replacing the Refrigerant Compressor (Compressor Run-in) 

In order to prevent compressor damage after installation, the compressor run-in procedure 
must be performed. 

The “Run-in” procedure is identical to E65/E66 and can be found in the service functions 
menu. 



E60 Climate Control 

























