I 


Table of Contents 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 

Subject Page 

Advanced Safety Electronics.4 

Innovations of Advanced Safety Electronics .4 

Advantages of the System .4 

New Features.5 

System Components.8 

byteflight.8 

Safety and Gateway Module SGM .9 

Voltage Supply.10 

Energy Reserve .10 

Star Coupler.10 

Gateway.11 

History Memory .11 

B-Pillar Satellite Left/Right SBSLVSBSR .12 

Door Module, Driver's Door/Passenger Door, TMFA/TMFB.13 

Vehicle Center Satellite SFZ .15 

Steering Column Switch Cluster SZL .16 

Belt Buckle Switch .18 

Seatbelt Tensioner .19 

Battery Cable Diagnosis.20 

Special Case .21 

Front Airbag, Driver.22 

Front Airbag, Passenger.22 

Advanced ITS (Head Airbag).23 

Side Airbag.23 

Active Headrest .24 

Safety Battery Terminal, SBK .25 

Up-Front Sensors.25 

Seat Occupancy Detection (OC-3 Mat).26 

Principle of Operation .29 

Trigger Algorithm .29 

Crash Severity .29 

Triggering Thresholds .29 

Triggering in the Event of Errors .29 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 


Revision Date: 09/03 





































Table of Contents 

Subject Page 

Principle of Operation (cont.) 

Triggering in the Event of a Crash.29 

Front-End Crash.30 

Crash Severity CS1 .30 

Crash Severity CS2 .30 

Crash Severity CS3 .30 

Example of Airbag Deployment.31 

Side-on Collision.31 

Rear Crash.31 

Emergency Call, US .32 

Manual Emergency Call .32 

Automatic Emergency Call .32 

Breakdown Call .32 

Airbag Indicator Lamp .32 

Passive Knee Protection.32 

Service Information.33 

Safety and Gateway Module Diagnosis.33 

Passenger Airbag Module.33 

Battery Cable Diagnosis.33 

Safety Battery Terminal .33 

Door Module, Driver’s Door/Passenger Door .33 

Up-Front Sensors.33 

Synchronization of New Modules .34 
























Model: E60 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 
Advanced Safety Electronics 

Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify and locate components in the ASE system 

• Understand Seat Occupancy Detection (OC-3 Sensor) 

• Understand diagnostic procedures of the ASE system 


3 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 




Advanced Safety Electronics 

Advanced Safety Electronics ASE is the new passive safety system for the E60 and its vari¬ 
ants. ASE is the successor to the Multiple Restraint Systems (MRS). The system is based 
on the same technology as the Intelligent Safety and Integration System (ISIS) of the 
E65/E66. ASE has been brought in line with the requirements specific to the E60. 

Innovations of Advanced Safety Electronics 

Like the E65/66, the E60 features the new byteflight fiber-optic technology. 

The ASE system consists of a main control unit, the Safety and Gateway Module SGM, and 
various satellites. Distributed with their sensors at strategic points around the vehicle, the 
satellites exchange information with the SGM. 

The advantages of the new safety technology can be summarized as 
follows: 

• High-speed data acquisition and transmission (1 OMbit/s) 

• More exact crash detection 

• Networked airbag control system 

• Selective triggering 

• More precise control of the intelligent airbags 

• Dependable triggering 

• Immunity to electromagnetic interference 

• Battery cable diagnosis with cutoff of the safety battery terminal when required 

Advantages of the System 

Multiple acceleration sensors installed at strategic points around the vehicle provide data 
for more exact analysis of crash situations than the MRS. 

The deceleration detected by the acceleration sensors in the vehicle are all transmitted to 
the Safety and Gateway Module. The SGM exchanges the acceleration data with all its 
satellites. This provides an exact picture of the crash situation, enabling a timely and selec¬ 
tive triggering of the actuators depending on the crash situation. 

In the event of a crash, only those actuators are triggered that are necessary for optimum 
protection of the car's occupants. This serves to lower repair costs and reduce insurance 
premiums. 


4 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 



New Features 


The following is a list of new features specific to the E60. Due to the different legal require¬ 
ments in the USA, additional features for the passive safety system ASE were required. 

The new features consist of the following: 

• Up-front sensors for detecting a front-end crash and adequate provision made for 
occupant not a wearing seat belt when the front passenger's airbag triggers 

• Passive knee protection on driver's and passenger's sides, because occupants are 
not required to wear seat belts by law in all 50 states 

• Automatic deactivation of the airbags on the passenger side if the seat is occupied 
by a child restraint system holding a child up to one year old (weight dependent). 

• Visual and acoustic seat-belt warning 

• The cars have an emergency-call button as standard, so that occupants can call for 
assistance at any time in the event of a crash or a breakdown 



SFZ SZL 


byteflight 

5 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 




System Overview Schematic 



6 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 












































Classroom Exercise - System Overview 



Identify the components on the facing page and complete the chart below. 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 


22 


2 


23 


3 


24 


4 


25 


5 


26 


6 


27 


7 


28 


8 


29 


9 


30 


10 


31 


11 


32 


12 


33 


13 


34 


14 


35 


15 


36 


16 


37 


17 


38 


18 




19 




20 




21 





7 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 





























System Components 

byteflight 

The familiar byteflight fiber optic bus that previously established a firm reputation in the 
E65/66 has been carried over to the E60. Extremely fast and dependable data communi¬ 
cation is essential, given the steadily increasing numbers of sensors and actuators. 

The bus system consists of the central Safety and Gateway Module SGM, and the satel¬ 
lites. There is a reduction in the number of satellites as compared to the E65/E66. A fiber 
optic star bus interconnects the satellites with the SGM. Data communication is bi-direc¬ 
tional and very high data rates are achieved (10 Mbit/s). Each satellite has a 
transmitter/receiver module. The SGM has a separate transmitter/receiver module for each 
satellite. 


D-Bus 



SBSL SBSR 

TMFA TMBF 

SFZ SZL 


SGM 

Safety and Gateway Module 

SBSL 

B-pillar satellite, left 

SBSR 

B-Pillar satellite, right 

TMFA 

Door module, driver’s door 

TMFB 

Door module, passenger’s door 


SFZ Vehicle center satellite 

SZL Steering column switch cluster 


byteflight 


02764J2 


Special safety protocols (telegrams) are used to provide increased system reliability and to 
virtually exclude the possibility of unintended triggering. In any given situation, the satellites 
trigger only such actuators as are necessary on receipt of a special telegram (alarm mode) 
from the SGM. 


8 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 









Safety and Gateway Module SGM 


The SGM is a combination of the Safety Information Module (SIM E65) and the Central 
Gateway Module (ZGM E65). The SGM uses the software of the ZGM, and carries out the 
ZGM functions. The functions of the SIM have also been integrated and a number of new 
functions added. 



SGM 


SIM 


Control units combined in the SGM 

The Safety and Gateway Module is responsible for the following functions: 

• Voltage supply of the satellites 

• Provision of the 60 V energy reserve (SIM 400 V) in the event of failure of the power 
supply during an accident 

• Function of the star coupler and the bus master of the byteflight 

• Gateway function to the other bus systems K-CAN, PT-CAN and diagnostic bus 

• The history memory has been integrated into the SGM 

• Provision of the crash telegram for activating various functions in other systems (see 
Gateway functions) 

• Drive for the Servotronic valve in the power-assisted steering 

• Drive for the ECO valve of the hydraulic pump 



9 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 















The Safety and Gateway Module is in the module carrier behind the glove compartment 
and has been adapted to the ASE system. 

The modules of theZGM have been accommodated on the printed circuit board of the SIM. 
The ZGM has its own microprocessor and its own diagnosis address. An electrical con¬ 
nection takes the place of what was formerly the fiber-optic connection between ZGM and 
SIM. A byteflight controller is used to transmit the same telegrams as are used for com¬ 
munication by means of an optical link. 

Note: As far as diagnosis is concerned, note that two control units are addressed, despite 
the fact that they share a common housing. 

Voltage Supply 

The SGM is supplied with voltage via terminal 30 and terminal 31. A voltage transformer 
(10.2 V) and an intelligent distributor with overcurrent protection carry voltage to the satel¬ 
lites. If a fault occurs, the distributor can shut off the supply to individual satellites. 

Energy Reserve 

At the same time the energy reserve is charged. The energy reserve consists of a storage 
capacitor (60 V). If the vehicle voltage drops below a defined threshold, power is tapped 
from the energy reserve. In this way, the entire functionality of the safety system is main¬ 
tained for approximately 1 second, the time it takes to drain the energy reserve. 

Note: When carrying out work on the safety system, always bear in mind that the storage 
capacitors take a few seconds to discharge after the battery has been disconnected, and 
the safety system remains operational for this period of time. 

Star Coupler 

The star coupler with the 6 transmitter/receiver modules receives its power supply (5 V) 
from a secondary voltage transformer. The same applies for the two microprocessors. The 
individual byteflights to the satellites are connected to the star coupler. The star coupler 
transmits a synchronization pulse every 250 microseconds. Between these synchroniza¬ 
tion pulses, the telegrams are sent from and to the satellites (bi-directional communication) 
on the byteflight. 

The satellites accommodate acceleration sensors and pressure sensors. These are the 
sensors that detect a crash. The satellites send the sensor data to the star coupler. The 
star coupler distributes the information to all the satellites. In this way, all the satellites have 
the same information at their disposal. 

The SGM uses the information it receives to recognize a crash when it happens. The SGM 
compares the values with the algorithm in its processor and, if the impact is of sufficient 
severity, it uses the synchronization pulse to initiate the alarm mode. The alarm mode 
places the satellites in a triggerable state. The actuators required in any given situation are 
actuated, depending on the crash severity and the algorithms stored in the satellites. 


10 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


Gateway 

All the functions of the Central gateway Module of the E65 are integrated into the SGM. 
The purpose of the gateway function is to interface the various bus systems of the E60. 

The bus system used in the E60 are as follows: 

• Byteflight 

• K-CAN 

• PT-CAN 

• Diagnosis bus 

• MOST (by a separate gateway in the M-ASK on the K-CAN) 



1. Safety and Gateway Module 

2. Gateway Function 

3. Diagnosis Bus 

4. K-CAN 

5. PT-CAN with wake-up line 

6 . byteflight 


02439.0Z 


History Memory 

A non-volatile memory is implemented in the SGM so that the following responses can be 
logged: 

• Which bus originated the incorrect wake-up call that woke the entire system 

• Which node prevented the bus system from entering sleep mode following shut 
down of terminal R and expiration of the run-on time (30 min). 

Each entry in the history memory identifies the originator, and logs the time of day and the 
odometer reading. In this way, dependable diagnosis can subsequently be performed. 


11 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 





















B-Pillar Satellite Left/Right SBSL/SBSR 

The SBSL controls and monitors the following trigger circuits: 

• Head airbag AITS II, left 

• Active headrests left and right 

• Side airbag in rear left door (optional) 

• Seatbelt tensioner, left 

• Seatbelt tensioner, rear left (optional) 



The SBSR controls and monitors the follow¬ 
ing trigger circuits: 

• Front airbag, passenger 

• Head airbag (AITS II) right 

• Side airbag in rear right door 
(optional) 

• Seatbelt tensioner, right 

• Seatbelt tensioner, rear right 

(optional) 


The left/right B-pillar satellites are located low in the B pillars in the vicinity of the sill and are 
connected to the SGM by the byteflight. 


The power supply of the satellites is also from the SGM and it is buffered by a storage 
capacitor. In sleep mode of the byteflight, the power supply of the satellites is deactivated 
by the SGM. 


Each satellite has an acceleration sensor for longitudinal acceleration and one for lateral 
acceleration. The sensor provides a voltage as measured variable. This voltage is a mea¬ 
sure for the positive and negative car acceleration and it is evaluated in the satellite. 


The sensors continuously provide the values determined. The measured values are trans¬ 
ferred by the byteflight to the SGM and all the satellites. 

When the SGM detects a critical range, the alarm mode is set by means of the synchro¬ 
nization pulse. 


The alarm mode places the satellites in a triggerable state. The trigger matrix stored in the 
satellites activates the necessary actuators depending on the crash severity. 


12 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 









The trigger circuits of the actuators are connected to ignition final stages in the satellites 
and are ignited by discharging capacitors. 

The self-diagnosis of the trigger circuits during the pre-drive check and in normal operation 
is the same for all satellites. 

Battery cable diagnosis is performed by both satellites. The connection of the monitoring 
line in the engine compartment is to the SBSL. The connection of the monitoring line to the 
battery in the luggage compartment is to the SBSR. 

A precise description of the battery cable diagnosis can be found in the section on battery 
cable diagnosis. 


Operating voltage 

10.2...10.7 V 

Full function 

Operating voltage 

10.7 ... 16 V 

Restricted function, diagnosis of trigger circuits not possible 

Power intake 

Typ. 90 mA 

Normal operation 


Door Module, Driver's Door/Passenger Door, TMFA/TMFB 

The driver's door/passenger door door module is a combination of the door module with 
the body electrics functions and the front-door satellite. 


The driver's door/passenger door door module controls and monitors the trigger circuits for 
the door-mounted side airbag. The pressure sensor in the door module registers a side 
impact by measuring pressure increases in the door cavity. 

1. Mounting screw holes 

2. Inlet port to the pressure sensor 

3. Connector for the switch block 

3 4. Connector for the power supply 

5. Connector for the input signals 

i 

6. Connector for the outside mirror 

7. Connector for the ASE system 



13 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


















The description below describes only the functions that are relevant to the ASE system. 
The other functions are described in the section entitled General Vehicle Electrics. 


VS_SIM 


LWL 

KI.31 


KI.30 



02444.02 


1. Voltage regulator VS_SIM. Voltage supply 

2. Microprocessor LWL. byteflight 

3. Ignition final stage KI.30. Terminal 30 

4. Igniter pellet for side airbag KI.31. Terminal 31 ground, carried by the load connector to the door 

module 

5. Pressure sensor S/E. Transmitter/receiver modules 

The door modules with the function of the front-door satellites are connected to the SGM 
by the byteflight. The power supply of the satellites is also from the SGM and it is buffered 
by a storage capacitor. In sleep mode of the byteflight, the power supply of the satellites 
is deactivated by the SGM. The door functions (FH, ASP, ZV) are sustained by means of a 
separate terminal 30. 

A pressure sensor is integrated in the front door module. The sensor permanently mea¬ 
sures the pressure at the door. In the event of a crash, penetration of the door outer skin 

reduces the volume of the door. This results in a significant pressure rise. The relative pres¬ 
sure change and rise in pressure evaluated over time are the most important factors for the 
crash evaluation. 


Triggering and monitoring of the trigger circuits are similar to the criteria for the B-pillar satel¬ 
lites. 


Operating voltage 

10.2...10.7 V 

Full function 

Operating voltage 

10.7 ... 16 V 

Restricted function, diagnosis of trigger circuits not possible 

Power intake 

Typ. 90 mA 

Normal operation 


14 


E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 




































Vehicle Center Satellite SFZ 


The vehicle center satellite controls and monitors the trigger circuit for the safety battery 
terminal. 

The vehicle center satellite is connected to the SGM by the byteflight. The power supply 
of the satellites is also from the SGM and it is buffered by a storage capacitor. In sleep 
mode of the byteflight, the power supply of the satellite is deactivated by the SGM. 

The satellite has an acceleration sensor for longitudinal acceleration and one for lateral 
acceleration. The sensor provides a voltage as measured variable. This voltage is a 
measure for the positive and negative car acceleration and it is evaluated in the satellite. 

The sensors continuously provide the values determined. The measured values are trans¬ 
ferred by the byteflight to the SGM and all the satellites. 

Triggering and monitoring of the trigger circuits are similar to the operation of the 
B-pillar satellites. 


Operating voltage 

10.2...10.7 V 

Full function 

Operating voltage 

10.7 ... 16 V 

Restricted function, diagnosis of trigger circuits not possible 

Power intake 

Typ. 90 mA 

Normal operation 



15 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 








Steering Column Switch Cluster SZL 

The steering column switch cluster consists of two modules, the steering column electron¬ 
ics (LSE) and the steering wheel electronics (LRE). The two electronic components are 
connected to each other by a coil spring. 

The steering column switch cluster controls and monitors the two trigger circuits for the 
front airbag on the driver's side. 


VS_SIM 


Kl. 30 



N 



1/ 

N 




1/ 



Si-Bus 
Kl. 31 


"a 



1. Voltage regulator 

2. Microprocessor 

3. Coil spring 

4. Steering wheel electronics with trigger output stage 

5. Igniter pellet for front airbag 1st stage 

6. Igniter pellet for front airbag 2nd stage 



02443_02 

VS_SIM 

Voltage Supply 

KL 30 

Terminal 30 

SI_Bus 

bytefiight 

KL 31 

Terminal 31 

S/E 

Transmitter/Receiver Modules 


The components connected directly to the steering column electronics are listed below: 

• Connection to the bytefiight 

• The steering-angle sensor 

• The direction of travel dip switch 

• The wiper switch 

• The switch for the cruise-control system (tempomat) 

The coil spring establishes the connection to the steering wheel electronics (LRE). The coil 
spring carries signals and power. 


16 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 









































The components connected directly to the steering wheel electronics are: 

• The steering wheel heating with temperature sensor 

• The Steptronic buttons 

• The horn buttons for the fanfare horns 

• The multifunction switch arrays 

• The trigger output stage for the driver's side front airbag 

The steering column switch cluster also features the following components: 

• The switch for steering wheel heating 

• The switch for steering wheel adjustment 

The steering-column electronics unit (LSE) is connected to the SGM by the byteflight. 
Terminal 30 carries the power supply and load current. 

The satellite's emergency supply is via terminal V_SIM of the SGM, with a storage capaci¬ 
tor as buffer. This supply is sustained even in sleep mode. 

Terminal 15 is provided for the sake of redundancy. The two fanfares (horns) are powered 
directly by the steering wheel electronics from terminal R. 

The steering column switch cluster accommodates the steering angle sensor, which sends 
its data by the F_CAN bus to the DSC and AFS. The data is also transmitted by the byte- 
flight and the SGM to the PT-CAN bus. There is also a serial connection to the control unit 
for the Active Front Steering system. 

A coil spring interconnects the steering column electronics and the steering wheel elec¬ 
tronics. The trigger output stage and capacitor are in the steering wheel electronics. The 
two trigger circuits for stages 1+2 of the driver's front airbag are connected to the trigger 
output stage. 

Triggering and monitoring of the trigger circuits are similar to the processes for the 
B-pillar satellites. 


Operating voltage 

10.2...10.7 V 

Full function 

Operating voltage 

10.7 ... 16 V 

Restricted function, diagnosis of trigger circuits not possible 

Power intake 

Typ. 120 mA 

Normal operation 


17 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 








Belt Buckle Switch 


The belt buckle switch is used to detect whether the seatbelt has been fastened or not. 
The detection arrives as a signal at the relevant satellites. The signal is used for evaluation 
for the "Seat Belt Reminder SBR" function and for selective triggering of actuators in the 
event of a crash. 

The belt buckle switch is located in the belt tensioner of the driver's and passenger seats. 
If the side airbag for rear seat passengers option is installed, seat belt tensioners with belt 
buckle switches are installed on left and right. 

The belt buckle switch is a two-wire Hall switch. The Hall switch is supplied with voltage by 
the satellite. The current intake of the switch is the signal for the switch position. 

To reduce the general power consumption, the switch is queried in cycles. The belt buck¬ 
le switch is permanently diagnosed and monitored as of terminal R. 

The SBR function is an extension of the seat belt icon that remains ON for a certain period 
of time (6 sec) after terminal 15 ON. 

If the driver pulls away without buckling the seat belt, a visual and acoustic warning is 
issued after the car has covered about 100 meters. The same applies for the front pas¬ 
senger, if the sensors indicate that the front seat is occupied, but the belt has not been 
buckled. 

The belt reminder lights up and the acoustic warning (gong) sounds for 90 sec, unless the 
belt is buckled in the meantime. 

The belt buckle is permanently monitored. A warning is issued if status changes while the 
car is on the move, in other words if the belt buckle is opened. 

The seatbelt warning lamp is switched on as of terminal 15 On until the driver inserts the 
seatbelt in the seatbelt buckle. 

If the seatbelt buckle is opened while the vehicle is being driven, the seatbelt warning lamp 
is activated again. 

An acoustic warning is also issued. The acoustic signal is intermittent and is output for up 
to 90 seconds. 


18 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


Seatbelt Tensioner 


The pyrotechnic seatbelt tensioner is designed to minimize any belt slack in the pelvic and 
shoulder region in the event of a crash. The seatbelt tensioner is located on the driver's 
and/or passenger seat. In combination with the mechanical force limiter in the inertia reel, 
this reduces the chest load for the seat occupants. 






1. Buckle strap 

2. Seat belt buckle with switch 

3. Bracket 


02468 02 

4. Not Used 

5. Gas generator 

6. Tensioning tube 



If the rear side airbag option is 
installed, seat belt tensioners 
are installed at the rear left and 
right as well. The seat belt ten¬ 
sioners form a unit with the seat 
belt buckle. In combination with 
the option, the inertia reels have 
mechanical force limiters. 

Technically, the front and rear 
seat belt tensioners are identical. 
The seatbelt tensioners consist 
of igniter pellet, generator, 
plunger and operating cable. 

In the event of a crash of suffi¬ 
cient severity, the gas generator 
is ignited. The gas spreads and 
shifts the plunger in the tension¬ 
ing pipe. The cable connected 
to the plunger thus pulls the 
seatbelt buckle downwards and 
takes the slack from the seat 
belt. 

The belt buckle switch is inte¬ 
grated in the seatbelt buckle. 
The rear seat-belt buckle switch 
is used to check whether the 
seat is occupied and evaluate 
this information. 


1. Buckle Strap 

2. Seat belt buckle with switch 

3. Bracket 


4. Connection for buckle switch 

5. Gas generator 

6. Tensioning tube 

7. Connection for igniter pellet 


19 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 








Battery Cable Diagnosis 

For the E60, the battery cable is routed from the luggage compartment outside on the 
underbody of the vehicle into the engine compartment. 

If the cable is damaged in an accident or when driving over an obstacle (e.g. crash barrier), 
the battery cable is disconnected from the battery and the alternator is switched off. This 
prevents a short-circuit and the risk of sparks. 



1. Outer insulation 3. Insulation of aluminum cable 

2. Monitoring shield 4. Aluminum cable 120mm 2 


The battery cable is 
fitted with a low- 
impedance metal 
mesh, which is insu¬ 
lated against the 
body and against 
the battery cable. 
This metal mesh is 
referred to as the 
monitoring shield. 

The battery cable is 
diagnosed by a spe¬ 
cial circuit between 
the SBSL and 
SBSR satellites. 


The following circuit shows the functional principle of the battery cable diagnosis. 




20 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 
















































Battery cable diagnosis takes place by means of the low-impedance metal braiding of the 
battery cable (= monitoring shield). A connection cable exits from each end of the moni¬ 
toring shield (at the safety battery terminal in the luggage compartment and at the battery 
earth point in the engine compartment). 

The connection at the safety battery terminal in the luggage compartment is connected to 
the right B pillar satellite. The second connection cable in the engine compartment is con¬ 
nected to the left B-pillar satellite. 

The satellites contain analog/digital converters that are connected to the microprocessor of 
the satellite. The connection cables of the battery cable diagnosis are connected to the 
analog/digital converters. The right B-pillar satellite contains a pull-up resistor. The left B- 
pillar satellite contains a pull-down resistor of the same size. 

The voltage supply of the satellite (approx. 10 V) is applied at the pullup resistor. Ground is 
applied at the pull-down resistor. The very low-impedance cable and the resistors of the 
same size mean that around half the voltage (approx. 5 V) is applied at the A/D converters. 


In the event of a fault, significantly different measured values result as follows: 


State 

Measured value SBSL 

Measured value SBSR 

Battery cable OK 

Approximately 5V 

Approximately 5V 

Interruption of the diagnosis connection 

Approximately 0V 

Approximately 10V 

Short circuit to earth 

Approximately 0V 

Approximately 0V 

Short to battery positive 

Approximately 10V + 

Approximately 10V + 


Every 250 microseconds, the values are measured, triggered by the synchronization pulse. 
If the battery cable is OK, the values are transferred every 20 ms to the SIM. If a significant 
deviation of the values occurs, the new values are transferred immediately. 


In the following cases, the battery cable is cut off by the safety battery terminal from the 
battery: 

• Short circuit to earth (body) 

• Short circuit to battery positive 

The alternator and the electric fuel pump are also de-energized at the same time. 

Special Case 

If the outer insulation is damaged ( e.g. due to friction/scuffing), but the monitoring shield 
has no connection to earth, the following case could occur. 

Moisture (rain) would mean that the voltage would gradually fall. A short circuit to earth 
would be detected, but the safety battery terminal would not be triggered. 

The entry "Implausible measured value" is set in the fault code memory. This would be indi¬ 
cated to the driver by the airbag warning lamp. 


21 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 









Front Airbag, Driver 


The purpose of the 
front airbag is to reduce 
the risk of the driver 
suffering injury in the 
event of a crash. The 
front airbag module for 
the driver's side is 
located in the impact 
pad of the steering 
wheel. The front airbag 
for the driver is 
equipped with a 2- 
stage gas generator. 




Front Airbag, Passenger 

The purpose of the 
passenger-side front 
airbag is to reduce the 
risk of the front-seat 
passenger suffering 
injury in the event of a 
crash. 

The front airbag is 
located beneath an 
invisible flap in the 
dashboard. 

The airbag is a 2-stage 
airbag with gas genera¬ 
tor. 



Note: If the passenger airbag module (1) is triggered, the supporting tube (2) has to be 
checked. During a collision with airbag deployment, the supporting tube is exposed to con¬ 
siderable force. Consequently, the supporting tube has to be checked and, if necessary, 
replaced. 


22 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 






Advanced ITS (Head Airbag) 


Standard equipment in the E60 
includes the Advanced ITS 
Inflatable Tubular Structure (AITS 
II) the advanced-design head 
airbag from the E65. 

The differences between it and 
the head-protection system 
installed in the E39 are: 

• One-part head airbag extending all the way from the A-pillar to the C-pillar 

• ITS extended by a sail between ITS and roof frame 

The AITS II extends all the way from the A-pillar to the C-pillar and covers the entire side 
zone. 

In conjunction with the thorax airbags in the front and rear doors, it provides optimum side 
protection for all passengers. 

The Advanced ITS prevents the head and other extremities of the occupants from swing¬ 
ing outwards. This leads to less severe neck backlash forces and less severe head injuries. 

Advantages of the system: 

• Extended covered area for side windows front and rear. 

• Protection against glass splinters and penetrating objects. 

• Optimized protection area, also for very large occupants. 

Side Airbag 

The side airbags in the doors reduce the risk of occupant injury in the torso region of the 
body in the case of a side-on crash. The side airbags are folded into an aluminum hous¬ 
ing with a plastic cover behind the door trim. In the area of the side airbag in the door 
trim is a tear seam. 

The side airbags are secured to the inner door panel with 3 screws. The plastic cover has 
defined breaking points. 

In a side impact of sufficient severity, the side airbag is triggered. The side airbag exits 
through the split line and deploys between the door and the seat occupants. 



23 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


Active Headrest 


The E60 has active headrests for driver and front-seat passenger included in the multi¬ 
function seat option. 

No active headrest is installed on the basic seat, as the fixed positioning of the backrest 
and headrest mean that the head is always near the headrest. 



In the case of the multifunction 
seat, the adjustment of the 
headrest means that there is the 
possibility that the gap between 
the headrest and head increas¬ 
es. In the event of a crash, the 
gap would be relatively large, 
leading to greater strain on the 
cervical vertebrae. For this rea¬ 
son, the active headrest was 
developed. In the event of a 
crash, this reduces the gap 
between the headrest and head 
and thus the rate of cervical ver¬ 
tebrae injuries. 


1. Mounting of the active headrest 

2. Connection for igniter pellet 

3. Gas Generator 


4. Headrest height adjustment 

5. Support tube 

6. Center of rotation 



Depending on the vertical adjust¬ 
ment of the headrest, different 
adjusting paths result. The 
adjustment of the headrest, 
measured on the cushion, is 
approx. 40 mm when the head¬ 
rest is retracted. When the 
headrest is fully extended, the 
adjustment is approx. 60 mm. 


24 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


















I 


Safety Battery Terminal, SBK 


The safety battery terminal is 
located directly at the positive 
terminal of the battery. The 
structure of the safety battery 
terminal is technically identical 
to that of the MRS system. 

Note: If the safety battery ter¬ 
minal is triggered, the battery 
cable has to be replaced all the 
way back to the main adapter 
point in the luggage compart¬ 
ment. 

1. Safety battery terminal, SBK 2. Intelligent battery sensor, IBS 

Up-Front Sensors 

Not all federal states require car occupants to wear seat belts, so adequate provision must 
be made to ensure that the airbag can reliably restrain the occupant in the event of a crash. 

The up-front sensors in the 
vicinity of the front left and 
right engine bearers detect 
deformation in the crumple 
zone and thus register energy 
absorption. The up front 
sensors are acceleration sen¬ 
sors that measure longitudi¬ 
nal acceleration (decelera¬ 
tion). The measured values 
are transmitted to the SGM 
and taken into account by 
the algorithm. 




Safety battery terminal, SBK 2. Intelligent battery sensor, IBS 


Note: In the event of a crash that triggers the airbags, the up-front sensors have to be 
replaced. The sensors might be damaged internally, even though no external damage is 
perceptible. Always comply with the instructions in the repair manual when replacing the 
up-front sensors. 


25 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 











Seat Occupancy Detection (OC-3 Mat) 

Legislation in the USA makes it imperative for the system employed to detect occupancy 
of the front passenger seat to distinguish between occupancy by a small person and use 
of the seat to anchor a child restraint system. 

A straightforward seat occupancy detector recognizes a certain weight as proof that the 
seat is occupied. In order to meet legislative requirements, the seat occupancy detector 
(SBE) was developed into an intelligent occupant classifier (Occupant Classification OC). 
This was achieved by means of the following measures: 

• By a larger number of sensor elements 

• By detection over the entire seat area 

• By an intelligent electronic analyzer 



Comparison between the OC-3 sensor mat (left) and the conventional seat occupancy detection mat (right) 

The OC-3 mat is capable of distinguishing between a one-year-old child in a child's seat 
and a light person. 

The OC-3 mat is integrated into the seat area of the passenger seat. The OC-3 mat con¬ 
sists of conductors with pressure-dependent resistor elements (FSR, or Force Sensitive 
Resistance elements). The conductors are connected to the electronic analyzer. 


26 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 





The FSR elements are wired in such a way that they can be sampled individually. When the 
mechanical load on a sensor element increases electrical resistance decreases and the 
measurement current changes accordingly. 



® 3 ) 


470 , 


.02 


1. FSR elements 

2. Output monitoring 

3. Electronic analyzer 

4. Input monitoring 


By analyzing the signals from the individual sensors, the analyzer maps the occupancy of 
the seat surface and can identify the local concentrations of weight. The distances 
between the areas and the concentrations of weight indicate whether the occupant is small 
or large. An algorithm computes the weight class and decides whether the seat is occu¬ 
pied by a person or by a child's seat. 




The width between the hip bones is related to 
the weight of the person. Consequently, the 
analyzer can distinguish between a light person 
and a heavy person. 

The electronic analyzer of the OC-3 mat sends 
a telegram to the SBSR. If the occupant is 
identified as a child (based on weight) in a 
child's seat, the airbags on the passenger side 
are deactivated. The SBSR sends a telegram 
to the SGM, and the SGM responds by acti¬ 
vating the airbag illuminated indicator. The 
airbag illuminated indicator lights up to indicate 
that the airbags on the passenger side have 
been deactivated. 


27 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 




































































Workshop Exercise 


Using the DISplus/GT-1, access the control unit functions page. 
Where can the status pages for the OC-3 sensor mat be found? 


What module receives input “telegram” from the “electronic analyzer”? 


Access the test module for the OC-3 sensor mat and list the steps below: 


Locate the data line between the sensor mat and the SBSR. Interrupt the data line by 
grounding the signal, (to access data line, remove b-pillar trim to access SBSR or go to 
connector under seat from the OC-3 mat/analyzer) 

What fault code is set when the data line is grounded? _ 

Status of airbag deactivation indicator light _ 

Perform test module for airbag deactivation indicator light. _ 

What test cable is used for testing the indicator light circuit? _ 

What is the voltage to the airbag indicator light (light disconnected)? _ 

What module controls the airbag indicator light? _ 

Why are there 2 diagnostic addresses for the SGM? 


28 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 






















Principle of Operation 

Trigger Algorithm 

The Advanced Safety Electronics ASE safety system has been developed for the E60. ASE 
is derived from the Intelligent Safety and Integration System ISIS in the E65/66. The trig¬ 
gering philosophy is identical. Various degrees of crash severity and triggering thresholds 
are distinguished. 

Crash Severity 

Numerous crash and road tests under extreme conditions have been used to set the BMW 
triggering thresholds for all possible types of accidents. The trigger thresholds are depen¬ 
dent on crash severity. 

Crash severity is divided into 4 groups: 

• CS 0: no pyrotechnic restraint systems needed 

• CS 1: light crash 

• CS 2: crash of medium severity 

• CS 3: severe crash 
Triggering Thresholds 

The triggering thresholds have been set depending on the crash severity and including 
other factors such as direction, overlap on collision, and depending on the evaluation as to 
whether the occupant was wearing a seatbelt or not. 

This results in the various trigger thresholds for the activation of the various restraint sys¬ 
tems. The various trigger thresholds means that triggering for the second stage of the front 
airbag can be varied,depending on the severity of the crash. 

Triggering in the Event of Errors 

If a fault is detected in the seatbelt buckle detection system, it is assumed that the seatbelt 
is not fastened. The triggering threshold is lowered. In spite of the fault recognition, an 
attempt is made to activate the seatbelt lock tensioner. 

If a fault is detected in the seat occupation detection system, it is assumed that the seat is 
occupied. The restraint systems are activated. 

Triggering in the Event of a Crash 

The following examples illustrate the actuators that can be activated: 

• Front-end crash 

• Side-on collision 

• Rear crash 

29 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


Front-End Crash 

In a front-end crash, a distinction is drawn between "light to medium severity collisions"(CS 
1/CS 2) and "severe collisions" (CS 3). 

Crash Severity CS1 

In a crash severity CS1 collision, (light collision), the seatbelt tensioners are triggered. The 
driver/front passenger's airbag are not deployed if the sensors indicate that the occupants 
are wearing their seat belts. 

Exception: If the occupants are not wearing seatbelts, the driver and passenger airbags are 
triggered. 

Crash Severity CS2 

As of crash severity CS 2, (medium-severity collision) the driver's/front passenger's airbags 
are deployed and the seatbelt tensioners are triggered. 

The safety battery terminal is activated, the electric fuel pump is switched off, and an emer¬ 
gency call is placed if a correspondingly prepared telephone is present in the vehicle. 

Crash Severity CS3 

In a crash severity CS3 collision, (severe collision), the the driver's/front passenger's airbags 
are deployed and the seatbelt tensioners are triggered, but the time delay is different. 


30 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


Example of Airbag Deployment 

The time transient for a front-end crash is graphed here. The seat-belt buckle switch and 
the seat occupancy detector provide the information indicating that the passenger seat is 
occupied. 

The collision occurs at to. The mechanical lock of the seat belt prevents it unreeling. The 
sensors detect the deceleration forces. At tl the actuators are triggered by the satellites 
(trigger phase). The pyrotechnical actuators are triggered. The driver and passenger belt 
tensioners are triggered, as is the first stage of the driver's-side and passenger-side 
airbags. 

In a crash of severity 2 or higher, the safety battery terminal is triggered at the same time, 
in order to prevent the battery cable from causing a short-circuit in the engine compart¬ 
ment. 

This is followed by the deployment phase, i. e. the in flowing gas inflates the airbags. In the 
seat belt tensioner, the plunger is displaced by the gas in the tensioning tube. The cable 
connected to the plunger pulls the seatbelt buckle downward and takes up the slack in the 
seat belt. 

At t2 the process for the seat belt tensioners is completed and restraint by the seat belt has 
commenced. Gas is still inflating the two airbags. 

The restraint phase starts for the driver at t4. Both stages of the two stage airbags can be 
triggered at as early a juncture as t2, depending on the severity of the crash. The delay 
between triggering of the two stages renders the airbags less likely to cause injury to the 
occupants. 

The recoil movement of the occupants starts at time t8. The forward movement of the 
occupants ceases and they drop back into their seats. 

Side-on Collision 

In the event of a side-on collision, a crash severity distinction is made between light and 
medium-severity collisions. 

If the crash severity is CS 1 (light collision) or worse, the AITS II head protection system and 
the side airbag on the impact side are deployed. In the event of crash severity CS 2 (medi¬ 
um-severity collision), the safety battery terminal is also triggered, the electric fuel pump is 
switched off, and an emergency call is placed if a correspondingly prepared telephone is 
present in the vehicle. 

Rear Crash 

As of crash severity CS 1, (light collision) the active headrests (if fitted) and the seatbelt ten¬ 
sioners are triggered. In the event of crash severity CS 2 (medium-severity collision), the 
safety battery terminal is also triggered, the electric fuel pump is switched off, and an emer¬ 
gency call is placed if a correspondingly prepared telephone is present in the vehicle. 

31 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


Emergency Call, US 

The E60 US offers the customer as standard a number of emergency call functions as well 
as a breakdown call. The emergency call functions available include the manual emergency 
call as well as the automatic emergency call in the event of a crash. 

Even if no telephone has been ordered, every vehicle has a Telematic Control Unit TCU, a 
telephone aerial, a hands-free unit as well as a GPS aerial for localization. 

Manual Emergency Call 

The emergency call switch (4) is connected directly to the telephone. Pressing the emer¬ 
gency call switch sets up a voice connection with the provider "Cross Country." The voice 
connection is indicated by a flashing LED in the switch. 

Automatic Emergency Call 

In the event of a crash with corresponding crash severity, the SIM transmits a crash 
telegram to the TCU (via the K bus). The Global Positioning System informs the TCU of the 
location of the vehicle. The TCU places an emergency call, which at the same time con¬ 
tains the location of the vehicle. 

A voice connection is set up with the provider "Cross Country" to obtain more information 
on the accident (severity of the accident, number of injured) so that rescue operations can 
be initiated. 

Breakdown Call 

The Breakdown call button is in the Central Information Display. Selection can be activated 
by means of the controller. If the breakdown call button is activated, a connection to the 
BMW Emergency Service of the relevant country is set up. 

Airbag Indicator Lamp 

The airbag illuminated indicator (3) is set in the front overhead console near the interior 
lights. The airbag illuminated indicator lights up if the front airbags on the passenger side 
have been deactivated. The emergency call switch and the two hands-free microphones 
are beside the airbag illuminated indicator in the overhead console. 

Passive Knee Protection 

The E60 US has plastic absorbers on the driver's side and passenger side. In the event of 
a crash, the passive knee protectors restrain the lower legs, especially if the driver or pas¬ 
senger are not wearing seat belts. This initiates a controlled forward shift of the upper body, 
which is cushioned by the relevant airbag. 


32 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


Service Information 

The following must be observed by Service: 

• Safety and Gateway Module diagnosis 

• Passenger airbag module 

• Battery cable diagnosis 

• Safety battery terminal 

• Door module, driver's door/passenger door 

• Up-front sensors 

Safety and Gateway Module Diagnosis 

As far as diagnosis is concerned, note that two control-unit functions (ZGM, SIM) are 
addressed, despite the fact that they share a common housing. Each function has its own 
microprocessor and its own diagnosis address. 

Passenger Airbag Module 

If the passenger airbag module is triggered, the supporting tube has to be checked. The 
forces to which it is exposed are high, and the possibility of the supporting tube deforming 
cannot be excluded. Consequently, the supporting tube has to be checked and, if neces¬ 
sary, replaced. 

Battery Cable Diagnosis 

If the shielding of the battery cable is damaged, the battery cable must be replaced com¬ 
pletely. It is not permitted to repair the shielding. 

Safety Battery Terminal 

If the safety battery terminal is triggered, the battery cable has to be replaced all the way 
back to the main adapter point in the luggage compartment. Repair is not intended. 

Door Module, Driver’s Door/Passenger Door 

When removing the door module, it is essential to ensure that the two inner screws (2) of 
the door module are not removed. These screws hold the housing of the door module 
together and ensure that the pressure sensor is sealed. If the screws are slackened there 
is a possibility that the pressure sensor will no longer operate correctly. 

Up-Front Sensors 

In the event of a crash that triggers the airbags, the up-front sensors have to be replaced. 
The sensors might be damaged internally, even though no external damage is perceptible. 
Always comply with the instructions in the repair manual when replacing the up-front sen¬ 
sors. 


33 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 



Synchronization of New Modules 


When new satellite modules are fitted, these modules have no system time. Transmission 
of the two system time telegrams allows the module to adapt the system time. This is only 
possible when the stored system time in the satellite modules is smaller than the time sent. 

If the system time in a module is greater than the time sent, (Ex. trying a part from another 
vehicle), the system time is not adopted and an entry is made into fault memory. 

When the SIM or any satellite is replaced, the system time must be entered. As the sys¬ 
tem time is available in all ASE modules, it can be transferred into the new module. 

This takes place via the Diagnosis Program (Service Functions). To do so, the DISplus /GT1, 
requests the system time from all satellites and selects the largest. 

The DISplus/GTI add an amount to this time and transmits the result into the new module 
as the system time. The correction amount compensates for the run time between read¬ 
ing from the satellites and entry into the new module. 

This prevents fault messages from the satellites because the system time transferred by the 
new module is smaller than that stored in the satellites. 


34 

E60 Advanced Safety Electronics 


