Table of Contents 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 

Subject Page 

Voltage Supply and Bus Systems .4 

Voltage Supply.4 

System Components .5 

Ground Points .5 

Battery .6 

Battery Service Information .6 

Battery Cable.6 

Intelligent Battery Sensor.6 

Mechanical Section.7 

IBS Measuring Ranges.8 

Electronic Evaluation Module .8 

IBS Hardware.9 

IBS Software .9 

IBS Charge Management.10 

Closed-Circuit Monitoring.10 

IBS Wake-up .11 

Servicing the IBS .11 

IBS Diagnosis.11 

Voltage Measurement.12 

Current Measurement.12 

Terminal 15 Wake-up Signal Faults.12 

SoC/SoH .12 

State of Charge .12 

State of Health.12 

30g and MPM System Schematic .14 

Terminal 30g Relay .15 

30g Switch On Conditions .16 

30g Switch Off Conditions .16 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 


Revision Date: 10/03 






























Subject 


Page 


Micro-Power Module.16 

Normal Mode.18 

Sleep Mode .19 

Service Information for MPM .19 

Alternator.21 

Digital Motor Electronics .21 

Variable Battery Charging Voltage.22 

Idle Speed Boost.22 

Reducing Peak Loads .22 

Electric Load Cutout.22 

Data Transfer to the IBS.23 

Closed-Circuit Current Diagnosis .23 

Terminal 30g Relay.23 

Bus Systems.25 

K-CAN .25 

K-CAN Changes.25 

MOST.25 

Most Changes .25 

byteflight.25 

byteflight Changes.25 

byteflight Comparison.26 

PT-CAN .26 

Bus system parameters .26 

Subbus Systems .27 

LIN-Bus .27 

LIN-Bus Main Controller.27 

F-CAN .28 

BSD (Bit-Serial Data Interface) .28 

Sub-bus System Parameters .29 

MOST Connector Junction.29 
































Model: E60 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 
Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand IBS operation. 

• Explain Power Management. 

• Recognize the different bus systems. 

• Diagnose Voltage Supply Faults. 


3 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 




Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 

Voltage Supply 


The voltage supply system on the E60 is similar to that of the E65. The E60, however, is 
Not fitted with a power module, therefore there is no main power switch. Supply voltage 
is monitored during both driving and parked conditions to reduce the possibility of unwant¬ 
ed closed current draws and insure that adequate voltage is available as needed. 


The "State of Charge" (SoC) and the "State of Health" (SoH) of the battery are determined 
continuously with the E60 power management system. 



Typical Voltage Supply for 6 Cylinder Vehicles 

1. Intelligent Battery Sensor (IBS) 

2. Battery 

3. Ignition/Starter Switch (ZAS) 

4. DME 

5. Alternator 

6. Starter 


7. Starter Relay 

8. Rear Power Distribution Box w/ Terminal 30g Relay 

9. Front Power Distribution Box 

10. Car-access System (CAS) 

11. Micro-Power Module (MPM) 


4 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 








































System Components 

The power supply system consists of the following components: 

• Vehicle Ground Points 

• Battery 

• Battery Cable 

• Intelligent Battery Sensor with ground Lead (IBS) 

• Terminal 30g Relay 

• Micro-Power Module (MPM) 

• DME 

• Car Access System (CAS) 


Ground Points 


The ground point (GRAV) improves the electro¬ 
magnetic compatibility (EMC) of the vehicle. 
Ageing connections between the front end and 
the remaining car body do not affect the EMC. The 
contact resistances between the front end and the 
remaining car body are bridged by 
means of the ground lead. 




& 


& 


0 






© 


V9 


r-j 




02355_02b 


5 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 


(x (x 












Battery 


The battery size in the E60 depends on the engine and equipment configuration. 

Battery Service Information 

The battery size is coded in the DME. Replacement batteries must be the same capacity 
rating as the original Battery. 

Particular attention must be paid to the cables and the IBS when replacing a battery. 
Irreparable damage may occur if the cables and IBS are subjected to high mechanical 
stress and strain. Refer to service information for the IBS. 


As on the E65, the power management system is to be initialized by means of the 
diagnosis job "Control_battery_replacement_register." Follow the repair instructions. 


Battery Cable 

The battery cable is installed on the underside of the vehicle. The battery cable is moni¬ 
tored by the ASE system as in the E85. Sensor leads are routed from the battery cable to 
the left and right B Pillar satellites. 

Battery cable size is dependent on engine. Most US vehicles use 120mm 2 aluminum 
Ribbon cable. 




02415 

Under car Routing of Ribbon Battery Cable 


Cross Section Battery Cable w/ Sensor lead 


Intelligent Battery Sensor 

The IBS (1) is a mechatronic intelligent battery sensor with its own microcontroller. It 
constantly measures the following: 


• Battery terminal voltage 

• Battery charge/discharge current 

• Battery acid temperature 



6 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 









Installed directly at the negative battery terminal, care should be used when removing and 
installing the negative battery cable. 


The IBS consists of 3 functional elements: 


• Mechanical section, 

• Hardware 

• Software 



Exploded View of IBS 

1. Pole Terminal 

2. Shunt 

3. Spacer 

4. Screw 

5. IBS 


1 2 


\t> \t> 



02 




6 


IBS Hardware 

1. Copper 

2. Gull Wings 

3. PC Board w/evaluator 

4. Injection Molding 

5. Copper 

6. Mangannin 


Mangannin 

A copper alloy resistor of low resistance value, 
that maintains an extremely constant tempera¬ 
ture, regardless of current flow. Used as the 
shunt resistor to measure current flow by the 
evaluation electronics of the IBS. 


Mechanical Section 


The mechanical part of the IBS consists of the battery terminal for the negative pole with 
ground cable. Tasks of the mechanical section of the IBS: 

• Providing electrical contact of the car body with the negative pole of the battery 

• Acceptance of the sensor element for current measurement 

• Acceptance of the hardware 

• Providing sufficient thermal contact between the temperature sensor of the hardware 
and the negative pole of the battery 

• Providing protection for the sensitive electronic components 

• The battery terminal is the ground connection for IBS 


7 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 





















IBS Measuring Ranges 

• Voltage 6 V to 16.5 V 

• Current -200 A to +200 A 

• Closed circuit current 0 A to 10 A 

• Starting current 0 A to 1000 A 

• Temperature -40°C to 105°C 

Electronic Evaluation Module 

The electronic evaluation module of the IBS continuously registers the measured data. The 
IBS uses these data to calculate the following battery indicators. 

• Voltage 

• Current 

• Temperature 

The IBS sends the calculated battery indicators to the DME via the BSD. The IBS calculates 
changes in battery SoC/SoH based on information received from the DME on the SoC of 
the battery during the period of time between engine "OFF" and deactivation of the DME 
relay. After the DME relay has been switched off, the IBS continues to constantly observe 
the SoC of the battery. 


r - ---1 



02915_02 


8 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 





















































IBS Hardware 


IBS Hardware consists of the following: 

• Shunt for current measurement 

• Temperature Sensor 

• Multi-layer pc-board as the electronic circuit including 
the electronic components. 

IBS Software PC-board of IBS 

The software in the PC-board of the IBS calculates State of Charge and State of Health of 
the battery and sends the information to the DME. Communication with the DME, which 
takes place via the BSD, allows the DME to obtain data constantly from the IBS during vehi¬ 
cle operation. 

The following functions are integrated in the IBS: 

• Continuous measurement of current, voltage and temperature of the battery under all 
vehicle operating conditions 

• Calculation of battery indicators as basis for SoC and SoH 

• Monitoring of battery charge/discharge current 

• Monitoring of SoC and notification to DME of critical SoC 

• Partial calculation of SoH Based on starter draw 

• Closed-circuit current monitoring in vehicle 

• Data transfer to DME 

• Self-diagnosis 

• Self wake-up capability during sleep mode 



i 


1 








: 

- © - 

3 ) 

4 


1— G 

D 


1 l+l 



5 / 


-©-^-4 

i- 

-El 


X 




1. Battery Positive 

2. Battery Negative 

3. Battery Voltage Measurement 

4. Temp Measurement 

5. Current Measurement 

6. IBS 

7. BSD 

8. DME 


9 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 















































IBS Charge Management 

The IBS continuously manages the charge status of the battery when the key is off. The 
current SoC is stored in the IBS every 2 hours. 

When the IBS receives the terminal 15 “wake up signal” the DME is updated with the cur¬ 
rent values of the battery indicators. 

Closed-Circuit Monitoring 

When the vehicle is off the IBS is programmed to wake up every 40 s so that it can update 
the measured values (Voltage, current, temperature). The measuring time of the IBS is 
approx. 50 ms. 

The DME reads the history of the measurements on start-up. An entry is made in the fault 
code memory of the DME if a closed-circuit current draw was present. 



VS222. 022 12 02 


10 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 










































IBS Wake-up 


When the key is switched off, before the DME enters sleep mode, the DME informs the IBS 
of the current SoC of the battery. The IBS monitors the SoC and when it drops below the 
programmed threshold, a wake-up signal is sent to the DME via the BSD. The DME wakes 
up, obtains information on the current SoC of the battery from the IBS and requests the 
auxiliary electrical loads to switch off. 

After one wake-up sequence the IBS is prohibited from waking the vehicle again during this 
key off cycle. The vehicle subsequently reassumes sleep mode. 

Servicing the IBS 

The IBS is very sensitive to mechanical stress and strain. It is serviced as a complete unit 
with the ground cable. The ground cable also serves as a heat dissipater for the IBS. 

Particular attention should be paid to the following points in service: 

• Do not make any additional connections at the negative terminal of the battery 

• Do not modify the ground cable 

• Do not make any connections between the IBS and the sensor screw 

• Do not use force when disconnecting the ground terminal from the battery 

• Do not pull at the ground cable 

• Do not use the IBS as a pivot point to lever off the ground terminal 

• Do not use the connections of the IBS as a lever 

• Use only a torque wrench as described in the repair manual 

• Do not release or tighten the sensor screw 

A fault code is stored in the DME when the IBS is defective. The DME adopts a substitute 
value and assumes IBS emergency mode. IBS emergency mode boosts the idle speed in 
order to sufficiently charge the battery. 

Note: 

The software in the DME and that of the IBS must match. To ensure this require¬ 
ment it may be necessary to replace the IBS in connection with a software update. 

IBS Diagnosis 

The IBS features a fault code memory that is read out by the DME. Self diagnosis checks 
the voltage, current, temperature measurement, terminal 15 wake up as well as system 
errors in the IBS. 

Direct diagnosis of the IBS is not possible, it must be diagnosed through the DME. 


11 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 



Voltage Measurement 

If the IBS is shorted to ground, a DME fault code will display “Voltage Fault DME ON”. The 
IBS will be unable to wake up the DME. 

If the IBS is shorted to B+, a DME fault code will display “Voltage fault, DME not ON” and 
no charging current. The vehicle will NOT enter sleep mode. 

Current Measurement 

Current measurement is a very dynamic process, indicated by the measuring range of mA 
to kA. 

The fault code “Current Fault” is entered in fault memory when an implausible value is 
determined during the plausibility check of the various measuring ranges of the IBS. 

Terminal 15 Wake-up Signal Faults 

The IBS recognizes wake-up line faults. The IBS can detect a wake-up line error under the 
following conditions: 

• DME “ON” 

• Terminal 15 “ON” (voltage high at IBS) 

• Terminal 15 running via BSD 

If Terminal 15 at the IBS and Terminal 15 via the BSD are not equal, a fault is indicated in 
the BSD line or an IBS Fault. 

The IBS fault may be caused by: 

• Terminal 15 Driver in the IBS has a short to ground 

• Terminal 15 Driver in the IBS has a short to B+ or is defective. 

SoC/SoH 
State of Charge 

SoC is a calculated condition showing the current charge in the battery. The SoC calcula¬ 
tions are performed by the DME. SoC is used during key off periods to insure the battery 
maintains a sufficient charge to start the engine at least one more time. 

State of Health 

SoH tracks the history of the battery in the vehicle. Charge/discharge cycles and times are 
monitored. SoH helps the DME determine the proper charging rates and anticipated bat¬ 
tery life. 

The IBS detects vehicle start based on current draw in excess of 200A. The engine run¬ 
ning signal is made available by the DME via the BSD. Internal resistance of the battery is 
calculated from the current and voltage dip. These indicators are forwarded to the DME. 
From this data, the DME the state of health (SoH) of the battery. 


12 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 


Workshop Exercise - IBS 


Vehicle has been brought into shop for dead battery. A closed current draw exceeding lim¬ 
its was found and repaired. However a fault is stored in the DME regarding the IBS. 

The fault is 

1. Interrogate the DME for Faults. What are the faults found? _ 


2. How does the IBS communicate with the DME? _ 

3. Perform a pin out of the IBS terminals with the key off and with the key on. 



Pin 1 

Pin 3 

Key ON 



Key OFF 




4. Perform the test plan B1362 as outlined in the DISplus. _ 

5. Scope the signal on the line coming from IBS and the line coming from DME. 


Why do you get these voltage readings? _ 

6. Monitor voltage (or scope pattern of BSD). Observe BSD entering sleep mode. How 
long did it take for the BSD line to go to sleep? 

What is the BSD voltage during sleep mode? _ 

7. Lower the terminal 30 input to the IBS through the stimulation mode of the DISplus. 

What happens to the BSD? _ 

8. Why is it important that replacement batteries be the same type and capacity as the 
factory installed battery? 


9. What measurements are performed directly by the IBS? _ 

10. Which control unit calculates the SoC/SoH of the battery while the engine is running? 


11. How often is the battery conditioned monitored while the vehicle is “OFF’? 


12. How does the IBS signal the DME of significant changes in SoC during “OFF’ 
time? 


13 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 


























30g and MPM System Schematic 


CD 




KI.30 








14 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 







































































































































































































Terminal 30g Relay 

The Terminal 30g Relay prevents increased closed-circuit current consumption by 
switching off electric loads. 

The switch-off procedure disconnects various electric loads in a defined manner from the 
vehicle electrical system. This happens approx. 60 min after terminal R "OFF" The deacti¬ 
vated electric loads are activated again together with terminal 30g "ON." 

The terminal 30g relay is actuated by the car access system. 



Power to the following control units is managed by the terminal 30g relay: 
Center console switch center 

Rain and low beam sensor 

Controller 

Central information 
display 

Slide/tilt sunroof 

Satellite radio 

TOP HiFi amplifier 

Telephone 

Head-up display 

Active cruise control 

Electronic transmission 
control/SMG 

Dynamic stability control 

Adaptive cornering light 


Terminal 30g Relay Location 


15 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 



























30g Switch On Conditions 

The switch-on conditions for terminal 30g relay are as follows: 

• Unlock vehicle or 

• Terminal R or 

• Status change of door contacts or of trunk contact or 

• Telephone wake-up line for telematic services or 

• Service applications 

30g Switch Off Conditions 

The switch-off conditions for terminal 30g relay are as follows: 

• 60 min after terminal R "OFF" or 

• Service applications 

• Power Management Switch off 


Notes: 


16 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 


















Workshop Exercise - Terminal 30g Relay 


Vehicle is brought into the shop with a “No Start” condition. 

1. Verify the complaint. 

2. Perform short test on vehicle. 

3. What control modules where not interrogated during the short test? 


4. What are the possible causes of this “No Start” condition? 


5. Check the status of the Key Recognition, EWS Line release. 

6. Activate starter position while observing status in the CAS. What is the status of the 
50E and 50 L? 


7. Print FB for the 30g Relay. Observe the modules which are supplied power via the 

relay. _ 

8. Is there a module on the list which could cause the no start condition? 

9. Repair fault, perform quick delete and now observe status of 50E and 50L. 

10. How long after terminal R “OFF” is the terminal 30g relay switched off? 

11. Terminal 30g relay is actuated by the _ 


17 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 
















Micro-Power Module 


In the same way as with terminal 30g, the micro-power module (MPM) facilitates defined 
deactivation of electric loads. 

The MPM is installed in the spare wheel recess and operates in 3 modes, normal mode, 
sleep mode and service mode 




02967 02 


Block Diagram of MPM 


1 . 

Rear Power Distribution 


Box 


2. 

MPM 


3. 

Front Power Distribution 


Box 


4. 

Electrical Load 

5. 

Electrical Load 

6 . 

Battery 


7. 

DME 


K-CAN 

Body CAN 

KI.15 

Terminal 15 

KI.15 WUP 

Terminal 15, 



Wake Up 


Normal Mode 

All functions of the MPM are available in normal mode. 

The MPM switches on/off the voltage supply to the electric loads involved in communica¬ 
tion. Loads are switched on and off only when a fault occurs during the vehicle rest period. 
The MPM switches the voltage supply on and off in the following control units: 

• Multi-audio system controller M-ASK 

• Car communication computer CCC 

• CD disc changer CDC 

• DVD changer DVD 

The supply voltage is switched on and off by means of a bistable (switchover type) relay. 
The relay is set to "ON" when it leaves the factory. This type of relay has two positions, On 
and OFF. When ON voltage is passed from Fuse 57 through the MPM to the above con¬ 
sumers. When OFF, the connection to F57 is broken. This type of relay does not need 
power (coil energized) to maintain either switch position. Power is only needed to cause the 
relay to switch from ON to OFF or OFF to ON. 

18 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 
























































































Switch on/off conditions for micro-power module 


Firs 

Swi 

Poi 



The MPM communicates with the vehicle through the K-CAN and is supplied power by 
both a KL 30 and a KL 15. If terminal 30 voltage is lost, operation continues with the volt¬ 
age supplied by terminal 15, and a fault is registered. 

Sleep Mode 

The MPM assumes sleep mode approx. 1 s after the K-CAN has gone into sleep mode. The 
current switching status of the relay is stored before the MPM assumes sleep mode. 

The MPM is woken by the terminal 15 signal via the K-CAN or by activation of terminal 15. 
On waking, the switching status of the relay last stored is reestablished. 

Service Information for MPM 

A fault code is stored in the fault code memory when the MPM disconnects the electric 
loads from the vehicle electrical system. The following fault codes can be read out in 
diagnosis: 

• Terminal 15 fault 

• Deactivation with information on the switch-off condition 

The information on the switch-off condition is stored in the info memory: 

• Undervoltage 

• Contact fault of relay contacts 


19 


E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 
















Workshop Exercise - Micro Power Module 


Vehicle is brought into shop with the radio not working. 

1. Verify the complaint 

2. Perform short test. Are there any faults stored which could be associated with this 

problem? _ 

3. Which control modules did not respond during the short test? 

4. Which bus or busses do these modules use for communication? _ 

5. What are the pin numbers of the connectors at the TCU that supply power to the TCU? 

Where does the power come from? _ 

6. What are the pin numbers of the M-ASK that provide K-Can communication? _ 

7. If the M-ASK is not recognized during the short test would the OPPS tester be useful? 

8. What fuse supplies power to the M-ASK ? - 

9. Is the fuse OK? _ 

10. What is the voltage source of the fuse? _ 

Print the ETM. 

11. Pin out all terminals of the MPM. 

12. What should the scope pattern be on terminals 3 and 11? - 

13. Is communication possible with the MPM? - 

14. What information is available through Diagnosis Requests? - 

15. Is operation of the MPM possible through component activation? - 


20 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 



















Alternator 


Bosch and Valeo alternators are installed in the E60. The alternators are fitted depending 
on the type of engine and equipment configuration. They differ with regard to their rating of 
140 A and 170 A and are aircooled. 


Digital Motor Electronics 


The power management software is contained in the DME. When the vehicle is at rest, the 
IBS is partially responsible for power management. 

The tasks of the power management system include: 

• Adaptation of the alternator charging voltage 

• Idle speed boost for increasing the power output of the alternator 

• Reduction of peak loads in the event of a shortfall in coverage provided by the vehicle 
electrical system 

• Deactivation by means of bus messages of electric loads such telephone, on reaching 
the start capability limit of the vehicle 

• Closed-circuit current diagnosis 


INPUT 


OUTPUT 



DME 


5 




v$223jm?2_m 


1 . 

Battery Voltage 

7. 

Idle Speed control 

2. 

Current Input 

8. 

Specified Alternator Charging Voltage 

3. 

Temperature Input 

9. 

Deactivation of Electrical Loads 

4. 

5. 

DME 

Power Management 

10. 

Peak Load Reduction 


6. EPROM with maps for Voltage,Current and Temp 


21 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 
































Variable Battery Charging Voltage 

The variable battery charging voltage on system ensures improved charging management 
of the battery in unfavorable driving situations. The power management controls the tem¬ 
perature-dependent voltage for the charging voltage of the alternator via the BSD line. 

Idle Speed Boost 

The idle speed can be increased in situations where the battery does not cover power 
requirements. When the specified voltage alone is no longer sufficient, the DME boosts the 
idle speed corresponding to the engine status. 

Reducing Peak Loads 

The peak load of the vehicle electrical system is reduced when there is still a shortfall in 
battery coverage despite boosting idle speed. 

Peak load reduction is realized by: 

• Reducing power output, e.g. by correspondingly controlling the clock cycles of the rear 
window defogger 

• If reducing the power output is not sufficient, individual electric loads can be switched 
off in extreme situations 

Electric Load Cutout 

The electric loads in the E60 are divided into the following categories: 

• Comfort loads, e.g. window defogger, seat heating, steering wheel heating 

Electric loads switch off automatically after engine "OFF." These electric loads can be acti¬ 
vated again after the vehicle has been restarted. 

• Legally required auxiliary electric loads, e.g. side lights, hazard warning lights 

Legally required auxiliary loads must be operational for a certain period of time after engine 
"OFF." These legally required electric loads are not switched off even on reaching the start 
capability limit of the battery. 

• Auxiliary electric loads, e.g. independent ventilation,communication components such 
as central information display, telephone, telematic services 

Auxiliary loads can be switched on after engine "OFF." The comfort electric loads switch off 
automatically on reaching the start capability limit of the battery. Switch-off is requested by 
the DME in the form of a CAN message. 

• System-related afterrunning loads, e.g. electric radiator fan 

System-related afterrunning loads can maintain operation for a defined period of time. 


22 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 


Data Transfer to the IBS 

The following data are transferred via the BSD to the IBS before the DME assumes sleep 
mode: 

• State of charge of the battery SoC 

• State of health of the battery SoH 

• Outside temperature 

• Available discharge level 

• Terminal 15 wake-up enable 

• Terminal 15 wake-up disable 

• DME close 

Closed-Circuit Current Diagnosis 

A fault code is stored in the DME when the battery current exceeds a defined value during 
the vehicle rest phase. The vehicle should be analyzed accordingly. 

Terminal 30g Relay 

The terminal 30g relay is actuated by the CAS at an excessively high closed-circuit current 
or on reaching the start capability limit of the battery. 


Notes 


23 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 














D-Bus 



24 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 































































































































































































Bus Systems 

K-CAN 

K-CAN Changes 

In the E60, the bus systems K-CAN-S and K-CAN-P of the E65 were combined to form the 
K-CAN. 

The car access system CAS is no longer used as a repeater between K-CAN-S and K- 
CAN-P. CAS is now only a K-CAN user. The internal designation is CAS 2. 

The instrument cluster and the central information display are now connected to K-CAN. 
They no longer serve as a gateway between K-CAN-S and MOST. 

The door modules are no longer connected to K-CAN-P but rather to byteflight. 

The controller CON is connected directly to K-CAN and no longer via the centre console 
switch centre SZM. 

MOST 

Most Changes 

MOST has less users than on the E65. Components such as the instrument cluster and 
central information display CD are connected to other bus systems. The MOST addition¬ 
ally features the satellite radio (SDARS). 

A large MOST system extending up to the luggage compartment is installed if the E60 is 
equipped with a telephone, or Top HiFi system. 


byteflight 

byteflight Changes 

The SIM and ZGM functions have been combined in the SGM. The door modules adopt 
the functions of the front door satellites. 


25 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 


byteflight Comparison 


byteflight E65 

byteflight E60 

Central Gateway Module ZGM 

Safety and Gateway Module SGM 

Safety and Information Module 

Combined in SGM 

Steering column switch cluster SZL 

SZL 

Center Satellite SFZ 

SFZ 

A-Pillar Satellite Left SASL 

Not used 

A-Pillar Satellite Right SASL 

Not used 

Front Door Satellite Left STVL 

Driver’s Door Module TMFA 

Front Door Satellite Right STVR 

Passenger’s Door Module TMBF 

B-Pillar Satellite left SBSL 

SBSL 

B-Pillar Satellite Right SBSR 

SBSR 

Driver’s Seat Satellite SSFA 

Not used 

Passenger’s Seat Satellite SSBF 

Not used 

Rear Seat Satellite SSH 

Not used 


PT-CAN 

No changes 


Bus system parameters 


Bus System 

Data 

kBd 

Rate 

MBd 

Bus Structure 

K-CAN 

100 


Linear/Two Wire 

PT_CAN 

500 


Linear/Two Wire 

byteflight 


10 

Star/Fiber Optic 

MOST 


22.5 

Ring/Fiber Optic 

D-Bus 

10.5/115 


Linear/Single Wire 


26 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 




























Subbus Systems 

LIN-Bus 

The LIN-bus was developed to provide a standard network for the automobile industry. 
The LIN-bus is a standardized serial single-wire bus system. The LINbus facilitates fast and 
simple data transmission. The use of LIN-bus technology reduces the number of lines in the 
vehicle. 


LIN-bus systems in E60 


Main Controller 

Server Unit 

IHKA 

Flap Motors and Blower Motor 

Door Module 

Driver’s Switch Block SBFA 

AHL 

Stepper Motor Controller SMC 


A typical LIN-bus system includes the following components: 

• 1 Main Controller 

• Several Server Units 

• Single-wire line 

The LIN-bus uses a bi-directional single-wire bus line as the transmission medium. The bus 
contains only one Main Controller while many server units are possible. The transfer rate 
on the LIN-bus can be up to 19.2 kBaud. 

The following transfer rates are possible: 

9.6 kBaud for IHKA 19.2 kBaud for other systems 

LIN-Bus Main Controller 

The LIN-bus Main Controller transfers the control unit requests to the server units of the 
system. The LIN-bus Main Controller controls the message traffic on the bus line. 

LIN-bus server units of the air conditioning systems include: 

• Actuator motors for the air distribution flaps 

• Blower controller 

The LIN-bus server units wait for commands from the LIN-bus Main Controller and 
communicate with it only on request. 


27 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 







F-CAN 



1. DSC Sensor 1 

2. DSC Sensor 2 

3. Active Steering Actuator 

4. SZL 

5. DSC 

6. AFS 


VS223 02302 02 


The F-CAN enables fast data transfer between the components, e.g.active steering. 


BSD (Bit-Serial Data Interface) 





DME 


02073 02 


1. Alternator GEN 

2. Bit-serial data interface BSD 

3. DME 

4. IBS 


28 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 


















Sub-bus System Parameters 


Sub-bus 

Data Rate kBd 

Bus Structure 

Components 

BSD 

9.6 

Linear/Single Wire 

DME, IBS, Alternator 

DWA-bus 

9.6 

Linear/Single Wire 

UIS, DWA Siren w/Tilt 

Sensor 

K-bus seat 

9.6 

Linear/Single Wire 

Seat adjustment switch unit, Center 
Console switch unit 

LIN bus A/C 

9.6 

Linear/Single Wire 

IHKA,AII A/C stepper motors blower 
motor, PTC 

Lin-bus RDC 

9.6 

Linear/Single Wire 

RDC, Wheel arch antennas 

Lin-bus AHL 

19.2 

Linear/Single Wire 

AHL Control Unit, 

Stepper Motor Controller 

Lin-bus TMFA 

19.2 

Linear/Single Wire 

Door Module, Driver’s Switch Block 

F-CAN 

100 

Linear/Two Wire 

AFS, ARS, Yaw rate sensors 
SZL,DSC, LWS 


MOST Connector Junction 

The MOST connector junction facilitates quick connection of new control units. 



29 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 








































































Workshop Exercise - Power Management/Bus System 


1. What are the power management tasks performed by the DME? 


2. Under what conditions (concerning the electrical system) does the DME boost the 

idle? _ 

3. How does the DME determine SoC? 

4. What is the difference is between SoC/SoH? _ 


5. How does the IBS detect starter operation? _ 

6. Explain IBS wake-up disable. _ 

7. List the components of a typical LIN-bus system. 


8. Name the Bus or sub-bus systems that are two wire busses. 


9. What is the purpose of the MOST connector junction? _ 

10. What are some of the symptoms of a failed MOST Bus? 


11. What modules are connected to the MOST Bus? 


30 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 





























12. Which control module is the gateway from the K-Can to the MOST? _ 

13. How does a short test help in MOST Bus diagnosis? _ 

14. What test plans are available for MOST Bus diagnosis in the DISplus or GT1? 

15. Where is the OPPS connection point located? _ 

What is special about this access point? _ 

16. How is the MOST Bus affected by a blown fuse to the: 

TCU _ 

CD Changer _ 

M-ASK _ 

17. What is the order of light travel in the MOST Bus? _ 

18. Does the MOST Bus respond differently (if faulted) in the E-60 depending on vehicle 
equipment? 


31 

E60 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 

















