I 


Table of Contents 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 

Subject Page 

General Vehicle Electrical Systems.5 

General Electrical New Features.6 

KBM (Body Base Module).6 

Door Modules.6 

CAS System.6 

PDC .6 

RDW (FTM).6 

Roller Sunblind.6 

Multifunction Seat.7 

KBM.7 

Power Windows.7 

Components.9 

Switch Block SBFA.9 

LIN Bus .9 

Door Modules.9 

byteflight.10 

SGM.10 

K-CAN .10 

KBM.11 

Power Window Motors.11 

Door Contacts .12 

CAS .12 

Operation.13 

Opening of Passenger Front by Driver .13 

Opening of Rear Window by Driver .13 

Indirect Anti-Trapping .13 

Power Detection.14 

Initialization of Power Windows.14 

Slide/Tilt Sunroof.16 

Slide/Tilt Sunroof Push-Button .16 

Slide/Tilt Sunroof Module .16 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 


Revision Date: 10/03 



































Subject Page 

Slide/TiltSunroof (cont.) 

Car Access System .16 

Functions .17 

Panic Mode .17 

Emergency Operation.17 

Initialization.17 

Central Locking System .18 

Secure Lock (Double Lock).19 

Automatic Locking .20 

Crash Unlock .20 

Power on Status.20 

DWA - Central Lock Interface.20 

Remote Control FBD .20 

Trunk Locking.21 

Hotel Setting.21 

Automatic Relock.21 

Car & Key Memory.22 

Wipe/Wash System .23 

Headlight Cleaning System (SRA).23 

Rain and Light Sensor .23 

Safety and Gateway Module.23 

Body Base Module.23 

Washer Nozzle Heating.23 

Car Access System.26 

Condition Based Service.29 

Manual Update of CBS Data .29 

Manual Update of Fault Memory Data .29 

Antitheft Alarm System.30 

System Functions .30 

Independent Voltage Supply.31 

System Operation.31 

Monitoring of the Vehicle Battery .31 

System Power-Down for Storage.31 

Reverse Polarity Detection .32 

Tilt Sensor .32 




































Subject 


Page 


DWA LED.32 

DWABus .32 

DWA Arming Sequence .32 

CAS Authentication to Prevent Tampering .33 

Forced Disarming.33 

Deletion of Cross-Wise Operation.33 

Bus Monitoring.33 

Park Distance Control PDC .33 

Active Cruise Control .34 

Exterior Lights .35 

Light Switch with Control Panel Unit.35 

Brake Light Switch.38 

Reverse Lights .38 

Brake Force Display.38 

AHL.39 

AHL Control Unit .39 

Function Indicator.40 

Repairs.41 

AHL Control Unit .41 

Replacing SMC .41 

Replace Bi-Xenon Headlights.41 

Diagnosis .41 

Interior Lighting.42 

PWM Control .42 

Consumer Shutdown Terminal .44 

Consumer Shutdown .44 

Roller Sunblind.44 

Seats.45 

Outside Mirrors .46 

Steering Column .50 
































Model: E60 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 
General Vehicle Electrical 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Locate electrical control modules in the car. 

• Explain the operation of the electrical systems. 

• Understand window standardization and initialization. 

• Adjust wiper pressure. 


4 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 




General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


Components and operation of the following electrical systems will be presented: 


• KBM 

• Central locking system 


• Slide/tilt sunroof 

• Car Access System 


• Power windows 

• Wipe/wash system 
• Anti-theft alarm system • Park distance control • Active cruise control 

• AHL 

• Roller sunblind 


• Exterior lighting 

• Interior lighting 



A 


:sb: 


SZL 


t- ' 


byteflight 



"n 


aj | 


© 


IHKA 




® 

mam 

CAS 




r i 


LB 




KBM 



_ I * ■ 1 • 

< ? 


| 

w 

UB 

y_ ■ 

W 


i 


J1 

■ Mar 



E60 


E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 




























General Electrical New Features 

KBM (Body Base Module) 

The KBM controls the following functions: 

• Rear Power Windows 

• Central Locking (Rear Doors, Trunk/Tailgate and Fuel Filler Flap) 

• Windshield Wiping/Wash System 

• Interior Lighting 

• Consumer Shutdown 

Door Modules 

The Door Module is integrated into the ASE. It communicates with other vehicle systems 
via the byteflight. 

The Door Modules contain the following functions: 

• Mirror Adjustment, Heating, Memory, Folding and Lighting 

• Central Locking (Front Doors Only) 

• Front Power Windows (with indirect anti-trapping) 

• Connection to Driver’s Door Switch Block 

• Connection to Passenger’s Door Power Window Switch) 

• Door Entry Lights and Switch Illumination 

• Recording of Front Door Pressure Sensor Information 

CAS System 

The Car Access System (CAS2) is based on the CAS of the E65, however in the E60 the 
ignitions starter switch and the CAS are two separate components. The E60 CAS is con¬ 
nected directly to the K-Bus and does not perform any repeater functions. 

PDC 

The signal from the PDC button is forwarded to the PDC Control Unit via the K-CAN. 

RDW (FTM) 

E60 uses RDW (FTM) for low tire warning. Information concerning low tire is based on 
wheel speed and is received from the DSC. 

Roller Sunblind 

The rear window roller sunblind is controlled from the center console switch panel. The 
roller sunblinds for the side windows are manually operated. 


6 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 



Multifunction Seat 


The multifunction seat makes it easier to get in and out of the vehicle. The backrest width 
and seat cushion depth are retracted for this purpose. 


KBM 


Located in the equipment frame at the glove box, the KBM has 4 electrical connectors 



CDC (Compact Disc Changer) 

KBM (Body Base Module) 

SGM (Safety and Gateway Module) 
AHL (Adaptive Headlights) 

Not for USA. 



02414 01 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 


XI3252 
XI3254 
XI3253 
XI3255 


(XI3252 54-pin, XI3254 3-pin, XI3253 13-pin, XI3255 6-pin) and an operating voltage 
range of 9-16 Volts. The KBM is internally protected against shorts to terminal 30 or 31 
and equipped with reverse polarity protection. 

Power Windows 

The front power windows are activated by the door modules of the respective door. 

The rear power windows are activated by the basic body module KBM. 

The power windows are operated as usual from the switch block in the driver's door (SBFA) 
and the switches in the other doors. Various safety functions and statutory requirements 
have been taken into consideration. 


7 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 














































Fill in the name of the 
components 


1 . 

10 . 

2 . 

11 . 

3 . 

12 . 

4 . 

13 . 

5 . 

14 . 

6 . 

15 . 

7 . 

16 . 

8 . 

17 . 

9 . 



8 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 

































Components 


• Switch block, SBFA 

• LIN Bus 

• Switches, passenger door, front/rear Doors 

• Door modules, driver's door (TMFA)/passenger door (TMBF) 

• byteflight 

• Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

• Body controller area network (K-CAN) 

• Basic body module (KBM) 

• Power-window motors with incremental sensor 

• Door contacts of all doors 

• Car Access System (CAS) 

Switch Block SBFA 

All the windows may be operated from the SBFA. The Switch Block passes all 
window requests to the TMFA via the LIN Bus. 

LIN Bus 

The LIN Bus is a sub bus allowing communication between the TMFA and the 
SBFA. 

Door Modules 



The door module contains separate "modules" for the door module 
electronics and the Advanced Safety Electronics. 


The door module is the interface between: 

• Switch block, driver's door 

• Switch, passenger side 

• Door contact 

• Incremental sensor in power-window motor 

• byteflight 

• Power-window motor 


The driver's door switch block is linked to the driver's door module by means of an LIN bus. 
Control of mirror adjustment, heating and front area light is also integrated in the door 
modules. 

The ASE system is integrated in the Door Modules. The door modules also incorporate the 
activation system for side air bag deployment. 


9 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 
















Door side View of Door Module 

1. Mounting Holes 

2. Input Channel to pressure sensor 

3. Connection for Switch Block 

4. Connection for Power Supply 

5. Connection for Input Signals 

6. Connection for Exterior Mirror 

7. Connection for ASE 


Note: 

When removing the door module, only unscrew the two outer screws(l). The inner 
screws(2) are exclusively for holding the door module housing together. Loosening 
the inner screws will cause operation of the door module to fail. 

The door module is powered with 10 V from terminal 30. and with 10 V by the SGM. The 
10 V supply is buffered for the function of the ASE system. When replacing the door mod¬ 
ule, bear in mind that the capacitor needs a few minutes to discharge. The airbag might be 
deployed if you replace the door module with the capacitor still charged. 

byteflight 

The byteflight bus system is involved in window operation as a method for door modules 
to communicate with the SGM. 

SGM 

The SGM converts and forwards messages to/from the byteflight and K-Can. 

K-CAN 

The K-CAN provides a communication path between the SGM, the CAS and the KBM as 
well as body modules. 


10 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 













KBM 


The KBM receives input from the rear door window switches and the rear door contact 
switches and provides output to the rear window motors. The KBM also monitors the 
incremental sensor (hall sensors) in the rear window motors for position, speed and rota¬ 
tion. 

Additionally the KBM allows also for contact and control of the rear windows through CAN 
communication with the SGM. 

The KBM provides both power and ground to the rear window motors. 



Power Window Motors 

The drive mechanism of a power window 
lift is a cable lift mechanism consisting of: 

• A DC motor 

• A reduction gear with incremental 
sensor (Hall sensor) 

• Evaluation Circuit 

• A shrouded connection 



1 2 


1. Power window system, front 

2. Power window system, rear 


The drive mechanism incorporates two Hall sensors, which are addressed by a magnet 
wheel mounted on the armature shaft. 

The two Hall sensors and the magnet wheel determine with the aid of the door module or 
the KBM the direction of rotation, the speed and the position of the window. 


11 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 

























































Door Contacts 


The door contact switches, incorporated in the door latch mechanisms, provide door 
open/close data to the Door Modules/KBM. 

CAS 

The Car Access System control unit functions as the master for power window functions: 

• Operation by radio remote control key 

• Comfort functions (One-Touch) 

• Central-locking interface 

• Child lock 

• Country-specific programming 


© 


SBFA 

‘—0-CW3-0— 


n 





© 


© 




PWWO 

© 




© 

© 

TMFA 


© 


TMBF 



© 



ASE 

byteflight 

SGM 

byteflight 

ASE 





3 


3 



SBFA 

Switch Passenger Front 

Flail Sensor Drivers Door 

Window Motor Drivers Door 

Door Contact Drivers Door 

TMFA 

SGM 

TBMF 

Flail Sensor Passenger 
Door Front 

Window Motor Passenger 
Door Front 

Door Contact Passenger 

Door Front 

CAS 

Window Switch R/R 
Door Contact R/R 
Flail Sensor R/R 
Window Motor R/R 
KBM 

Window Motor L/R 
Flail Sensor L/R 
Door Contact L/R 
Window Switch L/R 


12 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 






































































































Operation 


Opening of Passenger Front by Driver 

The signal triggered in the SBFA when the button is pressed is sent via a LIN Bus to the 
TMFA. The TMFA sends the signal via the byteflight to the SGM. 

The SGM converts the signal and sends it on the K-CAN to the CAS(the master for the front 
windows). The CAS evaluates the signal and sends a command to the SGM on the K-CAN. 
The SGM forward the command via the byteflight to the TMBF. 


The TMBF receives the command for window movement, and a check signal from the Flail- 
sensor in the window motor and if necessary calculates indirect trapping protection. The 
window is then moved per the request. 


Opening of Rear Window by Driver 


(!) 

/p\ 

byteflight 

© 

K-CAN 

© 

(iy 



TMFA 


SGM 


KBM 






VS223 02310 02 


Indirect Anti-Trapping 

Anti-trapping protection is active over the entire window travel in the closing direction. 
Indirect anti-trapping protection does not eliminate trapping completely but rather restricts 
it to a maximum permissible trapping force. 

For each subsequent closing operation, the currently required closing force is determined 
and compared with the stored value. If the difference between the two force values is over 
the specified trigger threshold, the direction of window movement is reversed immediately. 
The reversing procedure is country- and function-dependent (emergency mode). 

In order to ensure safe closing of the window glass, the drive mechanisms are briefly oper¬ 
ated to their full extent when the zero position is reached at the upper stop. 

Power-window anti-trapping protection has been developed in accordance with legal 
requirements in order to reliably prevent injury to vehicle occupants. When an object is 
detected in the path of the window, window travel is stopped and the window rolled down 
slightly. 

Anti-trapping protection is deactivated by the emergency close function (panic mode). The 
control sequence is divided into two phases. 


13 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 










Phase 1: 

The closing position is overpressed until the emergency close mode is activated after a spe¬ 
cific response time. The window is closed at maximum speed and with increased anti-trap¬ 
ping protection force. Anti-trapping protection remains activated even during emergency 
closing. If trapping is detected, the window is reversed only a short distance. 

Phase 2: 

The button is released and overpulled again in 4 s. The window is now closed without anti¬ 
trapping protection with full force. In the event of blocking, the power-window motor is sup¬ 
plied with power until thermal protection is engaged. 

In the event of faulty anti-trapping protection, there is the option of emergency-closing the 
windows. 

If fully operational anti-trapping protection cannot be detected, e.g. faulty sensors, auto¬ 
matic operation is not permitted. 

Power Detection 

The system adapts itself to changes in the weather and environmental influences. The clos¬ 
ing force is recorded by indirect sensors (Hall sensors) and limited accordingly. 


Initialization of Power Windows 


Front Windows 

Rear Windows 

On Initial start-up, only the upper window stop has to 
be learned. For this purpose the window must be held 

The rear windows must be initialized. 

for 500ms at the upper stop position. 

During the initialization the end positions of the window 
travel are determined by limit runs into the upper win¬ 
dow seal and to the lower window stop. 

Move window to full closed position and hold for at 

Move window to full closed position and hold for at 

least 500ms. 

least 500ms. 

Move window to lower window stop and hold for 17 
seconds. 

Move window to full closed and continue to hold the 
switch in the window closing direction. 

The Window will open the close to confirm proper 
initialization. 

Note: This procedure is the same as E65. 


Learns upper limit 


Learns speed, amperage and direction 


14 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 






Workshop Exercise - Power Windows 


1. Remove drivers side door panel. 

2. Scope LIN Bus from switch assembly to door module. 

3. What is the voltage range of the LIN Bus? _ 

4. What happens when the LIN Bus is shorted to B+ or B-? _ 

5. Perform Initialization on front windows. 

6. Perform Initialization on rear windows. 

7. Check the anti-trap feature on both the front and rear windows. 

8. Is the anti-trap closing force approximately the same on both the front and rear? 

9. Is the anti-trap closing force the same for the entire window travel? 

10. Perform the anti-trap test again quickly after performing the test a first time. 

11. Is the closing force the same as on the first test? _ 

Notes: 


15 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 
















Slide/Tilt Sunroof 



1. Car Access System (CAS) 

2. Slide/tilt sunroof module with integrated electronics 

3. Slide/tilt sunroof push-button 



0250m 


1. Slide/Tilt Sunroof Switch 

2. Slide/tilt sunroof module with integrated electronics 

3. CAS 


Slide/Tilt Sunroof Push-Button 

The push-button for the slide/tilt sunroof (SHD) switches to ground. The power supply of 
the push-button features polarity reversal protection and is disconnected from the power 
supply in the event of overvoltage and in sleep mode. 

Slide/Tilt Sunroof Module 

The SHD module controls and monitors the electric motor and therefore the movement of 
the slide/tilt sunroof. The commands the driver selects with the push-button are transferred 
directly to the slide/tilt sunroof module. 

Communication with the vehicle is controlled via the K-CAN. The SHD module receives 
information relating to terminal 58g via the K-CAN from the light module. The SHD module 
controls the LEDs of the SHD push-button. Terminal 58g has a clock cycle of 200 Hz for 
the purpose of dimming the lighting. 

Car Access System 

The CAS contains the master function for auto-remote opening. 


16 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 





































Functions 


Panic Mode 

Panic Mode is triggered by pressing and holding the SHD button in the 2nd notch position. 
With this function, the sunroof is closed without anti-trap or closing force limitation protec¬ 
tion. Panic close is possible only at speeds under 16 km/h. 

Emergency Operation 

In Emergency Mode, the sunroof only moves for 750ms at a time. The emergency func¬ 
tion is only available when the CAS has signaled the SHD control module, “Emergency 
Mode Enable”, via the K-CAN. 

Emergency operation is active under the following conditions: 

• Coding Invalid 

• Defective Hall-sensor 

• Initialization incomplete 

If initialization is incomplete operation is permitted based on scaling or characteristic curves. 
With no scaling, movement is allowed only in the direction of the scaling position. 

With no characteristic curve learned, movement is only is the closing direction. 

Initialization 

Initialization of the Sunroof is performed as follows: 

• Press the operating switch to the “Lift” position and hold. 

• After 15 seconds, the sunroof will “Lift”. Continue to hold the switch. 

• After approximately 5 seconds the sunroof will close. Continue to hold the switch. 

• The sunroof will then open completely and close completely. 

• If the switch is released at any time during the procedure the operation must be 
repeated. 

Note: 

Anti-trapping protection does not function during the initialization process. 


17 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


Central Locking System 

The central locking system ZV involves the actuation/evaluation of the doors, trunk and fuel 
filler flap. The central locking facilities of the doors are equipped with double lock functions 
and operate in accordance with the two-motor principle. 

The door modules control the central locking facilities of the front doors. The basic body 
module controls the central locking in the rear area. 



bytefSght 



bytofHght 


K-CAN 


ASE 




TMBF 




r 


'■D 


KBM 





i— £ —i 




"•@*1 


H(M)J 


si) 




1. Drivers door lock cylinder, con¬ 
tact, central locking motors 

2. TMFA 

10 3. SGM 

4. TMBF 

5. Passenger door contact, cen¬ 
tral locking motors 

6. Remote control 

7. CLT 

8. CAS 

9. KBM 

10. Fuel Filler Flap 

11. Trunk Button, Exterior 

12. Trunk Button, Interior 

13. Trunk locking cylinder, central 
locking motor 

14. Luggage compartment lighting 

15. Drivers side, rear door 

16. Passenger side, rear door 






16 


02126 02 


18 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 





































































































The central locking system consists of the following control points: 

• Driver's door lock cylinder 

• Center-lock button 

• Remote control key 

• Trunk lock cylinder 

The system can be additionally unlocked via the crash sensor and forced release is possi¬ 
ble by means of the "key inserted" signal in the CAS. A function is triggered when a status 
change at the respective input is detected. If several new ZV commands are given while a 
command is being carried out, only the last command will be subsequently executed. 

The CAS is the central locking master and is responsible for enabling all central locking pro¬ 
cedures in the vehicle. 


The central locking can assume following statuses: 


Status 

Explanation 

Unlocked 

All locks are in the unlocked position. Outer and inner door handles are operational. 

Selective Unlocked 

The driver’s door is unlocked. All other locks are in the lock position. 

Locked 

All locks are in the lock position. Outer door handle not operational, inner door handle 
operational. 

Secured 

All locks are in the lock position. Outer and inner door handles are not operational. 

Opened 

At least one lock is in the unlocked position. 


Secure Lock (Double Lock) 


The secure lock function (locking of the vehicle from the outside using either the remote or 
the drivers door lock cylinder) uses a mechanical coupling to uncouple the locking pin of 
the door from the lock. The vehicle can then no longer be opened by the following actions: 

• Pulling the locking buttons 

• Pulling the inner door handle 

• Pulling the outer door handle 

• Pressing the center-lock button 

Secure lock is only possible: 

• At terminal R off and key not inserted 

• After opening and closing the driver's door or Opening the passenger's door 

No action takes place following the secure lock request when the driver's door is open. 

A secure locked (secured) vehicle cannot be unlocked via diagnosis functions. 

A secure locked (secured) vehicle can be changed to “Lock status” by pressing the cen¬ 
ter console lock button (CLT). 


19 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 









The vehicle lock status is changed from secure to unlocked when the CAS recognizes a 
valid transponder key has been inserted. 

Automatic Locking 

If the system is not yet locked or if a door was opened with the ZV locked, a lock command 
is executed on exceeding a speed of 16 km/h. 

Crash Unlock 

In the event of a crash, the safety and gateway module (SGM) releases the central locking 
system (ZV) via the bus network at terminal R or 15. 

The ZV assumes "crash mode" even when the central locking was already unlocked. 
Crash unlock is disabled when the vehicle status is secure lock. 

Crash mode is released when an unlock/lock request is made. This corresponds to deac¬ 
tivation of crash mode. 

Power on Status 

The central locking status does not change by disconnecting and reconnecting the supply 
voltage. There is no reaction if command inputs are active while reconnecting the supply 
voltage (reset). 

DWA - Central Lock Interface 

The anti-theft alarm system DWA is not an integral part of the central locking system, how¬ 
ever, it requires commands and signals from this system. The central locking system (ZV) 
monitors the status of the doors, hood,trunk, fuel filler flap and terminals. The DWA moni¬ 
tors the tilt alarm sensor NG as well as the ultrasonic interior protection system USIS. 

The DWA is armed by means of any valid ZS command from an authorized control point or 
via the remote control. An LED provides an optical signal of the DWA status. 

The tilt alarm sensor and interior protection are switched off if a ZS command is initiated 
within 3 s after initially arming the DWA. 

The luggage compartment is accessible without triggering alarm even when the DWA is 
armed via the remote control. An alarm is triggered if the lock cylinder on the trunk is oper¬ 
ated mechanically with the DWA armed. 

Remote Control FBD 

Evaluation of the logic remote control (FBD) signals is integrated in the CAS control unit. In 
addition to various other functions, the central locking functions that can be coded in the 
key memory can be selected "personalized" in the CAS control unit. 

It is possible to actuate the central locking by means of a second remote control with the 
key inserted. 


20 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


Different personalized functions can be selected depending on the type of remote control 
key used. The functions "selective ZV", "lock as from 16 km/h" as well as "lock after 2 min" 
can be coded in the CAS. 

The remote control number identifies the key on which the "unlock" button was last 
pressed. Irrespective of this function, the currently used key is always identified as the con¬ 
trol point in connection with the "unlock trunk" function. 

Trunk Locking 

The trunk can be unlocked and opened via: 

• Radio remote control FBD 

• External trunk button on boot lid handle 

• Internal trunk button in driver's footwell 

• Lock cylinder on trunk; purely mechanical 


Hotel Setting 

The hotel setting is initiated via the lock cylinder of the trunk. The following control points 
are deactivated when the hotel setting is initiated: 

• Trunk button via remote control 

• Exterior trunk button 

• Interior trunk button 

The trunk remains locked even when the vehicle is unlocked. The hotel setting is indicated 
to the customer by means of the switch position. 

The push-button on the trunk is therefore only active when the vehicle is unlocked and sta¬ 
tionary and not when the hotel setting is initiated. 

The interior button is additionally active even when the vehicle is locked but only up to the 
specified speed threshold. 

The system can always be unlocked via the remote control with the ignition key removed 
without the hotel setting engaged. 

Automatic Relock 

The central locking unlocks (selective or global, corresponding to coding) when a release 
command is triggered inadvertently via the remote control. If no door or hood/trunk is 
opened within 2 min, the central locking reassumes the locked status in connection with 
the coding "automatic relock." 


21 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


Car & Key Memory 

The central individualization elements are the coding data of the vehicle. Certain codeable 
functions are enabled for the car memory as part of the individualization procedure. 

In connection with the personalization, individual functions depending on the vehicle key, 
maximum 4, used to unlock the system, are also controlled for the central locking. 
Otherwise the central locking operates in accordance with the coded basic setting. 


The central locking functions therefore depend on the personalization of the 4 vehicle keys 
and on the standard coding for the vehicle. 


Codeable Key Memory Functions: 


Coding 

Description 

Automatic relock 

Relock after 2 min 

Speed Lock 

Lock from 16 km/h 

Selective unlock 

Only the drivers door is unlocked 


Codeable Car Memory Functions: 



02111 


Coding 

Description 

Terminal R prohibits Trunk operation 

The trunk is not opened when terminal R is engaged 

Unlock on removing Key 

The vehicle unlocks after the key is removed IF the system was locked via 
the speed lock or terminal R Lock. 

Cross over operation disabled 

A vehicle locked via the remote can not be unlocked with the key. 


22 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 




























Wipe/Wash System 


The wipe/wash system is a conventional wipe/wash system with reset contact. All 
wipe/wash functions can be activated with the wiper switch once terminal R is on. The 
wipe/wash functions are controlled as a function of vehicle speed. 

The rain and light sensor is fitted as standard. 

To reduce noise and wear, the load circuit of the wiper motor has been designed as an 
external double relay. A power semiconductor is integrated in the body base module (KBM) 
for the washer fluid pump. 

Headlight Cleaning System (SRA) 

The headlight wipe/wash function is controlled by the KBM. 

Rain and Light Sensor 

If the rain and light sensor should fail or be faulty, the KBM will take control. The KBM will 
switch to an emergency mode. Emergency mode is a speed-dependent intermittent mode. 

Safety and Gateway Module 

The SGM switches the wiper switch signal from the byteflight to the K-CAN. 

Body Base Module 

The body base module receives all the information that is required for operation of the 
wipe/wash system. 

The body base module activates the following components: 

• Dual relay module for the wiper motor 

• Relay for the headlight cleaning system 

• Washer fluid pump 

Washer Nozzle Heating 

The IHKA activates the heated jets. 


23 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


Wiper IPO 



Wiper Schematic 




KI.30 


1. SteeringColumn 
Switch 

2. SZL 

3. RLS 

4. SGM 

5. CAS 

6. KBM 

7. Wiper Motor 

8. Wipe/Wash Relay 

9. Washer Fluid Pump 

10. SRA Relay 

11. SRA Pump 


24 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


02128 02 






































































Workshop Exercise - Wipers 



1. Find and print the Repair Instructions for windshield wiper adjustment. 

2. List the special tools required to perform the adjustment 

3. Adjust the wiper arms per the instructions. 

4. Observe new style wiper blades. 


Notes: 


25 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 





















Car Access System 


The CAS of the E60 is based on the CAS of the E65. The internal designation is CAS 2. 
The following changes have been made compared with the CAS of the E65: 

• Direct connection to the K-CAN 

• Repeater function has been omitted 

• Ignition starter switch and the CAS are 2 separate components 

• Data transfer as part of the Condition Based Service 



1. 

2 . 

3 . 

4 . 

5 . 

6 . 


Light Switch with Control Panel 

Instrument Cluster 

SZL 

CAS 


Light Module 
TMFA 


The CAS includes the following functions: 

• Reading in ignition starter switch (ZAS) 

• Transponder authentication 

• Terminal control 

• Electronic immobilizer 
enable to injection system 

• Master function for central locking system (ZV) 

• Master function for power windows (FH) and slide/tilt sunroof (SHD) 

• Remote control services (FBD) 

• Internal CAS functions 

- Wake-up signals 

- Sleep signals 

• Vehicle functions 

- Personalization 

- Auto encoding of vehicle model/transmitter 

- Vehicle order 

- Total distance recorder 

- Condition Based Service CBS 

- Voltage supply, brake-light switch 


26 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 











PT-CAN 



1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 


KBM 

SGM 

CAS 

DME 

EGS/SMG 


Output EWS 

Output Terminal R 

Output Terminal 15 Wake up 


9. Output Terminal 15-1 to 15-3 

17. Radio Receiver 

10. Output Terminal 30g Relay 

18. Brake Light Switch 

11. ACC Wake up line 15WUP_RS 

19. Clutch Switch Module 

12. Integrated Power Supply Module 

20. Centerlock Button 

13. Starter 

21. DSC 

14. Hood Contact 

22. Trunk Lock Cylinder 

15. Ignition/Starter Switch 


16. Remote 



27 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 







































Workshop Exercise - CAS 


Vehicle is brought into the shop with a complaint of no start. 

1. Verify the complaint. 

2. Does the engine crank? - 

3. Is the key recognized? - 

What is the quickest way to confirm that the key has been recognized? 
Where could you find that information in the DiSplus or GT1? _ 

4. Are there any relevant fault codes stored? _ 

5. What pin at the CAS provides the EWS release to the DME? _ 

Check this signal at the DME. 

6. Continue to Diagnose this problem. 

7. Repair the fault. 

8. What pin at the GAS provides the KL50E signal to the DME? _ 

9. What kind of signal is this? (High/low, PWM, Analog...) _ 

10. What pin of the GAS controls the 30g Relay? - 

Is this B+ or B- control of the relay? _ 

11. What pin of the CAS provides power to the brake light switch? _ 

12. What pin of the CAS provides power to the OC3 Mat? _ 


28 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 

















Condition Based Service 

The data for Condition Based Service (CBS) is updated during each journey. The fault mem¬ 
ory data is also updated during each journey. The conditions for this are: 

• Activation of terminal 15, speed exceeded 50 km/h and speed dropped below 30km/h 

• The data is updated after a distance of 10 km has been covered and after speed has 
dropped below 30 km/h 

Manual Update of CBS Data 

The procedure for transferring current data to the key during servicing is as follows: 

- Insert key in ignition and turn to position "R" 

- Press and hold Centerlock button 

- After 15 s the CBS data will have been transferred to the key 

- Read out the key 

Manual Update of Fault Memory Data 

- Press and hold Centerlock button 

- Insert key in ignition 

- Turn key from position "0" to position "R" 

- After 15 s, the fault memory data will have been transferred to the key 

- Read out the key 

Notes: 


29 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 













Antitheft Alarm System 

The alarm system detects and warns of any attempts to break in or tamper with the 
vehicle. 

The DWA comprises the following components: 

• Interior sensor with integrated DWA logic 

• Emergency siren with integrated tilt sensor 

• DWA LED 

• Door, Trunk and Hood Switches (fed via K-CAN) 

• Car Access System (CAS) 

• Light module (LM) 

• K-CAN 

• Local DWA bus line leading to emergency siren. 








®' 



CAS 

■ 

— 

® 

LM 


■ ^—j 




vD 


02651_02 


System Functions 


1. DWA LED 

2. Interior Motion Sensor (USIS) 

3. DWA Bus 

4. Siren with integrated Tilt Sensor 

5. Hood Contact 

6. CAS 

7. Light Module 


The following are monitored: 

• Doors 

• Hood 

• Trunk 

• Vehicle interior 

• Vehicle inclination 

• DWA bus line to the emergency siren 

• Voltage supply for vehicle electrical system 

• Voltage level at the emergency siren 


30 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 









































To prevent false alarms, the sensitivity of the DWA can be adapted. For this purpose, the 
following vehicle conditions are evaluated: 

• Status of auxiliary ventilation 

• Position of power windows 

• Position of slide/tilt sunroof 

The alarm system sends the following status messages: 

• System status via the DWA LED in the passenger compartment 

• Visual arm/disarm via hazard warning lights 

• Audible arm/disarm via an acknowledgement signal from the emergency sirenElectrical/ 

The alarm system outputs the following alarms: 

• Audible alarm via emergency siren 

• Visual alarm via hazard warning lights, dipped headlights, main beam headlights 

Independent Voltage Supply 

Thanks to the independent voltage supply, the emergency siren can issue an alarm even 
when the vehicle voltage supply is disconnected. The independent voltage supply is pro¬ 
vided by Li cells. The Li cells are not rechargeable. The status of the batteries can be read 
out via the diagnostics system. 

System Operation 

Monitoring of the Vehicle Battery 

The emergency siren detects: 

• A drop in voltage from the vehicle battery due to a break in the wiring 

• A voltage > 17 V 

• A voltage drop from a value of 7.5 V to 6.5 V in less than 40 mins 

The emergency siren monitors the B+, GND and DWA bus connection leads. If these leads 
are cut through, the independent alarm will be issued immediately. 

In accordance with ECE regulations, the emergency siren will not issue an alarm if, as a 
result of the vehicle being immobile for a long time, the battery is being continually dis¬ 
charged and the vehicle electrical system voltage drops by 0.5 V/h to 3 V in the process. 

System Power-Down for Storage 

If the emergency siren is disarmed and without an external power supply, the batteries 
switch to a low power status. Current consumption is then a maximum of 25 pA. 

The electronics return the emergency siren to its normal operating status when the vehicle 
battery is reconnected. 


31 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


Reverse Polarity Detection 

The reverse polarity detection system detects reverse polarity in the event of the vehicle 
being jump-started and stores this in its information memory. 

Tilt Sensor 

The tilt sensor monitors the position of the vehicle. It detects and warns of any attempt to 
steal the tires and wheels or to tow the vehicle away. 

The tilt sensor is integrated in the emergency siren. The tilt sensor is triggered and evaluat¬ 
ed by the microprocessor used in the emergency siren. The tilt sensor has diagnostic capa¬ 
bility. 

DWA LED 

As before, the DWA LED is activated directly by the DWA (positive switching). 

DWA Bus 

The DWA bus is a local sub bus with K bus specification. The DWA communicates with the 
emergency siren and the tilt sensor via the DWA bus. 

DWA Arming Sequence 

Immediately after arming the emergency siren is armed and monitors its voltage supply. 
The DWA commences line monitoring on the local DWA bus. 

3 s after arming each of the door and tailgate contacts to be monitored is included in the 
alarm table. Faulty contacts are evaluated as closed, but are not included in the alarm table. 
The tyre pressure monitoring system is included in the alarm table. 

3 s after centrally locking the vehicle or after locking the last door or tailgate the refer¬ 
encing phase of the tilt sensor commences. During this period, the ultrasonic sensors are 
verified for signal plausibility. The sensitivity level is set in accordance with the window and 
slide/tilt sunroof positions. 

30 s after locking the last door or tailgate the tilt sensor is included in the alarm table upon 
expiration of its referencing period. 

If no acknowledgement message is received from the tilt sensor within 60 s of arming, this 
sensor is deleted. If at least one input signal is not in idle state or if a sensor is defective, 
this is signalled by the flashing LED. 

If the emergency siren does not acknowledge the "arm" command, this is also indicated by 
the LED. 


32 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


CAS Authentication to Prevent Tampering 

To prevent the DWA from being easily disarmed by the central locking and tailgate status 
message "Central locking control" using a CAN tool, the CAS authenticates itself with the 
DWA. ~ 

Each time an unlocked vehicle is locked for the first time, the CAS sends an authentication 
to the DWA. Any further "locking" signals are then no longer accepted. 

When the system is disarmed, the DWA expects the CAS to again send authentication with 
the first locking operation. 

The system permits two disarming attempts with the wrong authentication, after which an 
alarm is issued. 

Forced Disarming 

The DWA is forcibly disarmed if a person located in the vehicle centrally locks the vehicle 
and then inserts the key into the ignition. The CAS evaluates this action and transmits a 
"locked" message. The DWA is thus disarmed. 

Deletion of Cross-Wise Operation 

Where cross-wise operation is deleted, the alarm is triggered if the DWA is armed by the 
remote control and disarmed by the door lock. This occurs because, even though the CAS 
recognizes when the lock is unlocked, it does not transfer the signal to the K-CAN. The 
DWA therefore remains armed and triggers the alarm when the door is opened. This func¬ 
tion is encoded in the CAS. 

Bus Monitoring 

If the DWA detects messages on the local DWA bus that indicate attempts to disarm or 
tamper with the emergency siren or the tilt sensor, an alarm will be triggered. 


Park Distance Control PDC 

The E60 is equipped with the 8-channel PDC system already known from the E65. The 
PDC button is integrated in the center console switch center SZM. In the E60 the button 
signal is forwarded via the K-CAN to the PDC control unit. 

The PDC sensors for front and rear introduced in the E65 are used as sensors here. 

For a manual gearbox, the signal for reverse gear is made available by the light module by 
way of a K-CAN message. 

For an automatic gearbox, the signal for reverse gear is made available by the transmission 
control unit by way of a K-CAN message. 


33 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


Active Cruise Control 


The Active Cruise Control system (ACC) is the same as that in the E65. 

The ACC has the following defining properties: 

- Operated from a steering column stalk 

- Statuses are shown in the instrument cluster display 

- Four selectable increment stages 

- Speed preselection in 1 km/h stages 

- Sheet steel bracket in the E60 with plastic intermediate holder for the sensor control unit 

- Audible instructions to the driver have been omitted 



02693 02 


1. Rear Brake Pressure Sensor 

2. Front Brake Pressure Sensor 

3. DSC 

4. DME 

5. EGS 

6. SZL 

7. SGM 

8. Instrument Cluster 

9. CAS 

10. Trailer Module (Not for U.S.) 

11. Light Module 

12. M-ASK 

13. ACC Control Unit 


34 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 












































The exterior lighting is based on the exterior lighting of the E65 and available in the follow¬ 
ing versions: 

• Basic version with halogen headlights 

• Adaptive cornering light with bi-xenon headlights 

Voltage for all the lights is regulated by the light module. This regulation compensates for 
fluctuations in vehicle voltage. 


Light Switch with Control Panel Unit 

The light switch is remotely mounted from 
the light module. They are connected by 
means of a ribbon cable. 

1. Light switch 

2. Instrument Cluster 

3. SZL 

4. CAS 

5. Light Module 

6. TMFA 



35 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 

























































Light System IPO 



36 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 































Lighting Schematic 




































































































































































































Brake Light Switch 

The car access system supplies the brake light switch with voltage. Signals from the brake 
light switch are used by the Light Module to activate the brake lights. 

The Light Module also supplies the brake signal to other systems via the K-CAN. 

Reverse Lights 

On manual transmission vehicles, the signal is made available via a switch from the gear 
selector lever. The light module controls the reversing lights accordingly. 

On automatic transmission vehicles, the signal is made available by the transmission con¬ 
trol unit via the PT-CAN. 

The signals for reverse gear and the brake light are made available to other subscribers by 
the light module via the K-CAN. 



Brake Force Display 

The segments of the rear fog light are used as the BFD as of a deceleration of 5 m/sec 2 

Service Information 

In the E60, the light switch contributes to improved protection for the occupants. This 
increased level of protection is achieved by artificially enlarging the impact surface of the 
light switch. 

In the event of an accident, a person sitting behind the steering wheel could knock against 
the light switch with his/her knee for instance. While retaining full functionality, the light 
switch can be shifted towards the rear. This increases the impact surface about the light 
switch. After being pressed back, the light switch must be pulled out to move it into the for¬ 
ward position again. 


38 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 























AHL 


The AHL control unit is linked to the following components: 

• Front and rear level sensor 

• Brake pedal switch 

• Steering angle sensor 

• Yaw rate sensor 

• DSC control unit, supplies speed signal 

• Car Access System 

• Safety and gateway module 

• Light module 

• Steering column switch cluster 

• Swivel module for bi-xenon headlights 

• Stepper motor controller 

• Stepper motors for AHL and steering angle sensor (LWR) 

• LIN bus 

AHL Control Unit 


The AHL control unit is the master control unit for vertical and horizontal adjustment of the 
bi-xenon headlights. The stepper motor controllers actuate the stepper motors of the bi¬ 
xenon headlights. The AHL control unit is installed on the carrier plate behind the glove 
compartment. 



39 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 





























02462.02 


Function Indicator 

The function of the AHL is indicated by the FLC LED lighting permanently. A fault in the AHL 
system is indicated by the FLC LED flashing with the AFIL active. 

The low beam headlight and the headlight vertical aim control (LWR) remain active in the 
case of fault. The swivel function of the bi-xenon modules is deactivated. 

A reference run is performed during every new start. If a defect is found, the bi-xenon head¬ 
lights are switched off to ensure oncoming traffic cannot be dazzled. The fog lights are 
switched on as a substitute 
function. 


40 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 





























































































Repairs 


Various repairs may be necessary during the course of vehicle's service life. As a conse¬ 
quence of repair work, it may be that the system parts for the AHL are installed with differ¬ 
ent software and hardware versions. In each case, the replaced components must be 
adapted to the specific requirements of the vehicle. 

AHL Control Unit 

After replacing an AHL control unit, it is necessary to enter the vehicle identification num¬ 
ber and to encode the control unit depending on specific vehicle data. 

The complete AHL function will not be operative if adaptation to the vehicle is not per¬ 
formed. 

Replacing SMC 

After replacing the SMC, it is necessary to enter the vehicle identification number and head¬ 
light-dependent coding in the SMC control unit. 

The complete AHL function will remain inoperative if this adaptation is not performed. 
Particular care must be taken when replacing the SMC to ensure that the housing seal of 
the SMC is fitted correctly. 

Replace Bi-Xenon Headlights 

After replacing the bi-xenon headlights, it is necessary to encode the corresponding SMC 
depending on the headlights. 

If this adaptation is not performed, the function will appear to be operative but not correct. 
The swivel range and zero point can vary from vehicle model to vehicle model and the bi¬ 
xenon headlight can have a different status! 

The headlights must be adjusted and checked. 

Diagnosis 

The AHL system must be set to diagnosis mode in order to perform the following jobs: 

• Read out of relevant bus signals with vehicle stationary 

-Road speed 
-Yaw rate 
-Steering angle 

• Checking signal plausibility 

• Checking that conditions for activation are fulfilled 

-Rain and light sensor status 
-Light switch status 

Missing or non-plausible BUS signals are stored in the form of fault codes in the AHL con¬ 
trol unit. The types of fault are stored in the SMC. The SMCs are accessed via the AHL con¬ 
trol unit. 


41 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


Interior Lighting 


The interior lights of the E60 are pulse width modulated and automatically controlled by 
various inputs. 

PWM Control 


The output is active from terminal 15 with a permanent clocking in a frequency of 100 Hz. 
In this way the power output is controlled. From a voltage of 12.8 V the pulse width mod¬ 
ulation is adjusted in such a way as to provide a power output of 100% as for 12.8 V. 

In the case of voltage drops in the vehicle electrical system of up to 1 V, the pulse width 
modulation is corrected and thus a constant brightness of the lamps connected at the con¬ 
sumer shutdown output is ensured. 

Below 12.8 V voltage regulation is no longer corrected. The brightness can fluctuate with 
the battery voltage level. 



42 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


02117 02 

























































































































































































Consumer Shutdown Terminal 


Some loads/consumers such as reading, glovebox and luggage compartment lights can 
remain switched on when the car is stopped. In order to protect the battery, these con¬ 
sumers are shut down after a drop at terminal R with a delay of 16 mins, or immediately 
with the diagnosis telegram. 

Consumer Shutdown 


Power outputs are made available by the KBM 2 for consumer shutdown. 

• VA 1: 

- Reading lights 

- Vanity lights 

- Boot 

• IB 2: 

- Glovebox light 


Roller Sunblind 


An electric roller sunblind is 
available for the rear window 
of the E60. Mechanical roller 
sunblinds are also available 
for the side windows of the 
E60. 

System Function 

The roller sunblind is operat¬ 
ed from the switch in the dri¬ 
ver's side switch block. 




Q2130JS 


44 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 
















































Seats 


Seat Variants 

Three different seat versions are available for the E60. 

• Electric basic seat with memory 

• Electric sports seat with memory 

• Multi-function seat with memory 

Provision is also made for the installation of various options: 

• Electric seat heater 

• Seat ventilation system 

• Active seat option 

• Lumbar support option 

Electrical Interfaces 

One 8-pin and one 25-pin connector are used to connect the system to the vehicle elec¬ 
trical system. The pin assignment of the 10 compartment plug connections has not 
changed from those for the seats in the E65. The 6 compartment plug connections for the 
seat modules have not changed either. 

Electric, Sport and Multi-Function Seats 

The signals required for seat adjustment are generated with the aid of the adjustment 
switches. The signals are forwarded to the center console switch centre (SZM) by means 
of an interface similar to a K bus. The centre console switch centre then forwards the data 
to the seat modules via the K-CAN. 

Signals are processed in the seat modules. With the aid of the output stage in the seat 
modules, the motors in the seat are activated for seat adjustment. 

Seat Heating 

The heating circuits vary depending on the equipment fitted. The multifunction seat and the 
option seat ventilation system have 4 heating circuits. In a 4 heating circuit system, the 
backrest and seat cushion each have a rapid-heat area and a secondary heat area. Each 
heat area is fitted with a temperature sensor. Current is applied to a maximum of two heat¬ 
ing circuits at any one time. 

Seat variants that are not based on the multi-function seat and that are not fitted with the 
option seat ventilation system have 2 heat circuits. In a 2 heating circuit system, the back¬ 
rest and seat cushion each have one heat area. 

Lumbar Support 

The seats are fitted with a pneumatically operated lumbar support adjustment. 


45 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


Active Seat 


The active seat is already described in the training material for the E65. To provide support 
and relieve the strain on the spinal column and back muscles during long journeys, the 
active seat can be installed in the vehicle. The up and down movement of the seat surface 
is initiated at the ischiatic tuberosity. 

Entry/Exit Function for the Multi-Function Seat 

There is an entry/exit aid for both the driver and passenger. The entry/exit aid is available in 
conjunction with the multi-function seat. The entry/exit aid system uses the backrest width 
(LBV) and seat cushion depth (STV) adjustment functions. 

The backrest width is retracted to allow entry/exit into the vehicle. This creates more space 
in the area of the backrest. The seat cushion depth is reduced. This creates more space 
around the seat area. 

Functional Principle 

One example in which the entry/exit aid is activated: 

The customer stops the vehicle. The vehicle is not in gear, the engine is either running or 
switched off. The vehicle door is opened. The door contact indicates this. The exit aid is 
activated. The LBV and then the STV are retracted. The customer gets out and the door is 
closed. The exit aid remains in that position and is used to assist entry when the 
customer gets back in the car. 

Outside Mirrors 


Activation of the wing mirrors is performed by the door modules by means of the local elec¬ 
tronics in the front doors. All the mirror functions, except for electrochrome wing mirror and 
mirror heating, are active with terminal R on through to consumer shutdown. 

The mirror functions are controlled exclusively in the door modules, which communicate 
with each other via the byteflight. All the mirror adjustment functions are served by the 
adjusting switches in the switch block in the driver's door. 

The following options are available: 


__E__ 

• Electrochrome interior rearview and 
wing mirrors 


I 


• Electrochrome interior rearview mirror 

3 

r~~M © 

) 

• Light package including front-area * ” 

© 



© 

lights in wing mirrors 

TMFA 

V 


TMBF 

• Wing-mirror memory in conjunction 



8 



with seat memory 



® 

SGM 




46 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 


6 











Seat IPO (Typical) 



byteflight 




SGM 


K-CAN 




SZM 

































Seat Schematic 



48 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 































































































































































































TMFA 



AON 


TMBF 



02262.02 


Steering Column 

The steering column adjustment function is 
described in the information for the E65. 
Possible functions of steering column 
adjustment are: 

• Height adjustment 

• Reach adjustment 

• Entry/exit aid 

• Steering-column memory 

• Motor protection 


or 


nr 



System Circuit Diagram 

1. Multi-function steering wheel 

2. Steering column switch cluster (SZL) 

3. Buttons for steering column adjustment 
and steering wheel heating 

4. Fanfare horn 

5. Fanfare horn 

6. Light Module (LM) 

7. Safety and gateway module (SGM) 

8. Active steering system (AFS) 

K-CAN - Bodyshell CAN 
F-CAN - Chassis CAN 



AFS 


8 


49 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 




















































Workshop Exercise - Seats 


Vehicle is brought into shop with drivers seat non-operational. 

1. Verify the complaint 

2. Does the passenger seat operate? _ 

3. Perform a short test and note the stored fault codes. 

4. Are either of the seats able to be operated through component activation? 

5. What is the path of the signal from the seat switch to the seat modules? 

6. What is the best place to check the seat switch operation request signal? 

7. What is the problem with the seat? _ 


50 

E60 General Vehicle Electrical Systems 














