Table of Contents 

E60 Driver Information 

Subject Page 

Instrument Cluster.3 

Display Areas.5 

Instrument Dials .5 

Indicators and Warning Lamps.7 

LC Display .8 

Program and Gear Display.8 

Condition Based Service (CBS) .9 

CBS Displays .10 

Displays in the Instrument Cluster .10 

Displays in the Central Information Display (CID).10 

Resetting the Service Operations .12 

Diagnostics.12 

Central Information Display (CID) .13 

New Features.14 

Bus Network.14 

Components.15 

LC Display .15 

Controller .16 

Status Bar .17 

Communications.19 

Navigation.19 

Entertainment.19 

Climate .19 

Settings .19 

Service Mode.19 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 Revision Date: 09/03 



























Model: E60 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 
Driver Information 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the instrument cluster warning symbols. 

• Reset the Condition Based Service Indicators. 

• Navigate through all screens of the CD with the controller. 

• Explain the new CID screens. 


2 


E60 Driver Information 




Instrument Cluster 


Annular indicators used for the first time by BMW for the two main instruments represent 
an innovation in display technology. This system has enabled the displays for the cruise 
control system set speed and the variable engine speed warning zone to be visually illus¬ 
trated . 


The pendulum dial layout for the analogue fuel gauge and fuel consumption indicator aug¬ 
ments the compact appearance and design of the instrument cluster. 

The indicator lamp for the fuel reserve has been replaced by a Check Control message in 
text and graphics. Likewise, the Check Control texts are no longer displayed in the instru¬ 
ment cluster but in the status bar of the Central Information Display (CID). 


Two large instrument dials show vehicle speed and engine speed. Two smaller pointer 
instruments display fuel level and current fuel consumption. The scales on the instrument 
cluster are specific to each country, vehicle and engine. Most of the indicator lamps are 
located in the centre at the top between the two large instrument dials. Also in the centre 
between the two large instrument dials are the two LC Displays. 



Components 

The instrument cluster comprises the following components: 

• Instrument dials 

• Indicator and warning lamps 

• LC display 

• Program and gear displays for automatic gearbox and SMG Sequential Manual 
Gearbox 

• Setting button for resetting the trip meter and operating the Condition Based Service, 
CBS menu 

• Connected components which serve to activate the displays in the instrument cluster 

3 


E60 Driver Information 






Instrument Cluster IPO 



4 


E60 Driver Information 





















































































Display Areas 


The instrument cluster is divided into the following display areas: 

• Instrument dials 

• Indicator and warning lamps 

• LC display 

• Program and gear displays for automatic gearbox and SMG Sequential Manual 
Gearbox 

Instrument Dials 

The instrument cluster includes the following dials: 

• Speedometer 

• Rev counter 

• Fuel gauge 

• Fuel consumption (economy) indicator 


The set speed for the cruise control system and the tach warning are displayed by means 
of annular indicators (moving rings). 



1. Set Speed for Cruise Control 

1. Front Frame 

2. Speedometer 

2. Annular Indicator 

3. Tach 

3. Ring Gear 

4. Tach Warning Zone 

4. Pinion 

5. Fuel Guage 

5. Light Duct 

6. Fuel Consumption Indicator 

6. Stepper Motor 

7. Base with Printed Circuit Board and Display 


The annular indicator is moved by means of the ring gear, connected to the indicator, the 
pinion and the stepper motor which is attached to the rear of the light duct. 

U.S. vehicle will have speedometers with 0-160 MPH and 0-7000 RPM displays. 

The maximum engine speed warning display is indicated by the tach as a function of engine 
temperature. 


5 


E60 Driver Information 













Instrument Cluster Schematic 




vi) 


PT-CAN 


If 




byteflight 


F-CAN 


K-CAN 



jL ' ' ' 


IHKA 

© 


LM 

© 


CAS 

© 


M-ASK 

® 

22 ) 

& 

'5 < 

14 ) 1 

MOST 



E60 Driver Information 



























































































































































1. Start of variable warning zone 

2. End of variable warning zone 

3. Start of fixed warning zone 

4. End of fixed warning zone 


G2H2 D2 


Indicators and Warning Lamps 

The indicator and warning lamps are activated by the processor in the instrument cluster. 
The main indicator and warning lamps are activated in the Predrive Check when terminal 
15 is switched on. The indicator lamps and warning symbols are lit by soldered-in LEDs 
(replacement of LEDs not possible). 



02227.02 


7 


E60 Driver Information 



























LC Display 

The LC display is located between the speedometer and the rev counter. The LC display 
is divided into two areas. The time and outside temperature are displayed in the upper win¬ 
dow, along with the set speed for the ACC, check control messages and CBS displays. 
The on-board computer functions, trip distance counter and CBS messages are output to 
the lower window. A manipulation dot indicates if there are different vehicle identification 
numbers in the light module and in the instrument cluster. 


* -MS 

3 ) 

Program and Gear Display 



On vehicles with automatic transmission or sequential manual transmission (SMG), the pro¬ 
gram and gear selected are shown in the center of the lower window of the LC display. 
The program and gear display is activated when terminal 15 is on. At terminal 15 off, run- 
on operation of the display is possible provided the SMG is still transmitting CAN mes¬ 
sages. 

The information between the control units for the automatic gearbox or SMG and the instru¬ 
ment cluster are exchanged via the K-CAN. The program and gear display shows letters 

2 


8 



and numbers. The program mode is displayed all the 
time and is not overwritten by other information. 

Note: 

With SMG, the selector-lever position "N" flash¬ 
es after the engine is turned off. This indication 
serves as a visual reminder that the car could 
still roll away. 



E60 Driver Information 


















Condition Based Service (CBS) 

With the series launch of the new 5 Series, BMW will also be offering service intervals that 
are geared towards the current condition of selected critical components - i.e. servicing that 
depends on the condition of components and maintenance requirements; this is known 
as Condition Based Service (CBS). CBS means thus: maintenance only for the component 
which is worn. 

The system calculates when a service operation, e.g. an oil change or emissions inspec¬ 
tion, is due and informs the customer of this via the LC display in the instrument cluster. 
CBS sorts all the data according to date due and can determine when the vehicle should 
be taken into BMW Service. 

The instrument cluster sends the sorted data to the Central Information Display (CID). 
There, the data can be selected for display in the Service menu. There are ten different 
types of service, with each of these types being assigned to a specific service group. 

The system involves the following components: 

• Instrument cluster 

• External units (DME, IHKA, DSC) 

• Car Access System (CAS) 2 

• Central Information Display (CID) 

All information that the CBS system requires is sent on the K-CAN bus. The instrument 
cluster is a subscriber on the K-CAN and acts as the CBS master control unit. The CBS 
requests from all the control units are therefore sent via the K-CAN to the instrument clus¬ 
ter and to the Central Information Display. 


D-Bus 

■ 



CAS 


M-ASK 


DME 


KOMB! 


TEL 


DSC 


Zt- IHKA 
K-CAN 


MOST 


byteflight 


PT-CAN 


9 


E60 Driver Information 















CBS Displays 


Displays in the Instrument Cluster 

The CBS display always comprises the following two separate displays: 


• A colored symbol in the upper display 

-Orange for normal 
-Yellow for service due 
-Red for service overdue 

• And information on remaining distance 
and/or due date in the lower display. 


1. CBS Symbol 

2. Final Date Information 

3. Remaining Distance Display 



Displays in the Central Information Display (CID) 

All information on the individual service operations can be displayed in the CID. The CBS 
functions are stored in the "Settings" menu item which is used exclusively for individual user 
settings. 

Press the Controller, the "Settings" menu will appear. 

Turn the controller until "Service" is highlighted, then press to activate the CBS menu. 

The CBS menu window will appear; this is divided into the following control and display 
fields: 

• Status bar 

• First menu bar 

• Second menu bar 

• Display field for CBS symbol 

• Display field for service operation 

Note: 

All screen shots shown are derived from a simulation of a version with featuring a 
6.5" medium-resolution colour LC display and correspond to the status at the time 
of going to press. Further changes are possible to the contents and the layout. 



E60 Driver Information 














02897 02 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

First Menu Bar 

-Service Requirement, Check Control Messages 
-Service 

2 

Second Menu Bar 
-Status 

3 

Display Field For CBS Symbols 

4 

Status Bar 

5 

Display Field for Service Operation 


The service operation display field always shows the first five messages. 

The displays are colour-coded and some also have a symbol. The displays mean the fol¬ 
lowing: 

• Red - The service operation is overdue 

• Yellow - The service operation is due shortly 

• Green - No service operation required 

Any overdue service operations and symbols marked in red in the list are always at the top 
of the list of messages. 

You can scroll through the list of the service operations from top to bottom by turning the 
controller (left/right). 

To display the information concerning a specific service operation on the CID, turn the con¬ 
troller to select the required service operation and display the selection by pressing the con¬ 
troller. 



E60 Driver Information 
































Resetting the Service Operations 

When one or more operations have been carried out, e.g. front pads have been changed, 
these operations must be reset to their full service interval. 

There are two options for resetting the service operations: 

• Legally required service operations 

Legally required service operations such as the Statutory vehicle inspection (HU) and 
the Statutory exhaust test (AU), can only be reset in the "Service" menu. 

• Maintenance service operations 

All service operations for the purpose of maintenance are reset by means of the 
reset button of the trip distance counter in the instrument cluster. If the reset button 
is pressed for longer than ten seconds, the reset mode opens automatically. 
"Reset?" is displayed in the lower display window. 

In the upper display window, the CBS symbol , e.g. for "engine oil service overdue" will be 
displayed. Press the reset button until the time/distance-dependent displays in the lower 
display window are replaced with dashes. Reset is no longer possible once more than 80 
percent of the interval has expired. A reset lock will be shown in the display with "OK". 



1. Reset button 
for trip counter 

2. Upper Display 
Window 

- CBS Symbol 

3. Lower Display 
Window 

- Gear Indicator 

- Reset Mode 



oauofiLoa 


Diagnostics 

There are three possible combinations for replacing the instrument clusters and Car Access 
System. 

• Instrument cluster faulty, Car Access System OK 

• Car Access System faulty, instrument cluster OK 

• Car Access System and instrument cluster must be replaced. 

Simultaneous replacement of the Car Access System and the instrument cluster must be 
avoided. The odometer reading will be lost as a result. In principle it is also possible to carry 
out a trial replacement of the instrument cluster/Car Access System. 

12 


E60 Driver Information 











Central Information Display (CID) 

The Central Information Display is an integrated display and operating panel for the follow¬ 
ing functions: 

• Audio systems such as radio, CD, MC 

• Computer, journey computer 

• Check Control messages 

• Navigation 

• Needs-based service (BOS) 

• Vehicle info 

• Brief info 

• Telephone and data services 

• CD-ROM or DVD 

• Personalized functions such as station selection 

• Heating and air conditioning system 

• Vehicle functions such as DSC, EDC, PDC, RDC 

• Service mode 



byteflight 


D-Bus 

K-CAN 

1 

(?) 

PT-CAN 

1—III — ^ 

II - ' 

\ VJV 

SGM 






3 



CID 







E60 Driver Information 



































































































New Features 


The CID of the E60 has new features or modified features: 


• Main Menu reduced to four selections 

- Communication 

- Car Data (unless equipped with Navigation) 

- Entertainment 
-Climate Control 

• User settings available in an additional menu setting 

• Two variants of controller 

• New Menu button 

• Voice Input button on center console 

Bus Network 


The M-ASK generates the LVDS data (Low Voltage Differential Signaling) for the graphic dis¬ 
play in the Central Information Display. 

The central operating control for the Central Information Display is the controller. The con¬ 
troller is connected to the CID via the centre console control centre (SZM) and the K-CAN 
system. 

The safety base module (SGM) provides the diagnostics interface for the CID via the diag¬ 
nostics bus. 

D-Bus 




SGM 


6 

.V if 

.M 

L 




K-CAN 



LVDS 



M-ASK 


CON 





CID 


02726 02 


E60 Driver Information 




















































Components 

The Central Information Display (CID) comprises the following components: 

• Casing with integral electronic module 

• LC display 

• Casing attachment (tube) with cover glass 

• Controller, a connected component which controls the displays in the CID. 





LC Display 


1. Casing w/ 
Electronic Module 

2. LC Display 

3. Casing w/ Glass 


In order to cope with the various equipment specifications, the following variants are used 
for the E60: 


• CID with 6.5" medium-resolution colour LCD (400 x 240 pixels) 

• CID with 8.8" high-resolution colour LCD (640 x 240 pixels) 

The LCD also features a help window. 

The casing is designed to be able to accommodate all screen variants offered. 

The entire Central Information Display assembly is fixed to the dashboard by two screws. 

15 


E60 Driver Information 





























Kommunrkation 


Klimo 


Car Data 


V 

Enters inrnent 


A J A 8AYERM 1 TMC 


T'lill 21:50 



Controller 


niiiliJin 







KommunilsatiQr 

Klsma 



V 

Entertainment 

~^^=KIL TPTMC a SOS 11:48 




v i gj t i tin 


28.11.2002 



m2 a m 


The controller is the central operating control for all comfort functions and selected options 
for some vehicle functions that are displayed on the Central Information Display. 

The controller is located in the centre console immediately behind the gear selector lever, 
within reach of the user (driver and front passenger). 

For the first time, the controller will be available in the following two variants for the E60: 

• Variant A 

The base variant has a mechanical latch system with 24 latches per full turn. 

• Variant B 

On the high-end version, the tactile feedback for the rotational movement of the 
controller is generated electrically. The tactile feedback for the rest position, the main 
directions of movement and the depressed position is created by mechanical 
means. 


The operating principle of the controller is identical with that of the E65. 

The controller is slid from a rest position (centre position) to which it always returns again 
when it is released. 

16 


E60 Driver Information 

























02723_02 

The main features of the operating principle are: 

• The centre is the rest position (centre position) 

• Slide to select the four main directions of movement 

• Turn to select the function 

• Press to select or confirm entry. 

There is also a panel of buttons immediately behind the controller. There are two variants, 
as follows: 

• Basic variant 

This version comprises a menu button which is used to call up the main menu in the 
Central Information Display. 

• High-end variant 

This version has two buttons. In addition to the menu button, there is a button for 
activating/deactivating the voice input system (SVS). The button signals are read 
into the controller and converted into K-CAN telegrams. 

The four menu items are displayed in a cross pattern on the Central Information Display cor¬ 
responding to the four main directions in which the controller can be moved. 

In addition to these four main menu items, there is a fifth menu item used exclusively for 
individual user settings. The screen can also be switched on and off from this menu. 

Status Bar 



The status bar displays the main information on the various functions, such as the tele¬ 
phone signal strength or the time; this information is permanently displayed after 
Ignition ON. 



1. Automatic A/C activated 

2. Audio Source activated 

3. TMC (Not for USA) 

4. Unread Text Message 

5. Telephone Signal Strength 

6. Time 



E60 Driver Information 








02800.02 

18 


E60 Driver Information 










Communications 


In this menu, entries in the telephone directory can be displayed and sorted according to 
various criteria. Here too, the user can query his SMS (Short Message Service) inbox for 
incoming text messages or display any calls that were not answered. 

This menu also contains the BMW services such as BMW Assist and BMW Online. Certain 
services are only available to customers once released. 

Navigation 

This menu provides access to all functions necessary to operate the navigation system. The 
computer can also be selected from this menu item. Certain services are relevant to spe¬ 
cific equipment and are only available to customers after appropriate authorization. The 
main menu is activated as soon as terminal 15 ON is on. 

Entertainment 

The Entertainment menu is a frequently used function. Certain services are relevant to spe¬ 
cific equipment and are only available to customers once released. The main menu is acti¬ 
vated as soon as terminal 15 ON is on. 

Climate 

As on the E65, the extended conditioning functions such as mixture control and automat¬ 
ic heater can be selected and activated from the Central Information Display. The main 
menu is activated as soon as terminal 15 ON is on. 

Settings 

The individual user settings can be adjusted from this menu. The main menu is activated as 
soon as terminal 15 ON is on. 

Service Mode 

Service mode is a special facility which provides information about the status of the display 
and user control system. The function is designed for use by BMW Service and is not 
intended to be accessible to vehicle owners. Service mode provides access to details of 
the hardware/software versions for the Central Information Display and the control units in 
the M-ASK network. As an addition to the comprehensive facilities of the diagnosis sys¬ 
tem, Service mode acts as a simple means of quickly accessing diagnostic data without 
the need for a diagnosis tester. 



E60 Driver Information 


Activating Service Mode 

In the main menu, press and hold the controller. Tactile feedback will then be generated. 

- Turn controller 3 stops clockwise 

- Turn controller 3 stops anti-clockwise 

- Turn controller 1 stop clockwise 

- Turn controller 1 stop anti-clockwise 

- Turn controller 1 stop clockwise 

- Press the controller to confirm, Service mode will then appear in the CID. 



Workshop Exercise - Driver Information 


1. List the steps necessary to set a preset radio station. 


2. What information is found under the heading “Car Data”? 


3. What are the possible “program” options for the “Star” MFL Button? 


4. List the steps necessary to reset the average speed reading. 

5. Using the Controller and CID, set the door locks to “Relock door if not Opened” 

6. What is the current setting of the speed dependent volume? _ 

7. What is the current setting of the pathway lighting? _ Increase the time setting by 2 

increment levels. What is the setting? _ 

8. Access the check control messages. What is the current message? _ 



E60 Driver Information 



















