Table of Contents 

E60 Communication Systems 

Subject Page 

Information/Communication Technology IKT.4 

New Features Compared to E39 .4 

Multi-Audio System Controller .4 

M-ASK Variants .5 

M-ASK Functions.6 

MOST-CAN Gateway.6 

LVDS Driver .6 

MOST Functions.6 

System Master.6 

Power Master.6 

Network Master.6 

Configuration Control.7 

Fault Code Memory .7 

Car Communication Computer.7 

Controller .7 

Navigation System .8 

Top-HiFi Amplifier with LOGIC7.8 

Telephone System .8 

Voice Input System.8 

Head-Up Display .8 

Rear-Compartment Entertainment Center.8 

Headset Interface.8 

Radio .9 

Antennas .9 

Audio Master Function .10 

Connection Master.11 

Audio Output Stage .11 

Audio Systems.11 

HiFi .11 

HiFi Components.11 

Multi-Audio System Controller .12 

Central Information Display.12 

Controller.12 

Mid-Range Speakers .12 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 


Revision Date: 10/03 




































Subject Page 

Audio Systems (cont.) 

Central Woofers.12 

HiFi Amplifier .12 

Tweeters (High-Range Speakers) .13 

HiFi System Speaker Layout .13 

Hi-Fi System Schematic.14 

Top HiFi .15 

Top HiFi Components.15 

Top-HiFi Amplifier.15 

LOGIC 7.15 

Mid-Range Speakers .15 

Tweeters (High-Range Speakers) .16 

Central Woofers.16 

Top-HiFi Speaker Layout .16 

Top HiFi Schematic.17 

Audio CD Changer.18 

Telephone Systems.19 

Telematic Control Unit.19 

Voltage Supply and Power Management .21 

MOST Bus Interface.21 

Bluetooth Antenna .21 

Multifunctional Steering Wheel .21 

Multi-Audio System Controller M-ASK .21 

Controller .21 

Design .22 

Operating Principle.22 

Eject Box .22 

Motorola Mobile Phone Phoenix V60 .22 

Compensator.23 

SOS Antenna.23 

GPS Antenna.23 
































Model: E60 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 
Communication Systems 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify MOST system components and locations. 

• Understand M-ASK functions. 

• Recognize the HiFi and Top HiFi Systems. 

• Know the Telematics System. 


3 

E60 Communication Systems 




Information/Communication Technology IKT 

New Features Compared to E39 

• Multi-audio system controller M-ASK 

• Car communication computer CCC (optional) 

• Controller with simplified operation 

• Navigation system integrated in CCC 

• Top-HiFi amplifier with LOGIC7 

• New fixed installation telephone system with GSM dual band and telematics 

• Head-up display 

• Voice input system integrated as software (CCC only) 

• Rear compartment entertainment center with a second display and DVD changer 

• Headset interface (not from series launch) 

Multi-Audio System Controller 

The multi-audio system controller M-ASK is the central control unit of the information and 
communications systems. The M-ASK combines up to four control units in one, used as 
the central control unit in the basic version. 



I i .... ■ Ji■ J 

M-ASK CCC 

4 


E60 Communication Systems 

















The M-ASK combines the following control units in one housing: 

• ASK 

• Aerial amplifier/tuner 

• MOST CAN gateway, interface to control display 

In the E65, these modules are installed in separate control units. 

The following advantages are achieved by combining several control units in one compo¬ 
nent: 

• Fewer plug connections therefore fewer sources of fault 

• Improved overall quality 

• Less installation area required for control units 

• Weight saving of control units 

• Low closed-circuit current requirement 


M-ASK Variants 

Corresponding to the optional equipment configuration, the multi-audio system controller is 

installed in one of the following hardware variants: 

• The M-ASK with CD drive features a single tuner and can be used worldwide. The 
M-ASK CD corresponds to the previous BMW radio Business CD and is fitted as 
standard. 

• The M-ASK with CD-ROM drive can play back MP3 files and features a single tuner. It 
additionally receives the Weatherband in the US version. The M-ASK CD-ROM 
corresponds to the previous BMW radio Professional. (Not Available at SOP) 


5 

E60 Communication Systems 


M-ASK Functions 

The M-ASK undertakes the most important and central functions as well as control tasks 
in the communication network. It is responsible for the control and communication of the 
individual systems among each other. These tasks comprise the following main functions: 

• MOST-CAN gateway 

• LVDS driver 

• MOST functions 

• Radio function 

• Audio master function 

• Audio output stages 

MOST-CAN Gateway 

The M-ASK forms a gateway (interface) between the MOST bus and the K-CAN. The gate¬ 
way connects the various bus systems of the vehicle network. The bus systems operate 
with different transmission rates and data formats. The information must be converted in 
the gateway in order to be able to use it in the various systems. 

LVDS Driver 

The LVDS driver (low voltage differential signal) receives the digital RGB signals from the 
graphic processor. The LVDS driver converts the RGB signals into LVDS signals and sends 
them via the LVDS cable to the central information display thus providing digital image sig¬ 
nals on the display. 

MOST Functions 

System Master 

The system master function that was still part of the control display on the E65/66 is now 
integrated in the M-ASK. 

Power Master 

In the E65/66 the power master function is in the control display and is now integrated in 
the M-ASK. The power master has following functions: 

Wake-up, initialization, power-down 

The power master wakes the bus and is responsible for ensuring correct initialization of the 
network. The network master is also responsible for initiating the power-down. Each power¬ 
down is requested at this master and initialized by it. 

Network Master 

The M-ASK is the network master for the MOST bus. The network master undertakes all 
control and monitoring tasks of the MOST bus. It performs following functions: 


6 

E60 Communication Systems 



Configuration Control 

The network master detects the exact system configuration each time that the network is 
started and compares it to a stored target configuration. 

Fault Code Memory 

The network master contains the central fault code memory of the MOST network. In addi¬ 
tion to deviations from the specified configuration, all faults that occur during operation of 
the network are stored in this fault code memory. 

Car Communication Computer 

The car communication computer CCC is the central control unit of the High equipment. 
The CCC comprises the functions of the M-ASK, plus some additional functions. Voice 
control of the systems and the Professional navigation system with map presentation are 
additionally possible in connection with the CCC. The CCC also contains the driver for the 
rear passenger compartment display. 

The CCC (to be introduced at a later date) will perform all the functions of the M-ASK as 
well as offering the High Navigation and additional programming possibilities. 

Controller 

The controller is the central control/operating element for all comfort and several car func¬ 
tions. The operating principle is identical to that of the E65. The directions in which the con¬ 
troller can be pushed has been reduced to four. 

The controller comes in two versions, i.e. basic and High. The basic version is fitted with a 
mechanical locating mechanism for the checkback signal while in the High version the con¬ 
troller function is electrically generated for the check-back signal. 




027?3_02 

7 

E60 Communication Systems 






Navigation System 

The Professional navigation system features a map display in the central information dis¬ 
play. The E60 no longer features a separate navigation computer. The navigation comput¬ 
er has been integrated in the CCC. 

Top-HiFi Amplifier with LOGIC7 

The E60 offers two different audio systems to choose from: HiFi and Top-HiFi. In the Top- 
HiFi version, the amplifier has a LOGIC7 function, i.e. there is optimum surround sound. 


Telephone System 

The E60 is equipped with the new fixed installation telephone system based on the Everest 
platform. It features various telematics functions. 

Voice Input System 

The CCC is combined with a voice input system, which can be used to execute most of 
the functions by way of voice commands in the communications network. 

Head-Up Display 

A further innovation in the E60 is the head-up display. Here additional information is beamed 
into the driver's field of vision. The driver can read this information without having to take 
his/her eyes off the road ahead, this representing an effective safety feature. 

Rear-Compartment Entertainment Center 

A rear-compartment entertainment centre will be provided at a later stage in conjunction 
with the CCC. This entertainment centre will allow the rear passengers to watch a DVD film 
on a second display in the rear compartment while the car is moving. TV reception with 
videotext will also be possible. 

Headset Interface 

The headset interface will allow passenger to listen simultaneously to different audio 
sources in the car (not at series launch). 


8 

E60 Communication Systems 


Radio 


The radio function is integrated in the M-ASK. The tuner is also located in the M-ASK. The 
tuner serves as the receiver. It converts the RF signal into an audio signal and transfers this 
signal via the audio output stages to the speakers. 

The radio is controlled by means of the controller in the centre console and the menu in the 
central information display. The familiar control functions are available. 

The M-ASK is offered with the following tuner variants: 

• BMW radio with CD drive and single tuner 

• BMW radio with CD-ROM drive and double tuner (Single Tuner at SOP) 

• BMW radio with DVD drive and double tuner (Single Tuner at SOP) 

The radios are world tuners, i.e. they can be programmed for all frequencies. The radios 
feature the familiar functions. 



1. M-ASK 

2. CID 

3. Audio Speaker 

4. Controller 

5. AM/FM Antennas 


Antennas 

The tuner is connected to the antenna diversity of the rear window via an antenna connec¬ 
tor (Fakra) and a coaxial cable. The following antennas are located in the rear window: 

• FM antennas FM1 -4 

• AM antennas LW, MW, SW 

• Remote control services (FBD) antenna 

In addition to the antennas in the rear window, there is also a roof antenna for the tele¬ 
phone, GPS and satellite radio (US only). 

The antenna structures are located on the inside and are the same on all rear windows. 
They are applied in a screen print process. The heating conductors of the rear window 
defogger are integrated in the antenna structures. 

The carrier frame for the antenna diversity module is bonded at the top right directly to the 
rear window. The antenna diversity module is clipped onto the carrier frame and is con¬ 
nected by means of spring contacts to the antenna structure. 


9 

E60 Communication Systems 






















hMl B FTs12 ■ FM3 FThli 

FM antenna arrangement in the E60 


1 m ht+u 

AM/FBD antenna arrangement in the E60 


Note: Particular care must be taken when removing the antenna diversity module 
to ensure that the clips of the carrier frame do not break off, otherwise the rear 
window will have to be renewed. 

Audio Master Function 

One of the main functions of the M-ASK is the audio master. The task of the audio master 
is to collect, process and output all audio signals in the vehicle. 

A further task of the audio master is to generate and make available the audio signals (with 
exception of the direction indicator noise) required by the various systems in the vehicle. 
The special acoustic signals are required for warnings or as information for the driver such 
as the PDC signal, jingles (gong). 

In addition to the generated audio signals, the following audio signals are processed and 
output or made available on the MOST bus. 

• Radio 

• CD changer 

• Telephone 

• Navigation message 

• AUX-ln 

• SDARS (US only) 

The M-ASK controls all sound and acoustic setting requirements of the customer. The level 
of a signal is not changed abruptly but rather smoothly, e.g. by mixing, fading in and fad¬ 
ing out or intermittent attenuation of the signal in the sink for the purpose of achieving high 
quality overall acoustics. 

The M-ASK ensures clear cut acoustic changeover between the sources when a control 
unit is requested to output an information or warning signal. The acoustic signals or audio 
sources requested in the M-ASK are output in accordance with a defined priority structure. 


10 

E60 Communication Systems 





















































Connection Master 


The task of the connection master is to make available the channels for the audio sources 
and the acoustic signals. 

The audio signals are distributed over speakers defined in a list. 

- Example 1: entertainment sources at all speakers 

- Example 2: hands-free telephone front left and right 

Audio Output Stage 

The multi-audio system controller M-ASK features 4 audio output stages each with a 25W 
output rating. The output stages are designed as bridgetype output stages. An electric fan 
feeds cooling air to the output stages and processors to ensure they do not cause the M- 
ASK to heat up. The electric fan is temperature-controlled and is regulated in three stages. 

Audio Systems 

Two audio systems are available: 

• HiFi audio system 

• Top-HiFi audio system 

The further developed central bass system have realized a distinct improvement in the bass 
range compared to the E39. The Top-HiFi audio systems offers additional features such as 
7-band graphic equalizer and surround sound. 

HiFi 

HiFi Components 

The HiFi audio system is the standard system in the E60 and consists of the following 
components: 

• Multi-audio system controller M-ASK 

• Central information display CID 

• Controller 

• Front left and right mid-range speaker 

• Left and right central woofer 

• Rear left and right mid-range speaker 

• HiFi Amplifier 

• Front left and right tweeter (high-range speaker) 

• Rear left and right tweeter (high-range speaker) 


11 

E60 Communication Systems 



Multi-Audio System Controller 

The M-ASK controls the stereo audio system. It contains the tuner for radio reception. 
Furthermore, the output stages for the audio outputs are integrated in the M-ASK. The M- 
ASK features four output stages each with an output power of 25 W. 

Central Information Display 

The CID serves the purpose of displaying and controlling the radio and audio functions. 

Controller 

The menus in the CID are selected and activated via the controller. 

Mid-Range Speakers 

The front and rear mid-range speakers are identical. In the HiFi audio systems, the speak¬ 
ers have a load rating of 25 W. The midrange speaker is equipped with a paper diaphragm. 
The effective frequency range is from 100 Hz to 15000 Hz. 

The front mid-range speakers are located in the doors. The rear midrange speakers are 
mounted under the rear window shelf. 

Central Woofers 

High sound pressures can be achieved with the aid of the central woofers. A sufficiently 
large space for the resonance volume is made available by connecting the central bass 
housing to the sill area of the vehicle. The high sound pressures of the central woofers cre¬ 
ate a distortion-free bass in the low frequency range. 

The two central woofers are located in the vehicle floor under the driver's and passenger's 
seats. The output of the central woofers is directed upward under the seats. 

Modified central woofers are used in connection with the HiFi audio system. The central 
woofers have a diameter of 200 mm and a load bearing capacity of 40 W. The transmitted 
frequency is between 30 Hz and 500 Hz. 

HiFi Amplifier 

The HiFi amplifier is designed as an analogue two-channel amplifier with an output power 
of 2x40 W. The HiFi amplifier is connected via two channels to the M-ASK. The input sig¬ 
nals are amplified via integrated band filters and bridge-type output stages to 2x40 W and 
output to the central woofers. 

The control takes place via the M-ASK. Due to the distribution of the output stages in the 
M-ASK and in the HiFi amplifier, the output stages must be switched on/off synchronously. 
The time required to switch on the output stages must not exceed 25 ms to ensure no 
crackling or clicking noise is heard. 

The HiFi amplifier does not feature diagnostic capabilities. 

The HiFi amplifier is installed on the rear left in the luggage compartment. 


12 

E60 Communication Systems 


Tweeters (High-Range Speakers) 

The HiFi audio system features additional tweeters (high-range speakers) at the front and 
rear. In connection with the HiFi audio system, the speakers are designed with a load rat¬ 
ing of 25 W. The tweeters are equipped with spherical caps made of silk. The effective 
frequency range is from 5000 Hz to 20000 Hz. 

The tweeters are connected in parallel with the supply line of the front mid-range speakers. 
The frequency range is determined by means of capacitors in the supply line. The tweeters 
feature an enclosed selfcontained design, i.e. the speakers and resonance volume form 
one unit. 

The front tweeters are located in the mirror triangles while the rear tweeters are mounted 
under the rear window shelf. 


HiFi System Speaker Layout 



1. CID 

2. M-ASK 

3. Tweeter, Front 

4. MidRange, Front 

5. Central Woofer 

6. Mid Range Rear 

7. Tweeter, Rear 

8. HiFi Amplifier 


13 

E60 Communication Systems 



















Hi-Fi System Schematic 



1. M-ASK 

2. CID 

3. Tweeter, Front 

4. Other MOST Bus users 

5. Mid Range, Front 

6. Controller 


7. Central Woofer 

8. HiFi Amplifier 

9. Mid Range, Front 

10. Tweeter, Rear 

11. Other MOST Bus users 


14 

E60 Communication Systems 



































































































































































































































Top HiFi 


Top HiFi Components 

The Top-HiFi audio system differs from the HiFi audio system by higher grade speakers and 
the addition of following components: 

• Top-HiFi amplifier 

• Front mid-range speaker mounted centrally in instrument panel 

• Mid-range speakers in rear left and right doors 

Higher grade speakers are used in the Top-HiFi audio system. The midrange speakers are 
equipped with aluminum diaphragms, the tweeters with aluminum spherical caps. The 
speakers were adapted corresponding to the higher output power of the Top-HiFi amplifi¬ 
er. 

Top-HiFi Amplifier 

The Top-HiFi amplifier is designed as an analogue 7-channel amplifier (LOGIC7). It features 
7 bridge-type output stages with an output power rating of 7x40 W at 2 and a bandwidth 
of 200 Hz - 20 kHz. In addition, two bridge-type output stages rated 2x70 W at 4 and a 
bandwidth of 20 Hz - 200 Hz are available for the central woofers. 

This amplifier is connected via the MOST bus to the M-ASK. All audio signals are transmit¬ 
ted from the M-ASK via the MOST bus. The Top-HiFi amplifier is equipped with the LOGIC7 
function. 

LOGIC 7 

LOGIC7 is a registered trademark of Lexicon, Inc., a company of the Harman International 
Group. It was especially developed for applications in motor vehicles. 

LOGIC7 is a sound system that creates a 7-channel surround sound from 2-channel audio 
sources (radio, CD, CC). The incoming stereo signals are decoded in the digital sound 
processor (DSP), distributed over 7 channels and remixed. The entire transmission width is 
used on each channel, thus creating perfect surround sound that gives the listener the 
impression of being in the middle of the space. 

Mid-Range Speakers 

The load rating of the mid-range speakers was increased to 40 W for the Top-HiFi audio 
system. The mid-range speakers are equipped with aluminum diaphragms, aluminum 
diaphragms are particularly lightweight and feature a higher rigidity. These properties result 
in improved inherent dynamics and a clearer sound over the entire frequency range. 

The effective frequency range is from 100 Hz to 10000 Hz. The Top-HiFi audio system was 
extended by three mid-range speakers. A mid-range speaker was positioned in the center 
of the instrument panel in order to realize the surround sound function in the vehicle. Two 
further mid-range speakers were integrated in the rear doors. 


15 

E60 Communication Systems 


Tweeters (High-Range Speakers) 

The tweeters (high-range speakers) have also been adapted. The load rating was increased 
to 40 W. The tweeters are equipped with aluminum spherical caps. They feature sealed 
design. The effective frequency range is from 5000 Hz to 20000 Hz. 

Central Woofers 

Compared to the HiFi audio system, further modified central woofers are used in the Top- 
HiFi audio system. The central woofers have a diameter of 200 mm and a load bearing 
capacity of 70 W. The transmitted frequency is between 30 Hz and 500 Hz. 

Top-HiFi Speaker Layout 



02153_02 


1. Front Center Speaker 

2. CID 

3. M-ASK 

4. MidRange, Front 

5. Tweeter, Frontl 

6. Central Woofer 

7. Mid Range Center 

8. Mid Range, Rear 

9. Tweeter, Rear 

10. Top HiFi Amplifier 


16 

E60 Communication Systems 















Top HiFi Schematic 




oo 







KL 30 «—j 


1. M-ASK 

8. Mid Range, Center 

2. CID 

9. Mid Range, Front 

3. Tweeter, Front 

10. Tweeter, Rear 

4. Other MOST Bus users 

11. Top HiFi Amplifier 

5. Mid Range, Front 

12. Other MOST Bus users 

6. Controller 

7. Central Woofer 

13. Mid Range, Front Center 



021S6 02 


17 

E60 Communication Systems 














































































































































































































































Audio CD Changer 

The audio CD changer in the E60 is a new development. The following details have 
changed: 

• The housing dimensions are smaller and more lightweight 

• The magazine is newly designed 

• The CD changer has an optical bus link 

The magazine is newly designed and now features a transparent cover making it possible 
to see what compartment is loaded with a CD. The new design now also differentiates dis¬ 
tinctly from the DVD magazine. 

As before, the CD changer is designed as a 6-compartment changer with magazine. The 
housing dimensions have been distinctly reduced so that less space is required, making it 
possible to fit he CD changer in the glove compartment. 



The CD changer is located in the units carrier behind 
the glove compartment. The glove compartment 
must be opened in order to change the magazine. 


A new feature is the optical link to the MOST bus. The CD changer sends the digital audio 
signals via the MOST bus to the multi-audio system controller. 

In the Top-HiFi audio system, the digital audio signals are sent directly to the Top-HiFi ampli¬ 
fier. All controls and operating signals are also sent via the MOST bus. 


18 

E60 Communication Systems 








Telephone Systems 


In the country-specific version US, the option comprises the complete telephone prepara¬ 
tion including telematics. A part of the telephone preparation is installed ex-factory, the 
remainder is retrofitted in the USA. The complete preparation consists of the following com¬ 
ponents: 

• Telematic control unit TCU (standard) 

• Telephone antenna (standard) 

• SOS antenna (standard) 

• GPS antenna (standard) 

• Bluetooth antenna (standard) 

• Hands-free microphones (standard) 

• Eject box (retrofitted in USA) 

• Motorola mobile phone Phoenix V60 (retrofitted in USA) 

• Compensator (retrofitted in USA) 

• Emergency call included for one year, then optional customer pay. 

Telematic Control Unit 


The TCU is always installed in the country-specific version US even if no telephone was 
ordered. The telematic functions emergency call and breakdown call are standard features. 
The scope of functions differs from the EU version by following features: 

• The TCU is always installed to facilitate the emergency call even if no telephone is fitted 

• Dual band 800 MHz and 1900 MHz 

• Combined transceiver module NAD (network access device) for the analogue AMPS 
standard (American Mobile Phone Standard) and the digital CDMA standard (Code 
Division Multiplex Algorithm) 

• Eject box with charger for Motorola Phoenix V60 

• Telematics Unit (E/B) Call 

• GPS Receiver 



1. Satellite Radio Receiver 

2. Top HiFi Amp 

3. Telematic Control Unit 


19 

E60 Communication Systems 








3. Controller 

4. Hands free microphone 

5. TCU 

6. CID 

7. Emergency Call Button 

8. M-ASK 

9. GPS Antenna 


12. Top HiFi Amp 

13. CDMA Ant. 

14. SOS Ant. 

15. Speaker 

16. Eject Box 

17. AMPS Ant. 

18. Compensator 


20 

E60 Communication Systems 
























































































































Voltage Supply and Power Management 

The power management module in the TCU monitors and controls the voltage supply of 
the telephone system. The telephone system is switched off in the event of undervolt¬ 
age/overvoltage in the system network. 

MOST Bus Interface 

The TCU is connected via the MOST bus interface to the MOST bus and therefore to the 
bus systems of the vehicle. Control data (e.g. telephone book entries) and audio signals for 
voice output (voice of call partner) are transmitted via the MOST interface. The TCU is 
woken up by the MOST bus. 


Bluetooth Antenna 

The Bluetooth antenna operates in the ISM band (industrial science medical band) on a fre¬ 
quency of 2.45 GHz. It is located under the rear window shelf. It is connected directly to 
the TCU. 

Note: To ensure unrestricted reception, care should be taken to ensure that no 
objects are placed on the rear window shelf as they could considerably influence 
the reception capability of the Bluetooth antenna. (Not available at SOP ) 

Multifunctional Steering Wheel 

The multifunction steering wheel has a send/receive button for accepting and ending a call. 
The TCU switches to hands-free mode if the call is accepted by pressing the receive but¬ 
ton. 

Multi-Audio System Controller M-ASK 

The multi-audio system controller is responsible for the control of the MOST bus and chan¬ 
nel allocation. It also controls the audio output at the speakers. 

Controller 

The controller is used to operate the telephone functions. Various menus can be selected 
and the functions executed with the aid of the controller. 


21 

E60 Communication Systems 



Design 


The design of the TCU in the US version is identical to that of the EU version (Everest plat¬ 
form). The difference is in a different transceiver module (NAD) that is adapted to the spe¬ 
cific requirements. The TCU features a modular design and is equipped corresponding to 
the country-specific version and requirements. 

Operating Principle 

In the US version, the telematic control unit features a combined transceiver module NAD 
(network access device). The NAD operates in accordance with the AMPS/CDMA standard 
with the frequencies 800/1900 MHz. 

The TCU features an antenna selector switch for the AMPS/CDMA antenna. The TCU oper¬ 
ates in the digital CDMA network. If a sufficient network supply cannot be ensured, the TCU 
switches over to the AMPS network. The widespread AMPS network is used especially in 
rural areas. 

If the option Professional navigation system is not installed, the TCU will be fitted with an 
internal GPS receiver. The GPS receiver is connected to the GPS antenna that is integrat¬ 
ed in the roof antenna. In the US version, the telephone/telematics functions are available 
in three stages: 

• Basic 

• Business 

• Professional 

Eject Box 

The eject box is an additional component that must be retrofitted in the USA. The eject box 
serves the purpose of accepting the Motorola Phoenix V60 mobile phone and is located in 
a compartment in the centre console. 

The charger for the mobile phone is integrated in the eject box. The antenna connection for 
the AMPS antenna is also located directly in the eject box. Data transfer from the mobile 
phone to the TCU takes place by means of a multi-core cable (P2K, point to connect). 

Motorola Mobile Phone Phoenix V60 

The Motorola Phoenix V60 mobile phone is the standard telephone in the US version. The 
mobile phone is also a component part of the retrofit. 

All functions are available only when the mobile phone functions are provided. The tele¬ 
phone book is integrated in the mobile phone. SMSs can only be sent with the mobile 
phone. 


22 

E60 Communication Systems 


Compensator 

The compensator is connected in the antenna line between the roof antenna and the 
mobile phone. The task of the compensator is to compensate for losses on the antenna 
line and to ensure the full transmit power of the mobile phone is available at the roof anten¬ 
na. The compensator is not an amplifier that boosts the transmit power output. 

SOS Antenna 

The SOS antenna is fitted as standard under the rear window shelf. It ensures an emer¬ 
gency call can be sent even after a crash and failure of the roof antenna. 

GPS Antenna 

The GPS antenna is integrated in the roof antenna. It receives the signals from the satellites 
of the global positioning system and sends these signals to the GPS receiver. 



Workshop Exercise - 


Communications 


1. Why does the Basic Controller NOT include the Speech Recognition Button? 

2. What happens to the radio sound when the MOST Bus fails in a vehicle equipped with 

Top HiFi? _ 

HiFi? _ 

3. Does the SOS call function operate if the MOST Bus is down? _ 

4. What is the location of the SOS antenna? _ 

5. Why does the TCU include a GPS receiver in vehicles equipped with Navigation? 


23 

E60 Communication Systems 











