Table of Contents 

E83 Safety Systems 

Subject Page 

History of Multiple Restraint Systems .3 

MRS 1 .3 

MRS 2.3 

MRS 3.3 

MRS 4.3 

MRS4RD .3 

System Components.6 

MRS4RD Control Unit .6 

Sensors .6 

Up-Front Sensors.6 

Door Pressure Sensors .7 

B-Pillar Satellites.7 

Seat Occupancy Detector (OC-3 Mat).8 

Belt Buckle Switch .9 

Actuators.10 

Driver's Airbag.10 

Passenger Airbag.10 

Head Airbag (Curtain Airbag).11 

Side Airbag .12 

BST.13 

System Functions.13 

Deployment .13 

Pre-Drive Check.14 

Cyclic Check.14 

System Readiness.15 

Fault Storage .15 

Crash Signal .15 

Emergency Call (If equipped w/Telematics).15 

Manual Emergency Call.16 

Breakdown Call .16 

Automatic Emergency Call .16 


Initial Print Date: 10/03 


Revision Date: 

































Safety Systems 


Model: E83 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 

■BJICT1WES 

After completion of this module you will: 

• Know the differences in the MRS Systems 

• Understand the operation of MRS4RD 

• Be able to locate all the components of MRS4RD 

• Understand OC3 mat operation 


2 

E83 Safety Systems 




History of Multiple Restraint Systems 

Multiple restraint systems have a long history at BMW. The first multiple restraint system, 
the MRS1, was introduced as long ago as 1996. 

MRS 1 

With the introduction of the side airbags in March 1996, the MRS1 replaced the 
ZAE/BAE control unit used until then on the E38/E39. When the side airbags were intro¬ 
duced, two MRSA external sensors were also added for improved side-impact detection. 
Because of the required number of inputs/outputs, the number of pins had to be 
increased from 30 to 50. 

MRS 2 

The addition of the ITS head airbag and rear side airbags on the E38 in May 1997 saw 
the introduction of the MRS2. On the E39, the MRS2 was first used when the ITS head 
airbag was fitted in September 1997. September 1998 saw the introduction of the 2- 
stage front-passenger airbag (SMART airbag). 

MRS 3 

The MRS3 system was launched with the arrival of the 2-stage driver's airbag in March 
1999. Another innovation on the MRS3 was its connection with the K-bus. The previous 
MRS systems had been hooked up to the diagnostic bus. The exception in that regard 
was the E36/7 (Z3). Since the Z3 has no K-bus, the MRS3 on the Z3 remained connect¬ 
ed to the diagnostic bus. 

MRS 4 

The changes on the MRS4 as compared with the MRS3 consisted of a modified proces¬ 
sor and new software for calculating the restraint system triggering algorithm. The MRS4 
was first used in April 2001 with the launch of the MINI as well as on the E46 and E53. 
The E38 and E39 models were fitted with the MRS4 for the first time in August 2001. 

MRS4RD 

The multiple restraint system 4 redesign MRS4RD is a development of the MRS4 on the 
E46. The MRS4RD has had its interfaces expanded to 75 pins. 

The job of the MRS4RD is to detect accident scenarios that are critical for the vehicle 
occupants and to selectively activate the necessary restraint systems according to the 
severity of the crash. 

The MRS4RD has been further optimized and equipped with the following sensors: 

• Up-front sensors 

• Door-compression sensors 

• B-pillar satellites 

The job of the up-front sensors is to detect frontal impacts. This allows the restraint sys¬ 
tems such as seatbelt tensioners and airbags to be activated. 


3 

E83 Safety Systems 


The job of the door-compression sensors is to detect side impacts The MRS4 satellites 
(MRSA) under the front seats have been moved to the B-pillars. The B-pillar satellites 
contain acceleration sensors for linear and lateral acceleration. 

The MRS4RD performs a self-diagnosis and monitors all input and output signals. Any 
faults detected are stored in a non-volatile memory and indicated to the driver by the 
airbag warning lamp (AWL). 

Communication with other control units in the vehicle's network of systems takes place 
via the K-bus. 

The MRS4RD can be programmed/encoded via the K-bus. 

MRS4RD Equipped E83 



TE03J3319 


4 

E83 Safety Systems 


Comparison E46/E53 MRS w/ E83 MRS4RD 


E46/E53 



E83 



1. Up-front Sensor, Left (E83) 

11. Seat-belt tensioner, Right 

21. Door Pressure Sensor, L (E83) 

2. DME 

12. Seat Belt Switch, Right 

22. Side Airbag, LF 

3. Instrument Cluster 

13. Seat Occupation Sensor 

23. ITS, Left (E83 Curtain Airbag) 

4. GM5 (E83 GM5RD) 

14. B-Pillar Satellite, Right (E83) 

24. Electric Fuel Pump 

5. LSZ 

15. Side Airbag, RR 

25. Fuel Pump Relay 

6. Telephone 

16. BST 

26. Driver Airbag 

7. Up-front Sensor, Right (E83) 

17. Side Airbag, LR 

27. Airbag Indicator Lamp (E83) 

8. ITS, Right (E83 Curtain Airbag) 

18. B-Pillar Satellite, Left (E83) 

28. Passenger Airbag 

9. Side Airbag, RF 

19. Seat Belt Switch, Left 

29. OC3 Mat (E83) 

10. Door Pressure Sensor, R (E83) 

20. Seat-belt Tensioner, Left 

30. MRS Control Unit 


Grayed Items X3 Only 


5 

E83 Safety Systems 

















































































































System Components 

The MRS4RD multiple restraint system consists of the following components: 

• MRS4RD control unit 

• Sensors and switches 

• Actuators 

MRS4RD Control Unit 

The number of pins on the MRS4RD control 
unit has been increased from 50 (MRS4) to 75 
because of the greater number of interfaces. 

The MRS4RD control unit is located centrally in 
the vehicle on the transmission tunnel. 

Integrated in the MRS4RD control unit are two 
acceleration sensors set right-angles to one 
another. The linear acceleration sensor (X-axis) 
is positioned at 0 degrees to the vehicle's lon¬ 
gitudinal axis, and the lateral acceleration sen¬ 
sor (Y-axis) at 90 degrees to that axis. 

All acceleration sensors sense acceleration in 
two directions, i.e. they register both positive 
and negative acceleration. The polarity of the acceleration signals depends on the direc¬ 
tion of impact. That means it is possible to distinguish between a front or rear impact and 
between a left or right side impact. 

Sensors 

The MRS4RD multiple restraint system has more sensors than its predecessor system. 
They include the following sensors: 

• Up-front sensors 

• Door-compression sensors 

• B-pillar satellites with lateral and linear acceleration sensors 

Up-Front Sensors 

The job of the up-front sensors is to detect frontal impacts. The up-front sensors are 
located in the front end above the longitudinal subframe members. The up-front sensors 
provide the MRS control unit with the initial information on the progression and severity 
of the impact. 

An up-front sensor consists of an acceleration sensor for detecting deceleration, a signal 
converter and a microprocessor for data transmission. 



6 

E83 Safety Systems 






The up-front sensors are supplied with power via a current-signal interface. The up-front 
sensors are supplied with a current of 5 - 10 mA. When a data message is transmitted, 
the level jumps vertically by 20 mA. 

The advantage of the current-signal interface is its constant supply of current which pre¬ 
vents corruption of the signal. A change of resistance in the lead does not affect the 
signal. 

A power supply with a voltage signal would be corrupted by changes in resistance in the 
lead. The signal could egually be corrupted by EMC interference from other leads. 

Door Pressure Sensors 

The function of the door pressure sensors (1) 
is to provide supplementary detection of side 
impacts in addition to the information sup¬ 
plied by the lateral acceleration sensors in the 
B-pillar satellites and the MRS4RD control 
unit. The door pressure sensors are located 
on the inner door panel and measure the 
pressure inside the door. 



In the event of a side impact, the outer door 
panel may be pushed inwards, thus com¬ 
pressing the space inside the door and 
increasing the pressure. That pressure 


increase is detected by the door pressure 
sensors. At the same time, the side impact is 
detected by the acceleration sensors in the B-pillar satellite. The B-pillar satellite then 
also transmits a data message. The MRS4RD control unit in the center of the vehicle 
processes the two signals and is able to trigger the restraint systems on the basis of the 
information provided. 


B-Pillar Satellites 

The two MRSA modules (multiple restraint sys¬ 
tem external satellites) which were previously 
positioned under the seats, have been replaced 
by B-pillar satellites. Each B-pillar satellite con¬ 
sists of a lateral acceleration sensor and a linear 
acceleration sensor. 

As with the up-front sensors, signal transmis¬ 
sion is cyclic. The B-pillar satellites detect side, 
front and rear impacts. 

The left and right B-pillar satellites are identical. 



7 

E83 Safety Systems 










Seat Occupancy Detector (OC-3 Mat) 

Because of the legal situation in the USA, the presence of a child seat for a child up to 
one year old must be automatically detected and the passenger airbags then deactivated. 
The OC3 mat detects a child seat that conforms to the relevant standard (NHTSA 
FMVSS 208) by virtue of the pattern of the impression it makes on the seat and deacti¬ 
vates the passenger airbags. 

A straightforward seat occupancy detector recognizes a certain weight as proof that the 
seat is occupied. In order to meet legislative reguirements, the seat occupancy detector 
(SBE) has been developed into an intelligent occupant classifier (OC). This was achieved 
by means of the following measures: 

• By a larger number of sensor elements 

• By sensing a larger area of the seat 

• By an intelligent electronic analyzer 



OC3 Mat 



Convention Seat Occupancy Detector 


The OC-3 mat is capable of distinguishing between a one-year-old child in a child's seat 
and a light person. 

The OC-3 mat is integrated into the seat area of the passenger seat. The OC-3 mat 
consists of conductors with pressure-dependent resistor elements (FSR, or Force 
Sensitive Resistance elements). The conductors are connected to the electronic analyzer. 

The FSR elements are wired in such a way that they can be sampled individually. When 
the mechanical load on a sensor element increases electrical resistance decreases and 
the measurement current changes accordingly. 


8 

E83 Safety Systems 





By analyzing the signals from the individual sensors, the analyzer maps the occupancy of 
the seat surface and can identify the local concentrations of weight. The distances 
between the areas where pressure is applied and the concentrations of pressure reveal 
whether the seat is occupied by a person (A) or a child seat (B). 




The analyzer of the OC3 mat sends a message to the MRS4RD control unit via the K- 
bus. If the system detects that the seat is unoccupied or that a child seat for a child up to 
one year old is fitted, the airbags on the passenger side are deactivated. The MRS4RD 
control unit switches on the airbag warning light. The airbag warning light indicates that 
the airbags on the passenger side are deactivated. 

Note: 

The airbag warning light is switched on if the seat is unoccupied. 

Belt Buckle Switch 

The belt buckle switch is used to detect whether the seatbelt has been fastened or not. 
The detection signal is sent to the MRS4RD control unit. The signal is used as a criterion 
for selective triggering of the actuators in the event of a crash. The belt buckle switch is 
located in the seatbelt buckle on the driver and passenger seat. 

The belt buckle switch is a two-wire Hall switch. The Hall switch is supplied by the 
MRS4RD control unit via a current-signal interface. The current draw of the switch is the 
signal for the switch position. The belt buckle switch is permanently diagnosed and moni¬ 
tored in all electrical system statuses from Terminal R "ON" onwards. 


9 

E83 Safety Systems 














Actuators 

The Multiple Restraint System 4 Redesign is responsible for activation of the following 
actuators: 

• Front airbag, 2-stage, driver's side 

• Front airbag, 2-stage, passenger side 

• Head air bag (curtain airbag), left and right 

• Side airbag, front door, left and right 

• Side airbag, rear door, left and right 

• Seatbelt tensioner, front, left and right 

• Safety battery terminal 

• Airbag warning lamp 

Driver's Airbag 

The purpose of the driver's front airbag in conjunction with the seatbelt is to reduce the 
risk of serious or fatal injury to the driver in the event of a head-on collision. The front 
airbag for the driver's side is located in the impact pad of the steering wheel. The front 
airbag for the driver is equipped with a 2-stage gas generator. 

Depending on the crash severity, the two stages of the airbag are ignited with a delay. 

The two stages of the gas generator permit the airbag to perform its restraining function 
in a manner appropriate to the severity of the collision, thus avoiding additional trauma to 
the driver during the deployment stage. The gas flowing into the airbag inflates it, and in 
combination with the seat belt this reduces the risk of injury in an accident. 

Passenger Airbag 

The purpose of the passenger front airbag in conjunction with the seatbelt is to reduce 
the risk of serious or fatal injury to the front passenger in the event of a head-on collision. 
The 2-stage passenger front airbag is located underneath the dashboard. 

In a crash and depending on crash severity, the two stages of the airbag are triggered 
with a delay. In this way the restraining effect is matched to the severity of the crash situa¬ 
tion. Another effect is to reduce the strain on the occupant during the airbag-deployment 
phase. 

When the passenger airbag inflates, a hinged flap that is attached to the dashboard 
opens. The passenger airbag inflates towards the windscreen. The front passenger's 
airbag emerges upwards and supports itself on the windscreen glass and the dashboard. 


10 

E83 Safety Systems 



Head Airbag (Curtain Airbag) 

On the E83, a new head protection system, the curtain airbag, is introduced as standard 
equipment for the first time. It differs from the head-protection system used on the 
E46/E53 as follows: 

• Continuous head airbag extending all the way from the A-pillarto the C-pillar 

The curtain airbag extends all the way from the A-pillarto the C-pillar, covering the entire 
side-window area. The curtain airbag inflates between the vehicle occupants and the side 
windows and pillar trims. In conjunction with the side airbags in the front and rear doors, 
it provides optimum protection for all passengers in the event of a side on impact. 

The curtain airbag reduces the risk of occupants' heads or other extremities protruding 
through the windows in a sideways collision. This leads to less severe neck backlash 
forces and less severe head injuries. 

Advantages of the system: 

• Extended covered area for side windows front and rear. 

• Protection against glass splinters and penetrating objects. 

• Optimized protective area offering protection for occupants of differing sizes. 



The curtain airbag is positioned along the line of roof side member, folded up. It consists 
of a gas generator, the two gas lances and the curtain. 


11 

E83 Safety Systems 


TE03J3494 




In the event of a side-on collision, the generator is detonated and the gas flows through 
the two gas lances into the curtain. Simultaneous inflation of the curtain at the front and 
back achieves more even deployment. 

The attachment of the curtain airbag to the A-pillar and the C-pillar pulls it into position. 
The curtain airbag inflates between the vehicle occupants and the side windows and pil¬ 
lar trims. 

Being a sealed system, the curtain airbag retains its shape and strength for several 
seconds. 


Curtain Airbag 



1. Gas Generator 

2. Front Gas Nozzle 

3. Rear Gas Nozzle 

4. Airbag Retaining Clips 



Side Airbag 

The side airbags in the front and rear doors reduce the risk of occupant injury in the torso 
region of the body in the event of a side-on impact. 

The side airbags are folded up inside an aluminum casing with a plastic cover behind the 
door trim panels. In the area of the side airbag in the door trim is a tear seam. The side 
airbags are fixed to the door trims as well as by a single screw to the inner door panel. 

The plastic cover has defined breaking points. In a side impact of sufficient severity, the 
side airbag is triggered. The side airbag exits through the split line and deploys between 
the door and the sear occupants. 


12 

E83 Safety Systems 


TE03-3495 4ZTE03-3496 















Seatbelt Tensioner 

The pyrotechnic seatbelt tensioner has the task in the event of a crash to minimize any 
belt slack in the pelvic and shoulder region. 

The seatbelt tensioner is located on the driver's and/or passenger seat. In combination 
with the mechanical force limiter in the inertia reel, this reduces the chest load for the seat 
occupants. 

BST 

If the MRS detects an impact of sufficient severity, the safety battery 
terminal is deployed. When this happens, the starter/alternator cable 
is electrically and mechanically disconnected. The alternator is deen¬ 
ergized. The safety battery terminal is located directly at the positive 
terminal of the battery. 

System Functions 

The MRS4RD control unit has to perform the following functions: 

• Crash detection and calculation of deployment timing 

• Activation of deployment output stages 

• Documentation of time sequence of actuator deployment 

• Pre-drive check 

• Cyclic monitoring 

• Indication of system readiness 

• Indication and storage of faults 

• Output of fault data (diagnosis) 

• Output of crash signal for other members of the communication network 

• Activation of the warning lamp if the passenger airbag is deactivated 

Deployment 

For the deployment output stages to be activated, the appropriate signals must be 
received from two different sensors, i.e. the B-pillar satellite and the MRS control-unit 
sensor. 

In electrical-system statuses from Terminal R "ON" onwards, the MRS4RD control unit is 
supplied with power and is ready for operation on completion of the pre-drive check. The 
deployment capacitor, which acts as a power reserve, is charged to approx. 26 V via a 
switching regulator. The deployment capacitor provides the back-up power supply in the 
event of a crash in which the battery power supply is cut off. 



13 

E83 Safety Systems 







The deployment capacitor, which provides the deployment power for the deployment 
output stages is controlled by a safety switch (trigger switch). The safety switch is operat¬ 
ed by the microprocessor. 

The deployment output stages consist of a high-side and a low-side power switch. The 
high-side power switch switches the deployment current and the low-side power switch 
switches the earth current. The high-side and low-side power switches are also used to 
check the deployment circuits as part of the pre-drive check. 

The incoming sensor signals are analyzed by the analyzer module and passed on to the 
microprocessor. The microprocessor performs the deployment-algorithm calculations. 
The calculation results are compared with the event/deployment matrix and a decision 
reached as to the deployment of the various detonator pellets. 

Pre-Drive Check 

As of system status Terminal R "ON," the MRS4RD performs a pre-drive check (system 
test). While the pre-drive check is in progress, the airbag warning lamp is switched on for 
3 - 5 seconds. Once the pre-drive check has been completed, and assuming no faults 
have been detected, the airbag warning lamp is switched off and the system is ready for 
operation. 

The following tests are performed as part of the pre-drive check: 

• Comparison of programmed equipment with actual equipment fitted 

• Testing of deployment circuits 

• Testing of resistance of deployment circuits 

• Testing of internal components 

• Testing of external components 

• Checksum calculation for algorithm parameters 

Cyclic Check 

Once the pre-drive check has been successfully completed and the system is ready for 
operation, a cyclic check for the purposes of fault monitoring is performed. The cyclic 
check continues to be carried out as long as the system status is Terminal R "ON." 

The following tests are performed as part of the cyclic check: 

• Monitoring of resistance of deployment circuits 

• Communication capability and status of components 

• Power supply 


14 

E83 Safety Systems 


System Readiness 

The MRS4RD indicates that the system is ready for operation by extinguishing the airbag 
warning lamp (AWL). 

Fault Storage 

If there is a fault in the system, it is indicated by the airbag warning lamp. 

If a fault occurs on the MRS4RD, it must be stored in a non-volatile memory (EEPROM). 
When faults are recorded, a distinction is made between internal and external faults. 

If an internal fault has been detected, the record of the fault cannot be deleted, i.e. the 
control unit has to be replaced. The only exception in that regard is incorrect program¬ 
ming data. 

External faults on system components are also recorded in the fault memory. Once such 
faults have been rectified, the record can be removed from the fault memory. 

Crash Signal 

In the event of a crash involving deployment of the restraint systems, the MRS4RD con¬ 
trol unit sends a crash signal to the members of the bus network. 

On receipt of that signal, the control units concerned perform the following functions 
according to the severity of the crash: 

• Switch off electric fuel pump 

• Switch off alternator 

• Unlock central locking system 

• Switch on hazard warning flashers 

• Make emergency call (only if Professional phone option fitted) 

Emergency Call (If equipped w/Telematics) 

The E83 offers the customer a number of emergency call functions and a breakdown call 
function if the vehicle is eguipped w/Telematics. The emergency call functions include a 
manual emergency call as well as the automatic emergency call activated as a result of a 
crash of appropriate severity. 

Even if the vehicle is not eguipped with the Motorola Everest telephone, every vehicle has 
a Telematic Control UnitTCU( if eguipped w/Telematics), a telephone aerial, a hands-free 
unit as well as a GPS aerial for localization. 


15 

E83 Safety Systems 


Manual Emergency Call 

The emergency call switch (4) is connected directly to the telephone. Pressing the 
emergency call switch sets up a voice connection with the provider "Cross Country." The 
voice connection is indicated by a flashing LED in the switch. 

Breakdown Call 

The Breakdown call button in the Central Information Display can be activated by means 
of the controller. If the breakdown call button is activated, a connection to the BMW 
Emergency Service of the relevant country is set up. 

Automatic Emergency Call 

In the event of a crash of the appropriate severity, the MRS4RD control unit transmits a 
crash telegram to the TCU. The TCU places an emergency call, which at the same time 
contains the location of the vehicle. 

If a navigation system is installed, the location of the vehicle is notified to the TCU. If no 
navigation system is installed, the location of the vehicle is determined by the internal 
GPS receiver of the TCU. 

A voice connection is set up with the provider "Cross Country" to obtain more informa¬ 
tion on the accident (severity of the accident, number of injured) so that rescue opera¬ 
tions can be initiated. 


16 

E83 Safety Systems 



Workshop Exercise - Safety Systems 


Vehicle is brought into shop with airbag light on. 

1. Confirm Complaint _ 

2. Perform Short Test _ 

3. List the Faults which pertain to the Safety System. 


4. What is the next step in the diagnostics of the problem? 


5. Is there a Test Plan available for this situation? _ 

6. Does the DISplus offer any alternate diagnostic suggestions? 


7. What is the result of the test suggested at the door pressure sensor? 


8. What is the location of the MRS control module? _ 

9. Is there an adapter that is used when testing the inputs and outputs of the 

MRS? _ 

10. Perform a resistance test on the wires from the MRS to the door pressure 
sensor. _ 


11. Is there an alternate connector to check this wiring? 


12. Test at the alternate connector. 


17 

E83 Safety Systems 
































