Table of Contents 


E65 Instrument Cluster 

Subject Page 

E65 Instrument Cluster.5 

Hardware.6 

Integrated Functions of the Instrument Cluster.7 

Components.8 

Display Areas of the Instrument Cluster .8 

LC Display.8 

Display Area 1, Inside the Speedometer.9 

Speed Limit Warning Field .9 

Cruise Control .9 

Test Functions.10 

CBS Reset.10 

Display Area 2, Inside the Tachometer .11 

Variable Engine Speed Advance Warning Field.11 

Navigation Display .11 

Display Area 3, Below the Speedometer .12 

Display Area 4, Below the Tachometer.12 

Display Area 5, Variable Display and Warning Field .13 

CC Warning Symbols .13 

Outside Temperature.13 

Time .13 

Display Area 6, Gear Display.14 

Pointer Instruments.14 

Speedometer .14 

Tachometer.15 

Indicator and Warning Lamps.15 

Illumination and Dimming .17 

Turn Signal Acoustic Feedback .18 

Trip Odometer Reset Button.18 

Input and Output Signals.19 

l-P-0.20 

K-CAN System Telegrams.21 

Speed.21 

Gearbox Data.21 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 




































Subject Page 

Engine Speed (RPM).22 

Outside Temperature.22 

CBS Messages.22 

Bus Status.22 

Dimming.22 

Driver Display, Speed Range .22 

Parking Brake (EMF) .22 

Vehicle Identification Number .23 

Vehicle Type.23 

Mileage Reading/Range .23 

Terminal Status.23 

Lamp Status .24 

LCD Brightness.24 

Engine Data.24 

Network Management K-CAN.24 

RDA Request/Data Storage .24 

Cruise Control.24 

Power Management Battery Voltage .25 

Relative Time.25 

Status Damper Program .25 

Status DSC .25 

Alive Counter EMF.25 

Time/Date .26 

Status Radio-Control Key.26 

Status Instrument Cluster.26 

Central Locking System and Trunk Lid Status.27 

MOST Bus.27 

Check Control .28 

Display Locations.29 

Display Characteristics.29 

Operation .30 

On-Board Computer (BC).31 

New Features.31 

On-Board Computer.33 

Travel Computer .36 

Limit.37 

Stopwatch.38 

Settings.38 

Clock.38 

Memo Signal.38 











































Subject Page 

Workshop Hints.39 

Redundant Data Storage .39 

Installation of a New Instrument Cluster.40 

Installation of a New or Used Instrument Cluster for Test Purposes . .40 
Simultaneous Replacement of CAS and Instrument Cluster (new) .. .41 

Instrument Cluster Test Functions.42 

Starting a Selected Test Function: .43 

Test function 01: Identification.43 

Test Function 02: System Test .44 

Test Function 03: Not Used.44 

Test function 04: Consumption.44 

Test Function 05: Range Consumption, Current Range Value_45 

Test Function 06: Fuel Tank and Displayed Value.45 

Tank phase 1: .45 

Tank phase 2: .45 

Tank phase 3: .45 

Test Function 07: Coolant Temperature, Outside Temperature, 

Dimming Photocell, Engine Speed.46 

Test Function 08: Current Vehicle Speed .46 

Test Function 09: Operating Voltage .46 

Test Function 10: Read Out Country Code.46 

Test Function 11: Read Out Units.47 

Test Function 12: Displays for Arrival .47 

Test Function 13: Trigger Acoustic Signals.47 

Test Function 14: Self-Diagnosis .47 

Test Function 15: Display of I/O Port Statuses.48 

Test Function 16: Display Test Bitmap.48 

Test Function 17: Analog-Digital Converter ADC .48 

Test Function 18: PWM Values.49 

Test Function 19: Lock and Release Test Functions.50 

Test Function 20: Correction Factor for Average Consumption .. .51 

Test Function 21: Software Reset/RAM Reload.52 

Resetting Condition Based Service (CBS) Display.53 

Overview of Check Control Messages.58 

































E65 Instrument Cluster 


Model: E65/E66 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 


• Understand the role of the instrument cluster as part of the Drive concept 

• Recognize and understand various information items supplied to the driver 

• Explain how to access the various display items from the instrument cluster 


4 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




E65 Instrument Cluster 

For consistent integration into the new operating and display concept, “Drive”, a com¬ 
pletely new instrument cluster has been developed for the E65. 

The following goals were taken into account during development: 

• The instrument cluster is an integral part of the iDrive/Driving Area. 

• All of the necessary information for driving the vehicle must be on display in the 
direct field of vision of the driver in a simple and easily understandable form. 

• Display technology with outstanding ergonomics due to graphic displays. 

• New type of Check Control system with clear, understandable texts and graphic 
symbols. 

With these goals realized, the instrument cluster has become a multifunctional display 
unit that links the benefits of various display technologies into a single unit. 



5 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Hardware 


The instrument cluster is designed as a complete integrated component and secured to 
the dashboard with three screws. It is connected to the vehicle communication system 
via the data buses: K-CAN System and MOST. 

The display of road speed and engine speed is by means of pointer instruments. The 
pointers are moved by stepper motors. The pointers move over an LC display. 



The fuel and temperature gauges have been deleted from the instrument cluster and are 
now an On-Board Computer and Check Control display respectively. 

The scale and labeling of the tachometer and speedometer are printed on a frame and 
placed over the LC display. The legally required displays are in the form of fixed-position, 
standardized indicator and warning lights. The indicator and warning lights are arranged 
between and next to the pointer instruments. 

The indicator and warning lights as well as the back light of the LC display use single 
color and multi-color LEDs. The light emitting diodes are designed to last the service life 
of the vehicle and cannot be replaced. 

All other displays and messages (e.g. those of the on-board computer) are represented 
on the LC display, which is visually divided into six display fields by the frames of the 
pointer instruments. 

The control unit is integrated in the instrument cluster. The control unit consists of a 
high-performance 32-bit computer for the display and lighting as well as the BC and CC 
functions. Another 8-bit computer is responsible for activation of the pointer instruments 
and the fixed-position indicator and warning lights. 

6 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





A memory of 4MB for the U.S. instrument clusters is used to store the language and 
units variants. Language and units can be changed using the Control Display. 

The following languages and units are stored in the language memory (4 MB) of the 
instrument cluster: 

• German • English (UK) 

• English (US) • French 

• Italian • Spanish 

Depending on the country code stored in the Car Access System (CAS), a language 
package consisting of three of the languages listed above is programmed in the CD. A 
language can be selected from these three languages in the CD. For U.S. versions the 
selectable languages are English (U.S.), French and Spanish. 

The setting of units and languages can be saved as a key memory function. This means 
that the units and languages are displayed automatically depending on the key used 
(user). 

Integrated Functions of the Instrument Cluster 

• Pointer instruments for road speed and RPM. 

• Indicator and warning lamps. 

• On-board computer (BC). 

• Check Control CC. 

• Test functions. 

• Time signal source (time master). 

• Dim signal source (dimmer master). 

• Outside temperature signal source (outside temperature master). 

• Turn signal indicator acoustic output. 

• Codeable memory for languages and units. 

• Fault code memory. 


7 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Components 


Display Areas of the Instrument Cluster 

The instrument cluster uses three main display devices: 

• LC display 

• Pointer instruments 

• Warning indicator lamps (LEDs) 


LC Display 

The LCD unit is the digital display area. A frame placed over the LCD unit visually sepa¬ 
rates it into six display areas for the indicator and warning lamps. A special feature here is 
that holes had to be drilled through the LC display for the connection of each pointer 
instrument (speedometer and tachometer). 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Display area 1 (Speedo) 

4 

Display area 4 

2 

Display area 2 (Tach) 

5 

Display area 5 

3 

Display area 3 

6 

Display area 6 


In order to ensure that the LC display can also be read easily at low temperatures, the dis¬ 
play is heated. The heating consists of heating wires on a sheet behind the display. 

When the driver's door is opened, the switch-on signal is sent by the CAS via the K-CAN 
System bus to the instrument cluster. 


The display heating is activated at temperatures below 10°C (50°F). 


8 

E65 Instrument Cluster 











Display Area 1, Inside the Speedometer 

In this display area, the following content can be displayed in the form of text and 
graphics: 

• Speed limit warning field 

• Cruise control 

• Test functions 

• Condition Based Service (CBS) reset 


Speed Limit Warning Field 

In order to prevent the speed limit from being 
exceeded, the driver can use the On-Board 
Computer to set a desired speed limit. 

When the speed limit is set, an illuminated bar 
segment beginning at the set limit appears in 
this display area. 

The circle segment starts at the desired limit 
and extends to the scale limit. If the set limit is 
exceeded, an acoustic signal sounds. 

Cruise Control 

The cruise control offers the possibility to save 
speed points which can be activated when 
required. 

This enables easy selection of speeds that are 
frequently required, for example 55, 65, 70 
mph at the push of a button without having to 
go to precisely to that speed and then set it. 

Up to 6 speed points (dots) are possible. 

When the cruise control is active, a bright 
arrow marks the speed currently set for con¬ 
trol. 

If the cruise control has been deactivated (e.g. 
after braking), the speed points to which the 
control was last set (while driving) is marked 
by a dim arrow. 


9 

E65 Instrument Cluster 









Test Functions 

The trip distance reset button can be used to select a total of 21 test functions in display 
area 1. The content of the test function appears in display area 2. The test functions are 
described in detail in Workshop Hints. 




CBS Reset 

The trip distance reset button can be used to select the CBS reset functions in display 
area 1. The content of the functions appears in display area 2. The CBS reset functions 
are described in detail in Workshop Hints. 



10 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Display Area 2, Inside the Tachometer 

In this display area, the following content can be displayed in the form of text and 
graphics: 

• Variable engine speed advance warning field 

• Navigation display 

• Diagnosis test functions 

Variable Engine Speed Advance Warning Field 

The scale of the tachometer contains a fixed (painted) engine speed advance warning 
field (dashed red) with subsequent 
engine speed warning field (continuous 
red). 

In addition, similar to the M5, the dis¬ 
play area contains a variable engine 
speed advance warning field below the 
engine speed scale. 

Here, depending on the engine tem¬ 
perature, a maximum engine speed 
recommendation is displayed to the dri¬ 
ver. When the engine is at operating 
temperature this display disappears. 

Navigation Display 

Guidance information (round arrow), the next junction and the distance to the next junc¬ 
tion are displayed. Up to a point shortly before the turn-off, the distance to it is showed 
numerically. It is then displayed in a bar chart. 

The bar decreases in size continuously until the turn-off is reached. Whether the dis¬ 
tance to the next turn-off is displayed numerically or as a bar chart is determined by the 
navigation system. The data is transferred from the navigation system by MOST bus 
telegram to the instrument cluster. 




11 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Display Area 3, Below the Speedometer 

In this display area, the following content can 
be displayed in the form of text and graphics: 

• Service requirement display (SBA) 

• On-board computer (BC) (fuel gauge, 
range) 

If there are no messages from the SBA, the 
fuel gauge or (depending on setting) range is 
displayed here. 

Pressing the BC key on the turn indicator 
switch toggles between the BC displays. 



Display Area 4, Below the Tachometer 

Both BC and CC text messages are shown in this display area. The BC text messages 
are overwritten by the CC text messages. Most CC text messages are supplemented by 
a symbol matching the message being displayed in the variable display and warning field 
(display area 5). 



12 

E65 Instrument Cluster 


















Display Area 5, Variable Display and Warning Field 

This area serves as a variable display and warning field. In this display area, the following 
content can be displayed in the form of text or graphics: 

• CC warning symbols 

• Outside temperature 

• Time 



CC Warning Symbols 

Each CC text message (in display area 4) is assigned a symbol that appears in the vari¬ 
able display and warning field. The warning symbols are displayed in red or yellow. If 
there are no CC messages, outside temperature and time are displayed here permanent¬ 
ly- 

Outside Temperature 

If the temperature falls below +3 °C (37oF), a CC message with acoustic warning is 
issued. The outside temperature is calculated and displayed by the instrument cluster 
taking the factors of engine-coolant temperature and vehicle speed into account. 

Time 

There is an integrated quartz crystal clock in the instrument cluster. The time appears in 
display area 5 of the instrument cluster and can be set manually by the driver using the 
controller in the CD. The display of time and outside temperature takes place as of KL R 
ON. 


13 

E65 Instrument Cluster 












Display Area 6, Gear Display 

When using the “Low” mode, the gear engaged by the gearbox is displayed in this dis¬ 
play area (LI to L6). Steptronic will be available in the U.S. later in production, with the 
introduction of the 745i sport and 760Li. 

In the Steptronic mode, the gear engaged by the gearbox is displayed in this display area 
(Ml to M6). In driving program position D and activated S program, an S is displayed 
here. 



Pointer Instruments 


Speedometer 

The speedometer scale and the scale letter¬ 
ing are shown on the fixed-position dial. 

The pointer is moved by a stepper motor. 
The speed signal goes from the DSC con¬ 
trol unit via the PT-CAN to the ZGM and 
from there via the K-CAN System to the 
instrument cluster. 

The signal from the left-hand rear wheel 
sensor, as processed by the DSC control 
unit, is used here. 



14 

E65 Instrument Cluster 












Tachometer 

The tachometer scale and the scale let¬ 
tering are shown on the fixed-position dial. 

The dial of the tachometer contains a fixed 
engine speed advance warning field 
(dashed red) with subsequent engine 
speed warning field (continuous red). 

The pointer is moved by a stepper motor. 

The engine speed signal goes from the 
DME (ECM) via the PT-CAN to the ZGM 
and from there via the K-CAN System to 
the instrument cluster. 

Indicator and Warning Lamps 

The indicator and warning lamp are arranged in fixed positions between and beside the 
pointer instruments in the instrument cluster. For activation, the symbols are given back¬ 
ground lighting (LEDs) in one or more colors. This enables display of symbols depending 
on the degree of importance in red, yellow, green or blue. The legally required and stan¬ 
dardized indicator and warning lights include: 

• Turn indicators 

• High beam headlight 

• Seatbelt warning 

• Airbag 

• General brake warning 

• Rear fog lights, fog lights 

• OBD II Check Engine (MIL) 

There are also indicator and warning lights for: 

• Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

• Program display of the automatic gearbox 




15 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





The arrows beside the program display indicate each of the possible directions of move¬ 
ment of the transmission selector lever. The program display remains illuminated for 10 
seconds after the remote control has been removed (after-run function). 

When the engine has been switched off (KL15 OFF) and drive position N selected, the 
program display remains active for up to 30 minutes. This indicates to the driver possible 
incorrect operation of the selector lever on parking the vehicle (position P not engaged). 
After 30 minutes have elapsed, the parking lock is activated automatically. The entire 
control of the program and gear display is handled by the EGS control unit. 

All other indicator and warning information is provided in a corresponding symbol display 
in the variable warning field. 

Notes: 


16 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



















Illumination and Dimming 

The background light of the display areas and the lighting of pointers and dials is provid¬ 
ed by orange LEDs. The light emitting diodes are designed to last the service life of the 
vehicle and cannot be replaced separately. 

The individual display areas are only illuminated when there is a message displayed in the 
relevant display area. However, for reasons of visual appearance, two adjacent display 
areas are always illuminated at the same time. 

The pointers and dials are only illuminated when the lights are switched on and they 
serve as a function indicator for "driving light ON". The brightness of the LCD display as 
well as all indicator and warning lamps is adapted to the lighting conditions in each case 
using a phototransistor. 



The brightness signal is calculated in the instrument cluster from the values of the photo¬ 
transistor (1) and the dimmer wheel. This brightness signal is also made available via the 
K-CAN System to other control units in the vehicle. The instrument cluster is thus used 
as the "dimming master". 

The contrast setting of the LC display is automatic, depending on age and temperature. 
For the temperature compensation, an NTC resistor is fitted to the LC display. The con¬ 
trast voltage is then determined according to the temperature by the electronics in the 
instrument cluster. 

In order to take account of ageing overtime, a counter is installed in the instrument clus¬ 
ter to record the operation time by the hour. With increasing age of the LC display, the 
contrast voltage is adapted to maintain a consistent contrast. 


17 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Turn Signal Acoustic Feedback 

The turn signal acoustic feedback is output through a loudspeaker integrated in the 
instrument cluster. 

All other acoustic signals are generated by the Audio System Controller ASK and output 
through the vehicle loudspeakers. 



Trip Odometer Reset Button 

The trip odometer reset button is located in the top left-hand corner of the instrument 
cluster; it takes on the following functions: 

• With the ignition switched off, brief pressing of the button displays the total mileage, 
the trip odometer, the time and outside temperature for 8 seconds. If the button is 
pressed once again within this time window, the trip odometer is reset. 

• Pressing the button for longer than 2 seconds displays the ABS symbol for 2 sec¬ 
onds in the variable warning field. 

• Activation of the test functions. 

• Resetting the service requirement display SBA 


18 

E65 Instrument Cluster 









Input and Output Signals 

The connection of the instrument cluster 
to the vehicle electrical system is by 
means of a 20-pin Elo connector. For the 
MOST bus, two additional contacts are fit¬ 
ted (2). The pins for the K-CAN System 
are located in the 20-pin Elo connector. 



1. Reset Button 

2. Connection for MOST 

3. 20 pin connector 


2 

3 



O O Q Q 


o 

¥ 


o 

n 


£ 



Q Q Q Q 


H 


H 


a 


mrr 


\ \ 

1 2 3 



p p 


r* *1 



5 


OO 



i > 

\ 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Outside temperature sensor 

5 

Fuel tank sensor, right 

2 

Washer fluid level sensor 

6 

K-CAN-System 

3 

Coolant level sensor 

7 

MOST Bus 

4 

Fuel tank sensor, left 




The connections of the outside air temperature sensor, washer fluid level sensor, coolant 
level sensor and the fuel-tank sensor are hardwire inputs to the instrument cluster. 

All other information/requests to or from the instrument cluster are transferred as data 
telegrams across the bus connection. The instrument cluster is connected to the vehicle 
communication system via the K-CAN System and the MOST. 


19 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





















































I-P-O 


F28 

KL30 


F29 


KL30 


KL31E 



Coolant Level 
Sensor 



Tank Level Sensor 
Left 



Tank Level Sensor 
Right 



Washer Tank 
Level Sensor 



Outside Temp 
Sensor 


KOMBI 


K-CAN-S 


Most Bus 



□ IZZI 


ASK 


Most Bus 



Control Display 


20 

E65 Instrument Cluster 









































K-CAN System Telegrams 





SMFA 


SMBF 



TMFAT 


TMBFT 



TM 


TM 

FATH 


BFTM 



SMFA! 1 


SMBFH 



HKL 


PM 


AHM 


PDC 


RDC 


CIM 


LM 


DWA 


IHKA 


CON 


BZM 


RLS 


SHD 


SH 


BZMF 


WIM 


A 

- CD 

I 

' - ^ 


1 

Kombi 


CDC 



JIT 

ASK 


AVT 

1 



I 

TEL 


LOGIC 7 

1 



JIT 

VM 


SVS 


L nav -J 


D-BUS 



SZL 


SFZ 


SASL 


SASR 


STVL 


SSFA 



STVR 


SSBF 


SBSL 


SBSR 


SSH 



K-CAN P 


K-CAN S 


MOST 


byteflight 


PT-CAN 


The communication with control units in the chassis, powertrain and body areas is via 
the K-CAN System. 

Via the K-CAN System, the following input and output signals are transferred in the form 
of telegrams: 

Speed 

This telegram is required for the display of the vehicle speed and the calculation of the 
distance driven. The signal from the left-hand rear wheel sensor processed by the DSC 
control unit is used. The speed telegram goes from the DSC control unit via the PT-CAN 
to the ZGM (Central Gateway Module) and from there via the K-CAN System to the 
instrument cluster. 

Gearbox Data 

Via this telegram, the instrument cluster receives the following gearbox data from the AGS 
control unit: 

• Gear position 

• Driving program 

• EGS error messages 

This data is used to display the gear position, the selected driving program and CC mes¬ 
sages. The gearbox data telegram goes from the AGS control unit via the PT-CAN to the 
ZGM (Central Gateway Module) and from there via the K-CAN System to the instrument 
cluster. 


21 

E65 Instrument Cluster 






















































































Engine Speed (RPM) 

The engine speed telegram goes from the DME(ECM) via the PT-CAN to the ZGM 
(Central Gateway Module) and from there via the K-CAN System to the instrument clus¬ 
ter. 

Outside Temperature 

The input value of the temperature sensor is computed in the instrument cluster against 
the current engine temperature and the vehicle speed. This ensures that the outside tem¬ 
perature signal is not excessively influenced by the airflow or the engine heat. The 
instrument cluster makes this outside temperature value available to the other control 
units (e.g. CD, IHKA) as a telegram via the K-CAN System. 

CBS Messages 

These telegrams are sent by the following components - which monitor their own wear 
parts within the framework of Condition Based Service CBS - to the instrument cluster: 

• DME(ECM) 

• DSC 

• IHKA 

These signals contain the current degree of wear of each component and are used in the 
instrument cluster for calculation of the CBS displays and service dates. 

Bus Status 

The ZGM informs the instrument cluster about the status of the K-CAN System, (e.g. bus 
active, bus in idle state). 

Dimming 

This signal comes from the dimmer wheel and is sent by the light module LM via the K- 
CAN System as a telegram to the instrument cluster. 

Driver Display, Speed Range 

This telegram is routed from the DME (ECM) via the PT-CAN to the ZGM and from there 
via the K-CAN System to the instrument cluster. The signal is used to show the variable 
engine speed warning field in the display of the instrument cluster. 

Parking Brake (EMF) 

The telegram for the parking brake indicator lamp is routed from the EMF control unit via 
the PT-CAN to the ZGM and from there via the K-CAN System to the instrument cluster. 


22 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Vehicle Identification Number 

This telegram is routed from the Car Access System (CAS) via the K-CAN System to the 
instrument cluster and it contains the last seven digits of the vehicle identification number. 

The vehicle identification number must be specified within the framework of the 
redundant data storage for the allocation of instrument cluster to vehicle. 

Vehicle Type 

This telegram is routed from the Car Access System CAS via the K-CAN System to the 
instrument cluster and it contains the following details of the vehicle type: 

• Model series 

• Body type 

• Gearbox 

• Engine type 

• Steering 

• Country-specific version 

This enables an allocation between the various vehicle versions and the instrument 
cluster. 

Mileage Reading/Range 

This telegram is made available by the instrument cluster via the K-CAN System to other 
control units. It contains the following details: 

• Total mileage 

• Tank level status, right, left, total, reserve 

• Calculated range 

These details are reguired for creation of fault code memory entries in other control units. 

Terminal Status 

This telegram is routed from the CAS via the K-CAN System to the instrument cluster 
and it contains details of each terminal status: 

• Status terminal R 

• Status terminal 15 

• Status terminal 50 

• Status key in ignition 


23 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Lamp Status 

This telegram is routed from the LM via the K-CAN-System to the instrument cluster and 
it contains details of each lamp activation: 

• Status high beam/headlight flasher 

• Status parking light 

• Status fog lights 

• Status rear fog light 

LCD Brightness 

This telegram is calculated from the value of the phototransistor and the dimmer wheel. 

It is routed from the instrument cluster via the K-CAN System to the control units: CDC, 
SZL and LM, it is used by these control units as a dimming signal. 

Engine Data 

This telegram is routed from the DME (ECM) via the PT-CAN to the ZGM and from there 
via the K-CAN System to the instrument cluster; it contains the following details: 

• Engine temperature (coolant temperature) 

• Engine oil temperature 

• Engine oil pressure 

• Alive counter of the DME (function monitoring of DME) 

• Status engine running 

• Injection rate (total of supplied volume of fuel) 

Network Management K-CAN 

This telegram is transmitted and received by every control unit. For this purpose, each 
control unit has a corresponding control unit address that it uses for transmission and by 
which it recognizes a network management message. 

RDA Request/Data Storage 

Via the K-CAN System, the instrument cluster requests the current data from the redun¬ 
dant data storage in the CAS. The same telegram is used to transfer the latest data of the 
instrument cluster to the CAS. 

Cruise Control 

This telegram is only sent by the DME when no ACC is installed; it contains the following 
information: 

• Current control speed 

• Status of the cruise control (off/activated) 

• Display of speed marks 


24 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Power Management Battery Voltage 

This telegram is routed from the Power Module via the K-CAN-P via the K-CAN System 
to the instrument cluster and it contains the following details: 

• Battery voltage 

• Status battery main switch 

Relative Time 

This telegram is made available to other control units by the instrument cluster for time 
calculations. A timer counts the seconds synchronous to the system/vehicle clock. This 
signal can be used to measure relative times. The clock cannot be used for this purpose, 
as it can be set by the customer. 

The counter runs following reset (e.g. disconnecting the battery) from 0 and counts in 
second increments from 0 to over 4 billion, which corresponds to approximately 140 
years. 

The DME (ECM), for example, needs the relative time to determine the immobilization 
period of the engine (engine OFF) and thus to improve the starting capability of the 
engine. The immobilization period is calculated by the DME (ECM) from the relative time 
of terminal R OFF to terminal R ON again. 

Status Damper Program 

This telegram is routed from the Electronic Damper Control-continuous (EDC-K) via the 
PT-CAN to the ZGM and from there via the K-CAN System to the instrument cluster. 

If the EDC-K fails, active output of error messages is no longer possible. Monitoring 
means the instrument cluster is able to detect failure of the EDC-K and to display a corre¬ 
sponding Check Control message. 

Status DSC 

This telegram is routed from the Dynamic Stability Control DSC control unit via the PT- 
CAN to the ZGM and from there via the K-CAN System to the instrument cluster, inform¬ 
ing it of the status messages of the DSC program and error messages. 

Alive Counter EMF 

This telegram is routed from the electro-mechanical parking brake EMF control unit via 
the PT-CAN to the ZGM and from there via the K-CAN System. It serves as function 
monitoring of the EMF by the instrument cluster. If the parking brake control unit fails, 
active output of error messages is no longer possible. Monitoring means the instrument 
cluster is able to detect failure of the parking brake control unit and to display a corre¬ 
sponding Check Control message. 


25 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Time/Date 

This telegram is made available by the instrument cluster via the K-CAN System to other 
control units and it contains details of the date and time. The wiper module, for example, 
needs the information date/time to calculate the alternating rest position for the wiper 
system. 

Status Radio-Control Key 

This telegram is routed from the CAS control unit via the K-CAN System to the instru¬ 
ment cluster and it contains the following details: 

• Personalization number of the radio-control key 

• Status key battery 

Status Instrument Cluster 

This telegram is routed from the instrument cluster to the control units, DME, SIM and 
wiper module, it contains the following details: 

• Displayed vehicle speed 

• Unit of speed kmh/mph 

• Fill level, washer fluid 

• Status interface cruise control 

• Status airbag warning lamp 

• Relative time counter 

• Status seatbelt warning lamp 

• Status engine warning lamp 

• Status DSC indicator lamp 

• Status brake warning lamp 

• Status parking brake indicator lamp 


26 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Central Locking System and Trunk Lid Status 

This telegram is routed from the CAS control unit via the K-CAN System to the instru¬ 
ment cluster and it contains the following details: 

• Status central locking system 

• Control central locking system 

• Status door contacts and trunk lid 

These signals are reguired by the instrument cluster for the display of the CC message 
regarding the positions of doors, trunk lid and central locking system. 

MOST Bus 

The data connection to the following control units in the communication area is via the 
MOST bus: 

• Navigation system 

• Audio System Controller (ASK) 

• Speech Processing System (SVS) 

• Control Display (CD) 


Notes: 


27 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Check Control 


Until now, the Check Control has been a reporting system for vehicle faults. For the E65, 
the scope of functions has been extended considerably. It now also displays operating 

statuses and provides detailed instructions. This provides the driver with valuable assis¬ 
tance, enabling the appropriate reactions in the event of a system failure or fault, despite 
the increasing complexity of the vehicle electronics. 

In the E65, the number and information content of the messages have increased consid¬ 
erably in comparison to the E38: 

• Most CC messages contain a unique instruction, telling the driver what to do. 

• The message texts are more detailed (40 characters instead of 20 in the E38). 

• Parallel to the CC message, the On-Board data menu of the Control Display contains 
more detailed information (up to 170 characters!) regarding the current message. In 
the case of particularly important messages, this appears automatically. 

• The combination of text and graphic ensures faster assimilation of the information on 
the part of the driver. 

• The number of warning indicator lamps in the instrument cluster has been drastically 
reduced; many of them have been replaced by more informative CC messages with 
variable indicator lamps. Warning lamps are now only used where this is legally 
required. 

• The Check Control is easy to expand, as the evaluation of the message conditions 
for the individual functions and systems has been shifted to the relevant control unit 
in each case. 

• The coolant-temperature gauge in the E65 is no longer a separate instrument, but a 
function of the Check Control. It is only displayed when required. 


28 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Display Locations 

The messages of the Check Control are displayed in three locations. 



Djf Priv r|t 

Brems- u, Fahrvmk&elektroruk o. 
Funktion. Parkbremsc a 
Notfunktion. Siehe Betnebiarileiturig. 
Weiteifjhrt hedingt mogfich, umgeherd 
BMW beivicc kontaktierert. 


A’i'C MUNCHEN 

TXT HI DIALOG 


t . 04 . 200 ' 1 10.38 


Display Area 5 Display Area 4 Control Display 

Graphic icons Short text message Graphic icons 


The variable graphic icons are displayed in yellow or red in display area 5 below the gear 
display. Normally, the time and outside temperature are displayed in this area, these can 
be overwritten by the Check Control where required. 

The text messages of the Check Control appear in display area 4 below the tachometer. 

If data from the On-Board computer is displayed here while a message is being issued, it 
is overwritten by the Check Control. 

For most of the messages of the Check Control, there are also supplementary explana¬ 
tions and instructions. These can be opened on the Control Display via the On-Board 
Data menu. In the case of priority 1 messages, they appear automatically. 

Check Control messages are most times announced by a gong. 

Display Characteristics 

All messages of the Check Control are triggered by the control units responsible for the 
monitored function and transferred as data telegrams via the MOST bus or the K-CAN 
System to the instrument cluster. 

From there, they are distributed, depending on requirements to the individual output loca¬ 
tions (within the instrument cluster or via MOST to the Control Display). 


29 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Each individual CC message is assigned characteristics that control its display features. 

At this point a distinction is made between text messages (in addition to an indicator 
lamp, an accompanying text also appears in the Check Control and possibly also on the 
Control Display) and non-text notifications (a warning LED or graphic icon lamp lights up). 

All the message texts are stored together with the characteristics in a table in the instru¬ 
ment cluster. In the event that a number of messages are output at one time, the mes¬ 
sage with the highest priority is displayed first. The same applies when different non-text 
indicators want to light up the same warning lamp. 

In addition to the visual display, the Check Control also uses acoustic signals. A gong or 
double gong are generated by the Audio System Controller (ASK). The gongs have dif¬ 
ferent tones depending on the importance of the associated message. The gong can be 
generated every time the CC message is re-displayed or only once during the initial 
appearance of the message 

The acoustic signals are output, depending on the reason for the warning, via the front 
left-hand and/or right-hand vehicle loudspeakers. 

Operation 

The messages of the Check Control are automatically displayed in display area 4 and 5 
of the instrument cluster. If these display areas already contain data at the time a fault 
occurs (e.g. from the On-Board Computer), this is overwritten by the Check Control. 


2 1 



The CC button in the turn signal stalk can be used to browse through all the CC mes¬ 
sages issued (press briefly), or to toggle between the On-Board Computer and Check 
Control in the display area below the tachometer. 

Eight seconds after the last touch to the button, the display switches back automatically 
to the initial state (darkened or On-Board Computer). 

Darkening is not possible when a message of priority 1 is displayed in the Check Control 
(e.g. engine overheating), or the fuel gauge is at reserve. 

30 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



On-Board Computer (BC) 

The On-Board Computer in the E65 is not only a trip computing system; it also provides 
the driver with important vehicle information. 

New Features 

The fuel tank contents, current consumption, total mileage and trip odometer, which have 
until now been displayed in separate, fixed-position displays in the instrument cluster, are 
now integral parts of the On-Board Computer. 

They are scrolled through as items of information and only displayed when the driver 
actively reguests them. 

Only the fuel gauge is automatically displayed as soon as the reserve level is reached. 
Most of the data for the On-Board Computer is transferred by control units in digital form 
via the K-CAN System to the instrument cluster, where it is processed and displayed in 
the instrument cluster itself or in the Control Display (transfer to that point by MOST 
telegram). 

Coolant level, wiper fluid levels and the outside temperature are signaled to the instru¬ 
ment cluster by hardwire. 

The tank level is reported in redundant form by two independent analog direct lines to the 
instrument cluster. 

In the case of average values, only dashes are displayed until the wheel speed signal 
arrives. The wheel speed signals are reported by the sensor of the left-hand rear wheel 
via the DSC control unit per K-CAN System to the instrument cluster. If this sensor is 
defective, the right-hand rear wheel is used. 

All texts for the On-Board Computer are stored in the Control Display. The corresponding 
numerical values are provided by the instrument cluster via MOST. The information 
memory for consumption and travel distances is also located in the instrument cluster. 


31 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



The On-Board Computer in the Control Display is operated by means of the Controller on 
the center armrest. 



It consists of the following sub-functions: 

• "Main" on-board computer, referred to simply as the On-Board Computer. Its infor¬ 
mation can be called up and scrolled as in previous models by pressing the turn 
signal switch and viewing the display in the instrument cluster. 

• Travel Computer. This computer is used to monitor one or more parts of a trip; its 
information can only be displayed in the Control Display. 

• Stopwatch and limit. These can also, like the travel computer can only be displayed 
in the Control Display, but they can be activated directly in the main menu "On¬ 
board computer". 

• Setting menu for independent ventilation, clock/date and memory signal are activat¬ 
ed using the entry "Settings" in the main menu "On-board computer". The “units” 
selection for the entire scope of the on-board computer are also located here. 

Not all functions of the On-Board Computer that are displayed in the Control Display can 
also be displayed in the instrument cluster; only those of the "main" On-Board Computer 
can do this. 

However, the functions of the On-Board Computer that cannot be displayed in the 
Control Display can only be displayed in the instrument cluster (fuel gauge, total mileage, 
trip distance). 


32 

E65 Instrument Cluster 














On-Board Computer 


mflO 

D2 Pri va t 'Lpj TM C O 

Montvale 

OBC 

116,1 km/h Resetl Travel 


Ibc 

2,6 1/100 km Reset] Distance 

0 km 

y Limit 

192 km nj ® 

735 km 

I© 

10,0 1/100 km^ Arrival 

10:55 

1 ra 

/1 III It Speed 

0 87,6 km/ 

[tf «=» 

Consumption 0 8,61/100 

20, ox: Si Auto 

WNYC Auto Si 20,OX 10:55 

28 06.00 -5,OX 


• Distance - Entered manually using the controller and then computed (counted 
down) by the instrument cluster or transferred by the navigation system via MOST to 
the instrument cluster. In this case, the navigation system handles the calculation up 
to the position "0"; from then on (minus distance), the instrument cluster continues 
the count in both cases. 

• Range - Calculated from the average fuel consumption figure and the tank contents. 
A calculation compensates for idle periods with the engine running or sudden 
changes in driving style. The average fuel consumption figure is a calculated result 
which, depending on the driving situation, revises the current fuel consumption over 
a given period. This ensures that the calculated results are plausible and that large 
jumps are avoided if vehicle handling changes suddenly. 

• Arrival time - Calculated from distance, time and an average speed. Here, too, the 
calculation method ensures equalization of the average speed so that there are no 
larger jumps in time; the displayed value grows or shrinks minute by minute. The 
arrival time can only be calculated when the clock has been set and a distance 
entered. If no distance is entered manually, but is adopted from the navigation sys¬ 
tem, there is a permanent alignment with the route guidance on the basis of the 
roadmap data. The result is a significantly more precise prediction of the arrival time. 


33 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





• Average fuel consumption - The calculation interval always begins with a manual 
reset; the display appears after arrival of the speed signal. The basis of the calcula¬ 
tion is the data from the consumption and travel memory. 

• Average speed - Here, too, each calculation interval begins with a manual reset; the 
display appears after arrival of the speed signal. The basis of the calculation is the 
data from the consumption and timer. 

The reset of average fuel consumption and speed is by means of the controller, directly in 
the menu of the on-board computer in the Control Display. When one of these displays is 
selected, a dialog window appears on the screen to enable a selective reset. 



Tap Button 2 (CC) to scroll 


34 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





































Individual items of information of the On-Board Computer can also be displayed in the 
instrument cluster: 


Distance 

Fuel gauge (tank contents can only be viewed in KOMBI) 

Range 

(The previous items can be displayed in the display field below the speedometer.) 


Arrival time 

Average fuel consumption 



Note: Can only be viewed in 
the cluster 


Average speed 

Total mileage 

Distance to destination 

Current consumption 

(The previous items can be displayed in the display field below the tachometer.) 

The functions Stopwatch, Limit and Memo as well as the timer for independent ventila¬ 
tion are only provided in the Control Display. They cannot be displayed on the instrument 
cluster. 


When the vehicle is started, the information that was 
last selected will be displayed. If the display area 
below the tachometer contains a Check Control 
message, no function of the On-Board computer is 
displayed there. 

The displays of the On-Board Computer are scrolled 
and shown in the instrument cluster by means of but¬ 
tons in the turn signal stalk. Pressing and holding the 
top (2) button toggles between Check Control and 
On-Board Computer in the display area below the 
tachometer. Briefly tapping scrolls through its func¬ 
tions. 



Briefly tapping the lower button (1) scrolls all the display options in the display area below 
the speedometer. 

Pressing and holding darkens both display areas. Darkening is not possible when a 
Check Control message is active or the fuel gauge is at reserve. A single display area 
cannot be darkened, the fields are always active or dark as a pair. 


35 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Travel Computer 

The travel computer is used to monitor individual stages of a trip. It must be selected and 
activated separately in the On-Board Computer menu in the Control Display. 



The travel computer displays the starting time and date, driving time, distance travelled, 
average fuel consumption and average speed exclusively in the Control Display. 

The travel computer information cannot be displayed on the instrument cluster. The 
“START” button , selected using the controller activates the travel computer. If a trip is 
interrupted, the calculation of the average values is stopped as of terminal 15 Off (unless 
START or STOP are activated) and only continued when the trip is resumed. 

The “STOP” button freezes the displays. Selecting “START” again resets all the displays 
of the travel computer; a selective reset of an individual functions is not possible in the 
travel computer. 


36 

E65 Instrument Cluster 






Limit 

A speed limit can be entered in the On-Board Computer, and a warning is triggered when 
the limit is exceeded. 




■HDD 


D2 Privat 


TMC 


dDBC ^ //o SET 


“bc 


jLimit 

1 © 

1 ca 




20,0°C 96 Auto 1/ 

VNYC 




Montvale 


Auto 96 20,0°C 08:16 


09.10.00 


-1,0°C 


The range above this speed is displayed with a bright bar segment within the speedome¬ 
ter dial in the LCD area of the speedometer. 

The limit can either be entered manually or the current driving speed can be adopted as 
the limit; both take place using the Controller and Control Display. 

The function is ready for operation and input as of terminal R On, but the limit warning 
can only be triggered during driving (terminal 15 On and incoming speed signal 
telegram). 

The instrument cluster saves the current speed limit and the corresponding activation 
state, even after terminal R Off. If the limit entered is exceeded, a gong sounds and a 
message appears in the Check Control. 

The information on the limit and activation state is reported by the Control Display to the 
instrument cluster per MOST telegram and stored in the instrument cluster. 


37 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Stopwatch 




■HDD 


D2 Privat 


TMC <t=z> 


Montvale 




0 

■ 

Interm. Time 


Limit 

I© 

HKD 

| ■> 

20,0°C Auto 


00:00:07 

00:00:00 


WNYC 


Auto Sg 20,0°C 08:20 


09.10.00 


-2,0°C 


The stopwatch is ready for operation as of terminal R. A stopwatch that is running is 
stopped at terminal R Off and restarts at terminal R On. 


The maximum runtime is 99 hours and 59 minutes. The stopwatch is started and 
stopped using selection buttons in the Control Display. 

When the stopwatch is running, an intermediate time can also be called up. 


Settings 

The following additional functions can be controlled using the On-Board Computer in the 
Control Display: 


Clock 

The calculation of the time takes place in the instrument cluster. Time is also displayed in 
the Control Display (transmission per MOST telegram). The time cannot be displayed in 
the instrument cluster as an On-Board Computer function. 

The time is located together with the outside temperature in the LCD display field below 
the gear display, (unless it has been overwritten by a variable indicator lamp of the Check 
Control). 


Memo Signal 

If MEMO is activated, the instru¬ 
ment cluster triggers an hourly 
reminder signal via ASK 15 sec¬ 
onds before each full hour. 

The signal can be activated and 
deactivated on the Control 
Display, assuming a time has 
been set. The MEMO signal is 
only triggered as of terminal R On. 


s 

•ill' D2 Privat Iijj TMC ^ 

aS°C MUNCHED 

fThr 

Inf 

DSC 

Uhrzeit 

10:27 | ' 1 

(Configuration 


Memo 

Stun dli dies 



ii .04. Tool Datum 

Erinner ungssignal 

Extra 


ausschalten 



_ _ 



20,Q°t 55AUTO ANTENNE T |AUTO55 20,Q°t 11.04200110:27 


38 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Workshop Hints 


Redundant Data Storage 

In the event of repairs, it is necessary that the mileage reading and the data for the CBS 
intervals be stored on replacement of the instrument cluster. 

The following data in the Car Access System CAS is redundant: 

• Vehicle identification number 

• Total mileage 

• CBS data 

Every time terminal 15 is switched on, a data check takes place. In order to detect 
manipulations, an orange dot (manipulation dot) is shown in display area 4 below the 



VIN > 
TOTAL MILES 


1 VIN N 

TOTAL MILES 


K-CAN-SYSTEM 


MANIPULATION DOT 


tachometer. 

The manipulation dot is set under the following conditions: 

• The vehicle identification number stored in both control units does not match. 

• In one of the two control units, no vehicle identification number is stored, e.g. new 
component. 

• The component for storage of the total mileage in the instrument cluster is defective, 
(the display for the mileage reading shows 999999). 


39 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





Installation of a New Instrument Cluster 


The manipulation dot is set when KL 15 is switched on because the vehicle identification 
number is not coded in the instrument cluster. 

The instrument cluster is now assigned to the vehicle using the BMW diagnosis unit (GT- 
1 or DISplus) by means of coding, (i.e. the vehicle identification number is entered in the 
instrument cluster). 

Switch off terminal 15. 

When KL 15 is switched on again, the instrument cluster reguests the current mileage 
and CBS data from the CAS. The manipulation dot is extinguished. 

Installation of a New or Used Instrument Cluster for Test Purposes 

Although the vehicle identification number (Kombi/CAS) differs and has not yet been 
entered in the instrument cluster, there is bi-directional communication between the 
instrument cluster and the CAS. 

For example, the mileage reading stored in the CAS is transferred into the working 
memory for the total mileage display in the instrument cluster and displayed. If there is 
now a test drive, the distance driven is counted in the working memory of the total 
mileage and transferred every 10 kilometers (E38 every 100 kilometers) to the CAS. 

If at least 24 hours have elapsed between switching terminal 15 on and off, another cali¬ 
bration is performed, independent of the distance driven. If the instrument cluster is 
removed following the test drive, the working memory loses the stored distance reading. 
This data is not stored, (the instrument cluster is returned to its initial state). 

Note: In the case of a used instrument cluster (vehicle identification number 
is entered), the vehicle identification number can be overwritten up to a 
kilometer reading of 254 km (158mi). A reset of the permanently stored 
mileage reading is not possible. 


40 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Simultaneous Replacement of CAS and Instrument Cluster (new) 

Where possible, this should be avoided, as the current mileage reading and all the CBS 
data are irretrievably lost! If both control units have to be replaced at one time, the follow¬ 
ing installation sequence is recommended: 

1. Replacement of the instrument cluster. 

2. Coding of vehicle identification number. 

3. Terminal 15 OFF/ON (possible data transfer). 

4. Replacement of the CAS. 

5. Coding of vehicle identification number. 

6. Terminal 15 OFF/ON. 

When terminal 15 is switched on again, the manipulation dot is deleted. The communica¬ 
tion between the instrument cluster and the CAS for redundant data storage is now 
restored. 

In summary, the following apply in the case of replacement of CAS or instrument cluster: 

• The manipulation dot is set if the vehicle identification number in the CAS differs 
from the vehicle identification number in the instrument cluster. 

• If the vehicle identification numbers are different, data exchange takes place in the 
working memory of the instrument cluster; however, no data is stored permanently. 

• The instrument cluster adopts the data from the CAS if the CAS has a higher 
mileage reading than the instrument cluster and the vehicle identification numbers 
match. 

• The CAS adopts the data from the instrument cluster if the instrument cluster has a 
higher mileage reading and the vehicle identification numbers match. 

• The mileage is transferred from the instrument cluster to the CAS every 10 km of 
the journey. If at least 24 hours have elapsed between switching terminal 15 on and 
off, another calibration is performed, independent of the distance driven. 


41 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Instrument Cluster Test Functions 



The instrument cluster of the E65 has 21 test functions that can be read out of the LCD 
display areas 1 and 2. 

The test functions can be displayed at terminal R (radio position) or at terminal 15 “ON”. 
The test functions are started by pressing the trip odometer reset button. Keep the but¬ 
ton pressed for longer than 5 seconds. First the SBA reset will be displayed, continue 
holding until the test functions appear. 

There is another possibility to start the test functions. With terminal R switched “OFF”, 
hold down the trip odometer reset button and then switch terminal R “ON”. 

In the left-hand display area (1) inside the speedometer, the following appears: 

Identification :01 

System test :02 

(Not used) :03 

Consumption :04 

A maximum of 4 test functions can be displayed at one time in the menu. Each brief 
press of the trip distance reset button scrolls through the available test functions. 

Tests one and two are unlocked. All other tests are locked and must be unlocked by 
means of test function number 19. It is only possible to unlock the test functions by 
entering a code. The required input code is calculated from the total of the last 5 digits of 
the vehicle identification number stored in the instrument cluster e.g. 1+2+3+4+5= 15. 


42 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Starting a Selected Test Function: 

Pressing the reset button >2 seconds starts the selected test function (e.g. system 
test:02). 

The display or sub-items of the selected test function appears in the display area (2) 
inside the tachometer. 

To return to the test functions menu, hold the reset button again > 2 seconds. 

The test functions are closed by switching off terminal R (radio position) or pressing the 
reset button for >6 seconds. 

To prevent unauthorized access to the test functions, they have to be locked once again 
before they are closed (see test function 19). 

Test function 01: Identification 

The following list appears in display area 2 within the tachometer: a maximum of 4 lines 
can be displayed at one time. Brief pressing of the trip distance reset button enables 
scrolling down the list. 


Part no. 

123456789012 

K-number v (1/KM) 

44734 


Version number 

12 


Coding index 

12 


Diagnosis index 

1234 


Variant index 

1234 


Identification 

123456789 

Production date 

13.3.03 


Manufacturer no. 

12 


Can-NK version 

12. 12. 1 

2 

SW version 

12. 12. 1 

2 

Standard Core 

12. 12. 1 

2 

Slave SW 

12. 12. 1 

2 

Busjnd. CAN 

1234 


Bus Ind. MOST 

1234 



43 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Test Function 02: System Test 

The system test permits simple, visual assessment of the following functions in the 
instrument cluster: 

• Pointer instruments 

• Displays 

• Backlighting of all displays 

• Warning and indicator lamps 

Activating this test function automatically activates the following components: 

• All pointer instruments (pointers are moved over the display field) 

• All LC displays with a segment test and their background lighting 

• All indicator and warning lamps 

• Variable indicator lamp (Check Control symbols) 

• Gearbox program / gear display 

• Turn signal indicators 

Test Function 03: Not Used 
Test function 04: Consumption 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). This function 
used to check consumption, even when the vehicle is stationary. The following list 
appears in display area 2 inside the tachometer: 

Consumption 14.31/100 km 

Stationary consumption 20.3 l/h 


44 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Test Function 05: Range Consumption, Current Range Value 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

The internal On-Board Computer cruising range consumption is used together with the 
average tank value to calculate the range. 

The following list appears in display area 2 within the tachometer: 

CR consumption 12.7 1/100 km 

Range 238 km 

Test Function 06: Fuel Tank and Displayed Value 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

In this function, the total tank contents and the contents of the left and right half of the 
tank are displayed separately. The following list appears in display area 2 within the 
tachometer: 

Tank L, R, total, 29.5 1,34.21,63.7 I 

Displayed value 60.2 I 

Tank phase 1 

Tank phase 1: 

Normal calculation procedure via sensor, no error. 

Tank phase 2: 

Calculation from fuel consumption signal and/or CAN signal running (sensor fault). The 
fuel level indicator displays empty. Refuelling can no longer be recognized. 

Tank phase 3: 

No more calculation of the tank contents possible (at least 1 sensor defective, no fuel 
consumption signal). The fuel level indicator displays empty and the "fuel reserve" display 
is activated. 


45 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Test Function 07: Coolant Temperature, Outside Temperature, Dimming 
Photocell, Engine Speed 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

The current values for coolant temperature, engine speed, dimming photocell, and the 
current outside temperature at the sensor are displayed. 

The following list appears in display area 2 inside the tachometer: 

Engine coolant temp. 105°C 
Engine speed 2480 rpm 

Outside temp. +20.0 °C 

Dimming 02E3 ADC 

Test Function 08: Current Vehicle Speed 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

The current driving speed appears in display area 2 within the tachometer. 

For example: V: 98 km/h 

Test Function 09: Operating Voltage 

The operating voltage available at the instrument cluster appears in display area 2 within 
the tachometer. 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

Test Function 10: Read Out Country Code 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

The currently set and selectable country codes/languages appear in display area 2 within 
the tachometer. 

The languages are set using the Controller and CD. 


46 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Test Function 11: Read Out Units 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

The currently set and selectable units (AM/PM and/or mrri.dd/ dd.rrirri etc.) appear in dis¬ 
play area 2 within the tachometer. The units are set using the Controller and CD. 

Test Function 12: Displays for Arrival 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

The average speed, displayed for calculation of the arrival time (OBC function DIS¬ 
TANCE), appears in display area 2 within the tachometer. 

V arrival 136.5 km/h 

Arrival time 23:46 

Arrival date 2.2.03 

Test Function 13: Trigger Acoustic Signals 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

When this test function is started, the following acoustic signals are triggered in succes¬ 
sion. There is a break of 2.5 seconds after each signal. 

• CCG (Check Control Gong IX) 

• DG (double gong) 

• Hour signal 

• Intermittent gong for 5 seconds 

• 3 times turn indicator acoustic signal 

Test Function 14: Self-Diagnosis 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

When this test function is started, a fault code memory table appears in display area 2 
within the tachometer. 

Occurring faults are output in this table in the form of fault codes (DTC). 

These fault codes are not used for normal diagnosis. 


47 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




Test Function 15: Display of I/O Port Statuses 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

When this test function is started, the statuses at the I/O ports (connections of the instru¬ 
ment cluster) appear in display area 2 within the tachometer. 

Test Function 16: Display Test Bitmap 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

When this test function is started, a test bitmap (BMW logo), which can be used to check 
the positioning accuracy and state of the display, appears in display area 2 within the 
tachometer. 

Test Function 17: Analog-Digital Converter ADC 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

When this test function is started, the following list appears in display area 2 within the 
tachometer. 


Fuel-tank sensor 1 

165 

Ohm 

Fuel-tank sensor 2 

264 

Ohm 

Coolant level 

001 

ADC 

Terminal voltage 

11850 

mV 

Temp, outside 

207/10 

°C 

Temp, glass(display) 

32 

°C 

Phototr. 

670 

ADC 

Gear 

P5 

ADC 

Gear R 

R885 

ADC 

Gear D 

D885 

ADC 

Gear N 

N885 

ADC 

Washer fluid 

341 

ADC 


48 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



The analog-digital converter ADC values are primarily for the purposes of evaluation by 
vehicle development. Changes to the ADC values allow assessment of the function of 
components (e.g. phototransistor). 

In the case of switches (e.g. coolant level sensor), the ADC value 0 = switch closed and 
the ADC value 1023 = switch opened. 

Test Function 18: PWM Values 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

When this test function is started, the following list appears in display area 2 inside the 
tachometer: 


Contrast display 

4615 

Background lighting 

3148 

Dimm. Gear 

10000 

Dimm. Ring 

10000 

Dimm. Warning field 

10000 


The contrast and dimming values are primarily for the purposes of evaluation by vehicle 
development. Changes to the values allow assessment of the activation of contrast and 
dimming. 

The values are displayed from 0 (lowest value) to 10000 (highest value). 


49 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Test Function 19: Lock and Release Test Functions 

All test functions, except for test functions one and two, are protected against unautho¬ 
rized access. It is only possible to unlock the test functions by entering a code. 

The required input code is calculated from the total sum of the last 5 digits of the vehicle 
identification number stored in the instrument cluster e.g. 1+2+3+4+5= 15. 

To unlock the test functions: 

1. Select test function 19. The following appears in display area 2 within the revolution 
counter: 

LOCK: ON 

CODE: 0 

2. Enter the total sum of the last 5 digits of the vehicle identification number. The total 
is set by pressing the trip distance reset button and displayed in the field CODE: 
each press of the button increases the total number by one digit. 

If the trip distance reset button is pressed more than 45 times, the total input num¬ 
ber jumps back to 00. The total cannot exceed 45. 

3. The input is acknowledged by pressing the trip distance reset button for longer than 
2 seconds. Now, all the test functions have been enabled and can be selected 
using the trip distance reset button in the left-hand display area within the 
speedometer. 

The test functions remain unlocked until they are locked again using test function 19. 

To lock the test functions: 

1. Select test function 19. The following appears in display area 2 within the tach: 

LOCK: OFF 

2. When the reset button is pressed, the following appears: 

LOCK: ON 

3. The input is acknowledged by pressing the trip distance reset button for a longer 
period. 

Now all the test functions are locked again. 


50 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Test Function 20: Correction Factor for Average Consumption 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

This function is for checking and entering a correction factor for the fuel consumption 
figures. 

When this test function is started, the correction factor for the average consumption 
appears in display area 2 within the tachometer. 

Entry of the correction factor is only possible within the range of 750 to 1250. At produc¬ 
tion, the factor 1000 is stored in the EEPROM. 

The correction factor is reduced by a numerical value of 1 with each brief touch of the 
reset button. Pressing the BC button on the turn signal stalk counts down in steps often 
to shorten the time required for the resetting procedure. 

If the minimum value of 750 is reached, the display jumps to the maximum value 1250 
and the counting resumes backwards. 

The input is acknowledged by pressing the reset button on the instrument cluster. 

The correction factor CC is calculated from the actual quantity of fuel consumed “CON 
ACT”, and the displayed value “CON DIS”: 

CC= (CON ACT./CON DIS) X 1000 1/100 km 


51 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Test Function 21: Software Reset/RAM Reload 

This test function must be unlocked before starting (see test function 19). 

This test function triggers a software reset and/or a RAM reload of the instrument cluster 
processor. During the software reset, all customer-relevant displayed values from the On- 
Board Computer, time, date and trip distance recorder are reset. 

In the case of a RAM reload, the RAM is re-initialized, with the exception of the date and 
time. When this test function is started, the following list appears in display area 2 within 
the tachometer: 

RAM reload ? 

SW RESET ? 

The RAM reload is started by pressing the reset button for> 2 seconds. A brief tap 
switches to the software reset, which is then triggered by another long press on the reset 
button. 

If the test function is to be closed without triggering a RESET, the remote control must be 
removed or one of the two buttons (BC/CC) must be pressed on turn signal stalk. 

Note: A software reset should be performed after replacement of a tank lever 
sensor or a temperature sensor, otherwise the dampening function in the 
software will only display the actual current value after a considerable 
delay. 

Notes: 


52 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Resetting Condition Based Service (CBS) Display 

When one or more service items have been carried out, (e.g. front and rear brake linings 
have been changed), these services must be reset to their full service interval. 

This is accomplished using the Instrument cluster. In the future, it will be possible to do 
this with the Diagnostic tester. 

• To reset a service, press the reset button on the top left part of the instrument clus¬ 
ter for more than ten seconds in KLR or KL15. This brings you directly to Reset 
mode. 



Reset button - 

Press and hold for 
10 seconds 


• A menu appears in the speedometer. At the top is the “Back” function, 
then the first three service items. 



Service item menu Reset mode for each individual service item is 


entered by pressing item in menu for greater 
than 2 seconds 


53 

E65 Instrument Cluster 










The residual wear or the remaining time are specified (possibly with a minus sign). 

The "!" symbol means that you can reset this service operation (early production vehicles 
may show an “F”), while a "0" indicates it is not re-set able (the first 20% of the service 
interval is also protected against accidental reset). 

You can scroll through the service items by pressing the reset button or the lower button 
(CC button) on the turn signal switch. 

When you have selected a service item, press the reset button > 2 seconds to display a 
2-line menu in the tachometer. 

The “Back” function is at the top, the re-set able service item is below it. Now select the 
service item with the reset button (or the CC button) and press and hold the reset button 
again. 

In a third menu line, further down, the system confirms that the reset volume was suc¬ 
cessful. 

The whole interval for the service operation is shown in the “Service Need Indicator “ 
using the Control Display. 

Notes: 





Workshop Exercise - Instrument Cluster 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, access the instrument cluster test functions 
and unlock the instrument cluster using proper test steps. 

What number is entered to unlock the test functions? Record number below. 


Continue to go through all test steps and familiarize yourself with the various infor¬ 
mation available. 

How is test function 6 useful in diagnosis? What does “Tank Phase 2” indicate? 


What is test step 21 and how is it useful in diagnosis? 


Which test functions are always unlocked? 



How is test function 2 useful in diagnosis? 


55 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





n Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. Where are fuel level and engine temperature displayed in the E65 Instrument 
Cluster? 


2. Which components of the Instrument Cluster are separately replaceable? 


3. What device is responsible for the gong tones? 


4. How is Check Control information displayed in the E65? 


5. How are the test functions of the Instrument Cluster called up? How many tests 
are there? How are the test functions unlocked? 


6. How is the CBS reset procedure called up? Which control units assist the 
Instrument Cluster with the calculation of CBS data? 


56 

E65 Instrument Cluster 


























7. 


On the cruise control display on the speedometer, How many speed points can be 
displayed? (w/o ACC) 


8. What can be shown in display area 5? 


9. What three information items are stored redundantly between the instrument 
cluster and CAS? 


10. Why should simultaneous replacement of the instrument cluster and CAS be 
avoided/ 


Notes: 


57 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



Overview of Check Control Messages 


Responsible 
Control Unit 

Priority 

Graphic Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Instruction in Control Display 

Gong 

ARS 

P2 


Dynamic Drive 
Inactive 

Dynamic Drive Inactive! Vehicle detects 
increased body roll in curves. Avoid 
high cornering speeds. Please contact 
your BMW center. 

Yes 

ARS 

PI 

■ 

Steering! Stop 
vehicle carefully 

Switch off engine. Hazard from fluid 
loss in steering or suspension hydraulic 
system. Continued driving is not possi¬ 
ble. Please contact BMW roadside 
assistance 

Yes 

ARS 

PI 

■ 

Dynamic Drive 
Inactive 

Dynamic Drive Inactive! Vehicle detects 
increased body roll in curves. Avoid 
high cornering speeds. 

Please contact your BMW center. 

Yes 

ARS 

P2 


Dynamic Drive 
Inactive 

Dynamic Drive Inactive! Dynamic drive 
is temporarily inactive. Increased body 
roll in curves. 

Avoid high cornering speeds. 

Yes 

CAS 

P2 


Door open! 


Yes 

CAS 

P2 

□ 

Door open! 


Yes 

CAS 

P2 


Door open! 


Yes 

CAS 

P2 

□ 

Door open! 


Yes 

CAS 

PI 


Hood open! Stop 
vehicle carefully 

Accident hazard! Secure the hood 

Yes 

CAS 

P2 


Trunk open! 


Yes 

CAS 

P2 

■ 

Ignition failure! 
Stop vehicle 
carefully 

No engine restart available. Continued 
driving is not possible. Please contact 
the BMW roadside assistance. 

Yes 


58 


E65 Instrument Cluster 



























Responsible 
Control Unit 

Priority 

Graphic Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Instruction in Control Display 

Gong 

CAS 

PI 


Starter! Leave 
engine running 

Engine restart may be impossible. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

CAS 

P2 

M 

Depress brake 
pedal to start 
engine 


Yes 

CAS 

P2 


Remote control 
battery! Charge 

Remote control battery! - Charge 
Ignition lock automatically charges bat¬ 
tery in remote control unit during 
extended vehicle operation. 

Yes 

CAS 

P2 

El 

Remote control - 
No response 

Remote control - no response! 
Remote control unit not present or 
defective, refer to Owner’s Manual. 

Yes 

CAS 

P2 

B£1 

Remote control 
battery 
discharged! 

Remote control battery discharged! 
Replace battery of remote control with 
integrated key, refer to Owner’s Manual. 

Yes 

CAS 

P2 

iflti 

Child safety lock 
fault! 

Child safety lock fault! 

Please contact your BMW center. 

Yes 

CAS 

PI 

ei 

Remote control! 
Do not stop 
engine 

Remote control is not in ignition lock. 
This can make it impossible to restart 

engine. 

Please contact your BMW center. 

Yes 

CAS 

P2 

E3 

Next press of 
button starts 
engine! 

Stay clear of rotating parts in engine 
compartment. Injury hazard! 

Yes 

CAS 

PI 


Remote control! 

Remote control! Convenience entry 
mode deactivated. 

AUTO P not available with engine off. 
Take remote control when leaving 
vehicle. 

Yes 

CAS 

P2 


Remote control 
inside vehicle! 

Remote control inside vehicle! It is not 
possible to lock and secure vehicle. 
Remove remote control from inside 
vehicle. 

Yes 

CAS 

P2 


Remote control 
missing! 

Remote control missing! Remote con¬ 
trol is not in immediate proximity of vehi¬ 
cle, rendering locking and security 
impossible. Keep remote control with 

you. 

Yes 


59 

E65 Instrument Cluster 






























Responsible 
Control Unit 


Priority 


Graphic Icon 


Check Control 
Message 


Instruction in Control Display 


Gong 


CIM 


P2 



Servotronic 
malfunction! Drive 
moderately 


Steering effort very light and sensitive. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


CIM 


P2 



Servotronic failure 


Servotronic failure! Increased steering 
effort required. Please contact your 
BMW center as soon as possible. 


Yes 


DME(ECM) 


P2 



Cruise control 
inactive! 


Cruise control inactive! Cruise control 
system is not operational. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


DME(ECM) 


P3 



Engine oil at mini¬ 
mum level! 


Engine oil at minimum level. Add oil as 
soon as possible, refer to Owner’s 
Manual. 


Yes 


DME(ECM) 


P2 


DME(ECM) PI 


DME(ECM) PI 





Engine oil level 
below minimum. 
Top off 


Engine oil level below minimum. Add oil 
as soon as possible, refer to Owner’s 

Manual. 


Yes 


Engine 
malfunction! 
Reduced power 


Engine malfunction! Reduced power- 
engine operating at reduced output. 
Drive moderately. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


Switch off engine. Potential engine 
Engine! Stop damage. Continued driving is not 
vehicle carefully possible. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


DME(ECM) 


P2 



Increased 

emissions! 


Increased emissions! Emissions related 
fault. Please contact your BMW center 
as soon as possible. 


Yes 


DME(ECM) 


P3 



Please tighten filler 
cap! 


Please tighten filler cap! Please check if 
filler cap is tightened. 


Yes 


DME(ECM) P2 


DME(ECM) PI 




Engine 
malfunction! 
Drive moderately 


Accelerate gently and drive slowly, 
avoiding high engine loads, as catalyst 
damage could result. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


Engine 
overheated! 
Stop carefully 


Switch off engine and allow to cool. Do 
not open hood: scalding hazard! 
Continued driving is not possible. 
Please contact BMW Roadside 
Assistance. 


Yes 


60 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





























Responsible 
Control Unit 

Priority 

Graphic Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Instruction in Control Display 

Gong 

DME(ECM) 

P3 


Oil Levels sensor 
failure! 

Oil level sensor failure! Check engine oil 
level and top off as required, refer to 
Owner’s Manual. Please contact your 
BMW center as soon as possible. 

Yes 

DME(ECM) 

PI 

■ 

Engine oil 
pressure! 

Stop carefully 

Engine oil pressure too low. Switch off 
engine. Possible engine damage. 
Continued driving is not possible. 
Please contact BMW Roadside 
Assistance. 

Yes 

DME(ECM) 

P2 

■ 

Generator fault! 

Generator fault! Battery is not being 
recharged. Switch off all non-essential 
equipment. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

DME(ECM) 

PI 

n 

Engine temp, high! 
Drive moderately 

If this reoccurs, please contact your 
BMW center. 

Yes 

DSC 

P2 


DSC inactive! 
Drive moderately 

Reduced vehicle stability under acceler¬ 
ation and in curves. Please contact 
your BMW center as soon as possible. 

Yes 

DSC 

P2 

§ 

DSC inactive! 
Drive moderately 

DSC Inactive! Drive moderately. 
Reduced vehicle stability under 
acceleration and in curves. 

No 

DSC 

PI 

■ 

Brake linings! 

Replace 

immediately 

Brake linings worn to minimum depth. 
Accident hazard! Have this checked by 
the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

DSC 

P2 

■ 

Brake fluid! Stop 
vehicle carefully 

Brake fluid level too low. Reduced brak¬ 
ing efficiency. Top off fluid in reservoir, 
refer to Owner’s Manual. Please 
contact your BMW Center. 

Yes 

DSC 

PI 


DSC failure! 


Yes 

DSC 

P2 

§ 

DTC active! 

DTC Active! Dynamic Traction Control 
enhances tire traction and forward 
propulsion on unpaved road surfaces, 
but with reduction in vehicle stability. 

Yes 

DSC 

PI 


Brake/drive failure! 
Drive moderately 

Brake and drive control systems failure. 
Parking brake without emergency brak¬ 
ing function. Avoid hard braking. Please 
contact the nearest BMW Center. 

Yes 


61 

E65 Instrument Cluster 



























Responsible 
Control Unit 

Priority 

Graphic Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Instruction in Control Display 

Gong 

DSC 

PI 


Drive Control! 
Drive moderately 

Drive control! Drive moderately. Drive 
control systems failure. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

DSC 

PI 


ABS inactive! 
Drive moderately 

Major reduction in braking stability. 
Reduced steering response during 
panic stops. 

Please contact your BMW center. 

Yes 

DSC 

PI 

■ 

Brake vacuum 
booster 
malfunction! 

Increased pedal pressure required for 
braking. Longer stopping distances. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

DSC 

PI 

|(©)| 

DBC inactive! 
Drive moderately 

DBC inactive! Drive moderately. 
Maintain adequate stopping distances. 
Please contact your BMW center as 
soon as possible. 

Yes 

DSC 

P2 


Braking system! 
Have system 
checked 

Braking system! Have system checked. 
Braking function not affected. Next fault 
can lead to brake failure. Please contact 
the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

EDC-K 

P2 

IvM 

Suspension 
control inactive! 

Reduced driving stability and comfort. 
Drive moderately. Have this checked by 
your BMW center as soon as possible. 

Yes 

EDC-K 

P2 

iv 

Suspension 
control fault! 

Suspension control fault! Reduced 
driving stability and comfort. Drive 
moderately. Have this checked by your 
BMW center as soon as possible. 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

P2 

m 

Transm. Overheat! 
Drive moderately 

Reverts to default shift program, 
reduced response. Avoid high speeds 
and engine loads. 

Yes 





Transm. Overheated. Move selector 


EGS (TCM) 

PI 

■ 

Transmission! 
Stop vehicle 
carefully 

lever to pos R Leave engine running. 
Allow transm. to cool then carefully cont. 
driving. If probl. persists, contact BMW 

center. 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

P2 

101 

Transmission fault! 
Drive moderately 

Limited transmission operation. Danger 
of complete transmission failure! Please 
contact BMW center. 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

P2 

13 

Trans. Range N 
only with 
engine on! 

The transmission automatically shifts to 
P when the engine is switched off. 
Please contact your BMW center as 
soon as possible. 

Yes 


62 

E65 Instrument Cluster 






























Responsible 
Control Unit 

Priority 

Graphic Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Instruction in Control Display 

Gong 

EGS (TCM) 

PI 

■ 

Transmission fault! 

This fault may be resolved by restarting. 

Contact the nearest BMW center if 
necessary. Use emergency release to 
disengage park detent prior to towing or 
pushing vehicle 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

PI 

BOB 

Transmission 
Failsafe! Drive 
moderately 

Only RR,N,D,D3 and D5 available. 
Ranges may be engaged without 
depressing brake. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

PI 

■ 

Transmission 
range R fault! 

It may be impossible to select R. 
Reduced acceleration. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

PI 

■ 

Transmission 
range R R, N fault! 

Only transmission range D is available. P 
engages automatically when engine is 
switched off. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

P2 

BOB 

Trans, in P only 
when stationary! 


Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

P2 

S3 

Transmission 
range P fault! 

Transmission range P may be 
unavailable. Engage parking brake 
when vehicle is stationary. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 


BOB 

Transmission in 
position N! 

Transmission automatically shifts into P 
when the remote control unit is 
extracted from the ignition lock or once 
30 minutes have elapsed. 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

PI 

■ 

Transmission 
Fault! Drive 
moderately 

No transmission display. Poss reduction 
of gear selections. Possible to select 
new gears without depressing brake. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

P2 

BOB 

Transmission is 
position N! 


Yes 

EGS (TCM) 


BOB 

To engage gear, 
brake 


Yes 

EGS (TCM) 

PI 

S3 

Gear engage 
without brake 
possible 

Before engaging gear, press brake. 
When leaving the vehicle, switch off 
engine. Accident hazard! Please 
contact your BMW center as soon as 

possible. 

Yes 


63 

E65 Instrument Cluster 






























Responsible 
Control Unit 


Priority 


Graphic Icon 


Check Control 
Message 


Instruction in Control Display 


Gong 


EGS (TCM) 


P2 



Repeat gear 
selection 


Yes 


EGS (TCM) 


P2 



Transmission 
position P 
engaging! 


To maintain transmission range N, press 
selector lever within 10 S to position N. 


Yes 


EGS (TCM) 


EGS (TCM) 


EMF 


EMF 


EMF 


EMF 


PI 


P2 


P2 


P2 


P2 


PI 



Transmission 
failsafe! Drive 
moderately 


Transmission failsafe program activated. 
Possible reduced acceleration. Please 
contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 



PARK 

(©) 


PARK 

(©) 


Pos. R, N, D, only 
with engine on. 


Parking brake 
failure! 


Parking brake failure! Park. Brake 
overheated from repeated or extended 
use. Will not operate with vehicle sta¬ 
tionary. Emergency braking function 
remains available. 


Yes 


Automatic hold fault! Engage and 
Automatic hold release parking brake with button and/or 
fault! select transmission position R 

Please contact your BMW center. 


Yes 


PARK 

((£9 


Parking brake fault! 


Parking brake fault! No emergency 
braking function. Parking brake available 
using button when stationary. 
Please contact your BMW center. 


Yes 



Release parking 
brake 


Yes 


EMF 


P2 


PARK 

(©) 


Automatic hold 
deactivated! 


Automatic Hold inactive in response to 
slippery road surface. 


Yes 


EMF 


EMF 


PARK 

(©) 


PARK 

(©) 


Parking brake 
failure! 


Parking brake failure! After parking, 
place selector lever in position R 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


Parking brake failure! After parking, 
place selector lever in position P for 
park. If req. use emerg. release of 
parking brake. Emerg. braking function 
OK. Please contact the nearest BMW 

center. 


64 

E65 Instrument Cluster 






























Responsible 
Control Unit 

Priority 

Graphic Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Instruction in Control Display 

Gong 

EMF 

P2 


Parking brake 
failure! 

Parking brake failure! Engage pos P for 
Park, If req., use emerg. release of park¬ 
ing brake, refer to Owner’s Manual. 
Please contact your BMW center. 

Yes 

EMF 

P2 

] i i I 

|(®) j 

Parking brake 
failure! 

Parking brake failure! Engage position P 

for Park. 

Please contact your BMW center. 

Yes 

EMF- DSC 

P2 


Parking brake 
overheated! 

Parking brake overheated from repeated 
or extended use. To prevent damage 
avoid engaging parking brake. 

Yes 

IHKA 

P2 

M 

Heating/air 
condition, fund 
Restricted! 

Heating /air condition funct. restricted! 
limited due to severe battery discharge. 
Charge by driving or using external 
charger. 

Yes 

KOMBI 


lei 

Check Control: All 
systems OK 


No 

KOMBI 



Remote control 
recognized! 


No 

KOMBI 

P2 


Trigger start! 


No 

KOMBI 

P2 


Trigger stop! 


No 

KOMBI 

Kombi 

not 

coded 

■ 

Speedometer 
display fault! 

Possible to continue at moderate speed. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

KOMBI 

P2 

m 

Range 


Yes 

KOMBI 

P2 

M 

Speed limit 
exceeded! 


Yes 


65 

E65 Instrument Cluster 































Responsible 
Control Unit 


Priority 


Graphic Icon 


Check Control 
Message 


Instruction in Control Display 


Gong 


KOMBI 


P2 



Outside 

Temperature! 


Yes 


KOMBI 


PI 



Fasten safety belts 


Yes 


KOMBI 


P2 



Washer fluid too 
low! 


Washer fluid too low! Refill fluid reser¬ 
voir, refer to Owner’s Manual. 


Yes 


KOMBI 


P2 



Coolant level too 
low! 


Coolant level too low! Refill Top off 
coolant, refer to Owner’s Manual. 


Yes 


KOMBI 


P2 



Range selection display! No transmis- 
Range selection sion display. Use extra caution when 
display starting off and parking. Please contact 

the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


KOMBI 


PI 



CAN bus off 


Yes 


KOMBI 


P3 



Set time and date 


Set time and date. After reconnecting 
battery cables, reset the time and date. 
Refer to Owner’s Manual. 


Yes 


LM 



Right tail lamp 
failure! 


Right tail lamp failure! Please contact 
the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


LM 


P2 


P2 



Left low beam 
failure! 


Left low beam failure! Please contact 
the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


Right low beam 
failure! 


Right low beam failure! Please contact 
the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Left license plate 
lamp failure! 


Left license plate lamp failure! Please 
contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


66 

E65 Instrument Cluster 

































Responsible 
Control Unit 


Priority 


Graphic Icon 


Check Control 
Message 


Instruction in Control Display 


Gong 


LM 


P2 



Left rear fog lamp! 


Left rear fog lamp! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Right backup 
lamp! 


Right backup lamp! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Left rear turn 
signal failure! 


Left rear turn signal failure! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Left backup lamp 
failure! 


Left backup lamp failure! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Right tail lamp 
failure! 


Right tail lamp failure! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Right front turn Right front turn signal failure! 

signal failure! Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 



Left front turn 
signal failure! 


Left front turn signal failure! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 



Left tail lamp 
failure! 


Left tail lamp failure! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 



Right side 
mounted turn 
signal! 


Right side mounted turn signal! 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Right rear turn Right rear turn signal failure! 

signal failure! Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 



Right front fog 
lamp! 


Right front fog lamp! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


67 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





























Responsible 
Control Unit 


Priority 


Graphic Icon 


Check Control 
Message 


Instruction in Control Display 


Gong 


LM 


P2 


«•!* 


Left side mounted 
turn signal! 


Left side mounted turn signal! 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Headlamp: Left 
high beam failure! 


Headlamp: Left high beam failure! 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Right rear fog 
lamp! 


Right rear fog lamp! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Headlamp: Right 
high beam failure! 


Headlamp: Right high beam failure! 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 


;0l0; 


Left front parking 
lamp failure! 


Left front parking lamp failure! 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 


«d!o| 


Right front parking 
lamp failure! 


Right front parking lamp failure! 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 




Right brake lamp 
failure! 


Right brake lamp failure! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Center brake lamp 
failure! 


Center brake lamp failure! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Left brake lamp 
failure! 


Left brake lamp failure! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 


V? 

L' 

-t! 

)- 


< 

i 



Right license plate 
lamp failure! 


Right license plate lamp failure! 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


LM 


P2 



Left front fog lamp 
failure! 


Left front fog lamp failure! 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


68 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




























Responsible 
Control Unit 

Priority 

Graphic Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Instruction in Control Display 

Gong 

LM 

PI 




Brake lamp control 
circuit failure! 

Brake lamp control circuit failure! 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

CD 



CODE 


Enter code 


Yes 

PDC 

P2 




PDC failure! 

PDC failure! No acoustic warning avail¬ 
able for PDC. Please contact your BMW 
center as soon as possible. 

Yes 


PM 

P2 


0 


Battery switch off! 

Battery switch off! Reset battery switch 
in luggage compartment to ON, refer to 
owners manual. 

Yes 

PM 

P2 




High standby 
current! 

High standby current! Vehicle electrical 
accessories are drawing excessive 
passive state current. Battery has been 
disconnected. Please contact your 
BMW center. 

Yes 

PM 

P2 


T 


Power module! 
Drive moderately 

Power module in emergency operating 
mode. Electrical power supply limited. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

PM 

P2 




Recharge battery! 

Recharge battery! Battery heavily dis¬ 
charged. Charge by driving for longer 
period or using external charger. Battery 
will be disconnected soon! 

Yes 

PM 

P2 




Power module 
failure! 

Power module failure! Automatic 
monitoring of battery charge level failure. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

RDC 

PI 




Flat tire! 

Stop vehicle 
carefully 

Left front tire is flat, refer to Owner’s 
Manual or contact BMW Roadside 
Assistance. 

Yes 

RDC 

PI 




Flat tire! 

Stop vehicle 
carefully 

Right rear tire is flat, refer to Owner’s 
Manual or contact BMW Roadside 
Assistance. 

Yes 

RDC 

PI 




Flat tire! 

Stop vehicle 
carefully 

Left rear tire is flat, refer to Owner’s 
Manual or contact BMW Roadside 
Assistance. 

Yes 


69 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





























Responsible 
Control Unit 

Priority 

Graphic Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Instruction in Control Display 

Gong 

RDC 

P2 

B9 

Check tire 
pressures! 

Check tire pressures! Check tire 
inflation pressures; refer to Owner’s 
Manual or inflation chart. 

Yes 

RDC 

PI 

■ 

Flat tire! Stop 
vehicle carefully 

Right front tire is flat, refer to Owner’s 
Manual or contact BMW Roadside 
Assistance. 

Yes 

RDC 

P2 


Tire pressure 
monitor failure! 

Tire pressure monitor failure! RDC is 
unavailable. Wheel without sensor 
mounted. Continued driving is possible. 
Please contact nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

RDC 

P2 

m 

Tire pressure 
monitor fault! 

Tire pressure monitor fault! The RDC is 
temporarily inactive due to interference 
from additional RDC wheels in vehicle or 
from an external source. 

Yes 

RDC 

PI 

■ 

Flat tire! Stop 
vehicle carefully 

Flat tire, refer to the Owner’s Manual or 
contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

RDC 

P2 


Tire pressure 
monitor failure! 

Tire pressure monitor failure! RDC tire 
pressure monitor for detection of flat 
tires is currently unavailable. 

Yes 

RDC 

PI 

m 

Initializing RDC! 

Initializing RDC! RDC tire pressure 
monitor is not available for 15-30 min. 
System is temporarily unable to detect 

flat tires 

Yes 

SHD 

P2 

B 

Sliding/tilt sunroof 
not initialized! 

Sliding/tilt sunroof not initialized! 
Anti-trap protection deactivated. Please 
contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

SHD 

P2 

B 

Sliding sunroof 
fault! 

Sliding sunroof fault! Anti-trap 
protection fault. Please contact the 
nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

TMFA/TMBF 

P2 


Power window not 
initialized! 

Power window not initialized! 
Anti-trap protection deactivated. Please 
contact the nearest BMW center. 

Yes 

TMFA/TMBF 

P2 


Power window 
fault! 

Power window fault! Anti-trap 
protection fault. Please contact the 
nearest BMW center. 

Yes 


70 

E65 Instrument Cluster 





























Responsible 
Control Unit 


Priority 


Graphic Icon 


Check Control 
Message 


Instruction in Control Display 


Gong 


WIM 


P2 



Windshield wiper 
fault! 


Windshield wiper fault! Temporary 
windshield wiper fault. Wipers may 
remain in continuous operation. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


ZGM/SIM 


P2 



Front pass. 
Restraint system 
fault! 


Front pass. Restraint system fault! 
Belt tensioner or belt force limiter fault. 
Continue to wear belts despite fault. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


ZGM/SIM 


ZGM/SIM 


ZGM/SIM 


ZGM/SIM 


ZGM/SIM 


ZGM/SIM 


P2 


P2 


P2 


P2 


P2 


P2 



Driver Restraint system fault! Belt 
Driver Restraint tensioner or belt force limiter fault, 
system fault! Continue to wear belts despite fault. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 



Restraint system, 
left rear fault! 


Restraint system, left rear fault! Belt ten¬ 
sioner or belt force limiter fault. 
Continue to wear belts despite fault. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 



Restraint system, right rear fault! Belt 
Restraint system, tensioner or belt force limiter fault, 
right rear fault! Continue to wear belts despite fault. 

Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


Restraint systems! 


Fault in pass. Restraint system affecting 
airbag, belt tensioner or belt force limiter 
fault. Continue to wear belts despite 
fault. Please contact the nearest BMW 

center. 


Yes 


Left rear side 
airbag fault! 


Left rear side airbag fault! If possible, 
avoid transporting passengers in the left 
rear seat. Please contact the nearest 
BMW center. 


Yes 



Right rear side 
airbag fault! 


Right rear side airbag fault! If possible, 
avoid transporting passengers in the 
right rear seat. Please contact the near¬ 
est BMW center. 


Yes 


ZGM/SIM 


ZGM/SIM 


P2 


P2 



Driver airbags 
fault! 


Driver airbags fault! System affecting 
operation of driver airbags. Please con¬ 
tact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 



Front passenger airbags fault! If possi- 
Front passenger ble, avoid transporting passengers in the 
airbags fault! front seat. Please contact the nearest 

BMW center. 


Yes 


ZGM/SIM 


P2 



Fuel pump fault! 
Drive moderately 


Fuel pump fault. This can lead to break¬ 
down or reduction in engine output. 
Please contact the nearest BMW center. 


Yes 


71 

E65 Instrument Cluster 




























