Table of Contents 


E65 Remote Control 


Subject 


Page 


Remote Control (FZV) . 

Introduction. 

System Overview. 

Components. 

Remote Controls (Keys) . 

Remote Control Functions. 

Remote Control Receiver. 

Operation. 

Integrated Universal Remote Control. 

Original Transmitter. 

Check for Random Code . 

Programming the integrated universal remote control 

Programming a Random Code. 

Freguency Range. 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 


COCO-xT lOLOCOCOCDI^h-I^COCOCO 

















E65 Remote Control (FZV) 


Model: E65/E66 
Production: All 

■biictihis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand remote control operation 

• Understand the operation of the universal remote control 


2 

E65 Remote Control 


Remote Control (FZV) 


Introduction 

The E65 is equipped with Remote Control Service devices as standard vehicle equip¬ 
ment. The services offered at production start are similar in function to the predecessor 
model E38: 

• Remote control of the DWA and Central Locking system (FZV) 

• Convenience open of the windows and sunroof 

• Integrated universal remote control (covered separately) 

On the E65, the electronic evaluation unit and receiver unit are combined in 
a single unit integrated in the antenna amplifier. 

This has the following advantages for the customer: 

• Higher tamper resistance 

• Greater security 

The radio signals of the Remote Control are encrypted by means of a variable (rolling) 
code. This code prevents the vehicle opening by "monitored and copied signals". 

The frequency range for the U.S. has changed from 315Mhz to 868.4Mhz. 

Depending on equipment fitted and encoding, the following functions are possible: 

• Remote control of the central locking system (ZV) 

• Arm and disarm anti-theft alarm (DWA) 

• Deactivate DWA interior protection and tilt sensor 

• Activate panic mode 

• Unlock/lock trunk lid 

• Open trunk lid 

• Switch on interior lights 


3 

E65 Remote Control 




System Overview 



4 

E65 Remote Control 

































Components 


Remote Controls (Keys) 

The Remote Control is comprised of a radio frequen¬ 
cy transponder (transmitter+receiver), an EWS 
transponder and an electronic evaluation unit. 

The voltage supply of the Remote Control is provid¬ 
ed by an integrated rechargeable battery which is 
charged during vehicle operation via a 125 kHz inter¬ 
face in the ignition switch (ZAS receptacle) as from 
terminal R. 

The rechargeable battery voltage is monitored inde¬ 
pendently by the Remote Control and signaled to the 
CAS. 

Up to four Remote Controls may be assigned to the vehicle for remote services (not EWS 
which may have up to 10). There is no procedure necessary for initialization, once the 
EWS transponder of the Remote Control is identified by the CAS, the radio frequency 
transponder is also logged in as valid. 

The range of the Remote Control can vary to a great extent. This is dependent on the 
location of the Remote Control in relation to vehicle and other physical conditions. 
























Remote Control Functions 

• Double lock/unlock: Press the desired button once. 

• Convenience open: Press and hold the unlock button. The operation of opening 
the windows and sunroof will stop when the button is released. 

• Open trunk: Press the trunk open button. 

• DWA arming/disarming: Automatically performed when locking or unlocking as 
long as the criteria for arming is fulfilled. 

• Disarm interior protection and tilt sensor: Press lock button again within 10 seconds 

of locking/arming. 

• Interior lights on (search mode): Press lock button with a locked vehicle. 

• Panic: Press panic button regardless of vehicle lock status. 

Remote Control Receiver 

The remote control receiver is located in the antenna amplifier. 

The receiver is responsible for intercepting the radio signals and converting them into 
a digital signal for the CAS. 

The CAS receives the signals over a dedicated serial data wire. 


4 



Operation 

The remote-control telegrams are broadcast as high-freguency signals (HF signals) after 
pressing a button on the Remote Control key. The signals are received by the rear win¬ 
dow antenna, relayed to the remote control receiver, demodulated and encoded. 

The operator reguest, e.g. "unlock central locking system" is then transferred to the CAS 
via a separate serial data interface. 

The function reguested by the operator is then communicated to the vehicle electrical 
system via the K-CAN S and K-CAN R 

6 

E65 Remote Control 





























































Integrated Universal Remote Control 

The integrated universal remote control replaces 
up to three hand held transmitters for various 
devices, (e.g. garage door/gate openers, alarm 
systems or house lighting systems). 

It recognizes and "learns" the signal transmitted 
by each individual original hand held transmitter. 

The signal of an original hand held transmitter can 
be programmed to one of the three channel but¬ 
tons. The device is operated with the pro¬ 
grammed channel button. The integrated universal remote control uses radio frequen- 
cies only (not infrared). Transmission of the signal is indicated by the indicator LED. 

During the programming procedure and prior to remote activation of a programmed 
device it is important to ensure that no persons, animals or objects are located within the 
range of the device in question (e.g. garage door) as a precaution against injury. The 
safety precautions for the original hand transmitter must also be complied with. 

Original Transmitter 

If the symbol depicted to the right is on the packaging or in 
the instructions of the original hand held transmitter, it may 
be assumed that this original transmitter is compatible with 
the integrated universal remote control. 

Check for Random Code 

The instructions of the original hand held transmitter 
describe whether or not the original hand transmitter is 
equipped with a random code system. 

Alternatively, a channel button can be programmed to carry out this check. Hold down 
the programmed channel button on the integrated universal remote control. 

If the indicator lamp on the integrated universal remote control flashes quickly for two 
seconds and then stays on, this means that the original hand transmitter is equipped with 
a random code system and that the channel buttons can be programmed accordingly. 




7 

E65 Remote Control 



Programming the integrated universal remote control 



To program a channel button with the signal of the original hand transmitter, proceed as 
follows: 

1. Ignition lock position (terminal 15). 

2. For initial operation, proceed as follows: press the two outer buttons (1) until the 
indicator lamp (on the left of the program button) begins to flash,then release the 
buttons. The three channel buttons are cancelled. 

3. Hold the original transmitter max. 5 cm (2in) away from the channel buttons. 

4. At the same time, press the transmit button on the original transmitter and the 
desired channel button on the integrated universal remote control. Release both 
buttons when the indicator lamp begins to flash guickly. 

5. To program additional transmitters, repeat steps 3 and 4. 

Programming a Random Code 

To use the integrated universal remote control with a random code system, additional 
programming steps are necessary. A second person simplifies the programming 
procedure. 

1. Program the integrated universal remote control as described previously. 

2. Hold down the programming button on the device receiver for approx, two 
seconds until the programming lamps on the device come on. 

3. Press the desired channel button on the integrated universal remote control 
three times. 

Frequency Range 

The system operates in the freguency bands 27-40 MHz and 433.2 MHz. Faults and 
malfunctions may be attributed to radio waves emitted by other transmitters at these fre- 
guencies. 

8 

E65 Remote Control 


^j ji Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. Which control unit is responsible for distributing the various operational messages 
transmitted by the Remote Control? 


2. What additional steps are reguired when programming the integrated universal 
remote control with a rolling code transmitter. 


3. How many remote controls can be assigned to the vehicle for remote control 
services? 


Notes: 


9 

E65 Remote Control 



























