Table of Contents 

E6x Body Electronics 

Subject Page 

General Vehicle Electrical Systems.10 

System Overview.11 

E63/E64 Changes from E60.12 

General Electrical New Features .13 

KBM (Body Base Module).13 

Door Modules.13 

CAS System.13 

PDC .13 

RDW (FTM ).13 

Roller Sunblind.13 

M ultifunction Seat.14 

KBM .14 

PowerWindows.14 

Switch Block SBFA.15 

LIN Bus .15 

Door Modules.15 

byteflight.16 

SGM .16 

K-CAN .16 

KBM .16 

Power Window Motors.17 

Door Contacts .17 

CAS .18 

Operation .19 

Opening of Passenger Front by Driver.19 

Opening of Rear Window by Driver.19 

Indirect Anti-Trapping .19 

Phase 1 .20 

Phase 2 .20 

Power Detection .20 

Initialization of PowerWindows.20 

Slide/Tilt Sunroof.23 

Slide/Tilt Sunroof Push-Button.23 

Slide/Tilt Sunroof Module .23 

Car Access System.23 

Functions .24 

Panic Mode .24 

Emergency Operation .24 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 









































Subject Page 

Initialization .24 

E63 Glass Tilt Sunroof.25 

Changes Compared to the E60.25 

System Components.25 

Control Unit M DS .25 

Functions .25 

Control Button.25 

Glass Tilt Sunroof.25 

SunroofVisor.25 

Service Information.27 

Initialization.27 

Manual Initialization with Control Button .27 

Preconditions.27 

Glass Tilt Sunroof .27 

E61 Panorama Glass Sunroof.28 

Functions ofthe Control Button.29 

Panorama Glass Sunroof Functions.29 

To Open SunroofVisor .30 

To Open SunroofVisor and Roof Panel.30 

Tilt Position .30 

To Close Roof Panels.30 

To Close SunroofVisor and Roof Panel.31 

To Close SunroofVisor.31 

Speed Control of Wind Deflector with Roof Open .31 

Toll Operation.31 

Convenient Opening and Closing via Key .32 

Initialization .32 

Anti-trapping Circuit .32 

Central Locking System .. .33 

Secure Lock (Double Lock).34 

Automatic Locking .35 

Crash Unlock .35 

Power on Status.35 

DWA - Central Lock Interface.35 

Remote Control FBD .35 

Trunk Locking.36 

Hotel Setting .36 

Automatic Relock .36 

Car & Key Memory .37 

Codeable Key Memory Functions.37 

Codeable Car Memory Functions.37 












































Subject Page 

Windshield Wiping/Washer System .38 

System Components .38 

Wiper Switch.38 

Rain and Light Sensor (RLS) .40 

Safety and Gateway Module .40 

Steering Column Switch Cluster.40 

Integrated automatic heating and air-conditioning system.40 

Body Basic Module (KBM) .41 

Wiper Motor.41 

Touring (E61).42 

Windshield and Rear Window Washer Pump (on the Touring) ... .42 

Headlamp Washer Pump .42 

Heated WasherJ ets .42 

System Functions .42 

Wiper Functions .42 

Touring (E61).43 

Windshield and Rear Window Wash Function (on the Touring) .. .43 

Headlamp Washer System .43 

Safety Function .44 

Replacing the Wiper System .44 

Workshop Hints. 45 

Wiper Blades .45 

WasherJ ets .45 

Car Access System .46 

Wake-up Time.47 

Workshop Hints.49 

Condition Based Service.49 

Manual Update of CBS Data.49 

Manual Update of Fault Memory Data.49 

Anti-theft Alarm System.54 

Components.55 

Ultrasonic Interior Motion Sensor.55 

Tilt Alarm Sensor.55 

Hood Contact Switch.55 

DWA Control Unit .55 

Car Access System .55 

Driver's and Front-Passenger Door Modules .56 

Body Basic Module (KBM).56 

Sliding/tilting Sunroof Control Unit .56 








































Subject Page 

Integrated Heating and Air Conditioning System.56 

Light Module.56 

Siren with Integrated Tilt Alarm Sensor.56 

DWA LED.57 

Principle of Operation.58 

Arming (priming)/disarming.58 

DWA Alarm Triggering (Alarm-trigger Signal).59 

CAS Authentication to Prevent Tampering .60 

Forced Disarming.60 

Independent Voltage Supply .60 

Reverse Polarity Detection .60 

System Power-Down for Storage .60 

Bus Monitoring .60 

Automatic adaptation of sensitivity of ultrasonic 

interior motion sensor .61 

Deactivating interior motion sensor and tilt monitoring.61 

Emergency Function for Acoustic DWA Alarm.62 

Combined Operation with Lock Cylinder and Remote Control_62 

DWA Alarm Output (coding).62 

Panic Mode .62 

E63/E64 Alarm System (DWA).63 

New Features for DWA on E63 and E64 Vehicles.63 

Advantages of Microwave Sensors.63 

Components .65 

M icrowave Sensors .65 

Car Access System (CAS) .67 

Driver's Door Module (TMFA) and 

Front-passenger Door Module (TMBF).67 

Body Basic Module (KBM).67 

Light Module (LM).67 

Emergency power siren with integrated tilt alarm 

sensor (SINE) .67 

DWA LED.67 

Principle of Operation .68 

Activating and Deactivating .68 

Sensor Operation.68 

Tilt Alarm Sensor .70 

DWA Control Unit.70 

DWA Alarm Triggering (Alarm-trigger Signal).71 

Undervoltage recognition, overvoltage recognition, 

car battery monitoring .72 

Monitoring of sub-bus for anti-theft alarm.72 

Deactivating interior motion sensor and tilt monitoring.72 

Combined operation with lock cylinder and remote control .. .73 









































Subject 


Page 

Operation.73 

Panic Mode .73 

Park Distance Control PDC .74 

Components.77 

Ultrasonic Sensors.77 

PDC Button.78 

PDC Control Unit .78 

Multi-audio System Controller/ Car Communication Computer . .78 

Central Information Display.78 

Instrument Cluster.79 

DSC Control Unit.79 

Electronic Transmission Control .79 

Light Module.79 

Car Access System .79 

Principle of Operation.80 

Acoustic Warnings .80 

Visual Warnings.81 

Check Control.81 

Conditions for Switching On and Off.82 

Problematic Conditions forSwitching On and Off.82 

Operation .82 

Active Cruise Control .83 

ACC System Overview.84 

Exterior Lights.85 

Components.86 

Light Switch with Control Panel Unit .86 

Brake Light Switch.86 

Reverse Lights .87 

Brake Force Display.87 

Service Information.87 

E63/E64 Exterior Lighting .88 

Changes as Compared to E60 .88 

Brake Force Display.88 

E61 Tail light.89 

Adaptive Headlights (AHL) .....90 

Introduction.90 

Components.92 

Light Switch.92 

Direction Indicator/High-beam Switch .92 









































Subject Page 

Steering Column Switch Cluster .92 

Ride-height Sensors .92 

Brake Light Switch .93 

Position Sensor (E60, E65, E53).93 

Car Access System .93 

EGS control unit or reversing light switch .93 

Rain-light sensor for automatic driving lights control .94 

Steering Angle Sensor and DSC Sensor .94 

AHL Control Uniton E60, E63 .95 

Stepper Motor Controllers .95 

Light Module .95 

Safety and Gateway Module .95 

Xenon-headlight Control Unit.95 

Stepper Motors for the Adaptive Headlights .96 

Function Indicator (On Light Switch) .96 

Principle of Operation.97 

System Activation and Calibration Sequence.97 

Activation of Stepper Motor Controllers.98 

Speed Dependent Analysis of Input Signals.98 

Horizontal swivelling of the headlights by the stepper 

motor controller.98 

Deactivation of adaptive headlight movements under 

extreme driving conditions .99 

Deactivation of adaptive headlight movements in 

response to system faults .99 

Setting Headlights to Parked Position .99 

Activation of automatic headlight-range adjustment 

by the AHL control unit .100 

Adaptive headlights for automatic driving lights control.100 

Switch-on Conditions .101 

Workshop Hints . 102 

AHL Control Unit .102 

Replacing SMC.102 

Replace Bi-Xenon Headlights .102 

Diagnosis.102 

Interior Lighting .109 

PWM Control.109 

Consumer Shutdown Terminal.109 

Consumer Shutdown.109 






































Subject Page 

RollerSunblind.Ill 

System Function.Ill 

Seats .112 

Seat Variants .112 

Electrical Interfaces.112 

Electric, Sport and M ulti-Function Seats.112 

Seat Heating .112 

LumbarSupport .112 

Active Seat.114 

Entry/Exit Function forthe M ulti-Function Seat .114 

Functional Principle .114 

One example in which the entry/exit aid is activated.114 

Seats E63/E64.115 

Introduction .115 

Components .116 

Seat Adjustment Buttons .116 

LumbarSupport Button .116 

Seat Memory Button.116 

Seat Heating Switch .116 

Hall Sensors .116 

Temperature Sensorfor Seat Heating .116 

Center Console Switch C luster (SZM).116 

E63/E64 Driver's Seat Module .116 

Passenger's Seat Module, E64 Only .117 

Seat Heating.117 

Seat Adjustment Drive Units .117 

Head Restraint Angle Adjustment .117 

LumbarSupport.117 

Central Information Display .117 

Head-up Display.117 

Seat Heating LEDs .118 

K-CAN .118 

K-Bus .118 

Principle of Operation.119 

Seat Adjustment.119 

Rear Easy-entry Facility.120 

Seat Heating.120 

E63/E64 Seat Heating .121 

Installation Location.121 

Construction.121 











































Subject Page 

Function of Seat Heating .122 

Seat Heating ON and OFF .122 

Seat Heating Temperature Control.123 

Monitoring ofTemperature Sensor.123 

Seat Heating Output Management .123 

Overvoltage/undervoltage Detection .123 

Behavior in the Event of Undervoltage.123 

Behavior in the Case of Overvoltage .124 

Short-circuit Detection .124 

No-load Detection .124 

Plausibility Check ofTemperature Profile .124 

Outside Mirrors.125 

Steering Column Adjustment.126 

Components .128 

Switch for Steering-column Adjustment.128 

Steering-column Adjustment Drive Unit.128 

Steering Column Switch Cluster.128 

SZM .128 

Door Contact in the Driver's Door.128 

Principle of Operation.129 

Manual Steering-column Adjustment .129 

Steering-column Memory .129 

Overheating Protection for Steering-column 

Adjustment Motors .130 


























E6x Body Electronics 


Model: E60, E61, E63 and E64 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify and locate electrical components 

• Explain the operation of body electrical systems 

• Diagnose body electrical systems 

• Perform various service related functions 


9 

E6x Body Electronics 




General Vehicle Electrical Systems 

This module contains information pertaining to various body electrical systems. The 
vehicles covered include the E60, E61, E63 and E64. The primary focus will be on the 
E60. Differences between the E60/E61 and the E63/E64 body electronics will be 
pointed out as necessary. Unless otherwise mentioned, the E63/E64 body electronics 
are identical to the E60. 


E60 


E61 




E63 


E64 




The components and operation of the following electrical systems will be presented 


KBM 

Anti-theft alarm system 
Interior lighting 

Windshield wiping and washing 
Exterior lighting 
Sliding/tilting sunroof 
Car Access System (CAS) 

E61 Multi Drive Sunroof (MDS) 


Central locking system 
Active cruise control 
Power windows 
Park Distance Control 
Roller sunblind 

E63 Multi Drive Sunroof (MDS) 
AHL 


10 

E6x Body Electronics 













































System Overview 



if 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Door Module, driver's side (TMFA) 

10 

Car Access System (CAS) 

2 

Driver's switch block module (SBFA) 

11 

Body Basic Module (KBM) 

3 

Driver's door lock actuator 

12 

Driver's side rear window switch 

4 

Driver's front power window motor 

13 

Driver's side rear door lock actuator 

5 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

14 

Driver's side rear power window motor 

6 

Door Module, passenger side (TMBF) 

15 

Passenger side rear window switch 

7 

Passengerdoorwindow switch 

16 

Passenger side rear door lock actuator 

8 

Passengerfront door lock actuator 

17 

Passenger side rear power window motor 

9 

Passenger power window motor 




11 

E6x Body Electronics 































E63/E64 C hanges from E60 

The function of the powerwindows correspond to those ofthe E60. However, the rear 
windows are fixed and the corresponding pins ofthe KBM are not used. The E63/E64 
does not use switches for the rear driver or passenger door (window). Also the power 
window motors and regulator assemblies are also deleted. Otherwise the operation of 
the power window circuits is the same as the E60. 







□35S5 aa 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Door Module, driver's side (TMFA) 

6 

Passenger door module (TMBF) 

2 

Driver's switch block module (SBFA) 

7 

Power window switch, passenger front 

3 

Door contact, driver's doorfront 

8 

Door contact, passengerfront 

4 

Power window regulator, driver's front 

9 

Power window regulator, passengerfront 

5 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

10 

Car Access System (CAS) 


12 

E6x Body Electronics 






























General Electrical New Features 


KBM (Body Base Module) 

The KBM controls the following functions: 

• Rear Power Windows 

• Central Locking (Rear Doors,Trunk/Tailgate and Fuel Filler Flap) 

• Windshield Wiping/Wash System 

• Interior Lighting 

• Consumer Shutdown 

DoorModules 

The Door Module is integrated into the AS E. It communicates with other vehicle 
systems via the byteflight. 

The DoorModules contain the following functions: 

• MirrorAdjustment, Heating, Memory, Folding and Lighting 

• Central Locking (Front Doors Only) 

• F rant Power Windows (with indirect anti-trapping) 

• Connection to Driver's DoorSwitch Block 

• Connection to Passenger's Door Power Window Switch) 

• Door Entry Lights and Switch Illumination 

• Recording of Front Door Pressure Sensor Information 

CAS System 

The Car Access System (CAS2) is based on the CAS of the E65, however in the E60 the 
ignition starter switch and the CAS are two separate components. The E60 CAS is 
connected directly to the K-Bus and does not perform any repeater functions. 

PDC 

The signal from the PDC button is forwarded to the PDC Control Unit via the K-CAN. 

RDW (FTM) 

E60 uses RDW (FTM) for low tire warning. Information concerning low tire is based on 
wheel speed and is received from the DSC. 

RollerSunblind 

The rear window roller sunblind is controlled from the center console switch panel. The 
roller sunblinds for the side windows are manually operated. 

13 

E6x Body Electronics 





Multifunction Seat 

The multifunction seat makes it easier to get in and out of the vehicle. The backrest width 
and seat cushion depth are retracted forthis purpose. 

KBM 




1 m 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Compact Disc Changer (CDC) 

4 

Adaptive Headlights (AHL) 

2 

Body Basic Module (KBM) 

5 

Tire Pressure Control (RDC) Not for US 

3 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 




Located in the equipment frame at the glove box, the KBM has 4 electrical connectors 
(X13252 54-pin, X13254 3-pin, X13253 13-pin, X13255 6-pin) and an operating voltage 
range of 9-16 Volts. The KBM is internally protected against shorts to terminal 30 or 31 
and equipped with reverse polarity protection. 

1. X13252 

2. X13254 

3. X13253 

4. X13255 


PowerWindows 

The front powerwindows are activated by the door modules of the respective door. 

The rear powerwindows are activated by the basic body module KBM. 

The powerwindows are operated as usual from the switch block in the driver's door 
(SBFA) and the switches in the other doors. Various safety functions and statutory 
requirements have been taken into consideration. 



14 

E6x Body Electronics 


























































Switch BlockSBFA 

All the windows may be operated from the SBFA.The Switch Block passes all window 
requests to the TM FA via the LIN Bus. 


LIN Bus 

The LIN Bus is a sub bus allowing communication between theTMFA and the SBFA. 


DoorModules 

The door module contains separate "modules" forthe door module electronics and the 
Advanced Safety Electronics. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Mounting holes 

5 

Connection for input signals 

2 

Input channel to pressure sensor 

6 

Connection for interior mirror 

3 

Connection for switch block 

7 

Connection for exterior mirror 

4 

Connection for power supply 




The door module is the interface between: 

• Switch block, driver's door • Switch, passenger side 

• Door contact • Incremental sensor in power-window motor 

• byteflight • Power-window motor 

The driver's door switch block is linked to the driver's door module by means of an LIN- 
Bus. Control of mirror adjustment, heating and front area light is also integrated in the 
door modules. 

The AS E system is integrated in the DoorModules. The door modules also incorporate 
the activation system for side airbag deployment. 

The door module is powered with 10 Vfrom terminal 30 and with 10V by the SGM.The 
10 V supply is buffered forthe function of the ASE system. When replacing the door 
module, bear in mind that the capacitor needs a few minutes to discharge. The airbag 
might be deployed if you replace the door module with the capacitor still charged. 


15 

E6x Body Electronics 
















byteflight 

The byteflight bus system is involved in window operation as a method for door 
modules to communicate with the SGM. 

SGM 

The SGM converts and forwards messages to/from the byteflight and K-Can. 

K-CAN 

The K-CAN provides a communication path between the SGM, the CAS and the KBM 
as well as body modules. 

KBM 

The KBM receives input from the rear door window switches and the rear door contact 
switches and provides output to the rear window motors. The KBM also monitors the 
incremental sensor (hall sensors) in the rear window motors for position, speed and 
rotation. 

Additionally the KBM allows also for contact and control of the rear windows through 
CAN communication with the SGM. 

The KBM provides both power and ground to the rear window motors. 



16 

E6x Body Electronics 








































































PowerWindow Motors 

The drive mechanism of a powerwindow lift is a cable lift mechanism consisting of: 

• A DC motor 

• A reduction gear with incremental sensor (Hall sensor) 

• Evaluation Circuit 

• A shrouded connection 

The drive mechanism incorporates two Hall sensors, which are addressed by a magnet 
wheel mounted on the armature shaft. 

The two Hall sensors and the magnet wheel determine with the aid of the door module 
orthe KBM the direction of rotation, the speed and the position of the window. 



Powerwindow system, front 


Powerwindow system, rear 




Door Contacts 

The door contact switches, incorporated in the door latch mechanisms, provide door 
open/close data to the Door Modules/KBM. 


17 

E6x Body Electronics 























CAS 


The Car Access System control unit functions as the master for power window functions 
• Operation by radio remote control key • Comfort functions (One-Touch) 


Central-locking interface 
Country-specific programming 


Child lock 



n 

a- 




e- 



TMFA 


ASE 


■pr 


fT.-rrtVl+T 


7 } 



SGM 




& 


& 


V 



TMBF 


A 

■ 


a 

s! 


ASE 

-Hr 


k-£an 


CAS 

nr 


T 

s 

i— 

y 


=B 


<P] 


10 



it 






21 




im JSg 


?u 


IS 






17 



KBM 


S 


m 


.’v 





I 





15. 


TG 


a; 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Driver's switch block module (SBFA) 

12 

Car Access System (CAS) 

2 

Passenger front door window switch 

13 

Window Switch, right rear 

3 

Hall sensor driver's door 

14 

Door contact, right rear 

4 

Driver's front power window motor 

15 

Hall sensor, right rear 

5 

Door contact driver's door 

16 

Window motor, right rear 

6 

Door Module, driver's side (TMFA) 

17 

Body Basic Module (KBM) 

7 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

18 

Window motor, left rear 

8 

Door Module, passenger side (TMBF) 

19 

Hall sensor, left rear 

9 

Hall sensor passenger door, front 

20 

Door contact, left rear 

10 

Passengerfront power window motor 

21 

Window switch, left rear 

11 

Door contact passenger door front 




18 

E6x Body Electronics 








































































































































Operation 

Opening of Passenger Front by Driver 

The signal triggered in the SB FA when the button is pressed is sent via a LIN Bus to the 
TMFA. TheTMFA sends the signal via the byteflightto the SGM. 

The SGM converts the signal and sends it on the K-CAN to the CAS(the masterforthe 
front windows). The CAS evaluates the signal and sends a command to the SGM on the 
K-CAN.The SGM forward the command via the byteflightto theTMBF. 

TheTM BF receives the command for window movement, and a check signal from the 
Hall-sensor in the window motor and if necessary calculates indirect trapping protection. 
The window is then moved per the request. 

Opening of Rear Window by Driver 


\m m 

^aa 


2 J 

hyseflight 


K-CAN 

<d) 

5*. > 








. “““jr > K 

■a 


TMFA 


SGM 


KBM 

( - W m 

m 


03^3 


VS223 _083iq 02 


Indirect Anti-Trapping 

Anti-trapping protection is active over the entire window travel in the closing direction. 
Indirect anti-trapping protection does not eliminate trapping completely but rather 
restricts it to a maximum permissible trapping force. 

For each subsequent closing operation, the currently required closing force is determined 
and compared with the stored value. If the difference between the two force values is 
over the specified trigger threshold, the direction of window movement is reversed imme¬ 
diately. 

The reversing procedure is country and function dependent (emergency mode). 

In order to ensure safe closing of the window glass, the drive mechanisms are briefly 
operated to their full extent when the zero position is reached at the upper stop. 

Power-window anti-trapping protection has been developed in accordance with legal 
requirements in order to reliably prevent injury to vehicle occupants. When an object is 
detected in the path of the window, window travel is stopped and the window rolled down 
slightly. 

Anti-trapping protection is deactivated by the emergency close function (panic mode). 
The control sequence is divided into two phases. 


19 

E6x Body Electronics 

















Phase 1 

The closing position is overpressed until the emergency close mode is activated after a 
specific response time. The window is closed at maximum speed and with increased 
anti-trapping protection force. Anti-trapping protection remains activated even during 
emergency closing. If trapping is detected, the window is reversed only a short distance. 

Phase 2 

The button is released and overpulled again in 4 s.The window is now closed without 
anti-trapping protection with full force. In the event of blocking, the power-window motor 
is supplied with power until thermal protection is engaged. 

In the event of faulty anti-trapping protection, there is the option of emergency-closing 
the windows. 

If fully operational anti-trapping protection cannot be detected, e.g. faulty sensors, auto¬ 
matic operation is not permitted. 

Power Detection 

The system adapts itself to changes in the weather and environmental influences. The 
closing force is recorded by indirect sensors (Hall sensors) and limited accordingly. 

Initialization of Power Windows 


Front Windows 

RearWindows 

On Initial start-up, only the upper window stop has 
to be learned. Forthis purpose the window must 
be held for 500ms at the upper stop position. 

A characteristic curve in not learned for the front 
windows. The lower stop does not have to be 
approached. In orderto compensate for mechani¬ 
cal aging, an automatic readjustment of the end 
position is performed cyclically at the upper stop. 

Move window to full closed position and hold 
for at least 500ms. 

The rear windows must be initialized. 

During the initialization the end positions of the 
window travel are determined by limit runs into the 
upper window seal and to the lower window stop. 

Move window to full closed position and hold 
for at least 500ms. 

Move window to lower window stop and hold 
for 17 seconds. 

Move window to full closed and continue to 
hold the switch in the window closing direc¬ 
tion. 

The Window will open the close to confirm 
proper initialization. 

Note: This procedure is the same as E65. 


20 

E6x Body Electronics 









Workshop Exercise - Power Windows 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, perform the following operations as directed. 

Using proper repair instructions in WebTIS, remove drivers side door panel. Using the 
proper test cables, obtain the correct scope pattern of the LIN-Bus signal from the switch 
assembly to door module. 

What is the observed voltage range of the LIN Bus? 


Using the appropriate test cables, create a short circuit to ground on the LIN-Bus. 
What is observed when the LIN Bus is grounded? (failures, fault codes etc.) 


Using the appropriate test cables, create a short circuit to B+on the LIN-Bus. 
What is observed when the LIN Bus is shorted to B+? (failures, fault codes etc.) 


Perform Initialization on front windows. List proper steps and relevant observations. 



Perform Initialization on rear windows. List proper steps and relevant observations. 


21 

E6x Body Electronics 





Check the anti-trap feature on both the front and rear windows. 

Is the anti-trap closing force approximately the same on both the front and rear? 


Is the anti-trap closing force the same for the entire window travel? 


Perform the anti- trap test again quickly after performing the test a first time. 
Is the closing force the same as on the first test? 


Notes: 


22 

E6x Body Electronics 




Slide/Tilt Sunroof 






cued; 


1. Car Access System (CAS) 

2. SHD module with integrated electronics 

3. Sunroof switch 


1. Sunroof switch 

2. SHD module with integrated electronics 

3. Car Access System (CAS) 


Slide/Tilt Sunroof Push-Button 

The push-button forthe slide/tilt sunroof (SHD) switches to ground.The powersupply of 
the push-button features polarity reversal protection and is disconnected from the power 
supply in the event of overvoltage and in sleep mode. 

Slide/Tilt Sunroof Module 

The SHD module controls and monitors the electric motor and therefore the movement 
of the slide/tilt sunroof. The commands the driver selects with the push-button are trans¬ 
ferred directly to the slide/tilt sunroof module. 

Communication with the vehicle is controlled via the K-CAN. The SHD module receives 
information relating to terminal 58g via the K-CAN from the light module. The SHD 
module controls the LEDs of the SHD push-button. Terminal 58g has a clock cycle of 
200 Hz forthe purpose of dimming the lighting. 

Car Access System 

The CAS contains the master function for auto-remote opening. 


23 

E6x Body Electronics 







































Functions 


Panic Mode 

Panic Mode is triggered by pressing and holding the SHD button in the 2nd notch 
position. 

With this function, the sunroof is closed without anti-trap or closing force limitation pro¬ 
tection. Panic close is possible only at speeds under 16 km/h. 

Emergency Operation 

In Emergency Mode, the sunroof only moves for 750ms at a time. The emergency func¬ 
tion is only available when the CAS has signaled the SHD control module, "Emergency 
Mode Enable", via the K-CAN. 

Emergency operation is active under the following conditions: 

• Coding Invalid 

• Defective Hall-sensor 

• Initialization incomplete 

If initialization is incomplete operation is permitted based on scaling or characteristic 
curves. 

With no scaling, movement is allowed only in the direction of the scaling position. 

With no characteristic curve learned, movement is only is the closing direction. 

Initialization 

Initialization of the Sunroof is performed as follows: 

• Press the operating switch to the "Lift" position and hold. 

• After 15 seconds, the sunroof will "Lift". Continue to hold the switch. 

• After approximately 5 seconds the sunroof will close. Continue to hold the switch. 

• The sunroof will then open completely and close completely. 

• If the switch is released at anytime during the procedure the operation must be 
repeated. 

Note: Anti-trapping protection does not function during the initialization 
process. 


24 

E6x Body Electronics 




E63 Glass Tilt Sunroof 



C hanges C ompared to the E 60 

Instead of the slide/tilt sunroof, the E63 features a glass tilt sunroof. The sunroof visor 
is two-piece. Two motors are installed for operating the glass tilt sunroof. The system 
differs in design from the standard S HD, the Multi-Drive Sunroof module (M DS) contains 
the operating electronics forthe sunroof motors (2). The M DS and the sunroof motors 
are separate components ratherthan the integrated style ofthe SHD. 

System Components 

The following components relating to the glass tilt sunroof are fitted in the vehicle: 

• Control button for glass tilt sunroof 

• Control unit, multi-drive sunroof MDS, for glass tilt sunroof 

• Motor for glass tilt sunroof 

• Motor for sunroof visor 

Communication with other users in the vehicle, such as the Car Access System (CAS), 
takes place via the K-CAN. 

Control UnitMDS 

The M DS is installed in the carrier in the glove compartment. 

Functions 

Control Button 

The button functions are described in the Owner's Handbook. 

GlassTiltSunroof 

The functions ofthe glass tilt sunroof are based on the tilt functions ofthe E60 slide/tilt 
sunroof. 

SunroofVisor 

The functions ofthe sunroof visor are based on the functions ofthe sunroof visor for the 
panoramic glass sunroof 


25 

E6x Body Electronics 






TMFA 


hylsfNght 


SGM 


MDS 


K-CAN 




TMBF 


14 


a 

S 

"n 

O 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Lock cylinder, driver's door 

8 

Car Access System (CAS) 

2 

Door contact, driver's door 

9 

Motorfor glass tilt sunroof 

3 

Driver's door module (TMFA) 

10 

Motorfor sunroof visor 

4 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

11 

Sunroof switch 

5 

Passengerdoormodule (TMBF) 

12 

Multi-Drive Sunroof module (MDS) 

6 

Door contact, passenger side 

13 

Light Module 

7 

Cas Access System (CAS) 

14 

Light M odule control switch 


26 

E6x Body Electronics 















































































Service Information 


Initialization 

Initialization of the glass tilt sunroof is based on that of the E60. The glass tilt sunroof can 
be initialized either via the control button or the tester. 

Only full initialization will ensure complete operability of the glass roof. 

Manual Initialization with Control Button 

The characteristic curve is relearned during every new or re-initialization of the glass 
tilt sunroof. 

Preconditions 

The glass sunroof must be clean and be at room temperature. Terminal 15 ON must be 
applied. When the glass tilt sunroof is subsequently initialized using the control button, 
this button must remain pressed until the initialization procedure is concluded. 

The control button is pressed and held in the lift sunroof direction. The initialization run 
starts up approxlmately.15 seconds after pressing the control button. 

GlassTiltSunroof 

The glass tilt sunroof can be replaced only together with the sunroof visor. 

The motors and the control unit can be replaced individually. The MDS module must be 
encoded and initialized after replacement. 


27 

E6x Body Electronics 



E61 Panorama Glass Sunroof 


The panorama glass sunroof in the E61 is the same as the panorama glass sunroof on 
the E53 and the E83. The functional principle is therefore only briefly mentioned here. 



The Multi Drive Sunroof module (M DS) controls and monitors the electric motors and 
therefore the movement of the panorama glass sunroof. The MDS is installed on the 
carrier behind the glove compartment. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

CD Changer(CDC) 

4 

Adaptive Headlight Module (AHL) 

2 

Body Basic Module (KBM) 

5 

Multi Drive Sunroof Module (MDS) 

3 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

6 

Passive Go (Comfort Access) 


28 

E6x Body Electronics 



































Functions of the Control Button 


The control button has three directions of movement. There are therefore three different 
functions available: a manual function, a pressure-point function and a double-click func¬ 
tion. The double-click function is when the control button is pressed beyond the pressure 
point orto the raise position twice in quick succession. This allows the customerto open 
or close the panorama glass sunroof automatically regardless of its current position. 

The current movement of the panorama glass sunroof can be stopped by pressing the 
control button in the opposite operating direction. The panorama glass sunroof control 
button switches to earth and is supplied with powerfrom terminal 58g via the M DS. 

Panorama Glass Sunroof Functions 


OJ > 1 ) 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Slide/tilt glass roof panel 

4 

Rear Visor 

2 

Tilt glass roof panel 

5 

VisorGap 

3 

Front visor 




29 

E6x Body Electronics 





















Initial status: both glass roof panels and both visors closed. 

To Open SunroofVisor 

Press "OPEN" once 

• Signal from switch to control unit 

• Control unit activates rear motor 

• Rear motor opens both visors 

• Roof panel remains closed 

To Open Sunroof Visorand Roof Panel 

Press "OPEN" twice (double-click) 

• Signal from switch to control unit 

• Control unit initially activates rear motor 

• Rear motor opens both visors 

• With a time offset, control unit activates front motor 

• F rant motor opens front roof panel 

• Rear motor raises wind deflector 

Tilt Position 

Press "TILT" once 

• Signal from switch to control unit 

• Control unit activates both motors 

• Front motor tilts both roof panels 

• Rear motor moves both visors to gap position (vent position) 

To C lose Roof Panels 

Press "CLOSE" once 

• Signal from switch to control unit 

• Control unit activates front motor 

• F rant motor closes both roof panels 


30 

E6x Body Electronics 




To Close Sunroof Visorand Roof Panel 

Press "CLOSE" twice (double-click) 

• Signal from switch to control unit 

• Control unit initially activates front motor 

• F rant motor closes both roof panels 

• With time delay, control unit activates rear motor 

• Rear motor closes both visors and releases the wind 
deflector so that the roof panel can press it down. 

To Close Sunroof Visor 

(only possible with roof panel already closed) 

Press "CLOSE" once 

• Signal from switch to control unit 

• Control unit activates rear motor 

• Rear motor closes both visors 

Speed Control of Wind Deflector with Roof Open 

As from a driving speed of 140 km/h, the control unit receives a speed signal from the 
DSC control unit. The control unit then activates the rear motor that releases the wind 
deflector (motor turns only slightly, the sunroof visors do not move). As a result, the wind 
deflector is pressed into a lower position. 

Toll Operation 

All control functions are also available as toll functions (comfort functions). 

They are activated by pressing beyond the switch notch. 

• Open sunroof visor only 

• Open sunroof visorand roof panel (up to comfort setting) 

• Roof panel tilt position and visor vent position 

• Close roof panel only 

• Close roof panel and sunroof visor 

• C lose sunroof visor only with roof panels already closed 


31 

E6x Body Electronics 





Convenient Opening and Closing via Key 

The roof can also be operated by pressing and holding the remote control 
in "open" or "close" direction. 

Initialization 

• Press switch in tilt position 

• Both roof panels move to tilt position, both visors move to vent position 

• Press and hold switch for 15 seconds 

• Initialization begins (keep switch pressed) 

• Both sunroof visors open 

• Both roof panels are lowered 

• Both roof panels open and close again 

• Both sunroof visors close 

• Release switch, panorama glass sunroof is initialized 

Anti-trapping Circuit 

Both the roof panels as well as the sunroof visors are equipped with an anti-trapping 
circuit. If the control unit recognizes a trapping situation, the corresponding motor is 
stopped and driven in the opposite direction. 

As a result, the roof panel or sunroof visor opens again (approximately. 15 cm) releasing 
the obstruction. 


32 

E6x Body Electronics 




Central Locking System 

The central locking system involves the actuation/evaluation of the doors, trunk and fuel 
filler flap. The central locking functions of the doors are equipped with double lock 
functions and operate in accordance with the two-motor principle. 

The door modules control the central locking functions of the front doors. The KBM 
controls the central locking in the rear area. 



02114_02 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Lock cylinder, driver's door 

12 

Door contact, driver's door 

2 

Trunk release button, interior 

13 

Central locking , driver's door 

3 

Central locking button 

14 

Door contact, front passenger door 

4 

Remote control (key) 

15 

Central locking, passenger door front 

5 

Lock cylinder, trunk/tailgate 

16 

Door contact, rear driver's side door 

6 

Trunk release button , exterior 

17 

Central locking, rear driver's side door 

7 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

18 

Door contact, rear passenger side door 

8 

Car Access System (CAS) 

19 

Central locking, rear passenger side door 

9 

Driver's door module (TMFA) 

20 

Central locking, fuel fillerflap 

10 

Passenger door module (TMBF) 

21 

Central locking, tailgate 

11 

Body Basic Module (KBM) 




33 


E6x Body Electronics 





































The central locking system consists of the following control inputs: 

• Driver's door lock cylinder 

• Center-lock button 

• Remote control key 

• Trunk lock cylinder 

The system can be additionally unlocked via the crash sensor and forced release is possi¬ 
ble by means of the "key inserted" signal in the CAS. A function is triggered when a 
status change at the respective input is detected. If several new ZV commands are given 
while a command is being carried out, only the last command will be subsequently exe¬ 
cuted. 

The CAS is the central locking master and is responsible for enabling all central locking 
procedures in the vehicle. 

The central locking can assume following statuses: 


Status 

Explanation 

Unlocked 

All locks are in the unlocked position, outer and inner door handles are operational. 

Selective Unlocked 

The driver's door in unlocked. All other locks are in the lock position. 

Locked 

All locks are in the lock position. Outer door handles are not operational. Inner door handles 

are operational 

Secured 

All locks are in the lock position. Inner and outer door handles are not operational. 

Opened 

At least one lock is in the unlocked position. 


Secure Lock (Double Lock) 

The secure lock function (locking of the vehicle from the outside using either the remote 
or the drivers door lock cylinder) uses a mechanical coupling to uncouple the locking pin 
of the doorfrom the lock.The vehicle can then no longer be opened by the following 
actions: 

• Pulling the locking buttons 

• Pulling the inner door handle 

• Pulling the outer door handle 

• Pressing the center-lock button 

Secure lock is only possible: 

• At terminal R off and key not inserted 

• After opening and closing the driver's door or Opening the passenger's door 

No action takes place following the secure lock request when the driver's door is open. 

A secure locked (secured) vehicle cannot be unlocked via diagnosis functions. 

A secure locked (secured) vehicle can be changed to "Lock status” by pressing the 
center console lock button (CLT). 

34 

E6x Body Electronics 

















The vehicle lock status is changed from secure to unlocked when the CAS recognizes a 
valid transponder key has been inserted. 

Automatic Locking 

If the system is not yet locked or if a door was opened with the ZV locked, a lock com¬ 
mand is executed on exceeding a speed of 16 km/h. 

Crash Unlock 

In the event of a crash, the safety and gateway module (SGM) releases the central locking 
system (ZV)via the bus network at terminal R or 15. 

The ZV assumes "crash mode" even when the central locking was already unlocked. 

Crash unlock is disabled when the vehicle status is secure lock. 

Crash mode is released when an unlock/lock request is made.This corresponds to deac¬ 
tivation of crash mode. 

Power on Status 

The central locking status does not change by disconnecting and reconnecting the 
supply voltage. There is no reaction if command inputs are active while reconnecting the 
supply voltage (reset). 

DWA - Central Lock Interface 

The anti-theft alarm system DWA is notan integral part of the central locking system, 
however, it requires commands and signals from this system. The central locking system 
(ZV) monitors the status of the doors, hood,trunk, fuel filler flap and terminals. The DWA 
monitors the tilt alarm sensor (NG) as well as the ultrasonic interior protection system 
(USES). 

The DWA is armed by means of any valid ZS command from an authorized control point 
or via the remote control. An LED provides an optical signal of the DWA status. 

The tilt alarm sensor and interior protection are switched off if a ZS command is initiated 
within 3 s after initially arming the DWA. 

The luggage compartment is accessible without triggering alarm even when the DWA is 
armed via the remote control. An alarm is triggered if the lock cylinder on the trunk is 
operated mechanically with the DWA armed. 

Remote Control FBD 

Evaluation of the logic remote control (FBD) signals is integrated in the CAS control unit. 
In addition to various otherfunctions, the central locking functions that can be coded in 
the key memory can be selected "personalized" in the CAS control unit. 

It is possible to actuate the central locking by means of a second remote control with the 
key inserted. 


35 

E6x Body Electronics 



Different personalized functions can be selected depending on the type of remote control 
key used. The functions "selective ZV", "lock as from 16 km/h" as well as "lock after 2 
minutes" can be coded in the CAS. 

The remote control number identifies the key on which the "unlock" button was last 
pressed. Irrespective of this function, the currently used key is always identified as the 
control point in connection with the "unlock trunk" function. 

Trunk Locking 

The trunk can be unlocked and opened via: 

• Radio remote control FBD 

• External trunk button on boot lid handle 

• Internal trunk button in driver's footwell 

• Lock cylinder on trunk; purely mechanical 

Hotel Setting 

The hotel setting is initiated via the lock cylinder of the trunk. The following control 
points are deactivated when the hotel setting is initiated: 

• Trunk button via remote control 

• Exteriortrunk button 

• Interior trunk button 

The trunk remains locked even when the vehicle is unlocked. The hotel setting is indicat¬ 
ed to the customer by means of the switch position. 

The push-button on the trunk is therefore only active when the vehicle is unlocked and 
stationary and not when the hotel setting is initiated. 

The interior button is additionally active even when the vehicle is locked but only up to 
the specified speed threshold. 

The system can always be unlocked via the remote control with the ignition key removed 
without the hotel setting engaged. 

Automatic Relock 

The central locking unlocks (selective or global, corresponding to coding) when a release 
command is triggered inadvertently via the remote control. If no door or hood/trunk is 
opened within 2 minutes, the central locking reassumes the locked status in connection 
with the coding "automatic relock." 


36 

E6x Body Electronics 



Car& Key Memory 

The central individualization elements are the coding data of the vehicle. Certain code- 
able functions are enabled for the car memory as part of the individualization procedure. 

In connection with the personalization, individual functions depending on the vehicle key, 
maximum 4, used to unlock the system, are also controlled forthe central locking. 
Otherwise the central locking operates in accordance with the coded basic setting. 

The central locking functions therefore depend on the personalization of the 4 vehicle 
keys and on the standard coding forthe vehicle. 

Codeable Key Memory Functions 


Coding 

Description 

Automatic relock 

Relock after 2 minutes 

Speed lock 

Lock from 16 km/h 

Selective unlock 

Only if the driver's door is unlocked 


Codeable CarMemory Functions 


Coding 

Description 

Terminal R prohibits trunk operation 

The trunk is not opened when terminal R is engaged 

Unlock on removing key 

The vehicle unlocks afterthe key is removed if the system 
was locked via the speed lock orterminal R lock. 

Crossover operation disabled 

A vehicle locked via the remote can not be unlocked with 

the key. 


37 

E6x Body Electronics 






















Windshield Wiping/Washer System 

The wipe/wash system is a conventional wipe/wash system with reset contact. All 
wipe/wash functions can be activated with the wiper switch once terminal R is on. The 
rain and light sensor (RLS) is fitted as standard. Wiper system functions are vehicle 
speed dependent. 

To reduce noise and wear, the load circuit of the wiper motor has been designed as an 
external double relay. The wipers are driven by an electric motor with a reducer gear. A 
transistor is integrated in the body base module (KBM)forthe washer fluid pump. 

The wiper blades have a new method of attachment to the windshield-wiper arm. 

The wash/wipe system no longer has ball-and-socket type washer jets. Instead, fan-type 
jets are used (fluidic jets). 

The washer jet heater is controlled by the IHKA module. And a headlight cleaning 
system is offered as an option 

TheTouring (E61) has a rearwindow wiperwith a separate rear window washer pump as 
standard. 

System Components 
Wiper Switch 

The wiperswitch is operated by a brief press (similar to E65).The wiper switch does not 
lock into place. 

The signal from the wiperswitch is passed on by the steering column switch cluster 
(SZL)to the Safety and gateway module (SGM).The SGM transmits the signal to the 
KBM. 

The axial switch on the end of the wiperswitch is used to activate automatic mode (auto¬ 
matic control of wipers by rain/light sensor). When automatic mode is not active, intermit¬ 
tentwipermode is controlled according to vehicle speed. 



38 

E6x Body Electronics 



Wiper System Overview 


byte flight 




Kl. 3D 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Steering Column Switch 

7 

Wiper Motor 

2 

SZL 

8 

Wipe/Wash Relay 

3 

RLS 

9 

Washer Fluid Pump 

4 

SGM 

10 

SRA Relay 

5 

CAS 

11 

SRA Pump 

6 

KBM 




39 

E6x Body Electronics 



























































































Rain and LightSensor(RLS) 

The rain/light sensor is integrated in the rear-view mirror pedestal attached to the 
windshield. The RLS is a combined rain sensor and ambient light sensor. It detects the 
amount of rain falling on the windshield in orderto control the windshield wipers, and the 
level of ambient light in orderto control the headlights. 

The rain sensor sends the "Switch on wipers" requestto the body basic module (KBM) 
via the body CAN-Bus (K-CAN). 

If the rain and light sensor should fail or be faulty, the KBM will take control. The KBM will 
switch to an emergency mode. Emergency mode is a speed-dependent intermittent 
mode. 



Safety and Gateway Module 

The SGM switches the wiper switch signal from the byteflightto the K-CAN via SZL. 

Steering Column Switch Cluster 

The steering-column switch cluster (SZL) forms the interface between the wiper switch 
and the Safety and gateway module (SGM).The signals are transmitted via the byteflight 
data bus. 

Integrated automatic heating and air-conditioning system 

The integrated automatic heating and air-conditioning module (IHKA) controls the 
washer-jet heating system. 


40 

E6x Body Electronics 




Body Basic Module (KBM) 

The body basic module (KBM) receives all the 
information that is required for operation of the 
wipe/wash system. 

The body base module activates the following 
components: 

• Dual relay module for the wiper motor 

• Relay for the headlight cleaning system 

• Washerfluid pump 

The KBM also controls the wash/wipe system 
on the Touring (E61) which also includes the 
wash/wipe system for the rear window). 

The body basic module is connected via the 
K-CAN and communicates with the: 

• Safety and gateway module (SGM) 

• Rain-light sensor (RLS) 

• Integrated automatic heating and air 
conditioning system (IHKA) 

The following systems are outputs/actuators ofthe wiper/washer system: 

Wiper Motor 

The wiper system is a twin-arm synchronous system with reciprocating action (four-bar 
linkage). The motor is a rotary motor without an electronic module and is controlled by 
KBM via a double relay. 

The wiper motor's end position (off position) is detected by a reset contact integrated in 
the wiper motor. The crank is permanently connected to the wiper motor. 




41 

E6x Body Electronics 



































































Touring (E61) 

The rear window wiper motor is mounted on the rear window and is controlled by the 
KBM via a relay. 

The rear window wiper motor's end position (off position) is detected by a reset contact 
integrated in the wiper motor. 

Windshield and RearWindow Washer Pump (on the Touring) 

Both washer pumps are attached to the washerfluid reservoir. The washer pumps are 
controlled by the KBM. The washer jets are not adjustable. The new-design washer jets 
(fluidic jets) produce a pulsating, fan-shaped jet of fluid. 

Headlamp Washer Pump 

The headlamp washer system is an option. The option includes a washerfluid reservoir 
which holds 5 liters instead of 3 liters. (Note: the Touring reservoir always holds 5 liters). 

The headlamp-washer pump is mounted on the washer-fluid reservoir. The washer 
pump is controlled by the KBM via a relay. 

Heated WasherJ ets 

The washer-jet heater system prevents the washer jets freezing in cold weather. 

The washer-jet heater system is controlled by the IHKA module on the basis of outside 
temperature (<3°C).The washer-jet heating system consists of heating resistors. 

System Functions 

The wash/wipe system incorporates the following functions: 

• Wiperfunctions 

• Windshield and rear window wash function (on the Touring) 

• Headlight washerfunction 

• Safety function 

Wiper Functions 

The windshield-wiperfunctions are available as soon as Terminal R status is ON. 

The following wiperfunctions are provided (see also wiper switch system): 

• Flick wipe (one-wipe) 

• Intermittent wipe 

• Wiper speed 1 

• Wiper speed 2 

• Automatic wipe controlled by rain-light sensor 


42 

E6x Body Electronics 




Touring (E61) 

The rear window is wiped intermittently (the customer can program the duration of the 
intervals, see Owner's Handbook). 

No wiper operation is allowed when the rear window is open (via rear window contact 
switch). 

When reverse gear is engaged intermittent operation switches to constant wiping. 

Windshield and Rear Window Wash Function (ontheTouring) 

The windshield-washerfunctions are available as soon as Terminal R status is ON. 

To operate the windshield washer, the wiper switch is pulled backwards (towards driver). 

Touring: To wash the rear window, the wiper switch must be pushed forwards (away from 
the driver) (speed 2). 

The washer pump continues running as long as the switch is held in that position. If the 
wiper switch is operated only momentarily (< 300 ms), only the washer pump switches 
on. If the switch is held in position for longer, the wipers come into action after a short 
delay. After the washer pump has switched off, the wipers complete three more wipes to 
dry the windshield. 

Headlamp Washer System 

When the low beams headlights are switched on, the headlamps are washed every 10th 
time the windshield washer is operated. 

After ignition ON and dipped beam headlights ON: 

The headlamps are cleaned at the same time as the first wash movement for the 
windshield. 

Wash-cycle sequence: 

• 0.7 seconds ON 

• 1.3 seconds OFF 

• 0.7 seconds ON 

After the headlamps have been washed, they cannot be washed again for another 10 
minutes (repeat lock). 

The repeat lock is reset byTerminal R status OFF. 


43 

E6x Body Electronics 



Safety Function 

T he signal from the reset contact on the wiper motor (also the rear window wiper on the 
E61) is used as an anti-jamming function forthe wiper motor. If the signal from the 
resetting switch is not present when the wiper motor is switched on, the wiper motor is 
switched off again. 

The wiper motor can then only be switched on one more time. 

Afterthat, the wiper motor can only be switched on subject to the following conditions: 

• 3 minutes have elapsed 

• Terminal R OFF followed byTerminal R ON 

The wiper motor can only be switched on by operating the wiper switch (not automatical¬ 
ly due to risk of injury). 

Once the anti-jamming function has been activated, the windshield-washer and head¬ 
lamp-washer pumps can be operated 3 more times. 

Replacing the Wiper System 

Note: Operate the windshield-wiper switch before fitting the windshield-wiper arms. 

Press the windshield-wiper switch once before fitting the windshield-wiper arms. 

The wiper motor will then return to the parked position. 

A replacement windshield-wiper system is supplied set to the change-over position. This 
enables fitting of the left-hand mounting bracket (2 screws). 


44 

E6x Body Electronics 



Workshop Hints 


Wiper Blades 

The new-design wiper blades make removing/refitting easier and quicker. 

When the wiper blades are replaced, the wiper-blade bearings are replaced as well. Worn 
wiper blade bearings do not therefore necessitate replacement of the windshield-wiper 
arms. The angle at which the wiper blade is set on the windshield-wiper arm is 
adjustable (±4°). 

The wiper blades carry a model identification code (e.g. 5). The fixing geometry of the 
wiper-blade bearing prevents reversal of the left and right wiper blades. 



WasherJ ets 

The washer jets are no longer adjustable (not ball-and-socket type). The E60 is fitted with 
fluidic washer jets. These jets wet the entire surface of the windshield (fan-shaped jet). It 
is neither possible nor necessary for the customer/service technician to adjust the jet. 



45 

E6x Body Electronics 






















Car Access System 

The CAS of the E60 is based on the CAS of the E65.The internal designation is CAS 2. 

The following changes have been made compared with the CAS of the E65: 

• Direct connection to the K-CAN 

• Repeater function has been omitted 

• Ignition starter switch and the CAS are 2 separate components 

• Data transfer as part of the Condition Based Service 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Light switch with control panel 

4 

CAS 

2 

Instrument Cluster 

5 

Light Module 

3 

SZL 

6 

TM FA 


46 

E6x Body Electronics 






























The CAS includes the following functions: 

• Reading in ignition starter switch (ZAS) 

• Transponder authentication 

• Terminal control 

• Electronic immobilizer enable to injection system 

• Master function for central locking system (Z V) 

• Master function for power windows (FH)and slide/tilt sunroof (S HD) 

• Remote control services (FBD) 

• Internal CAS functions 

- Wake-up signals 

- Sleep signals 

• Vehicle functions 

- Personalization 

- Auto encoding of vehicle model/transmitter 

- Vehicle order 

- Total distance recorder 

- Condition Based Service CBS 

- Voltage supply, brake-light switch 

Wake-upTime 

The vehicle can be woken up by various control units. 

These control units have different wake-up times. 


Control Unit 

Wake-up time 

CAS 

750 milliseconds 

SGM 

500 milliseconds 

IBS 

550 milliseconds 


47 

E6x Body Electronics 














CAS System Overview 


fl-CJv. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

KBM 

12 

Integrated Power Supply Module (IVM) 

2 

SGM 

13 

Starter 

3 

CAS 

14 

Hood Contact 

4 

DM E (ECM) 

15 

Ignition/Starter Switch 

5 

EGS/SMG 

16 

Remote 

6 

Output EWS 

17 

Radio Receiver 

7 

OutputTerminal R (KLR) 

18 

Brake Light Switch 

8 

OutputTerminal 15 Wake-up 

19 

Clutch Switch Module 

9 

OutputTerminal 15-1 to 15-3 

20 

Centerlock Button 

10 

OutputTerminal 30g Relay 

21 

DSC 

11 

ACC wake-up line 15WUP_RS 

22 

Trunk Lock Cylinder 


48 

E6x Body Electronics 






























































Workshop Hints 

Condition Based Service 

The data for Condition Based Service (CBS) is updated during each journey. The fault 
memory data is also updated during each journey. The conditions for this are: 

• Activation of terminal 15, speed exceeded 50 km/h and speed dropped below 
30 km/h 

• The data is updated after a distance of 10 km has been covered and after speed has 
dropped below 30 km/h 

Manual Update of CBS Data 

The procedure for transferring current data to the key during servicing is as follows: 

- Insert key in ignition and turn to position "R" 

- Press and hold Centerlock button 

- After 15 s the CBS data will have been transferred to the key 

- Read out the key 

Manual Update of Fault Memory Data 

- Press and hold Centerlock button 

- Insert key in ignition 

- Turn key from position "0" to position "R" 

- After 15 s, the fault memory data will have been transferred to the key 

- Read out the key 


49 

E6x Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - CAS 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, locate the CAS and prepare to connect the 
appropriate test cables. 

Using the Oscilloscope, measure the EWS signal between the CAS and the DME 
(ECM). 


Describe the signal shown and record scope settings below: 


Using the appropriate fused jumper, ground the EWS signal. Remove ignition key for 
20 seconds, then attempt to start vehicle. 

What is observed regarding vehicle starting, fault codes etc? 


Using the correct ETM, list the correct CAS pin numbers forthe following: 

SBE/OC-3 Powersupply/Wakeup 
SZL power supply/Wakeup 

ACC Power supply/Wakeup _ 

KL30g _ 

Brake light switch input 


50 

E6x Body Electronics 





Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the complaint outlined below. 
Complete worksheet using the "Complaint, Cause, Correction" format. 

Vehicle: Chassis#: Production Date: 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 


51 

E6x Body Electronics 





C lassroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What is different between the CAS module in the E65/66 and the CAS module in 
the 5 and 6 series? 


2. Describe the communication path between the driver's door window switch and 
the passenger door power window motor: 


3. Describe how the byteflight bus is involved in power window operation: 


4. How is the LIN bus involved in the power window system? 


5. Where are the door contact switches located and what is this input used for? 


52 

E6x Body Electronics 


























C lassroom Exercise - Review Questions 


Regarding sunroof operation, What is "Panic Mode” and How is it initiated? 


How does the E63 sunroof differ from the E60 sunroof? 


Describe the signal path for the operation of the wipers? 


What special tool is used to adjust the washer nozzles on the E60? 






















Anti-theft Alarm System 

The anti-theft alarm system (DWA) detects and reports attempts at vehicle tampering or 
intrusion. The vehicle interior is monitored by the ultrasonic interior motion detector 
(USIS). If an attempt is made to break into the vehicle and to enterthe interior, the DWA 
alarm is triggered. A tilt alarm sensor integrated into the siren monitors the vehicle's 
position. The tilt alarm sensor detects if the vehicle is raised or towed away. The DWA 
system uses an acoustic alarm via siren and visual indication via the exterior lights which 
are controlled through the Lamp M odule (LM). 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

DWA control unit 

7 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

2 

DWA LED in rearview mirror housing 

8 

Passenger's door module (TM BF) 

3 

Siren (Acoustic Alarm) 

9 

Car Access System (CAS) 

4 

Light Module (forvisual indication) 

10 

Tilt alarm sensor in siren housing (SINE) 

5 

Body Basic Module (KBM) 

11 

Ultrasonic interior motion sensor (USIS) 

6 

Driver's door module (TMFA) 




54 


E6x Body Electronics 





























Components 

The anti-theft alarm system receives input 
signals from the following components: 

Ultrasonic Interior Motion Sensor 

The ultrasonic interior motion sensor uses 
ultrasonic waves to monitor the vehicle interi¬ 
or. Movement is detected if the reflection 
(echo) of the ultrasonic waves changes. The 
sensitivity of the ultrasonic interior motion 
sensor can be adapted to different conditions 
(e.g. sliding/tilting sunroof open). 



US IS with integrated 
DWA module 


Tilt Alarm Sensor 

The tilt alarm sensor monitors the vehicle's 
horizontal position (inclination in longitudinal 
and lateral directions).The signal from the tilt 
alarm sensor is evaluated by the microproces¬ 
sor in the siren. The tilt alarm sensor detects a 
change in the vehicle position and triggers a 
DWA alarm. 

Hood Contact Switch 

The hood contact switch is a ground input to 
the CAS to indicate the status of the hood. 

The following control units are involved in the 
anti-theft alarm system: 



DWA Control Unit 

The DWA control unit is integrated into the housing forthe ultrasonic interior motion 
sensor. The DWA control unit activates the siren via a single-wire bus. The DWA control 
unit is connected to the K-CAN. 


Car Access System 

The CAS control unit monitors the status of the central locking system. The hood 
contact switch is connected to the CAS control unit. The opening of the hood is thus 
monitored (open orclosed).The CAS control unit feeds this signal to the DWA control 
unit via the K-CAN. The CAS control unit also supplies the flowing signals: 

• Trunk-lid unlocking via remote control 

• Key in ignition starter switch 

• Status of convenience opening/closing 


55 

E6x Body Electronics 



Driver's and Front-Passenger Door Modules 

The door modules (TMFA and TM BF) supply information about the position of the front 
powerwindows.The signal is fed to the DWA control unit via the K-CAN. 

In addition, the door modules monitorthe door contacts in the frontdoors. 

Body Basic Module (KBM) 

The KBM supplies the position ofthe rear powerwindows.The signal is fed to the DWA 
control unit via the K-CAN. 

The body basic module also monitors: 

• Door contacts in rear doors 

• Tailgate contact switch 

• Rear window contact switch (E61 only) 

Sliding/tilting Sunroof Control Unit 

The SHD control unit supplies information about the position ofthe sliding/tilting sunroof 
(or Panorama glass sunroof on the E61).The signal is fed to the DWA control unit via the 
K-CAN. 

Integrated Heating and Air Conditioning System 

The integrated heating and air conditioning system (IHKA) controls the independent 
ventilation function. The IHKA feeds this signal to the DWA control unit via the K-CAN. 
The signal for the independent ventilation function is needed to calibrate the sensitivity of 
the ultrasonic interior motion sensor. 

Light Module 

The light module (LM) actuates the lighting system for the visual DWA alarm. The DWA 
control unit feeds the triggering signal to the light module via the K-CAN. 

The following actuators are actuated for the anti-theft alarm system: 

Siren with Integrated Tilt Alarm Sensor 

The siren with integrate tilt alarm sensor (SINE) emits the acoustic DWA alarm. The DWA 
control unit activates the siren via a single-wire bus. In addition to the DWA alarm, the 
siren can also emit an acoustic confirmation signal when the system is primed or 
disarmed (can be set on the Central Information Display and controller). 


56 

E6x Body Electronics 



DWA LED 



The DWA LED is located on the underside of the interior mirror and provides a visual 
indication of the status of the alarm system. The DWA LED is directly actuated by the 
DWA control unit via a wire. The following displays are possible: 

• DWA LED off: DWA is disarmed. 

• DWA LED flashes (frequency = 0.5 Hz): DWA is primed. 

• DWA LED flashes with a frequency of 2 Hz for 10 seconds and then continues with 

a frequency of 0.5 Hz: DWA is primed but a door or hatch is not closed or a sensor is 
defective. 

• DWA LED flashes with a frequency of 2 Hz for 5 minutes and then continues with a 
frequency of 0.5 Hz: alarm is triggered. 

• DWA LED lights up for 2 seconds and then flashes with a frequency of 0.5 Hz: the 
ultrasonic interior motion sensor and the tilt alarm sensor are deactivated. 


57 

E6x Body Electronics 






Principle of Operation 

The anti-theft alarm system incorporates the following functions: 

• Priming/disarming 

• DWA alarm triggering (alarm-trigger signal) 

• Automatic adaptation of sensitivity of ultrasonic interior motion sensor 

• Deactivating interior motion sensor and tilt alarm sensor 

• Emergency function for acoustic DWA alarm 

• Combined operation with lock cylinder and remote control 

Arming (priming)/disarming 

The anti-theft alarm system is primed when the central locking is locked/deadlocked. 
Locking/deadlocking requires: 

The driver's door to be opened and closed after terminal 15 is switched OFF. 

The DWA control unit transmits the "Prime" message to the siren with integrated tilt 
alarm sensor (SINE) via the local data bus. The siren is then immediately primed. 

3 seconds after being primed, the door and hatch contacts are monitored. The condition 
forthis is that the contacts have idle status (doors and tailgate / rear window on E61 
closed). 

The DWA LED starts flashing and the hazard warning lights flash once as a visual confir¬ 
mation. Depending on the national version, a short acoustic warning tone may also sound 
from the siren (see national version). 

After the DWA has been primed and all doors and hatches are closed (including the rear 
window on the E61): 

• The ultrasonic interior motion sensor starts to map out the interior by means of ultra¬ 
sonic waves.The interiorcan be monitored after approximately 20 seconds. 

• The monitoring of the interior is interrupted if the side windows and/or the sliding/tilt¬ 
ing sunroof are closed using the convenience closing function. 

• Like the interior monitoring, the tilt monitoring does not start until the doors and 
hatches are closed. When it is activated, the tilt alarm sensorfirst conducts a 30 
second long calibration sequence. Tilt monitoring does not start until the calibration 
sequence has been completed. 

• If the luggage compartment is opened during the calibration sequence, the calibra¬ 
tion sequence is interrupted.The calibration sequence is then restarted when the 
luggage compartment is closed again. The monitoring functions of the ultrasonic 
interior motion sensor and the tilt alarm sensor have priority. If a faulty door or hatch 
contact is detected, this will automatically be assumed to be closed. 


58 

E6x Body Electronics 




• The anti-theft alarm system is disarmed when the central-locking system is 
unlocked. The DWA LED stops flashing and the hazard warning lights flash twice 
as a visual confirmation. 

• The luggage compartment can also be unlocked and opened with the remote con¬ 
trol without the alarm being triggered, even if the alarm system is activated. When 
the luggage compartment is opened, the interior monitoring and tilt monitoring are 
deactivated. The interior monitoring and tilt monitoring are reactivated as soon as the 
luggage compartment is closed again. 

DWA Alarm Triggering (Alarm-trigger Signal) 

The DWA alarm is triggered if an alarm status is detected while the alarm system is 
activated. The following will triggerthe DWA alarm: 

• Forced opening of a door: Bus signal from door contact (via door modules or KBM. 

• Forced opening of luggage compartment: Bus signal from tailgate contact switch via 
KBM. 

• Forced opening of rear window on E61: Bus signal from rearwindow contact switch 
(via KBM) 

• Forced opening of hood: Bus signal from hood contact switch (via CAS) 

• Movement in interior: Signal from ultrasonic interior motion sensor 

• Vehicle in inclined position: Signal from tilt alarm sensor 

• Open circuit in local data bus (between DWA control unit and siren) 

• Monitoring of vehicle battery: 

- On-board supply voltage drops from 7.5 to 6.5 volts within 40 minutes 

- Battery positive cable cut through 

- On-board supply voltage >18 volts 

When a DWA alarm is triggered, the DWA control unit activates the siren via the local data 
bus. At the same time, the DWA control unit transmits a message through the K-CAN. 
The light module activates the visual alarm via the lighting system. 

The siren can trigger an acoustic alarm if it is separated from the vehicle electrical system 
by manipulation while the DWA is activated. 

If the local data bus is separated as this happens, the DWA control unit will also trigger 
the visual alarm. 

A DWA alarm will immediately be cancelled if: 

• The DWA is disarmed (e.g. with the remote control) 

• The message "key is in ignition lock" is detected (from CAS) 


59 

E6x Body Electronics 




CAS Authentication to PreventTampering 

To prevent the DWA from being easily disarmed by the central locking and tailgate status 
message "Central locking control" using a CAN tool, the CAS authenticates itself with the 
DWA. 

Each time an unlocked vehicle is locked for the first time, the CAS sends an authentica¬ 
tion to the DWA. Any further "locking" signals are then no longer accepted. 

When the system is disarmed, the DWA expects the CAS to again send authentication 
with the first locking operation. 

The system permits two disarming attempts with the wrong authentication, after which 
an alarm is issued. 

Forced Disarming 

The DWA is forcibly disarmed if a person located in the vehicle centrally locks the vehicle 
and then inserts the key into the ignition. The CAS evaluates this action and transmits a 
"locked" message.The DWA is thus disarmed. 

Independent Voltage Supply 

Due to the independent voltage supply, the emergency siren can issue an alarm even 
when the vehicle voltage supply is disconnected. The independent voltage supply is pro¬ 
vided by Lithium (Li) cells. The Li cells are not rechargeable. The status of the batteries 
can be read out via the diagnostics system. 

Reverse Polarity Detection 

The reverse polarity detection system detects reverse polarity in the event of the vehicle 
being jump-started and stores this in its information memory. 

System Power-Down for Storage 

If the emergency siren is disarmed and without an external power supply, the batteries 
switch to a low power status. Current consumption is then a maximum of 25 A. 

The electronics return the emergency siren to its normal operating status when the vehi¬ 
cle battery is reconnected. 

Bus Monitoring 

If the DWA detects messages on the local DWA bus that indicate attempts to disarm or 
tamper with the emergency siren orthe tilt sensor, an alarm will be triggered. 


60 

E6x Body Electronics 


Automatic adaptation of sensitivity of ultrasonic interior motion sensor 

To prevent false alarms, the sensitivity of the ultrasonic interior motion sensor is adapted 
to the vehicle's conditions. To do this, the DWA control unit (and thus also the ultrasonic 
interior motion sensor) receives the following information via the K-CAN: 

• Position of front power windows (door module, driver and front passenger) 

• Position of rear power windows (body basic module) 

• Position of sliding/tilting sunroof (sliding/tilting sunroof control unit) 

• Status of comfort functions, e.g. convenience opening (Car Access System) 

• Independent ventilation function (IHKA) 

The range (sensitivity) of the ultrasonic signals is adapted. The positions of the side win¬ 
dows and the sliding/tilting sunroof are evaluated by the DWA. If no position value is avail¬ 
able, a less sensitive setting is selected. 

If the DWA is activated and a comfort function is executed (e.g. convenience closing 
using remote control): 

• If the position of the side windows or sliding/tilting sunroof is changed, the interior 
monitoring function is deactivated for as long as the closing procedure runs. 

• After the closing movement has been completed, or at most after 25 seconds the 
positions of the side windows and sliding/tilting sunroof are re-evaluated and the 
sensitivity adapted. 

The switching-on of the independent ventilation is also monitored to prevent false alarms 
(movement in vehicle interior caused by airflow). 

Deactivating interior motion sensor and tilt monitoring 

It may be advisable to deactivate the tilt monitoring and interior motion sensor under the 
following conditions: 

• When the vehicle is being transported (e.g. rail, ferry) 

• When the vehicle is parked in a two-level garage 

• When persons or animals remain in the vehicle 

The tilt monitoring and interior motion sensor are deactivated when the command 
"lock/doublelock" is executed twice within the space of 10 seconds (e.g. with the remote 
control). 

The DWA LED indicates the deactivation by lighting up for 2 seconds. 

The ultrasonic interior motion sensor and the tilt alarm sensor can also be permanently 
deactivated (see Car and Key Memory). 


61 

E6x Body Electronics 




Emergency Function for Acoustic DWA Alarm 

If the siren fails during an alarm, or if the local data bus is interrupted, the acoustic alarm 
is emitted from the fanfare horn. To do this, the DWA control unit transmits a message to 
the steering column switch cluster (SZL). 

Combined Operation with LockCylinderand Remote Control 

The alarm system can be primed and disarmed by either the door lock or the remote 
control (= combined operation). In some countries, insurance requirements prohibit such 
combined operation. 

In the event of the combined operation failing, the alarm system can still be primed at the 
door lock, but cannot be disarmed at the door lock. Disarming is only possible with the 
remote control. The function of the combined operation can be encoded in the CAS con¬ 
trol unit. 

DWA Alarm Output (coding) 

Individual settings can be made with the Car& Key Memory 

Acoustic confirmation from siren when primed and disarmed. The alarm tone can be set 
to an intermittent tone for 30 seconds 

Panic Mode 

Panic mode enables the DWA alarm to be triggered to attract attention in the event of a 
threat from the outside or an accident. 

Panic mode is triggered with the remote control. To do this, the special button has to be 
pressed for 3 seconds. Panic mode can be triggered regardless of the DWA status 
(primed/disarmed). Panic mode is ended when any button on the remote control is 
pressed. 

If the siren fails during panic mode, the acoustic alarm is emitted from the fanfare horn 
(emergency function). 

The duration of the alarm in panic mode is unlimited (until the vehicle battery is flat). 


62 

E6x Body Electronics 



E63/E64 Alarm System (DWA) 

The alarm system detects and warns of any attempts to break in or tamper with the 
vehicle. The system is installed in various types of vehicles in different country-specific 
versions. The DWA of the E63 is equipped with multiplex microwave sensors, the CAN- 
Sine and the DWA LED. 



New Features for DWA on E63 and E64 Vehicles 

For the first time, not only the tilt alarm sensor, but also the software for the anti-theft 
alarm is integrated in the emergency power siren (SINE = siren and tilt alarm sensor). 
The DWA control unit used to date is no longer installed. 

Also, new for BMW vehicles, the new multiplex microwave sensors (M uW) 
are fitted in the E63/E64. 

The advantages of these MuW sensors are: 

• Interior protection 

• Effective MuW sensor detection during interior monitoring 

• No false alarms triggered by M uW sensors during interior monitoring 

Advantages of Microwave Sensors 

The microwave sensors can be installed in hidden locations. 

The interior monitoring function works, for example, even when the side windows are 
open. The DWA control unit in the emergency power siren is connected to the 
microwave sensors by a sub-bus. When the boot-lid lock is mechanically unlocked with 
the key, the DWA alarm is triggered. 

The anti-theft alarm system, integrated in the CAN-Sine, communicates with the 
components via the K-CAN or via the DWA bus. 


63 

E6x Body Electronics 



DWA Overview (6 Series) 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hall Sensor, driver's door 

8 

M ultiplex microwave sensor, rear passenger side 

2 

Driver's door module (TM FA) 

9 

M ultiplex microwave sensor, Rear driver's side 

3 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

10 

M ultiplex microwave sensor, drivers side door 

4 

Passengerdoormodule (TMBF) 

11 

Hood contact 

5 

Hall sensor, passenger's door 

12 

CAN-SINE tilt alarm sensor with integrated emer¬ 
gency current siren 

6 

DWA LED 

13 

Car Access System (CAS 2) 

7 

Multiplexmicrowave sensor, passengerdoor) 

14 

Lock, driver's door 


64 

E6x Body Electronics 















































Components 

The following component description concerns changes to the DWA components on the 
6 series (E63/E64). Unless otherwise mentioned, the components are the same as the 
5 series (E60/E61). 

The anti-theft alarm system receives input signals from the following components: 

Microwave Sensors 

The microwave sensors monitor the vehicle interior. Movement is detected if the reflec¬ 
tion (echo) of the microwaves changes. The sensitivity of the microwave sensors is 
adapted for different conditions (e.g. vehicle model, installation location of microwave 
sensors). 

Two of the microwave sensors are installed on the inner door panel of the driver's door 
and front-passenger door. The other two additional microwave sensors are installed on 
the inside ofthe B-pillars. 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Microwave Sensor 

2 

Inner door panel 


65 

E6x Body Electronics 













Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Microwave Sensor 

2 

B-pillar 


Construction 

Each microwave sensor consists of the following 
components: 

• Transmitter unit 

• Receiver unit 

• Interface to sub-bus for anti-theft alarm 

• Internal circuit for 5-volt power supply 



66 

E6x Body Electronics 




































Car Access System (CAS) 

The CAS monitors the central locking system. 

The bonnet contact switch is connected to the CAS.The bonnet is thus monitored (open 
or closed). The CAS feeds the signal to the DWA control unit in the emergency power 
siren via the K-CAN.The CAS supplies the following signals: 

• Boot-lid unlocking via remote control 

• Key in ignition starter switch or terminal 15 ON 

• Status of convenience opening/closing 

• Authentication by CAS as protection against manipulation (referto E60/E61) 

Driver's Door Module (TMFA)and Front-passenger Door Module (TMBF) 

The door modules provide information about the position of the door contacts. The signal 
is fed to the DWA control unit in the emergency power siren via the K-CAN.The driver's 
door module also provides the signal from the lock cylinder. 

Body Basic Module (KBM) 

The body basic module monitors the boot lid (open or closed). The signal is fed to the 
DWA control unit in the emergency power siren via the K-CAN. 

When the boot-lid lock is mechanically unlocked with the key, the DWA alarm is triggered. 

LightModule (LM) 

The light module actuates the lighting system for the visual DWA alarm. The DWA control 
unit feeds the triggering signal to the light module via the K-C AN. 

The following actuators are actuated for the anti-theft alarm system: 

Emergency power siren with integrated tilt alarm sensor (SINE) 

The emergency power siren emits the acoustic DWA alarm. In addition to the DWA 
alarm, the emergency power siren can also emit an acoustic confirmation signal when the 
system is activated or deactivated (can be set on the Central Information Display (CID) 
and controller). 

■ DWA LED 

The DWA LED is on the bottom of the inside rearview mirror. The LED gives a visual 
indication of the status of the anti-theft alarm. It is directly actuated by the DWA control 
unit in the emergency power siren via a wire. 

Forthe operation of the DWA LED, referto the E60 DWA section. 


67 

E6x Body Electronics 


Principle of Operation 

The anti-theft alarm system incorporates the following functions: 

• Activating and deactivating 

• DWA alarm triggering (alarm-trigger signal) 

• Undervoltage recognition, overvoltage recognition, car battery monitoring (positive 
and negative cables) 

• Monitoring of sub-bus 

• Deactivating interior motion sensor and tilt monitoring 

• Emergency function for acoustic DWA alarm 

• Combined operation with lock cylinder and remote control 

Activating and Deactivating 

The anti-theft alarm system is activated when the central locking is locked/secured. 
Locking/securing requires: 

• Drivers doorto be opened and closed afterterminal 15 is switched OFF. 

• The emergency power siren is then immediately activated. 

• 3 seconds after activation, the door and hatch contacts are monitored. This is condi¬ 
tional on the contacts being in their rest position (doors and hatches closed). 

• The DWA LED starts to flash as a visual acknowledgement.The hazard warning 
lights flash once. 

• Depending on the national version, a short acoustic warning tone may also sound 
from the emergency power siren (see national version). 

SensorOperation 

The microwave sensor is a movement detector. The microwave sensor detects move¬ 
ment and the direction of movement (changes in distance) in the entire vehicle interior. 
The range/sensitivity of the microwave sensors is pre-set (depending on vehicle model 
and equipment). 

3 seconds after the last door or hatch is closed, the microwave sensor starts its 
reference run. 

During the reference run, the vehicle interior is "scanned". This allows any changes in the 
vehicle interior (e.g. objects left on the rear seat) to be recognized. A self-test monitors 
the correct functioning of the microwave sensors. The microwave sensors are operational 
20 seconds afterthe start of the reference run. 


68 

E6x Body Electronics 





CO 

C." 


The 4 microwave sensors monitorthe vehicle interior in zones. Forthis, the vehicle interi¬ 
or is divided into in 4 quadrants. 

The microwaves disperse in the shape of a sphere. 

The DWA control unit actuates the microwave sensors in the following order: 

The microwave sensors work in a frequency range of approximately. 2.5 GHz. The 
microwave sensor uses the Doppler effect to create the alarm trigger signal. 

The DWA control unit in the emergency power siren evaluates the signals from the 
microwave sensor and triggers the alarm. 

The emergency power siren for the acoustic alarm is actuated. The signal for the visual 
alarm is fed to the light module through the K-CAN. 


69 

E6x Body Electronics 














Tilt Alarm Sensor 

The tilt alarm sensor monitors the vehicle's horizontal position (inclination in longitudinal 
and lateral directions). 

T he signal from the tilt alarm sensor is evaluated by the DWA control unit. T he tilt alarm 
sensor detects when the vehicle is raised or towed away and triggers a DWA alarm. 



1. Rear Bumper 

2. Siren with integrated 
DWA functions and 
tilt sensor 


The following control units are involved in the anti-theft alarm system: 

DWA Control Unit 

The software for the DWA is integrated in the emergency power siren. The DWA control 
unit in the emergency power siren controls the anti-theft alarm. 

The microwave sensors are connected to the alarm system control unit by a single-wire 
bus (K-Bus).The DWA control unit is connected to the K-CAN. 

• After the DWA has been activated, and after all doors and flaps have been closed, 
the microwave sensors start to monitor the interior. The interior can be monitored 
after approximately. 20 seconds. 

• The monitoring of the interior is interrupted if the side windows and/orthe sliding/tilt¬ 
ing sunroof are closed using the convenience closing function. 

Like the interior monitoring, the tilt monitoring does not start until the doors and hatches 
are closed. When it is activated, the tilt alarm sensorfirst conducts a 30 second long ref¬ 
erence run. Tilt monitoring does not start until the reference run has been completed. 

If the luggage compartment is opened during the reference run, the reference run is 
interrupted. The reference run is then restarted when the luggage compartment is closed 
again. The monitoring function of the microwave sensors and the tilt alarm sensor have 
priority. If a faulty door or hatch contact is detected, this will automatically be assumed to 
be closed. 


70 

E6x Body Electronics 





The anti-theft alarm system is deactivated when the central-locking system is unlocked. 
The DWA LED stops flashing and the hazard warning lights flash twice as a visual confir¬ 
mation. Depending on the national version, a short acoustic warning tone (dual tone) may 
also sound from the emergency power siren (see national version). 

The boot lid can also be unlocked and opened with the remote control without the alarm 
being triggered, even if the alarm system is activated. When the boot lid is opened, the 
interior and tilt monitoring functions are deactivated. The interior monitoring and tilt moni¬ 
toring are reactivated as soon as the boot lid is closed again. 

DWA Alarm Triggering (Alarm-trigger Signal) 

The DWA alarm is triggered if an alarm status is detected while the alarm system is acti¬ 
vated. The following will trigger the DWA alarm: 

• Forced opening of a door: Bus signal from door module (door contact) 

• Forced opening of trunk lid: Bus signal from KBM (trunk lid contact switch) 

• Forced opening of hood: Bus signal from CAS (hood contact switch) 

• Movement in interior: signal from microwave sensors 

• Vehicle in inclined position: signal from tilt alarm sensor 

• Open circuit in sub-bus (between the alarm system control unit in the emergency 
power siren and the microwave sensors) 

• Undervoltage, overvoltage, car battery monitoring (positive and negative cables) 

When a DWA alarm is triggered, the DWA control unit activates the emergency power 
siren loudspeaker. At the same time, the DWA control unit transmits an alarm signal 
through the K-CAN.The light module activates the visual alarm via the lighting system. 

T he emergency power siren may also trigger an acoustic alarm if the anti-theft alarm is 
active and the emergency power siren is separated from the vehicle electrical system by 
manipulation (integral power supply from batteries). 

The DWA alarm is interrupted immediately underthe following conditions: 

• Anti-theft alarm is deactivated 

• Message "Key in ignition lock" (from CAS) and terminal 15 ON 


71 

E6x Body Electronics 




Undervoltage recognition, overvoltage recognition, car battery monitoring 

When the anti-theft alarm is active, the DWA control unit monitors the on-board supply 
voltage in the range between 6.5 and 17 volts. 

The DWA control unit recognizes the following deviations: 

• Undervoltage On-board supply voltage less than 6.5 volts 

• Overvoltage On-board supply voltage greaterthan 17 volts 

• On-board supply voltage drops from 7.5 to 6.5 volts within 40 minutes 

• Battery positive or negative cable cut through 

The voltage thresholds for overvoltage and undervoltage must be recognized for 
at least 250 milliseconds. 

M onitoring of sub- bus for anti-theft alarm 

The sub-bus between the alarm system control unitin the emergency power siren and 
the microwave sensors is monitored for open circuits. 

Deactivating interior motion sensor and tilt monitoring 

It may be advisable to deactivate the tilt monitoring and interior motion 
sensorunderthe following conditions: 

• When the vehicle is being transported (e.g. rail, ferry) 

• When the vehicle is parked in a two-level garage 

• When persons or animals remain in the vehicle 

The tilt monitoring and interior motion sensor are deactivated when the command 
"lock/secure" is executed twice within the space of 3 seconds (e.g. with the remote 
control). 

The DWA LED indicates the deactivation by lighting up for 2 seconds. 

The microwave sensors and the tilt alarm sensor can also be permanently deactivated 
(see Car and Key Memory).Emergency function for acoustic DWA alarm 

If the emergency power siren fails during an alarm, or if the sub-bus to the microwave 
sensors is interrupted, the acoustic alarm will be emitted through the fanfare horn. To do 
this, the DWA control unit transmits a message to the steering column switch cluster 
(SZL). 


72 

E6x Body Electronics 


Combined operation with lock cylinder and remote control 

The alarm system can be activated and deactivated by either the door lock or the remote 
control (= combined operation). In some countries, insurance requirements prohibit such 
combined operation. 

In the event of the combined operation failing, the alarm system can still be activated at 
the door lock, but cannot be deactivated at the door lock. Deactivation is only possible 
with the remote control. The combined operation function can be encoded in the Car 
Access System (CAS). 

Operation 

The visual and acoustic confirmation for activation and deactivation is not a function of 
the Car and Key M emory. 

The customer is able to set the type of confirmation using the Central Information Display 
and the controller (menu "Settings" under "Vehicle settings"). 

Panic Mode 

Panic mode enables attention to be attracted in the event of a threat from the outside or 
an accident (DWA alarm). Panic mode must be encoded. 

The button for trunk lid unlocking then works as a button for panic mode. 

The button has to be pressed for 3 seconds. 

Panic mode can be triggered regardless of DWA status (activated/deactivated). Panic 
mode is ended when any button on the remote control is pressed. If the emergency 
power siren fails during panic mode, the acoustic alarm is emitted from the fanfare horn 
(emergency function). 

The duration of the alarm in panic mode is unlimited (until the vehicle battery is flat). 


73 

E6x Body Electronics 


Park Distance Control PDC 


The E60 is equipped with the 8-channel PDC system which is carried overfrom the E65. 
On the 5 and 6 series, PDC is optional equipment. The system supports the driver in 
maneuvering in tight parking scenarios. 



TEO33D01 


On the E60, PDC has the following new features: 

• The PDC button is in the SZM. The signal from the PDC button is transferred to the 
PDC control unit through the K-CAN. 

• The signal from the reverse-light switch (reverse gear engaged) on vehicles with 
manual transmission is transferred from the light module to the PDC control unit via 
the K-CAN. 

• Display form of the optical warnings on the Central Information Display. 

For an automatic gearbox, the signal for reverse gear is made available by the EGS 
control unit by way of a K-CAN message. 

The PDC measures the distance to objects within its range with ultrasonic sensors. 
These sensors are carrier overfrom the E65. 


74 

E6x Body Electronics 

































Legend for System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

PDC Module 

9 

Car Access System (CAS) 

2 

Central Information Display (CID) 

10 

Light Module (LM) 

3 

M-ASK orCCC 

11 

Electronic Transmission Control (EGS) 

4 

Mid-Range loudspeaker (driver's door) 

12 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

5 

M id-Range loudspeaker (passenger door) 

13 

Instrument Cluster 

6 

M id-Range loudspeaker (left rear) 

14 

CenterConsole Switch Center(SZM) 

7 

M id-Range loudspeaker (right rear) 

15-18 

Ultrasonic Sensors (rear) 

8 

Trailer Module (AHM) Not for US 

19-22 

Ultrasonic Sensors (front) 


The driver is warned of an object that could cause a collision as follows: 

• Acoustic warning (via M-ASK (orCCC), and mid-range loudspeaker) 

• Visual warning (via Central Information Display) 

The P DC uses these two 2 warning functions to offer a degree of comfort for 
drivers who are hard of hearing or physically impaired. 

A fault in the PDC is indicated by a Check-Control message. 

Important: Responsibility remains with the driver at all times 

PDC is unable to take the place of the driver's personal assessment of obstacles. 

The ultrasonic sensors have a blind spot. Objects in this blind spot cannot be detected. 
The ability to detect objects can stretch the physical limits of ultrasonic measurements 
(no or poor reflection of ultrasonic impulses, e.g. trailer tow bars or narrow objects). 

Low objects that have already been indicated can "disappear", before a continuous tone 
sounds (e.g. a high curb). 

The evaluation of obstacles is thus the responsibility of the driver, even with PDC. 


76 

E6x Body Electronics 





































Components 

PDC consists of the following components: 

Ultrasonic Sensors 

There are 4 ultrasonic sensors in each of the front and rear bumpers. The sensors emit 
ultrasonic impulses. These ultrasonic impulses are reflected by obstacles (echo impulses). 

The ultrasonic sensors receive and amplify these echo impulses. The amplified echo 
impulses are then converted into a digital signal. Each ultrasonic sensor has its own 
microprocessor, its own power supply and its own data connection to the PDC control 
unit. 

Important: Measuring range of ultrasonic sensors 

The measuring range of the ultrasonic sensors is between approximately 25 centimeters 
and 200 centimeters. If the minimum distance that can be detected rises to an 
impermissible level, a fault message is entered in the fault memory. 

Dirt contamination, moisture, ice and snow can cause an impermissible rise in the mini¬ 
mum distance that can be detected. 

Note: C leaning the ultrasonic sensors 

To make sure the system remains fully operational, keep the ultrasonic sensors clean and 
free from ice. Do not clean by spraying high-pressure washers directly at the ultrasonic 
sensors. When cleaning, always maintain a minimum distance of at least 10 centimeters. 



77 

E6x Body Electronics 






PDC Button 

The PDC button is in the center console switch cluster (SZL). The signal from the PDC 
button is transferred through the K-CAN to the PDC control unit. 



The PDC button is used to manually switch the Park Distance Control system on and off. 
When the PDC is switched on, the function LED in the PDC button lights up. 

If a fault develops in the PDC, the function LED in the PDC button flashes. 


PDC Control Unit 

The PDC control unit controls the ultrasonic sensors for transmitting ultrasonic impulses. 
The PDC control unit also receives the digital signals from the individual ultrasonic sen¬ 
sors. By comparing the individual digital signals, the PDC control unit calculates the mini¬ 
mum distance between the ultrasonic sensor and the object. 



When an object is detected, an acoustic warning and a visual warning are given. 

The PDC control unit is connected to the following control units via the bus systems: 

Multi-audio System Controller/CarCommunication Computer 

The multi-audio system controller (M-ASK) or Car Communication Computer (CCC) 
emits the PDC acoustic warning through the mid-range loudspeakers. 

Central Information Display 

The visual PDC warnings are given in the Central Information Display (CID). 

In addition, information regarding a Check-Control message that may be present is 
shown. 


78 

E6x Body Electronics 











Instrument C luster 

A current Check-Control message is indicated by a symbol in the LCD display in the 
instrument cluster. Moreover, the instrument cluster also provides the exterior tempera¬ 
ture and the mileage reading for the PDC control unit. 

Ice and frost can cause an unexpected response from the ultrasonic sensors. The 
response characteristics of the ultrasonic sensors changes depending on the exterior 
temperature. 

If a fault is stored in the fault memory, the kilometer reading and the exterior temperature 
are also stored. 

DSC Control Unit 

The DSC control unit supplies the PDC with information about the roadspeed and dis¬ 
tance travelled. 

Electronic Transmission Control 

On vehicles with automatic transmission, the electronic transmission control (EGS) 
supplies the signal that reverse gear is engaged. 

Light Module 

On vehicles with manual transmission, the light module (LM) supplies the signal that 
reverse gear is engaged. 

Car Access System 

The CAS control unit supplies the PDC with the terminal status (e.g.. terminal 15). 

Forvehicles from 03/2004, power is supplied to the PDC control unit through terminal 
30g (active) instead ofterminal 15. 


79 

E6x Body Electronics 



Principle of Operation 

PDC incorporates the following functions: 

• Acoustic warnings 

• Visual warnings 

• Check Control 

Acoustic Warnings 

The acoustic warnings are emitted by the M-ASK via the mid-range loudspeaker. 

If an object is detected by 2 ultrasonic sensors, the loudspeaker closest to the object is 
actuated. The mid-range loudspeaker in the left/right-hand frontdoors orthe mid-range 
loudspeaker on the left/right-hand sides of the rear shelf can be actuated. If an object is 
detected by 3 ultrasonic sensors, the mid-range loudspeakers on the left and right-hand 
sides are actuated together. 

The smaller the distance to the object, the fasterthe sequence of acoustic warning tones. 
A distance of less than approximately 25 centimeters is indicated by a continuous tone. 
The warning tone switches off as soon as the vehicle moves away from the object. 

If the vehicle is moving directly towards a wall, the acoustic warning tone will be switched 
off after approximately. 3 seconds so that it does not distract the driver. If the vehicle con¬ 
tinues to approach the wall, the warning will be reactivated. 

Effective range for acoustic warnings: 

• Approximately 60 centimeters for the ultrasonic sensors at the two corners of the 
front bumper 

• Approximately 70 centimeters forthe two middle ultrasonic sensors in the front 
bumper 

• Approximately 60 centimeters forthe ultrasonic sensors at the two corners of the 
rear bumper 

• Approximately 150 centimeters forthe two middle ultrasonic sensors in the rear 
bumper 


80 

E6x Body Electronics 



Visual Warnings 

The visual PDC warnings are given in the Central Information Display (CID).This is 
subjectto the display in the CID being active. The visual warnings are given earlierthan 
the acoustic warnings. 

The effective range is approximately 2 meters at the front and approximately 2.5 meters 
at the rear. 

The graphic display is shown on the CID.The PDC control unit supplies the distance 
between the ultrasonic sensor and the object detected via the K-CAN. The display on 
the CID is an overhead view of the vehicle with the effective ranges of the ultrasonic 
sensors. 

The distance to objects detected is shown in the colors of traffic lights: 

• Distance down to 100 centimeters: green 

• Distance between 100 an 50 centimeters: yellow 

• Distance less than 50 centimeters: red 

The display appears as soon as the PDC is switched on (manually or automatically). The 
display overrides other displays in the CID. When the PDC is switched off again, the pre¬ 
vious display automatically appears again in the Central Information Display. 

CheckControl 

If a fault develops in the PDC, the function LED in the PDC button flashes. If this occurs , 
PDC cannot be switched on. 

Atthe same time, a Check-Control message is displayed in the following form: 

• Symbol in the LC D display in the instrument cluster 

• The following text appears in the status line of the Central Information Display: 

"PDC failure!" 

In the menu "BMW Service", the following text can be called up in the submenu 
"Check-Control messages": "Park Distance Control” 

No acoustic warning available for Park Distance Control (PDC). Have the problem 
checked by BMW Service as soon as possible. 


81 

E6x Body Electronics 



Conditions for Switching On and Off 

PDC is switched on underthe following conditions: 

• PDC button pressed (PDC switched on manually) 

• Reverse gear engaged (PDC switched on automatically) 

PDC is switched off under the following conditions: 

• PDC button pressed (PDC switched off manually) 

• Ignition switched off (PDC switched off automatically 

• After driving approximately. 50 meters 

• After exceeding a speed of 30 km/h 

Problematic Conditions for Switching On and Off 

In borderline situations, PDC may give a warning even though there is no object within 
the effective range (reflection from the ground, e.g. on coarse gravel). 

In borderline situations, it could happen that objects that are present are not detected 
(no or insufficient reflection due to geometric form). 

Underthe following conditions, it could happen that the PDC gives a warning, even 
though there is no object within the effective range: 

• Ultrasonic sensor incorrectly located in its bracket 

• Heavy rain 

• Severe dirt contamination or icing of the ultrasonic sensors 

• Ultrasonic sensors covered in snow 

• Echo pulses caused by ground, e.g. extremely coarse road surface or high grass 

• Very smooth walls in large, enclosed, rectangular spaces, e.g. in underground car 
parks (interference from earlier, reflected echo impulses) 

Underthe following conditions, the PDC may not recognize an obstacle that is present: 

• Low objects or objects with corners and sharp edges (no reflection) 

• If you drive alongside a wall while you are parking, the acoustic warning will be deac¬ 
tivated so long as you are moving parallel to the wall. 

Operation 

The visual warning (display) is switched on in the Central Information Display (CID) as 
follows: 

• "Settings" menu 

• "Vehicle settings" menu 

• "PDC" menu 

• Activate "Display on" 


82 

E6x Body Electronics 




Active C ruise C ontrol 

The Active Cruise Control system (ACC) is the same as that in the E65. 

The ACC has the following defining properties: 

• Operated from a steering column stalk 

• Statuses are shown in the instrument cluster display 

• Four selectable increment stages 

• Speed preselection in 1 km/h stages 

• Sheet steel bracket in the E60 with plastic intermediate holder 
for the sensor control unit 

• Audible instructions to the driver have been omitted 


ACC SensorE60 



83 

E6x Body Electronics 







ACC System Overview 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear brake pressure sensor 

8 

Instrument Cluster 

2 

Front brake pressure sensor 

9 

CAS 

3 

DSC 

10 

Trailer Module (notfor US) 

4 

DM E (ECM) 

11 

Light Module 

5 

EGS 

12 

M-ASK 

6 

SZL 

13 

ACC Control unit 

7 

SGM 




84 

E6x Body Electronics 




































































Exterior Lights 


The exterior lighting is based on the exterior lighting of the E65 and available in the fol¬ 
lowing versions: 

• Basic version with halogen headlights 

• Adaptive Headlight System (AHL)with bi-xenon headlights 

Voltage for all the lights is regulated by the light module. This regulation compensates for 
fluctuations in vehicle voltage. 





02281_02 


85 

E6x Body Electronics 











































Components 


LightSwitch with Control Panel Unit 

The light switch is remotely mounted from the light module. They are connected by 
means of a ribbon cable. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

LightSwitch 

4 

CAS 

2 

Instrument Cluster 

5 

Light Module 

3 

SZL 

6 

TM FA 


Brake LightSwitch 

The car access system supplies the brake light switch with voltage. Signals from the 
brake light switch are used by the Light Module to activate the brake lights. 

The Light Module also supplies the brake signal to other systems via the K-CAN. 


86 

E6x Body Electronics 




























Reverse Lights 

On manual transmission vehicles, the signal is made available via a switch from the gear 
selector lever. The light module controls the reversing lights accordingly. 

On automatic transmission vehicles, the signal is made available by the transmission con¬ 
trol unit via the PT-CAN. 

The signals for reverse gear and the brake light are made available to other subscribers 
by the light module via the K-CAN. 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Left Side brake lights 

3 

Right Side brake lights 

2 

Raised (3rd) brake light 

4 

Brake Force Display (BFD) lights 


Brake Force Display 

The segments of the rearfog light are used as the BFD as of a deceleration of 5 m/sec 2 . 

Service Information 

In the E60, the light switch contributes to improved protection forthe occupants. This 
increased level of protection is achieved by artificially enlarging the impact surface of the 
light switch. 

In the event of an accident, a person sitting behind the steering wheel could knock 
against the light switch with his/her knee for instance. While retaining full functionality, the 
light switch can be shifted towards the rear. This increases the impact surface about the 
light switch. After being pressed back, the light switch must be pulled out to move it into 
the forward position again. 


87 

E6x Body Electronics 































E63/E64 Exterior Lighting 
Changes as Compared to E60 

The E 63/E 64 features 2 lamp bulbs in each directional indicator for the front directionals. 

The marker light of the E63 is fed from below into the light guide. The hotspot is located 
at the feed point of the light guide. 

The front side markers are equipped with lamp bulbs. LED's are used forthe tail lights 
and brake lights. 


Parking Lights ON Turn Signal ON 



Brake Force Display 

The upper LED's of the rail light are used as the BFD as of a deceleration of 6 m/s 2 . 


88 

E6x Body Electronics 







E61 Tail light 

The tail light assembly on the E61 is a split unit with one portion on the rear hatch and 
the other on the rear quarter panel. The tail light is divided into 7 areas. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Directional indicator 

5 

Tail light/brake light 

2 

Two-stage brake light 

6 

Tail light/brake light 

3 

Reverse light 

7 

Side marker light 

4 

Rear reflector 




The lamps forthe tail light, brake light and directional are located in individual sockets. 
The center (third) brake light used LED technology and is located in the rear spoiler. 


89 

E6x Body Electronics 





















Adaptive Headlights (AHL) 


Introduction 

The adaptive headlights system is designed to improve nighttime driving visibility in turns. 
This is achieved by turning the bi-xenon headlights towards the inside of a bend when 
cornering. This improves illumination ofthe curve of the road which in turn, improves to 
level of visibility for the driver. Without AHL, the driver would be looking into a "black 
hole” when cornering. 

AHL enhances the already existing active safety features. The system collects data 
regarding vehicle speed, steering angle and rotational speed (yaw) and controls a set of 
stepper motors to make adjustments to the bi-xenon headlights. AHL also works in 
conjunction with other vehicle systems via the various bus networks. 



02422 02 


90 

E6x Body Electronics 





















































































































AHL System Overview 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Headlight Switch 

8 

Right side swivel (positioner) module, includes 
right headlight assembly. 

(with SMC/XENON and shutter assembly) 

2 

Light Module (LM) 

9 

Car Access System (CAS) 

3 

Rain and Light Sensor (RLS) 

10 

Front Level Sensor 

4 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

11 

Rear Level Sensor 

5 

Steering Column Switch Cluster(SZL) 

12 

Adaptive Headlight Module (AHL) 

6 

Brake Light Switch (BLS) 

13 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

7 

Leftside swivel (positioner) module, includes left 

headlight assembly. 

(with SMC/XENON and shutter assembly) 




91 


E6x Body Electronics 




























































































































































Components 


Light Switch 

The rotary switch for the side lights and dipped- 
beam (low beam) headlights differs depending on 
the vehicle equipment level. For the adaptive head¬ 
lights function to 

operate, the light switch must be set to position "A". 
("A" = "automatic driving lights control" or "adaptive 
headlights"). 

Direction Indicator/High-beam Switch 

The high-beam headlights are switched on and off 
with the direction indicator/high-beam switch (by 
pressing or pulling the switch). The adaptive head¬ 
lights function operates with both dipped and high- 
beam headlights. 

Steering Column Switch Cluster 

The control unit in the steering column switch clus¬ 
ter (SZL) forwards the signals from the direction indi¬ 
cator/high-beam switch. 

Signal path: 

SZL ->byteflight->SGM ->K-CAN -> LM 
SZL ->byteflight->SGM ->PT-CAN ->AHL 



Headlight Switch 



SZL 


Ride-height Sensors 

The ride-height sensors supply the input signals for 
the headlight-range adjustment. One ride-height 
sensor is located on the right-hand side of the front 
axle. A ride-height sensor is located on the right of 
the rear axle. 





The automatic headlight-range adjustment adapts 
the height adjustment of the headlights for different 
operating conditions (e.g. when laden, when braking 
and when accelerating in dynamic driving situations). 



If the special equipment "Adaptive headlights" is fit¬ 
ted, the adaptive headlights control unit evaluates 
the signals from the ride-height sensors (AHL control unit).This is because:The AHL 
control unit also controls automatic headlight-range adjustment. 




Ride Height Sensor 


92 

E6x Body Electronics 

















Brake Light Switch 

If the special equipment "Adaptive headlights" is fitted, the signals from the brake light 
switch are read by the adaptive headlights control unit. 

In addition, the brake light switch signal is also an input signal for automatic headlight- 
range adjustment, see above: ride-height sensors. 

Position Sensor(E60, E65, E53) 

The position sensor in the positioner module forthe bi-xenon headlights supplies a signal 
indicating the aim ofthe headlights in the horizontal plane. 



Car Access System 

The Car Access System (CAS) supplies input signals with regard to the terminal manage¬ 
ment (e.g. terminal 15 ON). 

The adaptive headlights control unit is activated when terminal 15 is switched ON. 

EGS control unit or reversing light switch 

When reverse gear is engaged, the headlights are moved to the straight-ahead position. 

• On vehicles with automatic transmission, the EGS control unit supplies the relevant 
signal to the light module (the EGS control unit is the control unit for electronic 
transmission control). 

• On vehicles with manual transmission, the signal is supplied by the reversing 
light switch. 


93 

E6x Body Electronics 





Rain-lightsensorforautomatic driving lights control 

The rain-light sensor measures the ambient light conditions outside the vehicle. 

• As it starts to get dark, the rain-light sensor sends the message "Twilight" to the light 
module. The light module informs the adaptive headlights control unit so that the 
automatic headlight-range adjustment of the dipped-beam headlights can be acti¬ 
vated. The headlights are tilted up and down as required, but they are not yet swiv¬ 
elled towards the bend in the road. 

• In darkness, the rain-light sensor sends the message "Darkness" to the light module. 
The light module sends the relevant information to the adaptive headlights control 
unit. 

The headlights are swivelled as necessary. 

Steering Angle Sensorand DSC Sensor 

The steering angle sensorand DSC sensor (DSC = Dynamic Stability Control) supply 
signals for the adaptive headlights to the adaptive headlights control unit. These signals 
are evaluated as follows, depending on the vehicle's speed: 

• Vehicle speeds up to 30 km/h - The adaptive headlights function is controlled on 
the basis of the information from the steering angle sensor (in the SZL). 

• Vehicle speeds between 30 km/h and 50 km/h - In the 30 to 50 km/h speed 
range, there is a continuous transition in signal evaluation: from the evaluation of 
signals sent by the steering angle sensor to evaluation of the signals sent by the yaw 
rate sensor (in the DSC sensor). 

• In extreme dynamic driving situations - (e.g. if the vehicle starts to skid or fish¬ 
tail), even at speeds less than 50 km/h, the signals from the yaw-rate-sensor are 
considered. If the vehicle starts to skid or fishtail, the headlights will move to the 
straight-ahead position. The headlights are not swivelled until the vehicle has 
stabilized. 

• Vehicle speeds over 50 km/h - At speeds upwards of 50 km/h, the signals from 
the yaw rate sensor (in the DSC sensor) form the primary basis for control of the 
adaptive headlights function. 

Reason: for a constant cornering radius, the steering angle required increases over 
proportionally with increasing speed. In addition, the steering angle required also 
depends on the coefficient of friction of the road surface. 

Yaw rate is directly proportional to speed. Forthis reason, the yaw rate is always 
the most suitable measure for controlling the adaptive headlights at high speeds. 
Even at high speeds, however, the steering angle sensor signal is used to detect 
(predict) the driver's commands in advance. This is because: The yaw rate signal is 
not supplied until the vehicle has responded to the steering wheel movement. 

The steering-angle sensor signal is disabled so that rapid, momentary steering 
adjustments do not affect the adaptive headlights function. 


94 

E6x Body Electronics 



AHL Control Uniton E60, E63 

The AH L control unit is responsible for the 
vertical and horizontal adjustment of the bi¬ 
xenon headlights. For safety reasons, the 
AHL control unit is also responsible forthe 
LWR (automatic headlight-range adjustment) 
for vertical adjustment). 

The AHL control unit is connected to the 
PT-CAN and is located in the control module 
carrier behind the glove compartment. 

Stepper Motor C ontrollers 

The stepper motor controllers (SMCs) control 
the stepper motors in the headlights forthe 
AHL functions (L/R) as well as the LWR func¬ 
tions (Vertical). The SMC control units com¬ 
municate with the AHL control module via the 
LIN bus. 

Light Module 

On the E60,the light module (LM) controls 
and monitors all vehicle lights. Information is 
transmitted and received via the K-CAN data 
bus. The light module is responsible forthe 
actuation of the indicator light for AHL (on the 
light switch). 



Light Module 




Wl iiilliiiillllillliniin 

!]inui n,niuinn,t r 

...ii. 

Mil i finmmuu i 


r 




Safety and Gateway Module 

On the E60, the safety and gateway module 
(SGM) is the interface between the two data 
buses K-CAN and PT-CAN.Thus, all informa¬ 
tion exchanged between the light module and 
the AHL control unit passes through the 
SGM. Information from the yaw rate sensor (in 
the DSC sensor) is also fed through the SGM 
to the AHL control unit. 

Xenon-headlightControl Unit 

The xenon-headlight control unit monitors the 
D2-S bulbs forthe bi-xenon headlights. 



95 

E6x Body Electronics 


TC03-3EH3 




Stepper Motors forthe Adaptive Headlights 

The stepper motors turn the positioner modules in the bi-xenon headlights. 

The stepper motors turn the headlights vertically and horizontally (vertically = for the 
automatic headlight-range adjustment and horizontally for adaptive headlights). 



Function Indicator (On Light Switch) 

The function of the AHL is indicated by the FLC LED lighting permanently. A fault in the 
AHL system is indicated by the FLC LED flashing with the AHL active. 

The green FLC LED has two functions: 

• The LED lights up permanently when the light switch is set to position "A”. 

The AHL and LWR systems are active when the LED is on solid. 

• The LED flashes if a fault develops in the adaptive headlight system. 

The LED actuated by the light module. 

The low beam headlight and the headlight vertical aim control (LWR) remain active in the 
case of fault. The swivel function of the bi-xenon modules is deactivated. 

A reference run is performed during every new start. If a defect is found, the bi-xenon 
headlights are switched off to ensure oncoming traffic cannot be dazzled. The fog lights 
are switched on as a substitute function. 


96 

E6x Body Electronics 




Principle of Operation 

The adaptive headlights system adjusts the horizontal aim of the headlights (i.e.from side 
to side) in orderto illuminate the inside of a bend when cornering. 

The following functions of the adaptive headlights system are described below: 

• System activation and calibration sequence 

• Activation of stepper motor controllers (SMC) 

• Speed-dependent analysis of input signals 

• Horizontal swivelling of the headlights by the stepper motor controller 

• Deactivation of adaptive headlight movements under extreme driving conditions 

• Deactivation of adaptive headlight movements in response to system faults 

• Setting headlights to parked position 

• Activation of automatic headlight-range adjustment by the AH L control unit 

• Adaptive headlights for automatic driving lights control 

System Activation and Calibration Sequence 

When terminal 15 is switched ON, the headlights always perform a calibration sequence, 
even if the lights are not switched on. The AHL control unit sends the "perform calibra¬ 
tion sequence" request to the stepper motor controllers (SMCs, control units for the 
headlight stepper motors). The stepper motor controllers actuate the stepper motors in 
the headlights.The calibration sequence is performed. During the calibration sequence, 
the headlights move in the following manner: 

• The headlights move horizontally (= calibration sequence for the AHL). 

• The headlights move vertically (= calibration sequence forthe headlight-range 
adjustment function). 

• At the end of the calibration sequence, the headlights are in the straight-ahead 
position. 

Following the calibration sequence, the system is ready for operation. 

When reverse gear is engaged, the headlights are moved to the straight-ahead position. 

Note: The calibration sequence is performed only after terminal 15 has been switched 
OFF for at least 15 seconds. 

If terminal 15 is switched on and off repeatedly (for example, for demonstration reasons), 
the headlights are not calibrated each time terminal 15 is switched on. 

Terminal 15 must have been switched off for at least 15 seconds before it is switched on 
again. Only then is a calibration sequence performed when terminal 15 is switched on. 


97 

E6x Body Electronics 




Activation of Stepper Motor Controllers 

The AH L control unit transmits the nominal values for the positioner modules (position 
and speed of movement of the positioner modules) to the stepper motor controllers 
(SMC). The AHL control unit calculates the nominal values on the basis of the following 
input signals: 

• Vehicle road speed 

• Steering angle (at speeds up to 
50 km/h , depending on program¬ 
ming) (50km/h =31mph) 

• Yaw rate (above 50 km/h, see 
"Steering-angle sensor and DSC 
sensor" above) 

Speed Dependent Analysis of 
InputSignals 

The adaptive headlights are controlled 
based on input from the steering angle 
sensor and the yaw rate sensor. The 
AHL control will use these signals on 
a priority basis depending upon road 
speed. 

The encoding process performed at 
the end of the production line determines the 

priority assigned to sensor signals above which speed threshold (see above). 

Horizontal swivelling of the headlights by the stepper motor controller 

Horizontal range of movement of headlights 

• Inwards, i.e. towards center of vehicle: up to a maximum of 8° 

• Outwards: up to max. 15° 

That means in a right-hand bend the right-hand headlight turns by up to 15° (the right- 
hand headlight is the "inside" headlight on a right-hand bend. It therefore swivels 
outwards away from the vehicle center). 

The left-hand headlight swivels through a maximum of 8° (the left-hand headlight swivels 
towards the vehicle center, i.e. inwards). 

The headlight on the outside of the bend reaches its end position at the same time as 
the headlight on the inside of the bend, ensuring that the road is evenly illuminated. 

On a right-hand bend, the left-hand headlight is on the outside of the bend. The right- 
hand headlight is on the inside of the bend. 



1. Vehicle Speed 2. Steering Angle 

3. Yaw (rotation) 


98 

E6x Body Electronics 


Deactivation of adaptive headlight movements under extreme driving 
conditions 

If the vehicle starts to skid and fishtail, the swivelling movement of the adaptive headlights 
is deactivated as follows: 

• The headlights are returned to the straight-ahead position.The headlights are no 
longerturned. 

• The lights remain on. 

Deactivation of adaptive headlight movements in response to system faults 

If a system fault occurs, the green indicator lamp on the light switch flashes. Dazzling of 
oncoming traffic must be prevented in the event of a system fault. To this end, the 
swivelling movement of the adaptive headlights is deactivated as follows: 

• If the stepper motors are still functional, the headlights are returned to the straight¬ 
ahead position. The headlights are no longer swivelled towards bends in the road. 

• If it is no longer possible for a headlight to be moved back to the straight-ahead posi¬ 
tion, the headlight is tilted downwards (by the stepped motors for automatic head¬ 
light-range adjustment). This prevents dazzling of oncoming traffic. 

• If the headlight cannot be tilted downwards, the bi-xenon bulb in this headlight is dis¬ 
abled as follows: 

- When the vehicle is parked, the AHL control unit recognizes sleep mode 
(stand still plus terminal R OFF for several minutes). 

- The next time the vehicle is restarted, the bi-xenon light of the defective head 
light is not switched on. 

- The front fog lights are switched on in order to ensure a minimum level of 
illumination. 

- The dipped-beam headlights are not switched off while the vehicle is in motion. 

Setting Headlights to Parked Position 

When terminal R is switched off, the headlights move to the parked position.The parked 
position is important for the headlights' next calibration sequence: from the parked posi¬ 
tion, the headlights are run through a calibration sequence in the pre-drive-check. During 
each calibration sequence, the AHL control unit relearns the straight-ahead position for 
the headlights. 

When the headlights have reached the parked position, the stepper motor controllers 
(SMCs) inform the AHL control unit ("acknowledge"). 

The AHL control unit deactivates the stepper motor controllers. 

The run-down period lasts approximately 10 seconds. 


99 

E6x Body Electronics 



Activation of automatic headlight-range adjustment by the AH L control unit 

If special equipment "Adaptive headlights" is fitted, the AH L control unit also controls the 
automatic headlight-range adjustment. 

The automatic headlight-range adjustment adapts the headlight range for different oper¬ 
ating conditions. Variations in the vehicle tilt angle are produced by vehicle loads and 
braking or acceleration in extreme driving situations. The automatic headlight-range 
adjustment tilts the headlights up and down as required. 

The AH L control unit controls the automatic headlight-range adjustment as follows: 

1. The ride-height sensors and the brake light switch send the input signals forthe 
headlight-range adjustment to the AHL control unit. 

2. From the input signals received, the AHL control unit calculates the vehicle tilt angle 
(along the longitudinal axis, relative to the road surface). 

3. Using the stepper motors for moving the headlights vertically, the headlight range is 
adjusted automatically and dynamically. 

The headlight range is adjusted so that the actual headlight range conforms to the legally 
required headlight range as follows: 

• If vehicle rear is lowerthan front- The actual headlight range will be longerthan 
the legally stipulated range. The headlight beam height is lowered to reduce the 
headlight range to match the legal requirement. 

• If the vehicle is horizontal - The actual headlight range will be the same as the 
legally stipulated range. 

• If vehicle front is lowerthan rear - The actual headlight range will be shorter than 
the legally stipulated range. The headlight beam height is raised to increase the 
headlight range to match the legal requirement. 

Adaptive headlights for automatic driving lights control 

The automatic driving lights control feature (option in conjunction with the RLS) 
automatically switches the side lights and dipped-beam headlights on and off. 

Switch-on conditions: 

• The light module must be encoded with automatic driving lights control. 

• The light switch must be in position "A" ("A" for automatic driving lights 
control or adaptive headlights). 

• The rain-light sensor must be installed and operational. 


100 

E6x Body Electronics 



The rain-light sensor detects the brightness of the ambient light. The rain-light sensor 
sends the following requests to the light module: 

• Low ambient brightness (twilight, darkness, in a low-level garage ortunnel): "switch 
on dipped-beam headlights" request. 

• Sufficient ambient brightness: "switch off dipped-beam headlights" request. 

If only the side (parking) lights are to be switched on, the light switch must be set to side 
lights (switch position 1). 

When the light switch is set to position "A", the AHL control unit is also activated: 

• When the automatic driving lights control function switches on the dipped-beam 
headlights (e.g. at dawn/dusk), the adaptive headlights function is notified at the 
same time. 

The light module sends the message "Dipped headlights on" to the AHL control 
unit (and the AHL control unit takes over control of automatic headlight-range adjust¬ 
ment). 

• The light module also takes account of the signals from the rain-light sensor. 

The headlights are not turned when the vehicle is cornering until total darkness sets 
in. 

The message "Dipped (low beam) headlights on" is generated separately for each head¬ 
light unit. 

If a headlight fails, the movement of the adaptive headlights is suspended. 

The front fog lights are switched on in order to ensure a minimum level of illumination. 

Switch-on Conditions 

When terminal 15 is switched ON, the AHL control unit "wakes up".The swivelling of the 
lights is subject to the following conditions: 

• Reverse gear must not be engaged. 

• No system faults must be present. The indicator light must not be flashing. 

• The D2-S bulbs in both headlight units must be working (the D2-S bulbs are the 
bulbs forthe xenon headlights). 

• The vehicle must not be skidding orfishtailing. 

• The rain-light sensor must detect darkness. 

• Additional precondition for activation: automatic driving lights 
control is active (light switch in position "A", see above). 


101 

E6x Body Electronics 



Workshop Hints 

Various repairs may be necessary during the course of vehicle's service life. As a conse¬ 
quence of repair work, it may be that the system parts for the AHL are installed with dif¬ 
ferent software and hardware versions. In each case, the replaced components must be 
adapted to the specific requirements of the vehicle. 

AHL Control Unit 

After replacing an AHL control unit, it is necessary to enter the vehicle identification 
number and to encode the control unit depending on specific vehicle data. 

The complete AHL function will not be operative if adaptation to the vehicle is not per¬ 
formed. 

Replacing SMC 

After replacing the SMC, it is necessary to enter the vehicle identification number and 
headlight-dependent coding in the SMC control unit. 

The complete AHL function will remain inoperative if this adaptation is not performed. 

Particular care must be taken when replacing the SMC to ensure that the housing seal of 
the SMC is fitted correctly. 

Replace Bi-Xenon Headlights 

After replacing the bi-xenon headlights, it is necessary to encode the corresponding SMC 
depending on the headlights. 

If this adaptation is not performed, the function will appear to be operative but not correct. 
The swivel range and zero point can vary from vehicle model to vehicle model and the bi¬ 
xenon headlight can have a different status! 

The headlights must be adjusted and checked. 

Diagnosis 

The AHL system must be set to diagnosis mode in order to perform the following jobs: 

• Read out of relevant bus signals with vehicle stationary 

-Road speed 
-Yaw rate 
-Steering angle 

• Checking signal plausibility 

• C hecking that conditions for activation are fulfilled 

-Rain and light sensor status 
-Light switch status 

Missing or non-plausible BUS signals are stored in the form of fault codes in the AHL 
control unit. The types of fault are stored in the SMC. The SMCs are accessed via the 
AHL control unit. 

102 

E6x Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the complaint outlined below. 
Complete worksheet using the "Complaint, Cause, Correction" format. 

Vehicle: Chassis#: Production Date: 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 


103 

E6x Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the complaint outlined below. 
Complete worksheet using the "Complaint, Cause, Correction" format. 

Vehicle: _ Chassis#: _ Production Date:_ 

Complaint: 



104 

E6x Body Electronics 








Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the complaint outlined below. 
Complete worksheet using the “Complaint, Cause, Correction" format. 

Vehicle: _ Chassis#: _ Production Date:_ 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 


105 

E6x Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the complaint outlined below. 
Complete worksheet using the "Complaint, Cause, Correction" format. 

Vehicle: _ Chassis#: _ Production Date:_ 

Complaint: 



106 

E6x Body Electronics 







C lassroom Exercise - Review Questions 


What is the difference between the alarm siren on the E60 compared to the 
E63/E64? 


On the E60 DWA system, What signal does the IHKA module send to DWA and 
Why? 


Under what conditions will PDC be switched "OFF"? 


WhatisBFD? Explain 


What are the three main input variables for AH L? 


107 

E6x Body Electronics 



























du C lassroom Exercise - Review Questions 


6. Explain the signal path between the turn signal switch and the AHL module? 


7. What are the two functions of the Green LED on the light switch (AHL equipped 
vehicles)? 


Notes: 


108 

E6x Body Electronics 
































Interior Lighting 

The interior lights of the E60 are pulse width modulated and automatically controlled by 
various inputs. 

PWM Control 

The output is active from terminal 15 with a permanent clocking in a frequency of 100 
Hz. In this way the power output is controlled. From a voltage of 12.8 V the pulse width 
modulation is adjusted in such a way as to provide a power output of 100% as for 12.8 V. 

In the case of voltage drops in the vehicle electrical system of up to 1 V, the pulse width 
modulation is corrected and thus a constant brightness of the lamps connected at the 
consumer shutdown output is ensured. 

Below 12.8 V voltage regulation is no longer corrected. The brightness can fluctuate with 
the battery voltage level. 

Consumer Shutdown Terminal 

Some loads/consumers such as reading, gloveboxand luggage compartment lights can 
remain switched on when the car is stopped. In order to protect the battery, these con¬ 
sumers are shutdown after a drop at terminal R with a delay of 16 minutes, or immedi¬ 
ately with the diagnosis telegram. 

Consumer Shutdown 

Power outputs are made available by the KBM 2 for consumer shutdown. 

• VA 1 (Output 1): 

- Reading lights 

- Vanity lights 

- Boot 

• IB 2 (Output 2): 

- Glovebox light 


109 

E6x Body Electronics 



System Overview Interior Lighting 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Door contact, rear driver's side door 

15 

Footwell light, driver, front 

2 

Door contact, rear passenger side door 

16 

Footwell light, passengerfront 

3 

Button, trunk lid exterior 

17 

Glovebox lighting 

4 

Central locking, tailgate 

18 

Exit light, driver, rear 

5 

Remote control 

19 

Exit light, passenger, rear 

6 

Lock cylinder, tailgate 

20 

Luggage compartment light 

7 

Lock cylinder, driver's door 

21 

Luggage compartment light 

8 

Door contact, driver's door front 

22 

Interior reading lights, front 

9 

Door contact, passenger door, front 

23 

Interior reading lights, rear 

10 

Body Basic Module (KBM) 

24 

Vanity light, driver/passenger 

11 

Car Access System (SGM) 

25 

Exit light, driver's side 

12 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

26 

Front area light, driver 

13 

Door module TM FA, driverfront 

27 

Exit light, driver's side 

14 

Door module TM BF, passengerfront 

28 

Front area light, passenger side 


110 

E6x Body Electronics 












































Roller Sunblmd 

An electric roller sunblind is available for the rear window of the E60. Mechanical roller 
sunblinds are also available for the side windows of the E60. 

System Function 

The roller sunblind is operated from the switch in the driver's side switch block. 


<D 




i, 



bytpfkght 




02118 02 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Driver's doorswitchblock 

4 

Car Access System 

2 

Driver's door module 

5 

Center Console Switch Center (SZM) 

3 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

6 

Roller S unblind 


111 

E6x Body Electronics 



























Seat Variants 

Three different seat versions are available for the E60. 

• Electric basic seat with memory 

• Electric sports seat with memory 

• Multi-function seat with memory 

Provision is also made for the installation of various options: 

• Electric seat heater 

• Seat ventilation system 

• Active seat option 

• Lumbar support option 

Electrical Interfaces 

One 8-pin and one 25-pin connector are used to connect the system to the vehicle elec¬ 
trical system. The pin assignment of the 10 compartment plug connections has not 
changed from those for the seats in the E65.The 6 compartment plug connections for 
the seat modules have not changed either. 

Electric, Sport and Multi-Function Seats 

The signals required for seat adjustment are generated with the aid of the adjustment 
switches. The signals are forwarded to the center console switch center (SZM) by means 
of an interface similar to a K-Bus.The center console switch center then forwards the 
data to the seat modules via the K-C AN. 

Signals are processed in the seat modules. With the aid of the output stage in the seat 
modules, the motors in the seat are activated for seat adjustment. 

Seat Heating 

The heating circuits vary depending on the equipment fitted. The multifunction seat and 
the option seat ventilation system have 4 heating circuits. In a 4 heating circuit system, 
the backrest and seat cushion each have a rapid-heat area and a secondary heat area. 
Each heat area is fitted with a temperature sensor. Current is applied to a maximum of 
two heating circuits at any one time. 

Seat variants that are not based on the multi-function seat and that are not fitted with the 
option seat ventilation system have 2 heat circuits. In a 2 heating circuit system, the back- 
restand seat cushion each have one heat area. 

Lumbar Support 

The seats are fitted with a pneumatically operated lumbar support adjustment. 

112 

E6x Body Electronics 



Seat System Overview (Multifunction Seat example) 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Power distribution, front 

10 

Driver's seat module (SMFA) 

2 

Seat switch panel 

11 

Seat heating (Seat bottom) 

3 

Center Console Switch Center (SZM) 

12 

Seat heating (Backrest) 

4 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

13 

Lumbarsupport 

5 

Driver's Door Module (TMFA) 

14 

Active seat 

6 

Exterior mirror, driver 

15 

Fan motors, ventilated seat 

7 

Passengerdoormodule (TMBF) 

16-22 

Seat adjustment motors 

8 

Exterior mirror, passenger side 

23 

Flead restraint adjustment 

9 

Power distribution, front 




113 


E6x Body Electronics 












































Active Seat 


The active seat is already described in the training material for the E65.To provide sup¬ 
port and relieve the strain on the spinal column and back muscles during long journeys, 
the active seat can be installed in the vehicle (Refer to the Active Seat section in the E65 
training material). 

Entry/Exit Function forthe Multi-Function Seat 

There is an entry/exit aid for both the driver and passenger. The entry/exit aid is available 
in conjunction with the multi-function seat. The entry/exit aid system uses the backrest 
width (LBV) and seat cushion depth (STV) adjustment functions. 

The backrest width is retracted to allow entry/exit into the vehicle. This creates more 
space in the area of the backrest. The seat cushion depth is reduced. This creates more 
space around the seat area. 

Functional Principle 

One example in which the entry/exit aid is activated 

The customer stops the vehicle. The vehicle is not in gear, the engine is either running or 
switched off. The vehicle door is opened. The door contact indicates this. The exit aid is 
activated. The LBV and then the STV are retracted. The customer gets out and the door 
is closed. The exit aid remains in that position and is used to assist entry when the 
customer gets back in the car. 


114 

E6x Body Electronics 



Seats E63/E64 


Introduction 

The E63 and E64 will feature electrically adjustable driver's and passenger's seats as 
standard. 



Electrically adjustable sports seats will be optionally available.The sports seats addition¬ 
ally feature a manual seat depth adjustment facility, more pronouncedly formed seat 
upholstery and a lumbar support. 

The electrical control is identical for both the basic seat and sport seat. Both versions 
include seat memory on the driver's side. 

The K-Bus connects the driver's seat module (SM FA) to the SZM. In the E64, the pas¬ 
senger's seat module (SM BF) is also connected to this K-Bus. 

The SZM represents the interface between the K-Bus of the seats and the K-CAN. The 
K-CAN and SZM therefore connect the seat control units to the control units of the body 
electronic systems. 


115 

E6x Body Electronics 











Components 

The system features the following switches and sensors: 

S eat Adjustment B uttons 

The seat adjustment buttons are located on the outer sides of the seat cushions. They 
vary in terms of number and function. The E64 seat is additionally equipped with an 
option for electrically adjusting the head restraints (headrests). 

Lumbar Support Button 

A rocker switch is provided on the seat to adjust the lumbar support. 

Seat Memory Button 

Only the driver's seat features additional buttons for the seat memory. 

Seat Heating Switch 

The buttons for controlling the seat heating are included in the center console switch 
cluster. 

Hall Sensors 

Hall sensors are installed forthe purpose of detecting the position of the seats. The sen¬ 
sors are integrated in the seat drive units. 

Temperature Sensorfor Seat Heating 

A temperature sensor is installed in each of the seat cushions forthe seat heating. 

The seats are controlled by the following control units: 

Center Console Switch C luster (SZM) 

In addition to the switches, the electronic circuits forthe heating control and monitoring 
functions are integrated in the center console switch cluster (SZM). The SZM is also 
responsible forthe electronic control of the steering column adjustment function. 

E63/E64 Driver's Seat Module 

The control unit of the driver's seat module (SM FA) communicates via the K-Bus with the 
center console switch cluster (SZM). 


116 

E6x Body Electronics 



Passenger's Seat Module, E64 Only 

The control unit of the passenger's seat module (SM BF) communicates via the K-Bus 
with the center console switch cluster (SZM). 

In the E63 the drive units are controlled directly by a load circuit. 

The following actuators are driven to perform the seat functions: 

Seat Heating 

The seat cushion heating and backrest heating are installed such that they cover the 
entire area. Even the side sections and thigh supports are heated: 

Seat Adjustment Drive Units 

The following drive units are installed in the E63 and E64 seat: 

• Drive unit for seat forward/backward adjustment with 2 adjustment speeds 

• Drive unit for seat height adjustment 

• Drive unit for seat cushion tilt adjustment 

• Drive unit for backrest angle adjustment 
Additionally installed in the E64: 

• Drive unit for head restraint height adjustment 

Head Restraint Angle Adjustment 

The head restraint angle adjustment as well as the seat depth adjustment on the sports 
seat are always manual. 

Lumbar Support 

The lumbar support in the seat backrest consists of 2 lumbar cushions as well as an elec¬ 
tric air pump with electrically operated valves. 

The following displays provide seat status information: 

Central Information Display 

A corresponding check control message is shown on the central information display (CID) 
when, for example, a backrest is not locked in correctly (E64 only). 

Head-up Display 

A corresponding check control message and an information text are shown in the head- 
up display (HUD) when the backrest is not locked in correctly (E64 only). 


117 

E6x Body Electronics 



Seat Heating LEDs 

3 light emitting diodes (LEDs) in the center console switch cluster indicate the switched 
status of the seat heating system. 

Seat communication features the following bus systems: 

K-CAN 

The body controller area network (K-CAN) is a two-wire bus for communication between 
all control units connected to the K-CAN. 

K-Bus 

The body bus (K-Bus) is a single-wire connection. The center console switch cluster and 
the seat modules communicate with each othervia the K-Bus. 


118 

E6x Body Electronics 



Principle of Operation 

The system functions of the electrically operated seats include: 

• Seat adjustment 

• Rear easy-entry facility 

• Seat heating 

Seat Adjustment 

The installed seats feature the following seat adjustment options: 

• Seat forward/backward adjustment (with electric drive unit, 2 speed stages) 

• Seat height adjustment (with electric drive unit) 

• Seat depth adjustment (manual only, sports seat only) 

• Backrest angle adjustment (with electric drive unit) 

• Head restraint height adjustment (E63: manual; E64: with electric drive unit) 

• Head restraint angle adjustment (manual only) 

• Lumbar support height adjustment (electro-pneumatic) 

• Lumbar support depth adjustment (electro-pneumatic) [more ...] 

The standard seat forward/backward adjustment, seat height adjustment, seat cushion tilt 
adjustment and backrest angle adjustment facilities are each operated with separate elec¬ 
tric drive units in all seats. The head restraint height adjustment is driven by an electric 
drive unit only on the E64. 

All these functions are controlled via the control panel on the outer sides of the seat 
cushions. Signals from the respective button trigger seat adjustment in the required 
directions. 

A separate rocker switch is used to operate the lumbar support. An electric pump sup¬ 
plies the lumbar support cushion with compressed air. The individual air chambers are 
filled or emptied via several valves to vary the height and thickness of the lumbar support. 

The limit stop is calculated for each drive unit in order to reduce the load of the electric 
drive units to a minimum. Automatic recognition of the limit stops is integrated in each of 
the electric drive units. Hall sensors integrated in the drive units register the adjustment 
distances which are processed in the seat module. In the event of the drive unit blocking, 
the detected position value is interpreted as the limit stop. All subsequent adjustments 
are interrupted just before this point. 

Once the obstruction has been removed, adjustment can again extend beyond the newly 
detected limit stop when the seat adjustment button is pressed again. 


119 

E6x Body Electronics 




Rear Easy-entry Facility 

The rear easy-entry facility is controlled by a push-button on the seat backrest. The rear 
easy-entry facility can be activated only under the following conditions: 

• The vehicle must be stationary with no wheels turning 

• The door must be opened 

Rapid adjustment is achieved with the second speed stage of the drive unit for seat for¬ 
ward/backward adjustment. The seat moves for as long as the button is pressed. At the 
same time, the backrest can be released manually and folded forward. 

The seat moves back to its initial position when the seat adjustment button is 
pressed back. 

Seat Heating 

The seat heating system heats the seat cushion and backrest including the side sections. 
Separate seat heating switches (push-buttons) in the center console switch cluster 
(SZM) control the driver's seat and passenger's seat. 

The center console switch cluster controls the seat heating electronically. The system 
is monitored by a temperature sensor. The seat heating is operational as from terminal 
15 "ON". 

3 LEDs located above the seat heating switches indicate the heating stage currently 
active in the seat heating system. 

Note:The seat heating is not actuated while the steering column is adjusted. 

The current at the center console switch cluster would be too high if the seat heating and 
steering column adjustment were operated simultaneously. The seat heating is interrupt¬ 
ed in order to protect the center console switch cluster (SZM). 


120 

E6x Body Electronics 



E 63/E 64 S eat H eating 
Installation Location 

The heating mats of the heating system are integrated in the seat cover. The electronic 
circuits and push-buttons necessary for operating the seat heating system are integrated 
in the center console switch cluster (SZM). 






T&1Q4QD3 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Temperature sensor in seat cushion 

6 

Heating matin backrest 

2 

Heating mat in seat cushion 

7 

Seat and backrest upholstery 

3 

Heating mat in thigh support 

8 

Head restraint 

4 

Heating mat in side sections of seat cushion 

9 

Seat frame 

5 

Heating mat in side sections of backrest 

10 

Thigh support 


Construction 

The seat heating system consists of a carbon fibre net integrated in the seat covers. The 
heating mats are also integrated in the thigh support and side sections of the seats. The 
head restraint (headrest) is not heated. 

There is a direct line from the center console switch cluster (SZM) to the heating mats for 
control purposes. A temperature sensor in the seat measures the current temperature. 


121 

E6x Body Electronics 


























Function of Seat Heating 

The heating mats for the driver's seat and passenger's seat are controlled separately. 

The heating stage is selected with the seat heating switches in the center console switch 
cluster.The seat heating is operational as from terminal 15 ON.The heating stage is 
selected by pressing the seat heating switch several times. 3 green light emitting diodes 
(LEDs) above the seat heating switches indicate the status of the seat heating system. 

Operate the seat heating systems as described in the Owner's Handbook. 

Note:The seat heating is interrupted when steering column adjustment is activated. 

The seat heating is interrupted in order to protect the SZM.The current at the SZM 
would be too high if the seat heating and steering column adjustment were operated 
simultaneously, posing a risk of irreparable damage to the electronic circuitry. 

The seat heating system features the following functions: 

• Seat heating ON and OFF 

• Seat heating temperature control 

• Monitoring of temperature sensor 

• Seat heating output management 

• Overvoltage/undervoltage detection 

• Short-circuit detection 

• No-load detection 

• Plausibility check of temperature profile 

Seat Heating ON and OFF 

Separate seat heating switches (push-buttons) in the center console switch cluster 
(SZM) control heating stages forthe driver's seat and passenger's seat as follows: 

• Switch briefly pressed lx: Seat heating stage 3 ON >3 LEDs ON 

• Switch briefly pressed 2x: Seat heating stage 2 ON >2 LEDs ON 

• Switch briefly pressed 3x: Seat heating stage 1 ON > 1 LED ON 

• Switch pressed lx long: Seat heating OFF > LEDs OFF 

The seat heating can be switched off in any stage by pressing the button for longer 
than 1.2 seconds. The LED indicators are located above the seat heating switch. 


122 

E6x Body Electronics 




Seat Heating Temperature Control 

An electronic temperature control circuit is integrated in the SZM. A temperature sensor 
is integrated in the heating mat for the purpose of registering the seat temperature. 

The seat heating is deactivates at terminal 15 OFF. The selected heating stage remains 
stored fora further 15 minutes. The seat heating is activated and operated at the heating 
stage last selected at terminal 15 ON.The heating stage currently activated is indicated 
by the number of illuminated LEDs. 

Monitoring of Temperature Sensor 

The temperature sensor is permanently monitored. The seat heating and LEDs are 
switched off immediately if a short circuit or line break (open circuit) is detected. The 
system can be switched on only by means of the seat heating switch. The seat heating 
is deactivated when a short-circuit or an open circuit is detected in the temperature 
sensor. The LED lights briefly before the electronic module switches off. The seat 
heating can then be reactivated. The temperature sensor is checked again. 

Seat Heating Output Management 

If there is a drop in the vehicle's system voltage, the heating output is correspondingly 
adapted in 4 stages as follows: 

• "No reduction", normal unrestricted operation. 

• "25 % reduction", when heating stage 3 is set the system uses heating stage 2. 
However, the LED indicating stage 3 remains on. The system switches back to heat¬ 
ing stage 3 when the heating output management signals "no reduction". 

• "50 % reduction", seat cushion and backrest with side sections are heated at half 
capacity. The system switches back to 100 % heating output when the heating out¬ 
put management signals "no reduction". 

• "Heating deactivated", the LED forthe selected heating stage remains switched on. 
The seat heating is reactivated when the heating output management signals "no 
reduction". 

Overvoltage/undervoltage Detection 
Behavior in the Event of Undervoltage 

The seat heating is switched off when the supply voltage forthe SZM drops below a 
value between 11.0 V and 11.8 V for more than 5 seconds. The current seat heating 
setting is retained. The seat heating can be switched on again only when the voltage 
value is higher than 11.8 V to 12.6 V for longerthan 4 seconds. The seat heating switch 
can be used to select the heating stage and switch off the system. 

The LED remains on. The time limit of 5 seconds restarts when the seat heating is deac¬ 
tivated as the result of undervoltage being detected and then reactivated. 


123 

E6x Body Electronics 


Behavior in the Case of Overvoltage 

The seat heating is deactivated immediately when the supply voltage for the center con¬ 
sole switch cluster (SZM) exceeds a value between 15.9 V and 16.7 V for longerthan 
0.1 seconds. The seat heating LED is switched off. 

The seat heating and the LED indicator are not switched on again automatically when the 
normal voltage range from 11.8 V to 16.6 V is re-established.The LED may light briefly 
before the electronics is switched off when the seat heating is deactivated as the result 
of an overvoltage and then switched on again. 

Short-circuit Detection 

Actuation of the seat heating system is short-circuit-proof with respect to terminal 30 
(battery positive terminal). The heating mats and LEDs are deactivated in response to a 
short-circuit. They can be switched on again only by means of the seat heating switch. 
The seat heating is also switched off as the result of increased power intake due to a 
defective heating mat. 

No-load Detection 

The LED cannot be activated when a heating mat is not connected or there is a break 
in the wiring (open-circuit). 

The LED lights briefly when the seat heating is deactivated and briefly reactivated in the 
event of a short-circuit, the heating mat not connected ora break in the wiring. 
Consequently, the electronic circuitry switches off the seat heating system. 

Plausibility C heck of Temperature Profile 

A plausibility check is performed only at a seat temperature of30°C or less. This prevents 
the temperature in the backrest increasing to impermissibly high levels. 

After the seat heating has been activated, the electronic circuitry expects a temperature 
increase at the temperature sensor. The seat heating is switched off immediately when 
the seat temperature is lower than 30 °C and no increase in the temperature value is mea¬ 
sured within 255 seconds. 

The LED is also switched off. 


124 

E6x Body Electronics 


Outside Mirrors 

Activation of the wing mirrors is performed by the door modules by means of the local 
electronics in the frontdoors. All the mirror functions, except for electrochromatic wing 
mirror and mirror heating, are active with terminal R on through to consumer shutdown. 

The mirrorfunctions are controlled exclusively in the door modules, which communicate 
with each other via the byteflight. All the mirror adjustment functions are served by the 
adjusting switches in the switch block in the driver's door. 

The following options are available: 

• Electrochromatic interior rearview and wing mirrors 

• Electrochromatic interior rearview mirror 

• Light package including front-area lights in wing mirrors 

• Wing-mirror memory in conjunction with seat memory 






TWIBF 



WKIJEfWE 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rearview mirror (Electrochromatic) 

5 

TM BF 

2 

Driver's switch block 

6 

Side view mirror, right (Electrochromatic) 

3 

TM FA 

7 

KBM 

4 

Side view mirror, left (Electrochromatic) 

8 

SGM 


125 

E6x Body Electronics 






























Steering Column Adjustment 

The fully electric steering-column adjustment allows the driver to set the steering wheel 
to the best possible position. This is done with a switch on the left-hand side of the 
steering column. The tilt and fore-and-aft position of the steering column are adjusted by 
means of an electric motor. 



Vehicles with electric steering column adjustment have a steering-column memory in 
conjunction with seat memory and mirror memory. 

The steering-column adjustment is actuated by the SZM. One motor drives the tilt and 
fore-and-aft adjustment. A second motor changes the direction of adjustment via the 
adjustment gears. 

Possible functions of steering column adjustment are: 

• Height adjustment 

• Reach adjustment 

• E ntry/exit aid 

• Steering-column memory 

• Motor protection 


126 

E6x Body Electronics 



Steering Column Adjustment (Overview) 












TMBF 






02262_02 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Steering column adjustment button 

8 

Seat Module, Driver's Side (SM FA) 

2 

Exterior mirror, driver 

9 

Safety and gateway Module (SGM) 

3 

Steering column switch cluster (SZL) 

10 

Passenger Door Module (TMBF) 

4 

Driver's door module (TMFA) 

11 

Center Console Switch Center (SZM) 

5 

Power distribution, rear 

12 

Motor for steering column adjustment 

6 

Seat switches 

13 

Motor for steering column adjustment 

7 

Multi-function Steering wheel 

14 

Exterior mirror, passenger side 


127 

E6x Body Electronics 























































Components 

The steering-column adjustment consists of the following components: 

Switch for Steering-column Adjustment 

This switch enables the driverto adjust the tilt and fore-and-aft setting of the steering col¬ 
umn. The switch for steering-column adjustment is on the left-hand side of the steering 
column. 

Steering-column Adjustment Drive Unit 

Two motors are built into the drive unit. 1 motor drives the tilt and fore-and-aft adjustment 
of the steering column. The second motorchanges the direction of adjustment via the 
adjustment gears. 

The adjustment movement and position recognition for both tilt and fore-and-aft adjust¬ 
ment are recorded in the drive unitforthe steering-column memory.There are 2 Hall 
sensors and 2 magnetic rings (16-pin) integrated in the drive unit. 

Steering Column Switch Cluster 

The switch for steering-column adjustment sends its signal to the SZL.The SZL 
forwards this signal to the SZM. 

Signal path: 

Switch for steering-column adjustment > SZL > byteflight > SGM >K-CAN >SZM. 

SZM 

The center console switch cluster (SZM) actuates the steering-column adjustment. The 
SZM also stores the positions for the steering-column memory. 

Door Contact in the Driver's Door 

The center console switch cluster requires the signal from the door contact in conjunc¬ 
tion with the terminal status for the easy-entry system. 

Signal path: 

Driver's door contact switch >TMFA > byteflight > SGM >K-CAN >SZM 


128 

E6x Body Electronics 



Principle of Operation 

The fully electric steering-column adjustment comprises the following functions: 

• Manual steering-column adjustment 

• Steering-column memory 

• Overheating protection for steering-column adjustment motors 

Manual Steering-column Adjustment 

The driver is able to adjust the steering column with a switch. When the switch is operat¬ 
ed, the signal is transmitted cyclically from terminal 30 (cycle time: 100 milliseconds). The 
steering-column adjustment is actuated for as long as the signal is being received. 

Once the switch is no longer actuated, the message "Stop" is transmitted 3 times. 

The steering-column adjustment is stopped when this signal is received, or if the cyclic 
message is not received twice. 

To enable a failure of the steering column switch cluster to be detected, a further a cyclic 
message is transmitted when the data bus is active (cycle time: 1 second). 

When changing the direction of adjustment, the center console switch cluster first actu¬ 
ates the motor for setting the adjustment gears. 

The actuation of this motor is time-dependent. The adjustment motor is not actuated 
until the direction of adjustment is correctly set. The total adjustment movement is no 
more than 36 millimeters fortilt adjustment and 40 millimeters forfore-and-aft adjust¬ 
ment. 

Steering-column Memory 

The position of the steering column in each direction of adjustment is recorded by a Hall 
sensor. This position is stored in the center console switch cluster (SZM). This allows the 
Key Memory to call up the position of the steering column for up to 4 vehicle keys. 

The tilt adjustment moves to the uppermost position to make it easier to get in and out of 
the vehicle. 

Forthe easy-access facility, the steering-column adjustment is automatically actuated 
underthe following conditions: 

• Terminal R OFF 

• Terminal RON and driver's door opened (via door contact) 

• Terminal 15 OFF with driver's door open (via door contact) 


129 

E6x Body Electronics 



The steering-column memory is activated under the following conditions: 

• One of the two memory buttons forthe seat-mirror memory and the steering-column 
memory on the seat is pressed (from terminal R OFF). 

• Another remote control is used (personalization). Condition: The selection "Last seat 
position after unlocking" is activated in the "Settings" menu in the Central 
Information Display (CID) (from 09/2003). 

In both cases, the steering-column memory will not move the steering column to the 
stored position until terminal 15 is switched ON. 

Overheating Protection for Steering-column Adjustment Motors 

To protect the motors against overheating, a temperature model is stored in the center 
console switch cluster. 

The temperature model makes allowance forthe warming up and cooling down of the 
motors. 

It is possible to move the steering column in either direction through the range of move¬ 
ment at least 6 times before overheating protection is activated. 


130 

E6x Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the complaint outlined below. 
Complete worksheet using the “Complaint, Cause, Correction" format. 

Vehicle: _ Chassis#: _ Production Date:_ 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 


131 

E6x Body Electronics 





Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the complaint outlined below. 
Complete worksheet using the “Complaint, Cause, Correction" format. 

Vehicle: _ Chassis#: _ Production Date:_ 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 


132 

E6x Body Electronics 




C lassroom Exercise - Review Questions 


Describe the signal path from the Driver's doorswitchblockto actuate the E60 
roller sunblind: 


What control module stores the steering column memory settings? 


On the E64, how is the customer informed that the seat backrest is not locked? 
Why is this information important to the driver? 


Describe the signal path for seat heating: (between switch and heating mats). 


133 

E6x Body Electronics 
























du C lassroom Exercise - Review Questions 


5. Describe the overheating protection forthe steering column adjustment motors: 


6. What situation is indicated when the PDC button flashes? 


7. How is "Panic Mode” initiated on DWA? 


Notes: 


134 

E6x Body Electronics 































