Table of Contents 

E6x Driver Information Systems 

Subject Page 

Instrument Cluster.4 

Instrument Cluster System Overview (IPO) .5 

Legend for System Overview .6 

Cluster Inputs and Interfaces.6 

AmbientTemperature Sensor .6 

Fuel Level Sensors, Left and Right.6 

Coolant Level Switch .6 

Windshield Washer Fluid Level Switch.6 

Parking Brake Warning Switch .6 

Reset Button .7 

Axial buttons in turn-signal/main-beam switch .7 

Bus Interfaces.7 

Dynamic Stability Control .7 

Active Cruise Control.7 

Active Front Steering .7 

Digital Motor Electronics .7 

Electronic Transmission Control.8 

Safety and Gateway Module.8 

Light Module .8 

Integrated automatic heating and air-conditioning system.8 

Car Access System .8 

M-ASK/CCC and CID .8 

Components.9 

Display Areas .9 

Analog instruments and moving-disc indicators.10 

Indicators and Warning Lamps.12 

LC Display.12 

Program and Gear Display.13 

Principle of Operation.14 

Lighting of the Instrument Cluster.14 

Acoustic Generator.14 

Dimming of the instrument cluster.15 

High and low-voltage detection forthe instrument cluster.15 

Heating and contrast for the LCD display.15 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 





































Subject Page 

On-board Computer Functions .16 

Check-Control Messages .16 

Pre-drive Check.17 

Service Notes.18 

Redundant Data Storage .18 

Installing a new CAS control unit.18 

Installing a new instrument cluster.19 

Test installation of a new instrument cluster .19 

Simultaneous replacement of CAS control unit 

and instrument cluster .19 

Instrument ClusterTest Functions.20 

Condition Based Service (CBS).21 

CBS Displays .22 

Displays in the Instrument Cluster .22 

Displays in the Central Information Display (CID).23 

Resetting the Service Operations .25 

Diagnostics.25 

Central Information Display (CID) .26 

New Features.27 

Bus Network.27 

Components.28 

LC Display.28 

Controller.29 

Status Bar.31 

Communications .31 

Navigation .31 

Entertainment.32 

Climate .32 

Settings .32 

Service Mode.32 

Activating Service Mode .32 

































Driver Information Systems 


Model: E60, E61, E63 and E64 
Production: All 

■Biiermis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the instrument cluster warning symbols 

• Resetthe Condition Based Service indicators 

• Navigation through various screens of CID using the controller 

• Explain CID screens 


3 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Instrument Cluster 


The instrument clusters used in the new 5 and 6 series vehicle are similar in appearance 
and operation. There are slight differences which can be distinguished by the gauge 
configurations. The E63/E64 instrument cluster uses a speedometer which has a slightly 
finer scale and there is an oil temperature gauge located below the tachometer. 

The E60 and future E61 uses the more familiarfuel consumption indicator in the 
tachometer area. 

Both clusters use the new annular indicators. Forthe first time, this type of gauge display 
is used by BMW forthe two main instruments .This represents an innovation in display 
technology. This system has enabled the displays forthe cruise control system set 
speed and the variable engine speed warning zone to be visually illustrated. 

The indicator lamp forthe fuel reserve has been replaced by a Check Control message in 
text and graphics. Likewise, the Check Control texts are no longer displayed in the instru¬ 
ment cluster but in the status bar of the Central Information Display (CID). 



Two large instrument dials show vehicle speed and engine speed. The scales on the 
instrument cluster are specific to each country, vehicle and engine. Most of the indicator 
lamps are located in the center at the top between the two large instrument dials. Also in 
the center between the two large instrument dials are the two LC Displays. 


4 

E6x Driver Information Systems 





Instrument Cluster System Overview (IPO) 



02266,02 

5 

E6x Driver Information Systems 









































Legend for System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

i—l 

Ambient temperature sensor 

11 

M-ASK orCCC 

2 

Coolant level switch 

12 

Central Information Display (CD) 

3 

Fuel level sensor, left 

13 

D IS plus/GT-1 

4 

Parking brake warning switch 

14 

Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) 

5 

Fuel level sensor, right 

15 

Brake pad wear sensors 

6 

Windshield washerfluid level sensor 

16 

Electronic Transmission Control Module (EGS) 

7 

Front power distribution box 

17 

Dynamic Stability Control M odule (DSC) 

8 

Instrument cluster (kombi) 

18 

Active Cruise Control (ACC) 

9 

Car Access System (CAS) 

19 

Digital Motor Electronics (DM E or ECM) 

10 

IHKA 

20 

Active Front Steering Module (AFS) 


Cluster Inputs and Interfaces 

The instrument cluster receives input signals from the following components: 

AmbientTemperature Sensor 

The ambient temperature sensorsupplies the value forthe temperature outside the 
vehicle to the instrument cluster. The ambient temperature is shown on the LCD display. 
Instrument resolution is 0.5°C (1°F). The value for ambient temperature is also made 
available to other control units via the K-C AN. 

Note: Ifthe ambient temperature sensor circuit fails, the display will show +50 degrees Celsius 
ifthe circuit is shorted and -50 degrees Celsius ifthe circuit is open. 

Fuel Level Sensors, Leftand Right 

The fuel tank contains two fuel-level sensors. Each fuel-level sensor sends a signal indi¬ 
cating the amount of fuel in the tank. A value is obtained by adding the two signals. 

Coolant Level Switch 

The coolant-level switch sends a signal ifthe coolant level is too low (Reed contact). 

The information is output on the LCD display in the form of a Check-Control message. 

Windshield WasherFluid Level Switch 

The Windshield washerfluid level switch sends a signal ifthe fluid level is too low. 

The information is output on the LCD display in the form of a Check-Control message. 

Parking Brake Warning Switch 

The parking brake warning switch indicates that the handbrake is applied. The general 
brake warning lamp lights up red when the handbrake is applied. 


6 

E6x Driver Information Systems 














































Reset Button 

The reset button is used forthe following functions: 

• Reset trip meter 

• Call up Condition Based Service (CBS) 

• Call upTestfunctions (only for service staff) 

Axial buttons in turn-signal/main-beam switch 

The axial buttons (Check-Control button at top, on-board computer button at bottom) are 
forthe following functions: 

• Menu of the Check-Control system in the LCD display and clock/date selection 

• Menu of the on-board computer in the LCD display 

The signal generated when one of the axial buttons is pressed is transmitted through the 
bus system. 

Bus Interfaces 

The following control units communicate via the PT-CAN orthe K-CAN with the control 
unit of the instrument cluster: 

Dynamic Stability Control 

An active regulation sequence ora fault in the DSC will be indicated by the correspond¬ 
ing indicator and warning light (ABS, DSC orDTC). 

The brake pad wear sensors are also connected to the DSC control unit. The general 
brake warning light is actuated if the brake pads wearto the permissible limit. Front and 
rear brake pad wear is a CBS service operation (sensor-based). 

Active C ruise C ontrol 

There are now a permanent indicator and warning lights in the instrument clusterfor 
Active Cruise Control (ACC). They indicate: Object detected or driver override, distance 
levels 1 to 4. 

Active Front Steering 

A fault in the active front steering system is indicated by the corresponding indicator and 
warning light being actuated. 

Digital Motor Electronics 

The appropriate indicator and warning light is activated to indicate a fault in the DM E. 
Engine oil is a CBS service operation (sensor-based). 


7 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Electronic Transmission Control 

The EGS control unit supplies the signal forthe gear engaged to the instrument cluster. 
The selected gear is shown in the selector-lever and shift indicator in the LCD display. 

Safety and Gateway Module 

The appropriate indicator and warning light is activated to indicate a fault in the passive 
safety system (airbag). 

The SGM is the gateway between the byteflight, PT-CAN and K-CAN data buses. The 
diagnosis lead is also connected at the SGM. 

Light Module 

A fault in the lighting system is indicated by the light module (LM) actuating the corre¬ 
sponding indicator and warning light. 

Integrated automatic heating and air-conditioning system 

The IHKA calculates the condition of the microfilter. The condition of the microfilter is 
CBS service operation. 

Car Access System 

The CAS control unit serves for redundant data storage. The following are stored in the 
CAS control unit (redundantly to the instrument cluster): 

• Vehicle identification number 

• Odometer reading 

• CBS data 

M-ASK/CCC andCID 

Forthe instrument cluster, the M-ASK and CCC serve as an interface to the Central 
Information Display (CID).The CID displays detailed texts concerning Check-Control 
messages and information about CBS and other on-board computerfunctions.The CID 
also enables the driverto change the units of measurement (e.g. Celsius to Fahrenheit, 
and vice versa) forthe instrument cluster. 

Moreover, the M-ASK and CCC establish a telephone connection when a CBS serve 
operation is due (=TeleService).This is achieved by sending a message to the telephone 
control unit via the M OST. 

Other control units communicate via the bus to send messages (Check-Control mes¬ 
sages) to the instrument cluster. The instrument cluster emits these Check-Control mes¬ 
sages via symbols in the LCD display. 


8 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Components 


The instrument cluster comprises the following components: 

• Instrument dials 

• Indicator and warning lamps 

• LC display 

• Program and geardisplays forautomatic gearbox and SMG Sequential Manual 
Gearbox 

• Setting button for resetting the trip meter and operating the Condition Based 
Service,CBS menu 

• Connected components which serve to activate the displays in the instrument 
cluster 



Display Areas 

The instrument cluster is divided into the following display areas: 

• Instrument dials (Analog Instruments) 

• Indicator and warning lamps 

• LC display 

• Program and geardisplays forautomatic gearbox and SMG Sequential Manual 
Gearbox 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Set speed for cruise control 

4 

Tachometer warning zone 

2 

Speedometer 

5 

Fuel gauge 

3 

Tachometer 

6 

Fuel consumption indicator 


9 

E6x Driver Information Systems 









Analog instruments and moving-disc indicators 

The instrument cluster has a total of 6 stepper motors forthe various instruments. Forthe 
first time, moving-disc instruments are used in the instrument cluster. 

0 n the left, the set speed for cruise control is displayed on a moving-disc instrument. 

On the right, a moving-disc instrument shows the engine-revolutions advance-warning 
field. 

The engine-revolutions advance-warning field is subdivided into: 

• Fixed engine-revolutions advance-warning field 

• Variable engine-revolutions advance-warning field 

The maximum engine speed warning display is indicated by the tachometer as a function 
of engine temperature. 




1. Start of variable warning zone 

2. End of variable warning zone 

3. Start of fixed warning zone 

4. End of fixed warning zone 


10 

E6x Driver Information Systems 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

B 

Stepper motorforthe tachometer 

6 

Moving disc instrument for the cruise control 
speed setting 

2 

Stepper motorforthe fuel consumption gauge 
(or Oil temperature gauge E63/E64) 

7 

Drive pinion forthe moving disc instrument 

3 

Stepper motorforthe variable RPM advance 
warning field 

8 

Stepper motor the cruise control speed setting 

4 

Drive pinion forthe moving disc instrument 

9 

Stepper motorforfuel gauge reading 

5 

Moving disc instrument for the variable RPM 
advance warning field 

10 

Stepper motor for speedometer reading 


The 6 stepper motors in the instrument cluster are used forthe: 

• Speedometer 

• Tachometer (Revolution counter) 

• Fuel gauge 

• Fuel consumption indicator (E60/E61) 

• Engine oil temperature (E63/E64) 

• Moving-disc instrument forthe speed setting of the cruise control system 

• Moving-disc instrument forthe variable engine-revolutions advance-warning field 

The set speed forthe cruise control system and the tach warning are displayed by means 
of annular indicators (moving rings). 

The annular indicator is moved by means of the ring gear, connected to the indicator, the 
pinion and the stepper motor which is attached to the rear of the light duct. 

U.S. vehicles will have speedometers with 0-160 M PH and 0-7000 RPM displays. 


11 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



























Indicators and Warning Lamps 

The indicator and warning lamps are activated by the processor in the instrument cluster. 

The main indicator and warning lamps are activated in the Pre-drive Check when terminal 
15 is switched on. The indicator lamps and warning symbols are lit by soldered-in LEDs 
(replacement of LEDs not possible). 



1. Left turn signal indicator 

2. Indicator lamp area 

3. Rightturn signal indicator 


LC Display 

The LC display is located between the speedometer and the rev counter. The LC display 
is divided into two areas. The time and outside temperature are displayed in the upper 
window, along with the set speed forthe ACC, check control messages and CBS dis¬ 
plays. 

The on-board computerfunctions, trip distance counter and CBS messages are output 
to the lower window. A manipulation dot indicates if there are different vehicle identifica¬ 
tion numbers in the light module and in the instrument cluster. 


i) 



1. Upper LCD display area 

2. Lower LCD display area 

3. Trip counter reset button 


12 

E6x Driver Information Systems 





Program and Gear Display 

On vehicles with automatic transmission orsequential manual transmission (SM G), the 
program and gear selected are shown in the center ofthe lower window ofthe LC display. 

The program and gear display is activated when terminal 15 is on. At terminal 15 off, 
run-on operation ofthe display is possible provided the SM G is still transmitting CAN 
messages. 

The information between the control units forthe automatic gearbox or SMG and the 
instrument cluster are exchanged via the K-CAN. The program and gear display shows 
letters and numbers. The program mode is displayed all the time and is not overwritten 
by other information. 


1] 2 



02521_02 

Note: With SMG, the selector-lever position "N" flashes afterthe engine is 
turned off. This indication serves as a visual reminder that the car could 
still roll away. 


13 

E6x Driver Information Systems 











Principle of Operation 

The control unit of the instrument cluster incorporates certain functions 
over and above the display and indication functions, namely: 

• Lighting of the instrument cluster 

• Dimming of the instrument cluster 

• High and low-voltage detection forthe instrument cluster 

• Heating and contrast for the LCD display 

• On-board computerfunctions 

• Check-Control messages 

• Pre-drive check 

• Condition Based Service (CBS) 

• Vehicle identification check 

Lighting of the Instrument Cluster 

The instrument cluster has an integral power supply unit. The power supply is connected 
to terminal 30. The power supply provides the supply voltage forthe instrument cluster. 

This arrangement means that the lighting of the instrument cluster is independent of the 
on-board power supply. If the on-board power supply is disrupted (voltage dips), the 
brightness cannot fluctuate. 

LEDs in BMW orange provide backlighting forthe LCD display, the pointers of the analog 
instruments and the scale rings. 

The pointers and the scale rings are illuminated when the lights are switched ON 
(=function display). 

The display itself is not back-lit unless it contains a reading. 

Acoustic Generator 

Acoustic warnings are issued in support of the Check-Control messages. The instrument 
cluster controls these warnings by means ofthe K-CAN.The M-ASK and CCC emit 
acoustic warnings through the loudspeakers. 

An additional loudspeaker in the instrument cluster issues the following acoustic 
warnings: 

• Flash 

• Hazard warning lights 


14 

E6x Driver Information Systems 




Dimming of the instrument cluster 

The brightness of the LCD display and all indicator and warning lights is adapted to suit 
ambient lighting conditions. This function is implemented by a phototransistor in the 
instrument cluster. 

The brightness signal is calculated in the instrument cluster on the basis of the following 
values: 

• Signal from the phototransistor (ambient luminosity) 

• Dimmer signal (on the control panel forthe lights) 

The brightness signal calculated in this way is made available to the other control units 
via the K-CAN. 

High and low-voltage detection forthe instrument cluster 

If the on-board voltage drops below approximately 7.5 volts, no further read or write 
accesses to the data memory are permitted. The instrument cluster initiates data backup 
in advance of a pending reset triggered by undervoltage. 

Overvoltage in the on-board power supply is also detected. 

If the on-board voltage is greater than 16 volts: 

• Certain inputs and outputs are disabled in orderto protect the hardware. 

• Indicator and warning lights are dimmed forthe duration of the overvoltage or are 
deactivated in orderto prevent overload. 

Heating and contrast forthe LC D display 

A heater built into the display ensures good legibility even at low ambient temperatures. 
The heater is switched on if the temperature of the LCD display is below 10 °Celsius. 
The switch-on signal is transmitted (by the CAS control unit to the instrument cluster via 
the K-CAN) when the driver's door is opened. 

The contrast of the LCD display is automatically set as a function of the temperature of 
the LCD display and the operating time. A counter registers the standby times and oper¬ 
ating times logged by the instrument cluster, so that due allowance can be made for age¬ 
ing. Contrast voltage is automatically adjusted depending on increasing time in operation 
(ageing). 


15 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



On-board Computer Functions 

There are two ways in which on-board computerfunctions can be displayed: 

• in the instrument cluster 

• in the Central Information Display (extended on-board computerfunctions) 

The on-board computerfunctions forthe instrument cluster are as follows: 

• Ambient temperature 

• Time 

• Date 

• Average consumption (resettable) 

• Range 

• Average speed (resettable) 

The on-board computerfunction required can be displayed: When terminal R is ON by 
pressing the on-board computer button on the turn-signal/main-beam switch in a specific 
sequence. The last line is followed by an empty line, before the first line reappears on the 
screen (rolling list). When terminal R switches ON, the on-board computerfunction most 
recently selected by means of the on-board computer button reappears. If the on-board 
computer button is pressed and held down for longerthan 2 seconds, the values of the 
resettable on-board computerfunctions are recalculated. 

Check-Control Messages 

The Check-Contra I system informs the driver if important functions, information or warn¬ 
ings are no longer available. Check-Control messages are displayed in the form of a sym¬ 
bol on the LCD display (red, yellow, orange). The instrument cluster discharges the func¬ 
tions of priority control forthe Check-Control messages.The readings fortime and date 
and ambient temperature are overwritten. If a Check-Control message is present but not 
displayed, this will be indicated by warning triangle in the LCD display. 

Supplementary notes and instructions are available for most Check-Control messages 
and are displayed in the Central Information Display (CID) (short form can be found in the 
status bar). 

In addition to the visual display, the Check-Control system also alerts the driver with 
acoustic signals. Depending on the importance of the associated message, a single or 
double gong with varying volume and tone will sound. 

Current Check-Control messages can be called up with the Check-Control button (press 
and hold for longerthan 2 seconds) on the turn-signal/main-beam switch.The Check- 
Control messages can then be viewed in sequence (press for less than 2 seconds). 

When the Check-Control button is pressed, this is registered via the K-CAN. 

If 8 seconds pass without a button being pressed, eitherthe time and ambient tempera¬ 
ture ora current Check-Control message with priority 1 will appear. 


16 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Pre-drive Check 

The pre-drive check serves as: 

• A check of internal functions in the instrument cluster 

• Monitoring of the live signals from all control units that may emit Check-Control mes¬ 
sages 

During the pre-drive check, the most important indicator and warning lights are activated 
for 4 seconds when terminal 15 is switched ON. Exception: Indicator and warning lights 
for airbags actuated when terminal R is switched ON. 

The following indicator and warning lights are activated in the pre-drive check: 

• Seat-belt warning 

• Airbag (initially yellow, then red) 

• Anti-lock brake system (ABS) 

• General brake warning light (initially yellow, then red) 

• Emission warning lamp 

• Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

• Active Front Steering 

• ACC control by driver or object detected (initially yellow, then red) 

Once a pre-drive check completes successfully, all indicator and warning lights are 
switched off. If a fault occurs during the pre-drive check, the check is interrupted for the 
system in question. The indicator and warning lights forthis system remain on. The 
Check-Control system issues the appropriate message. 


17 

E6x Driver Information Systems 




Service Notes 


Redundant Data Storage 

If the instrument cluster is exchanged, the stored data (e.g. total distance reading) must 
be retained. This will make it possible to detect any evidence of manipulation. 

In orderto guard against manipulation, the following data are stored redundantly (second 
copy) in the CAS control unit: 

• Vehicle identification number 

• Total distance reading (kilometer reading) 

• Data related to the scopes ofthe Condition Based Service 

The data is verified each time terminal 15 is switched on. A manipulation dot is shown in 
the LCD display in the event of any discrepancy. The manipulation dot appears to the left 
ofthe trip distance recorder. 

The manipulation dot is displayed in the following cases: 

• The vehicle identification number stored in the instrument cluster is different to the 
one stored in the CAS control unit. 

• A vehicle identification number is not stored in one ofthe two control units (e.g. new 
component). 

• The module in the instrument clusterfor storing the total distance reading is faulty 
(the kilometer reading is shown as 999999). 

Installing a new CAS control unit 

• Orderthe new CAS control unitforthe specific vehicle in question, quoting key 
number, VIN, standard equipment. 

• Once the new CAS control unit has been encoded (DM E/DDE control unit and CAS 
control unit mutually identified and calibrated), the engine can be started. 

Important: Do not install a used CAS control unit. 

The engine cannot be started if the CAS control unit being fitted has already been used 
(different vehicle identification number). 


18 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Installing a new instrument cluster 

• The manipulation dot is displayed when terminal 15 is activated because the 
instrument cluster has not yet been encoded with the vehicle identification number. 

• Encode the instrument cluster (input the vehicle identification number in the 
instrument cluster and assign it to the vehicle). 

• Switch terminal 15 off and on. Afterterminal 15 has been switched back on: The 
current kilometer reading and the CBS data are transmitted to the instrument cluster 
by the CAS control unit. The manipulation dot disappears. 

Test installation of a new instrument cluster 

The VINs in the instrument cluster and CAS control unit do not match orthe VIN has not 
yet been entered in the instrument cluster. 

A bidirectional communication between the instrument cluster and the CAS control unit 
takes place as follows: 

• The kilometer reading stored in the CAS control unit, for example, is transferred to 
the working memory of the total distance recorder in the instrument cluster and then 
displayed. During a test drive, the kilometers covered continue to be metered in the 
working memory of the total distance recorder and are sent to the CAS control unit 
every 10 km. 

• If at least 24 hours have elapsed between terminal 15 being switched off and on, 
calibration will be repeatedly automatically regardless of the distance covered. 

• When the instrument cluster is removed following a test drive the working memory 
loses the kilometer reading stored. The instrument cluster is reset to the initial 
status. 

Important: An instrument cluster that has previously been used will not 
be reset. 

The vehicle identification number entered in a used instrument cluster can be overwritten 
until a distance of 254 km has been covered. It is then impossible to reset the perma¬ 
nently stored value. 

Simultaneous replacement of CAS control unit and instrument cluster 

Important: Do not replace the CAS control unit and the instrument cluster 
at the same time. 

Avoid simultaneous exchange of the CAS control unit and instrument cluster due to the 
risk of the current kilometer reading and all CBS data being irrevocably lost. 


19 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Follow the steps below if it is necessary to replace both control units at the same time 
(e.g. neither respond to the BMW diagnosis system): 

• Replace the instrument cluster 

• Encode the VIN in the instrument cluster 

• Switch terminal 15 OFF,then ON.There may actually be a transfer of data between 
the CAS control unit and the instrument cluster. 

• Replace the CAS control unit 

• Encode the VIN in the CAS control unit 

• Switch terminal 15 off then on again. 

• The manipulation dot is cleared afterthe terminal 15 is switched back on. 
Communication between the instrument cluster and CAS control unit for redundant 
data storage is now ensured. 

Instrument C luster Test Functions 

The testfunctions are useful fortroubleshooting with the BMW diagnosis system. The 
test-function readings are displayed in the upper zone of the LCD display. The texts for 
the testfunctions are stored in the German-language version only. 

With terminal R ON orterminal 15 ON: 

Press the reset button in the instrument clusterfor 10 seconds to reset the testfunctions. 

The testfunctions can be scrolled through with the reset button in the instrument cluster. 

An alternative means of accessing the testfunctions is: hold down the reset button in the 
instrument cluster and simultaneously switch terminal RON. 

Note: Disabling and enabling the testfunctions 

Only the first two testfunctions are freely accessible. The testfunctions are disabled from 
No. 3 onward. 

They can be enabled only in test function No. 19. 

The testfunctions are enabled by: entering the sum obtained by adding togetherthe last 
five digits of the VIN. 

Note: For detailed list of Test Functions, access the latest SBT in WebTIS. 


20 

E6x Driver Information Systems 




Condition Based Service (CBS) 

With the series launch of the new 5 Series, BMW will also be offering service intervals 
that are geared towards the current condition of selected critical components - i.e. servic¬ 
ing that depends on the condition of components and maintenance requirements; this is 
known as Condition Based Service (CBS). CBS means thus: maintenance onlyforthe 
component which is worn. 

The system calculates when a service operation, e.g. an oil change or emissions inspec¬ 
tion, is due and informs the customer of this via the LC display in the instrument cluster. 

CBS sorts all the data according to date due and can determine when the vehicle should 
betaken into BMW Service. 

The instrument clustersends the sorted data to the Central Information Display (CID). 
There, the data can be selected for display in the Service menu. There are ten different 
types of service, with each of these types being assigned to a specific service group. 

The system involves the following components: 

• Instrument cluster 

• External units (DME, IHKA, DSC) 

• Car Access System (CAS) 2 

• Central Information Display (CID) 

All information that the CBS system requires is sent on the K-CAN bus. The instrument 
cluster is a subscriber on the K-CAN and acts as the CBS master control unit. The CBS 
requests from all the control units are therefore sent via the K-CAN to the instrument 
cluster and to the Central Information Display. 



21 

E6x Driver Information Systems 









CBS Displays 


Displays in the Instrument Cluster 

The CBS display always comprises the following two separate displays: 

• A colored symbol in the upper display 

-Orange for normal 
-Yellow for service due 
-Red for service overdue 

• And information on remaining distance and/or due date in the lower display. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

i—1 

Engine Oil 

7 

Spark Plugs 

2 

Microfilter (IHKA) 

8 

Statutory vehicle inspection 

3 

Front brake pads 

9 

Emissions test 

4 

Rear brake pads 

10 

Countdown to next service 

5 

Brake fluid 

11 

Date for next service 

6 

Vehicle Check 

12 

CBS Symbol 


22 

E6x Driver Information Systems 































Displays in the C entral Information Display (C ID) 

All information on the individual service operations can be displayed in the CID. The CBS 
functions are stored in the "Settings" menu item which is used exclusively for individual 
user settings. 

Press the Controller, the "Settings" menu will appear. 

Turn the controller until "Service" is highlighted, then press to activate the CBS menu. 

The CBS menu window will appear; this is divided into the following control and display 
fields: 

• Status bar 

• First menu bar 

• Second menu bar 

• Display field for CBS symbol 

• Display field for service operation 


1 )— 
V_y 

= < 

Service-Bedarf ► 

2 )— 

^ « Status ► 



A Bremsbelage vo. 

3 )— 
v_y 

- (®) 

km -100 

A § Fahrzeugprufung 

A § Abgasprufung — 

A Bremsbelage hi. 
Bremsflussigkeit y 


-Er ^-= BAYERN3 TP TMC B SOS 15:01 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

First Menu Bar 

• Service Requirement, Check Control M essages 

• Service 

2 

Second Menu Bar- Status 

3 

Display Field forCBS Symbols 

4 

Status Bar 

5 

Display Field forService Operation 


23 

E6x Driver Information Systems 














The service operation display field always shows the first five messages. 

The displays are color-coded and some also have a symbol. The displays mean the fol¬ 
lowing: 

• Red - The service operation is overdue 

• Yellow - The service operation is due shortly 

• Green - No service operation required 

Any overdue service operations and symbols marked in red in the list are always at the 
top of the list of messages. 

You can scroll through the list of the service operations from top to bottom by turning the 
controller (left/right). 

To display the information concerning a specific service operation on the C ID, turn the 
controllerto select the required service operation and display the selection by pressing 
the controller. 

Note: All screen shots shown are derived from a simulation of a version with 
featuring a 6.5" medium-resolution color LC display and correspond to 
the status at the time of going to press. Further changes are possible to 
the contents and the layout. 


24 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Resetting the Service Operations 

When one or more operations have been carried out, e.g. front pads have been changed, 
these operations must be reset to theirfull service interval. 

There are two options for resetting the service operations: 

• Legally required service operations - Legally required service operations such as the 
Statutory vehicle inspection (HU) and the Statutory exhaust test (AU), can only be 
reset in the "Service" menu. 

• M aintenance service operations - All service operations forthe purpose of mainte¬ 
nance are reset by means of the reset button of the trip distance counter in the 
instrument cluster. If the reset button is pressed for longerthan ten seconds, the 
reset mode opens automatically. "Reset?" is displayed in the lower display window. 

In the upper display window, the CBS symbol, e.g. for "engine oil service overdue" will be 
displayed. Press the reset button until the time/distance-dependent displays in the lower 
display window are replaced with dashes. Reset is no longer possible once more than 80 
percent of the interval has expired. A reset lock will be shown in the display with "OK". 



1. Reset Button for trip counter 

2. Upper display window (CBS) 

3. Lower window display 


Diagnostics 

There are three possible combinations for replacing the instrument clusters and Car 
Access System. 

• Instrument cluster faulty, Car Access System OK 

• Car Access System faulty, instrument cluster OK 

• Car Access System and instrument cluster must be replaced. 

Simultaneous replacement of the Car Access System and the instrument cluster must be 
avoided. The odometer reading will be lost as a result. In principle it is also possible to 
carry out a trial replacement of the instrument cluster/Car Access System. 


25 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Central Information Display (C ID) 

The Central Information Display is an integrated display and operating panel forthe fol¬ 
lowing functions: 

• Audio systems such as radio, CD, MC 

• Computer, journey computer 

• Check Control messages 

• Navigation 

• Needs-based service (BOS) 

• Vehicle info 

• Brief info 

• Telephone and data services 

• CD-ROM orDVD 

• Personalized functions such as station selection 

• Heating and air conditioning system 

• Vehicle functions such as DSC, EDC, PDC, RDC 

• Service mode 






26 

E6x Driver Information Systems 








































































New Features 

The C ID of the E60 has new features or modified features: 

• M ain M enu reduced to four selections 

- Communication 

- Car Data (unless equipped with Navigation) 

- Entertainment 
-Climate Control 

• User settings available in an additional menu setting 

• Two variants of controller 

• New M enu button 

• Voice Input button on center console 

Bus Network 

The M-ASK generates the LVDS data (Low Voltage Differential Signaling)forthe graphic 
display in the Central Information Display. 

The central operating control forthe Central Information Display is the controller. The 
controller is connected to the CID via the center console control center (SZM) and the K- 
CAN system. 

The Safety and Gateway Module (SGM) provides the diagnostics interface forthe CID via 
the diagnostics bus. 


D-Bus 



27 

E6x Driver Information Systems 




































Components 

The Central Information Display (CID) is comprised of the following components: 

• Casing with integral electronic module 

• LC display 

• Casing attachment (tube) with cover glass 

• Controller, a connected component which controls the displays in the CID. 



1. Casing with electronics 

2. LC Display 

3. Casing with glass 


LC Display 

In orderto cope with the various equipment specifications, the following variants are used 
forthe E60: 

• CID with 6.5" medium-resolution color LCD (400 x240 pixels) 

• CID with 8.8" high-resolution color LCD (640 x240 pixels) 

The LCD also features a help window.The casing is designed to be able to accommo¬ 
date all screen variants offered. The entire Central Information Display assembly is fixed to 
the dashboard by two screws. 


28 

E6x Driver Information Systems 











Controller 

The controller is the central operating control for all comfort functions and selected 
options for some vehicle functions that are displayed on the Central Information Display. 

The controller is located in the center console immediately behind the gear selector lever, 
within reach of the user (driver and front passenger). 

Forthe firsttime, the controller will be available in the following two variants forthe E60: 

• Variant A - The base variant has a mechanical latch system with 24 latches perfull 
turn. 

• Variant B - On the high-end version, the tactile feedback forthe rotational movement 
of the controller is generated electrically. The tactile feedback forthe rest position, 
the main directions of movement and the depressed position is created by mechani¬ 
cal means. 


The operating principle of the controller is identical with that of the E65. 

The controller is slid from a rest position (center position) to which it always returns again 
when it is released. 


29 

E6x Driver Information Systems 








The main features of the operating principle are: 

• The center is the rest position (center position) 

• S lide to select the four main directions of movement 

• Turn to select the function 

• Press to select or confirm entry. 

There is also a panel of buttons immediately behind the controller. There are two 
variants, as follows: 

• Basic variant - This version comprises a menu button which is used to call up the 
main menu in the Central Information Display. 

• High-end variant - This version has two buttons. In addition to the menu button, 
there is a button for activating/deactivating the voice input system (SVS). The button 
signals are read into the controller and converted into K-CAN telegrams. 

The four menu items are displayed in a cross pattern on the Central Information Display 
corresponding to the four main directions in which the controller can be moved. 

In addition to these four main menu items, there is a fifth menu item used exclusively for 
individual user settings. The screen can also be switched on and off from this menu. 


30 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Status Bar 

The status bar displays the main information on the various functions, such as the 
telephone signal strength orthe time; this information is permanently displayed after 
Ignition ON. 


A ri A BAYfRN 3 TMC * T.tfll 21:50 


L) 2 3 J A J 6 

02829 . 0(2 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Automatic A/C Activated 

4 

Unread Text Message 

2 

Audio Source Activated 

5 

Telephone Signal Strength 

3 

TMC (NotforUSA) 

6 

Time 


Communications 

In this menu, entries in the telephone directory can be displayed and sorted according to 
various criteria. Here too, the user can query his SMS (Short Message Service) inbox for 
incoming text messages or display any calls that were not answered. 

This menu also contains the BMW services such as BMW Assist and BMW Online. 
Certain services are only available to customers once released. 

Navigation 

This menu provides access to all functions necessary to operate the navigation system. 
The computer can also be selected from this menu item. Certain services are relevant to 
specific equipment and are only available to customers after appropriate authorization. 
The main menu is activated as soon as terminal 15 ON is on. 


31 

E6x Driver Information Systems 










Entertainment 


The Entertainment menu is a frequently used function. Certain services are relevantto 
specific equipment and are only available to customers once released. The main menu is 
activated as soon as terminal 15 ON is on. 

Climate 

As on the E65,the extended conditioning functions such as mixture control and automat¬ 
ic heater can be selected and activated from the Central Information Display. The main 
menu is activated as soon as terminal 15 ON is on. 

Settings 

The individual user settings can be adjusted from this menu. The main menu is activated 
as soon as terminal 15 ON is on. 

Service Mode 

Service mode is a special facility which provides information about the status of the dis¬ 
play and user control system. The function is designed for use by BMW Service and is 
not intended to be accessible to vehicle owners. Service mode provides access to 
details of the hardware/software versions forthe Central Information Display and the con¬ 
trol units in the M-ASK network. As an addition to the comprehensive facilities of the 
diagnosis system, Service mode acts as a simple means of quickly accessing diagnostic 
data without the need fora diagnosis tester. 

Activating Service Mode 

In the main menu, press and hold the controller. Tactile feedback will then be generated. 
-Turn controllers stops clockwise 
-Turn controllers stops anti-clockwise 

- Turn controller 1 stop clockwise 
-Turn controller 1 stop anti-clockwise 

- Turn controller 1 stop clockwise 

- Press the controllerto confirm, Service mode will then appear in the CID. 


32 

E6x Driver Information Systems 




Workshop Exercise - Driver Information 


Access the appropriate SBT in WebTIS for the E60 instrument cluster. Print out the 
instrument cluster test functions page. 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, unlock the test functions. 


Describe the procedure for unlocking the test functions: 


What is the test test for "fuel tank contents"? Record data below. 


How is this test step helpful in diagnosis? 


Describe Test step 21 and how it is helpful in diagnosis. 


List the steps necessary to seta preset radio station: 


33 

E6x Driver Information Systems 




What information is found underthe heading "Car Data"? 

What are the possible "program" options forthe "Star" M FL Button? 

List the steps necessary to reset the average speed reading: 

Using the Controller and CID, set the door locks to "Relock door if not Opened": 

What is the current setting of the speed dependent volume? 

What is the current setting of the pathway lighting? 

Increase the time setting by 2 increment levels. What is the setting? 

Access the check control messages. What is the current message? 


34 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


What are some of the differences between the instrument cluster used on the 
E60/E61 versus the E63/E64? 


What temperature would be displayed if the ambient temperature circuit was 
open? 


What action initiates the heating function of the instrument cluster? 


What instrument cluster information is stored redundantly in the CAS? 


What is the consequence of replacing the instrument cluster and the CAS at the 
same time? 


Listtwo methods for entering the instrument clustertest functions: 


35 

E6x Driver Information Systems 






























7 


In the CBS display in the instrument cluster, What does a red symbol indicate? 


8. What is the diagnostic pathway between the D-bus and the CID? 


9. What criteria dictates the position of the "variable warning zone" in the 
tachometer? 


10. What are the maximum/minimum voltage requirements for proper instrument 
cluster operation? 


36 

E6x Driver Information Systems 



