Technical training. 

Product information. 


F25 Driver Assistance Systems 



BMW Service 


Edited for the U.S. market by: 

BMW Group University 

Technical Training 

ST1106 2/1/2011 

V_/ 






General information 


Symbols used 

The following symbol is used in this document to facilitate better comprehension or to draw attention 
to very important information: 

A 

Contains important safety notes and information that needs to be observed strictly in order to guaran¬ 
tee the smooth operation of the system. 


Information status and national-market versions 

BMW Group vehicles meet the requirements of the highest safety and quality standards. Changes in 
requirements for environmental protection, customer benefits and design render necessary continu¬ 
ous development of systems and components. Consequently, there may be discrepancies between 
the contents of this document and the vehicles available in the training course. 

This document basically relates to the European version of left hand drive vehicles. Some operating el¬ 
ements or components are arranged differently in right-hand drive vehicles than shown in the graphics 
in this document. Further differences may arise as the result of the equipment specification in specific 
markets or countries. 

Additional sources of information 

Further information on the individual topics can be found in the following: 

• Owner's Handbook 

• Integrated Service Technical Application. 

Contact: conceptinfo@bmw.de 
©2010 BMW AG, Munich 

Reprints of this publication or its parts require the written approval of BMW AG, Miinchen 

The information contained in this document forms an integral part of the technical training provided by 
the BMW Group and is intended for its course trainers and participants. Refer to the latest relevant in¬ 
formation systems of the BMW Group for any changes/additions to the Technical Data. 

Status of the information: July 2010 
VH-23/lnternational Technical Training 




F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

Contents 


1. Introduction.1 

1.1. Bus System Overview.2 

2. High-beam assistant.5 

3. Park Distance Control.12 

4. Rear view camera.13 

5. Top view.15 

6. Dynamic Cruise Control.17 

6.1. Introduction.17 

6.2. Control functions.17 

6.2.1. Cruise control.17 

6.2.2. Acceleration and deceleration.17 

6.2.3. Cruise control when cornering.17 

6.2.4. Prioritization of partial setpoint values.18 

6.2.5. Estimation of disturbance force.18 

6.2.6. Activation of the actuators.18 

7. Hill Descent Control.19 

8. Head-Up Display.20 





















F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

1. Introduction 


BMW has long since offered a comprehensive range of driver assistance systems. These make it easi¬ 
er for the driver to control the vehicle, by: 

• providing the driver with information 

• prompting the driver on how to react or 

• actively intervening in the way the vehicle is driven. 

The F25 is equipped with the following driver assistance systems: 

• High-beam assistant 

• Park Distance Control 

• Reversing camera 

• Top View 

• Cruise control with braking function 

• Hill Descent Control 

• Head-Up Display 


1 




F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

1. Introduction 

1.1. Bus System Overview 


m 



F25 Bus system overview 































































































F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

1. Introduction 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wakeable control units 

2 

Control units with wake-up authorization 

3 

Start-up-device control units for starting up and synchronizing the FlexRay bus 
system 

ACSM 

Advanced Crash Safety Module 

AMPT 

Top HiFi amplifier 

CAS 

Car Access System 

CID 

Central Information Display 

COMBOX 

Combox (Combox multimedia, Combox multimedia with telematics) 

CON 

Controller 

D-CAN 

Diagnosis-on CAN 

DME 

Digital Engine Electronics 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

DVDC 

DVD changer 

EDC 

Electronic Damper Control EDC 

EGS 

Electronic transmission control unit 

EKPS 

Electric fuel pump 

EMF 

Electromechanical parking brake 

EPS 

Electronic power steering (electromechanical power steering) 

Ethernet 

Wired data network system for local data networks 

FLA 

High-beam assistant 

FlexRay 

FRM 

Fast, preconfigured and error-tolerant bus system for automotive use 

Footwell module 

FZD 

Roof function center 

GWS 

Gear selector switch 

HEADUNIT 

Headunit (Car Information Computer or Car Information Computer Basic II) 

HKL 

Automatic luggage compartment lid actuation 

HUD 

Head-Up display 

ICM 

Integrated Chassis Management 

IHKA 

Automatic integrated heating and A/C control unit 

JBE 

Junction Box Electronics 

K-CAN 

Body controller area network 

K-CAN2 

Body controller area network 2 

KOMBI 

Instrument panel 

MOST 

Media Oriented System Transport 


3 




















F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

1. Introduction 


Index 

Explanation 

OBD 

On-board diagnosis (diagnostic socket) 

PDC 

Park Distance Control 

PT CAN 

Drive train Controller Area Network 

PT CAN2 

Drive train Controller Area Network 2 

RAD 

Radio 

SMFA 

Driver's seat module 

TPMS 

Tire Pressure Monitoring System 

TRSVC 

Control unit for camera systems 

VDM 

Vertical Dynamics Management 

VTG 

Transfer box 

ZGM 

Central gateway module 


4 









F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

2. High-beam assistant 


The high-beam assistant FLA (Automatic high beams SA 5AC) of the F25 is based on the F01/F02 
FLA system. 

The F01 system combines three functions in one and uses a KAFAS control unit that is not used here. 

As in the F01 this system is also designed to assists the driver in the use of the high-beam headlights. 

Depending on the traffic situation, the prevailing ambient light conditions and which lights on the vehi¬ 
cle have been switched on, the FLA switches on the high-beam headlights automatically and thereby 
relieves the driver of having to switch on the high-beam headlight on manually. 

Note: Automatic high beams 5AC must be ordered with ZPP Premium Package 

High-beam headlight can still be switched on and off manually as usual. The driver always has the ca¬ 
pability, and indeed the obligation, to override the system whenever the situation requires it. 

The high-beam assistant function in the F25 is implemented with the use of the FLA control unit and 
its own dedicated video camera. 


The FLA video camera is a simplified image sensor that can identify the color and intensity of light. 



High-beam assistant display and button 


5 





F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

2. High-beam assistant 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stalk 

2 

High-beam assistant button 

3 

Display when high-beam assistant activated 

4 

Display when high-beam headlight on 


© © 



z 

< 

o 



High-beam assistant FLA control module and video camera 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

High-beam assistant FLA control unit with connection to vehicle electrical 
system on K-CAN 

2 

High-beam assistant FLA video camera, image data sent from the video 
camera to the FLA control unit along the LVDS data line 



( 2 ) 


High-beam assistant FLA control unit and video camera location (F01/F02) 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

High-beam assistant video camera 

2 

High-beam assistant control unit in the rear-view mirror 


6 


































F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

2. High-beam assistant 

In order for the driver to be able to activate and use the high-beam assistant, the light switch must first 
be set to Automatic or light switch position II. The high-beam assistant has its own activation button in 
the turn signal/ main-beam stalk on the steering column. While the high-beam assistant can be activat¬ 
ed at any time with the light switch in position II, there is an additional prerequisite in the Automatic po¬ 
sition whereby the automatic driving lights controller must have already switched on the lights. 



Light switch 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Foglight 

2 

Lightswitch 

3 

Knurled wheel to adjust instrument lighting 


A 

Note: The high-beam assistant is not a substitute for the driver’s decision of when to use the 
high-beam headlights. For safety reasons, always manually dip the high-beam headlights 
when confronted with oncoming traffic. 


7 











F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

2. High-beam assistant 



® ® ® 


Circuit diagram for high-beam assistant (F01/F02) 


8 


TE08-0454 














































F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

2. High-beam assistant 


Index 


Explanation 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 


7 

8 

9 

10 
11 


Forward-pointing FLA video camera on the base of the rear-view mirror. 

FLA control unit in the rear-view mirror 

Light switch Position A or position II 

Footwell module FRM Main-beam headlights on/off 

High-beam assistant on/off button on the turn signal stalk on the steering 
column 

Steering column switch cluster SZL with turn signal stalk on the steering 
column 

Integrated Chassis Module ICM, road-speed signal 
Central gateway module ZGM 
Instrument cluster Function display 
Junction box electronics 
Front distribution box 


Detection of light in the field of view of the video camera 

In both versions of the FLA, the video cameras monitor the area ahead of the vehicle for light sources. 
Vehicles travelling in front and oncoming traffic become recognizable at distances of up to approxi¬ 
mately 400 m. The detection range of the video camera is approximately 1,000 m. The video camera 
has a horizontal viewing angle of approximately 15° to the left and right and a vertical viewing angle of 
approximately 5° up and down. When active, these special video cameras capture dots of light and, in 
the process, are able to distinguish between various parameters, e.g. light color and light intensity. 



9 


















F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

2. High-beam assistant 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Recognition range 

2 

Detection range 



Evaluation of image data 

The various dots, colors and intensities of light captured by the camera are evaluated by the control 
unit and, based on the control unit's assessment, a switch-on or switch-off recommendation is sent 
from the FLA control unit to the footwell module. In addition to the switch-on/switch-off recommen¬ 
dation, road speed is also taken into account. At speeds below 38 km/h/24 mph, the FLA is switched 
off; at speeds higher than 50 km/h/31 mph, it may be switched on, depending on all other parameters. 

If the vehicle is in an environment with adequate light, the main-beam headlights do not switch on. The 
FLA control unit or sends a switch-off recommendation to the footwell module. 

These conditions could be: 

• Daylight 

• Twilight 

• Road lighting 

• Illuminated places 


10 
















F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

2. High-beam assistant 

The system is designed to switch off the main-beam headlights automatically in response to the fol¬ 
lowing conditions. 

• Oncoming traffic 

• Preceding traffic 

• Detection of background brightness (twilight, street lamps, illuminated places, etc.) 

• Driving speed too low. 

Control of the main-beam headlights 

At the request of the FLA (KAFAS) control unit, the actual switching on and off of the main-beam 
headlights is always carried out by the footwell module, which is responsible for all of the exterior light¬ 
ing. To this end, the FLA control unit uses its own image data to assess background brightness. The 
decision of the FRM to activate the dipped-beam headlights in A mode is made in the FRM indepen¬ 
dently of the FLA function. The FRM receives the light signal from the RLSS. System limitations In var¬ 
ious situations, and under specific environmental conditions, the limitations of a camera-based system 
begin to impact on functionality. 

These limitations may be reached in the following situations. 

• Extremely unfavorable weather conditions (e.g. fog or heavy snowfall) 

• Poorly illuminated road users (e.g. riders on small motorcycles, cyclists, pedestrians) 

• Individual driving situations (e.g. sharp bends, steep brows and hollows of hills, traffic coming 
at right angles from left or right) 

• Differentiation between different light sources, reflective traffic signs, etc. 

• No recognition of oncoming traffic is possible if only the cone of light is within the video 
camera's field of view. 

Recognition is possible only if the light source itself is within the field of view of the video cam¬ 
era. 

The driver is able to intervene at any time and override the assistance system by switching the main- 
beam headlights on and off manually. The driver always bears sole responsibility for the vehicle and 
the control of the vehicle's lighting. 


11 



F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

3. Park Distance Control 


The Park Distance Control PDC (SA 508) assists the driver when maneuvering in and out of a parking 
space. The current distance from an obstruction is indicated by acoustic signals and on a visual dis¬ 
play. The Park Distance Control of the F25 accesses measured data acquired by four ultrasonic sen¬ 
sors on the front and rear bumpers. 

PDC is activated in response to the engagement of reverse gear or the operation of the PDC button 
next to the gear selector switch. 

The driver receives feedback via the speaker system on the distance measurements and distance 
warnings in the form of acoustic signals. 

In vehicles equipped with CID (SA 609, 663), feedback is also displayed on the CID. 


If, 


\ 

^ m 

4 ► i 


1 r f 

» Jy 

/ 'WT 



F25 Display of distance warning in CID 


A_ 

PDC cannot replace the driver's personal judgement of the traffic situation. Also check the traffic sit¬ 
uation around the vehicle by looking directly. Otherwise there is a risk of accidents occurring, due to 
other road users or objects that are outside the detection range of the PDC for example. Loud sound 
sources outside and inside the vehicle could drown out the PDC signal. 


12 





F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

4. Rear view camera 


A prerequisite for the optional rear view camera (SA 3AG) to be fitted in the F25, is that the optional 
PDC (SA 508) and CID (SA 609, 663) is also fitted. The rear view camera is fitted right of center near to 
the handle recess on the tailgate. 

In a vehicle equipped with the reversing camera, the controller and the operating menu can be used to 
toggle between the basic PDC display and the reversing camera image with PDC. 



Reversing camera display with PDC 


To support the driver, turning-circle lines, lane/parking-aid lines, obstacle markings and, where applica¬ 
ble, zoomed views of the trailer tow hitch are faded into the reversing camera image. 


13 




F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

4. Rear view camera 





Example of how parking-aid line is displayed 
Overview of the rear view camera assistance function 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Depiction of a parking-aid line 

2 

Parking-aid line assistance function 

3 

Turning-circle line assistance function 

4 

Obstacle marking assistance function 

5 

Zoomed trailer tow hitch assistance function (not US) 


The reversing camera is deactivated automatically as soon as the vehicle exceeds a speed of 20 km/h 
or travels forward by more than 20 m. 


14 


















F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

5. Top view 

The area next to the vehicle can be displayed to the driver in the CID with the assistance of two exteri¬ 
or mirror cameras using the optional equipment Rear view camera with Top View (SA 3AH). This allows 
the driver to see areas around the vehicle that are not within his direct field of vision when parking and 
also when driving slowly. 

The reversing camera (SA 3AG) and the Interior and exterior mirrors with automatic dimming function 
(SA 430) must be fitted in order to be able to fit the optional equipment Rear view camera with Top 
View. 



F25 Exterior mirror camera 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Exterior mirror camera 


The Top View display can be activated via a button in the control box next to the gear selector switch or 
via the controller. 

When the Top View is activated, both exterior mirror cameras are used in conjunction with the revers¬ 
ing camera. 

The familiar turning circle and drive lines already projected by the reversing camera in the general view 
are also projected here for the driver. 



O- 


Top View 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Obstruction 

2 

Warning about obstruction 


15 




















F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

5. Top view 


When an obstruction is detected, the driver receives a visual and acoustic warning in the CID based on 
the PDC information. 



F25 General view of Top View showing drive line and turning circle line 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Turning circle line 

2 

Lane line 


The turning circle line shows the path of the smallest possible turning radius on a level roadway. 

Only one turning circle line is displayed at the maximum steering-wheel angle. 

The lane line depends on the current steering angle and is adapted continuously to the steering wheel 
movements. 

The lane line helps the driver assess the space requirements when parking and manoeuvring on a level 
roadway. 

A_ 

Also check the traffic situation around the vehicle by looking directly. Otherwise there is a risk of acci¬ 
dents occurring, due to other road users or objects that are outside the image ranges of the camera for 
example. 


16 










F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

6. Dynamic Cruise Control 

6.1. Introduction 

The cruise control with braking function has been used in many BMW models since the BMW 3-Series 
(E9x). It is also referred to as "Dynamic Cruise Control" (DCC). It relieves the burden on the driver on 
quiet roads by maintaining a constant speed regardless of the resistance to vehicle motion (gradient, 
payload). The driver is still responsible for driving the vehicle when using this support. The driver can 
override the DCC function at any time by braking or accelerating. 

DCC also offers the driver the opportunity to adjust the set speed in small or large increments, which 
is then set and maintained by the system by controlling the powertrain and brakes. The brakes are also 
controlled during steep downhill driving if sufficient deceleration is not achieved by engine drag torque 
alone. 

In the F25, the cruise control with braking function is implemented by the ICM control unit. 


6.2. Control functions 


6.2.1. Cruise control 

The cruise control calculates a reference acceleration or deceleration based on the desired speed set 
by the driver and the actual speed. 

6.2.2. Acceleration and deceleration 

The driver can specify the desired speed or desired acceleration via the rocker switch in the multifunc¬ 
tion steering wheel. 

6.2.3. Cruise control when cornering 

Another purpose of this function, also referred to as the "lateral acceleration controller", is to prevent 
the lateral acceleration from increasing above an acceptable level when cornering with the cruise con¬ 
trol switched on. A lateral acceleration is calculated from the driving speed and yaw rate. This value is 
compared with a speed-dependent limit in order to achieve the following seemingly contradictory ob¬ 
jectives: 


• Disruptive and overly restrictive interventions are avoided if the driver himself would also prefer 
high lateral acceleration. 

• Useful interventions and therefore also significant limitations in dynamics at high speeds. 

Most drivers find an overly high lateral acceleration in these situations unpleasant which is why 
a lower limit value is used. 

The output variable for the cornering speed control system is also used as a setpoint value for the lon¬ 
gitudinal acceleration. 


17 



F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

6. Dynamic Cruise Control 

6.2.4. Prioritization of partial setpoint values 

The setpoint value with the highest priority according to the situation is selected from the longitudinal 
acceleration setpoint values for the control functions referred to above. In this instance, signals are fil¬ 
tered to prevent abrupt jumps when changing over the setpoint values. 

6.2.5. Estimation of disturbance force 

An acceleration or brake force must be calculated in order to be able to apply the prioritized longitu¬ 
dinal acceleration with the assistance of the actuators. Example: more driving power is required to 
achieve the same longitudinal acceleration during an uphill journey than on the flat. If the vehicle needs 
to decelerate when travelling up hill, less braking force is required compared to driving on the flat. In or¬ 
der to be able to correctly calculate the forces required, the precise value of the gradient and also the 
weight of the vehicle, the rolling resistance, the drag and other acceleration forces must be known. As 
a sensor system that can monitor all of these disturbances does not exist, an estimated value is calcu¬ 
lated instead by comparing these two variables: 

• actual movement variables of the vehicle 

• anticipated movement variables of the vehicle as a result of the driving and braking forces cur¬ 
rently acting on the vehicle. 

The extent of the disturbance determined using this method is taken into account during subsequent 
processing of the longitudinal acceleration setpoint value by means of addition or subtraction. 

6.2.6. Activation of the actuators 

Driving power and/or braking forces must be introduced in order to produce the longitudinal acceler¬ 
ation calculated by the control functions and thus compensate for disturbances acting on the vehicle. 

A setpoint value for the power is normally forwarded in order to accelerate the vehicle. In exceptional 
cases during downhill driving on a steep gradient, it may be necessary to activate the brake to ensure 
the acceleration does not exceed a specific value. 

If the vehicle needs to be decelerated, the extent of the contribution that may be required by the pow¬ 
ertrain towards the deceleration, and therefore the braking effect of the engine and transmission, is ini¬ 
tially determined. This value is output to the Digital Motor Electronics or Digital Diesel Electronics and 
electronic transmission control. If the drive train cannot achieve this value on its own, the additional 
amount that is required is forwarded to the Dynamic Stability Control. 

The vehicle's brake lights are also switched on if the brakes are noticeably actuated in order to pro¬ 
duce the desired deceleration. 


18 



F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

7. Hill Descent Control 


The purpose of HDC is to support the driver when driving downhill. When the driver activates this 
function by pushing the button, the vehicle travels on downhill gradients at a constant speed defined 
by the driver of between roughly 5 and 25 km/h. If the actual speed is not the same as the reference 
speed set by the driver, the HDC attempts to match the two speeds. The driver is supported by the 
DSC control functions during this process. 

If the driver operates the HDC button, the ICM control unit checks this operation against the current 
states of the other assist systems. 


19 



F25 Driver Assistance Systems 

8. Head-Up Display 

The very name ”Head-Up” describes the principle benefit of this system. The Head-Up Display HUD 
projects a virtual image into the driver's field of view. Important information, e.g. from the cruise control 
or navigation system when the arrow display is active, is reflected on the windscreen and is therefore 
permanently in the driver's field of view. 

The Head-Up Display (SA 610) in the F25 contains various functions aimed at enhancing road safety 
and ride comfort. That includes display of: 

• Road speed 

• Set speed regulation by the cruise control with braking function (DCC) 

• Information from the navigation system 

• Check Control messages. 

Having the displays in the driver's direct field of view increases safety, as the driver always focusses on 
the traffic conditions. 



Head-Up Display 


For more information on the Head-Up Display, refer to the information bulletin entitled "Head-Up Dis¬ 
play HUD" for the F01. 

As there is no FAS strip in the F25, the Head-Up Display is operated via the controller and the oper¬ 
ating menu. In the F25, the optional Head-Up Display can only be used in conjunction with a CID (SA 
609, 663). 


20 






Bayerische Motorenwerke Aktiengesellschaft 
Handlerqualifizierung und Training 
RontgenstraBe 7 

85716 UnterschleiBheim, Germany 


