Technical training. 

Product information. 


F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 



BMW Service 


Edited for the U.S. market by: 

BMW Group University 

Technical Training 

ST1106 2/1/2011 

V_/ 






General information 


Symbols used 

The following symbol is used in this document to facilitate better comprehension or to draw attention 
to very important information: 

A 

Contains important safety information and information that needs to be observed strictly in order to 
guarantee the smooth operation of the system. 


Information status and national-market versions 

BMW Group vehicles meet the requirements of the highest safety and quality standards. Changes in 
requirements for environmental protection, customer benefits and design render necessary continu¬ 
ous development of systems and components. Consequently, there may be discrepancies between 
the contents of this document and the vehicles available in the training course. 

This document basically relates to the European version of left hand drive vehicles. Some operating el¬ 
ements or components are arranged differently in right-hand drive vehicles than shown in the graphics 
in this document. Further differences may arise as the result of the equipment specification in specific 
markets or countries. 

Additional sources of information 

Further information on the individual topics can be found in the following: 

• Owner's Handbook 

• Integrated Service Technical Application. 

Contact: conceptinfo@bmw.de 
©2010 BMW AG, Munich 

Reprints of this publication or its parts require the written approval of BMW AG, Miinchen 

The information contained in this document forms an integral part of the technical training provided by 
the BMW Group and is intended for its course trainers and participants. Refer to the latest relevant in¬ 
formation systems of the BMW Group for any changes/additions to the Technical Data. 

Status of the information: July 2010 
VH-23/lnternational Technical Training 




F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

Contents. 


1. System overview.1 

1.1. Introduction.1 

2. System Components.2 

2.1. Instrument panel.2 

2.1.1. Brake Energy Regeneration display.2 

2.1.2. On-board computer.3 

2.2. Central information display.4 

2.2.1. CID with 8.8" screen diagonal.4 

2.2.2. CID with 6.5" screen diagonal.5 

2.3. Head-Up Display.5 

2.4. Steering wheel controls.6 

2.5. Center console controls.7 

2.6. Service information.8 

2.6.1. Test functions.8 

2.6.2. Resetting the scope of maintenance work.9 



















F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

1. System overview 

1.1. Introduction 

As with all other BMW models, the operating concept of the new BMW X3 is based on a clear opti¬ 
mized layout of the driving area. The number of switches has been reduced in order to simplify logi¬ 
cal operation. The display and operating elements are organized in a hierarchical arrangement corre¬ 
sponding to their function. 



F25 Overview of display and operating elements 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Head-Up Display HUD 

2 

Central information display CID 

3 

Operation of heating and air conditioning system 

4 

Gear selector switch GWS 

5 

Controller CON 

6 

Control buttons, steering wheel 

7 

Instrument panel (KOMBI) 


1 













F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

2. System Components 

2.1. Instrument panel 

The central display unit with speed reading, speed sensor, fuel gauge, engine oil temperature, and in¬ 
dicator and warning lights is referred to as the instrument panel. 

The instrument panel receives information on the wiring harness in the form of analogue and digital 
electrical signals. These signals are processed and displayed in the instrument panel or passed on as 
information to other control units. 

The F25 instrument panel is the same as the instrument panel of the F07 and FI 0 and, as a control 
unit, is a bus component of the MOST bus and PT-CAN. 

It incorporates a 5.7" TFT display screen with a resolution of 640 x 160 pixels located just below the 
round instruments. The round instruments are always enclosed by a closed ring. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

TFT display 

2 

Closed instrument rings 


2.1.1. Brake Energy Regeneration display 

The brake energy regeneration display is standard on all F25 vehicle and is installed in the instrument 
cluster just below the tachometer. 

The energy recovery indicator is faded into the current consumption display in coasting (overrun) 
mode. 

The kinetic energy of the vehicle is converted into electrical energy in coasting (overrun) mode. The 
vehicle battery is partially recharged and the fuel consumption can be reduced. 


2 






F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

2. System Components 



F25 Brake energy regeneration display 


2.1.2. On-board computer 

The F25 is equipped as standard with an on-board computer. 

The on-board computer functions can be called up by briefly pressing the on-board computer button 
on the steering column switch. 

Pressing the on-board computer button again displays information in the following order: 

• Range 

• Average consumption 

• Average speed 

• Distance (with activated route guidance) 

• Arrival time (with activated route guidance) 

• Date 

• Time display 

In vehicles with CID the functions to be displayed can be selected via "Settings" -> "Info Display". 


3 



F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

2. System Components 



F25 Buttons on steering column switch 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

On-board computer button 

2 

High-beam assistant button 

3 

Steering column switches 

For more detailed information, refer to the current version of the BMW X3 Owner's Manual. 


2.2. Central information display 

Depending on the equipment installed, two different versions of the central information display CID are 
installed in the F25. 

As on all new BMW models with iDrive, the system is operated by means of the central operating ele¬ 
ment, the controller. 

The central information display is an integrated display and operating facility for the following func¬ 
tions: 

• Audio functions, such as radio, CD, MP3 for example 

• Telephone and data services 

• Navigation 

• On-board computer, journey computer 

• Vehicle information, Interactive Owner's Manual 

• Heating and air conditioning system 

• Vehicle functions, for example PDC and EDO 

• BMW Assist. 

2.2.1. CID with 8.8" screen diagonal 

A CID with 8.8" screen diagonal is available as and option and installed in conjunction with the Naviga¬ 
tion system (SA 609). The display resolution is 1280 x 480 pixels. 


4 







F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

2. System Components 



F25 CID with 8.8” screen diagonal 


2.2.2. CID with 6.5" screen diagonal 

A CID with 6.5" screen diagonal is standard equipment and is installed in conjunction with the BMW 
Professional radio (SA 663). The resolution of this display is 800 x 480 pixels. 



F25 CID with 6.5" screen diagonal 


2.3. Head-Up Display 

The very name ”Head-Up” describes the principle benefit of this system. The Head-Up Display HUD 
projects a virtual image into the driver's field of view. Important information, e.g. from the cruise control 
or navigation system when the arrow display is active, is reflected on the windscreen and is therefore 
permanently in the driver's field of view. 

The Head-Up Display is available as option (SA 610) in the F25 and contains various functions aimed 
at enhancing road safety and ride comfort. 

The following items are displayed : 

• Vehicle speed 

• Set speed regulation by the cruise control with braking function (DCC) 

• Information from the navigation system 

• Check Control messages. 


Having the displays in the driver's direct field of view increases safety, as the driver always focusses on 
the traffic conditions. 


5 




F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

2. System Components 



Head-Up Display 


For more information on the Head-Up Display, refer to the information bulletin entitled "Head-Up Dis¬ 
play HUD" for the F01. 

As there is no FAS strip in the F25, the Head-Up Display is operated via the controller and the oper¬ 
ating menu. In the F25, the optional Head-Up Display can only be used in conjunction with a CID (SA 
609, 663). 


2.4. Steering wheel controls 

A switch block is integrated into the steering wheel on the left and right-hand side. 

The operating elements for the Cruise control with braking function (Dynamic Cruise Control DCC) are 
on the left-hand side of the steering wheel. 

The controls for the radio and telephone functions are on the right. 



F25 steering wheel mounted controls 


6 












F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

2. System Components 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rocker switch ±, change speed, set speed 

2 

Knurled wheel, select/set radio station or music track 

3 

MODE button, change between audio sources 

4 

Shift paddle for upshifting (only with SA 2TB) 

5 

Rocker switch +, increase volume 

6 

Rocker switch -, reduce volume 

7 

Voice input system button 

8 

Telephone button 

9 

Enable/disable or interrupt DCC 

10 

Resume button, call-up stored speed 

11 

Set speed button 

12 

Shift paddle for downshifting (only with SA 2TB) 


2.5. Center console controls 


The center console of the F25 is equipped with the following controls: 



F25 Operating elements of the center console 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Gear selector switch 

2 

Controller 

3 

Parking brake 

4 

Automatic Hold 


7 






















F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

2. System Components 


Index 

Explanation 

5 

Park Distance Control 

6 

Hill Descent Control 

7 

Drive dynamic control switch 

8 

Dynamic Stability Control 


2.6. Service information 

2.6.1. Test functions 

The test functions are shown in the TFT display of the instrument panel. The test functions are used 
by BMW Service to check the encoding. The test functions also provide help in troubleshooting with¬ 
out a BMW diagnosis system. 

To start functional check 

• Terminal 15 ON 

• Press and hold down the reset button in the instrument panel for 10 seconds 
All the described test functions can also be performed via the BMW diagnosis systems. 

Locking and unlocking the test functions (test function 04) 

Only the first four test functions are freely accessible. All test functions are locked from the fifth test 
function onwards. The test functions can be unlocked via test function 04. 

The test functions are unlocked by entering the cross total above the vehicle identification number. 

Display of test functions 

The test functions are faded into the centre of the TFT display, between the two round instruments. 

The main test functions are listed below. In addition to the majority of test functions, further equivalent 
functions exist and a similar display appears for each one individually in the instrument panel. 


Test function 

Description 

01 

Identification 

02 

System test 

03 

Test End 

04 

Unlock test functions 

05 

Current consumption 

06 

Range consumption 

07 

Fuel gauge values 


8 











F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

2. System Components 


Test function 

Description 

08 

Coolant temperature, ambient temperature 

09 

On-board computer average values 

10 

Speedometer / revolution counter 

11 

Display of operating voltage 

12 

Trigger audio signals 

13 

Read fault codes 

14 

Dim LCD 

15 

Dim PWM signal 

16 

Condition Based Service 

17 

Check Control 

18 

Correction factor, consumption figures 

19 

Software reset / RAM reload 


Operation of test functions 

The test functions are operated with the assistance of the reset button in the instrument panel. 

Press the reset button briefly once to scroll through the test functions. Hold the reset button pressed 
down for longer to access the selected test function. 

Exit test functions 

• Terminal 15 OFF 

• Hold reset button pressed for longer than 10 seconds. The main menu fades into the instru¬ 
ment panel 

• Call up test function 03 (end test) 

• Call up test function 19 (RESET). 


A_ 

To protect against unauthorized access, all but the first four test functions are locked again 
when the test functions are exited. 


2.6.2. Resetting the scope of maintenance work 

If the service has been carried out for one or more scopes of maintenance work, replacement of front 
brake pads for example, the full service interval must be reset for these scopes. 

When resetting the scopes of maintenance work, a differentiation is made between 2 types: 


9 












F25 Displays, Indicators and Controls 

2. System Components 

• Statutory scopes of maintenance work, such as the technical vehicle inspection, can only be 
reset in the "Service" menu. 

• All service-related scopes of maintenance work, such as changing the spark plugs for exam¬ 
ple, are reset via the reset mode in the instrument panel. 


Activating reset mode 

• Terminal 15 ON 

• Press and hold down the reset button in the instrument panel for between 5 and 10 seconds 

Hold the reset button pressed for longer than 10 seconds to access the test functions. 

Press the reset button briefly once to scroll through the scopes of maintenance work. Hold the re¬ 
set button pressed for longer to access the reset menu for the selected scope of maintenance work. 
Press and hold the button again to reset the scope of maintenance work. It is only possible to reset the 
scopes of maintenance work once thresholds for specific scopes of maintenance work have been un¬ 
dercut. 

Exit reset mode 

• Terminal 15 Off 

• Start engine 

• Do not press button for 15 seconds 


10 





Bayerische Motorenwerke Aktiengesellschaft 
Handlerqualifizierung und Training 
RontgenstraBe 7 

85716 UnterschleiBheim, Germany 


