Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Central Body Electronics (ZKE III) .2 

Objectives of the Module .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components .4 

Power Distribution .7 

Windshield Wiping/Washing.9 

Headlight Washing.10 

Rear Window Wiper/Washer.11 

Rain Sensor.12 

Central Locking. 17 

Trunklid/Tailgate.25 

Remote (Keyless) Entry .26 

Car Memory/Key Memory.27 

Anti-Theft (DWA) System .33 

Power Windows/Sunroof .42 

Interior Lighting . 51 

Visual Entry Aid.55 

Seat/Mirror/Steering Column Memory . 58 

Seat Functions.65 

Steering Functions.66 

General Functions .75 

Consumer Cut Off/Overload Protection.75 

Sleep Mode.76 


Review Questions 


79 



























CENTRAL BODY ELECTRONICS (ZKE III) 

Models: E38 - 740i(L) and 750iL 

E39 - 525i, 528i, 530i, 540i and M5 
E53 - X5 3.0i and X5 4.4i 

Production Date: E38 1994 to Present 

E39 1997 to Present 
E53 1999 to Present 

Manufacturer: Hella 

Pin Connectors: White - 26 pin, Black 26 pin, Black 20 pin (large) 

Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• List the functions directly controlled by the GM III. 

• Describe how the GM III recognizes the key position from the drivers door. 

• Explain what “convenience” features are available from the FZV key. 

• Describe how the Seat Module communicates a request for a stored memory position 
with the mirror modules. 

• List what circuits are controlled by Consumer Cut Off. 

• Demonstrate how to Emergency disarm DWA. 

• Describe the changes in the 2000 MY Key. 

• Explain the electronic influence on power steering assist (Servotronic). 

• Demonstrate how to open the sunroof (in the event of an electrical malfunction). 

2 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





Central Body Electronics (ZKE III) 


Purpose of the System 


The Central Body Electronics (ZKE III) system manages the following functions: 


Driver’s Door Switch Block/ 
Module 

Power Windows 

Mirror Adjustment/Memory/ 

Heating 









GM III 

Windshield Wiping/Washing 
Windsheild Rain Sensor (AIC) 
Headlight Washing 
Tailgate Wiping/Washing 
Interior Lighting 
Central Locking 
Keyless Entry 
Key Memory 
Power Trunk Release 
Electric Opening of Tailgate 
DWA Alarm System 
Servotronics 

Consumer Cut-off/sleep mode 
Diagnosis 


Passenger’s Door Module 

Mirror Adjustment/Memory/ 
Heating 

Power Windows 




Sunroof Module 

Power Sunroof 



Seat/Mirror/ Steering Column 
Memory Module 

Seat Adjustment/Memory 
SteeringColumn Adjustment/ 
Memory 


The ZKE III system was introduced on the E38 and is used in the E39 and E53. Most of the 
functions operate the same on these vehicles with minor changes and added features to 
the system. 

ZKE III represents the combination of Body Electronics functions into one central control 
module, the General Module (GM). 

3 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 

















System Components 


General Module (GM): The GM is reponsible 
for the operation and central coordination of 
body electronics. The GM is a micro-computer 
that is the central component (heart) of the 
Central Body Electronics. The GM is located be¬ 
hind the glove box. 

The main objectives for using the GM are: 

• Increase Overall Reliability 

• Centralize Electronic Systems 

• Decrease Assembly and Service Repairs 

• Centralized Diagnosis of all ZKE Components 

• Individualization of Features (Coding) 



The GM requires input commands to perform 
Central Body Electronics functions. The inputs 
are supplied by digital switched signals such 
as: 



• Trunk Lock Microswitch - supplies voltage (KL 
30) to the GM when switched. A path to gro¬ 
und is provided by the GM (internally). The 
GM monitors the switched input voltage. 

• Central Lock Button - supplies a ground cir¬ 
cuit to the GM when switched. The GM sup¬ 
plies and monitors a reference voltage (5v) 
that is “pulled” low when the switched gro¬ 
und path is provided. 

The GM processes the input information and 
contains “coded” instructions that allow a spe¬ 
cific output control of functions. 

The GM will produce output functions using 
internal transistors to switch current flow (pro¬ 
viding voltage or ground) through circuits and 
actuators. Actuators are the final controlling 
devices used by the GM to operate or control 
various output functions such as relays and 

motors. 

4 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 









The ZKE III system offers an overall reduction in vehicle wiring particularly in the areas sub¬ 
ject to wear from movement such as doors, seats and the steering column. To accomplish 
this, the “P- Bus” is used to interface (signaling) with peripheral modules over a single wire. 
The ZKE III modular system consisting of the following components: 


General Module III = Main controller for ZKE functions 


PM - SB/FT 
PM - BT 
PM - SHD 
PM - SM 
AIC 


= Driver’s door switch block and door module 
= Passenger’s door module 
= Sunroof module 

= Seat/Mirror/Steering Column memory module 
= Rain Sensor (if equipped) 


All modules communicate through the P-Bus and GM III onto the K-Bus for diagnosis. 



FBZV 

RECEIVER 

MODULE 



t 

FBZV 


E)irnw®ir’® ©©©ir 
SwDtellulM®©^/ 



GM III MODULE 
LOCATED IN CARRIER 
FORWARD OF GLOVE BOX 




/" K 

w 


IP 



IPM-SInlO) 


E38 on K-Bus 
>99 MY 



12520102.eps 


5 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 































































































The following is an overview of new or changed features found on the E53 ZKE III variant: 

• Passenger’s door module is incorporated into the passenger’s door switchblock. 

• Sunroof module (SHD) is located on the P -Bus. 

• The Central Locking system uses a door lock actuators with hall effect sensors. 

• The GM III is responsible for the Key Memory feature. 


The E53 ZKE III system continues to be a modular system consisting of the following: 


General Module III = Main controller for ZKE functions 


PM - SB/FT 
PM - SB/BT 
PM - SHD 
PM - SM 
AIC 


= Driver’s door switch block and door module 
= Passenger’s door module/Window switch 
= Sunroof module 

= Seat/Mirror/ Steering Column memory module 
= Rain Sensor (if equipped) 


All of these modules communicate over the “K-Bus and P-Bus” for signaling purposes and 
diagnosis. 




FZV RECEIVER MODULE 



GM III MODULE 
LOCATED IN CARRIER 
FORWARD OF GLOVE BOX 


'Jm [j* 



FBZV 


M III 

DWA 


m 

S) 

m 

D 

( 5 L 


Mw®! 311 ® 0®@[r 


SwfelM®©k/ 

V 

IModuO® 


PMKFT/SB 




P®®®®^®^® 


P®@[f MoM® 


pim-bt 


StLOOTO®!? 

IM©(M® 

PM 



6 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 

















































Power Distribution 


The power distribution box for the 
E38 is incorporated in the Electr¬ 
onics box in the engine compart¬ 
ment. 

The power distribution box for the 
E39 and E53 is inside the vehicle. 
The main fuse box is located 
inside the glove box above a 
hinged panel. 

A “pull out” fuse designation card 
is also located in the fusebox. This 
notes: 

• Fuse value in amps 

• Location 

• Circuit listing by fuse 



Equipment 


ABS 
ABS 
Air 

Airbag 
Anti-glare 
Automatic 
Auxiliary fan 
Brake light 

Central locking system 
Charging socket 
Courtesy mirror 
Diagnosis plug 
Driver seat adjustment 
Electric seat heating 
Engine control 
Fuel pump 
Garage door opener 


Fuse Equipment 


Fuse Equipment 


17 30 Headlight cleaning system 

30 31 Heated rear window 
9 20 28 Heated steering wheel 

4042 Heated washer jets 
21 Heater 

)l 817 31 Heater blower 
7 20 22 75 Horn 

41 Immobilizer 
6 27 29 Independent heater 
39 Instrument duster 
39 Light module 

15 38 Multi-function steering wheel 44 
13 21 Multi-information display 43 64 66 
32 On-board monitor 25 44 

1415 Outside mirror adjustment 6 29 

31 17 Passenger compVtrunk lighting 4 
21 Passenger seat adjustment 10 


254344 

45 


20 Roller sun blind 
34 Servotronic 
9 Shifting gate illumination 24 38 
20 23 Sliding/tilt roof 5 

28 Speed control 41 

3 38 Steering column adjustment 13 

12 37 Telephone 43 44 

23 Thermal sensor 21 

18 24 40 Window lift 6 27 29 

16 41 Windscreen washer system 4 2 
er 1 26 


Fuse Nr 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

Ifi 

17 

18 

19 

20 






Amperes 

30 

30 

15 

20 

20 

30 

20 

25 

15 

30 

75 

5 

30 

5 

7,5 

5 

10 

5 

5 

75 

















Fuse Nr 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

4(1 

41 

4? 

43 

44 

45 

Amperes 

5 

30 

10 

5 

7.5 

5 

30 

30 

30 

25 

10 

15 


10 



5 

5 

75 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

75 


8371420 

E.5769.H 


12520103.eps 


The placement of the power distribution box is 
close to the main electronics carrier behind 
the glove box. The modules/relays located in 
the electronics carrier include (examples): 

• General Module III (GM III) 

• Drive away protection (EWS II) 

• Anti-lock Brake (ABS/ASC+T) 

• Light Check Module (LCM) - behind right kick 
panel 

• Overload protection relay module 

An auxiliary fuse block is located in the trunk 
above the battery. In addition to fuses, the 
auxiliary fuse block also contains relays (exam¬ 
ples): 

• Fuel filler flap lock motor relay 

• Fuel pump relay (some vehicles) 

• Rear defroster relay 

• Unloader relay 




7 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 























































































































Fused Power Distribution Centers 


The E38, E39 and E53 utilize high amperage fused power distribution centers. 


The E38 and E39 locations are found under the carpet on the passenger’s side floor and 
in the right rear area of the trunk, forward of the battery. 



REAR FUSED POWER FRONT FUSED POWER 

DISTRIBUTION CENTER DISTRIBUTION CENTER 


The X5 utilizes a single high amperage fused 
power distribution center located next to the 
left side EHC air reservoir beneath the cargo 
area floor paneling. 



8 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





Windshield Wiping/Washing 


Purpose of the System 

The windshield wiping/washing functions are controlled by the GM III when the ignition is 
in position KL R or KL15. The system has four wiping stages and four interval wiping 
speeds. The wiper motor output control is through two relays (double relay >98 MY, except 
E38) that are located in the Electonics box (E box). 

The Windshield Wiping System can also be supplemented with the Rain Sensor system as 
optional equipment. The Rain Sensor detects rain drops on the windshield and automati¬ 
cally activates the wipers when the stalk switch is in the intermittent position. 

System Components 

Wiper Stalk Switch lnput:The wiping stage inputs are coded signals through a two wire 
link with a combination of high/low inputs. The wiping stages include: 

Single (S): Momentarily holding the wiper 
switch down in the single position provides a 
momentary ground signal to activate a single 
sweep in slow speed. 

Slow (I) and Fast (II): The stage I and stage II 
wiping speeds are road speed dependent. 

Stage I switches to intermittent when the vehi¬ 
cle is stopped and stage II switches to stage I 
when stopped. 

12510108.eps 

Windshield Washing: The wash request provides a switched ground input to the GM by 
pulling the stalk rearward. The GM activates the windshield washer pump directly. 

Intermittent (Int): The intermittent wiping time inputs are provided by a potentiometer 
mounted in the wiper stalk switch (1 through 4). The intermittent wiping intervals are also 
dependent on the road speed. As road speed increases, the wiping interval is shortened. 

WIPER TIME DELAYS (SECONDS) BASED ON SET POSITIONS 1 - 4 



9 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


KLR KL 30 



WIPER 

MOTOR 

Blocking Protection = Return 
Contact Signal must be 
present every 16 seconds 
or motor will be deactivated 


(LOCATED IN WASHER RESERVOIR 
FRONT RIGHT FENDER) 


12510122.eps 


Headlight Washing (if equipped): When the headlights are on, the headlight washer 
pump is activated with the first activation of the windshield washer pump. It is only activat¬ 
ed again after five succesive windshield washer cycles during the same ignition key on cycle 
(rest function). The GM recognises headlights on via K-Bus signalling. The GM provides a 
ground on the headlight washer relay control circuit providing pump operation. The head¬ 
light washer pump is located on the side of the washer fluid reservoir. 


10 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 











Rear Window Wiper/Washer System (E39 Sport Wagon and E53): The system is 
included in the scope of ZKE however is not controlled directly by the GM. The control elec¬ 
tronics are integrated into the rear wiper motor assembly. The control electronics contains 
two hall sensors, one for monitoring park position and other for the end stop, or to signal 
reverse direction of the wiper motor. The control electronics are connected to the vehicle 
electrical system via a single seven pin connector. 


The rear wiper system is operator controlled 
through the wiper stalk switch providing the fol¬ 
lowing functions: 

• Intermittent rear window wiping 

• Programmed rear window wiping interval 

• Operation of the rear window washer 



Pressing the wiper stalk forward to the first detent activates the rear wiper in the intermit¬ 
tentmode. The timed interval is approximately 7-12 seconds. The full sweep and park posi¬ 
tions are recognized by the two hall sensors on the motor gear assembly. If the wiper is 
switched OFF, the wiper blade will return to the park position. 

The programmed wiper interval procedure is as follows: 

• Briefly switch the rear wiper ON/OFF 

• Wait the desired interval time 

• Switch the rear wiper ON again 

• The OFF time will be the programmed interval - up to approx. 30 seconds 

Rear window washing is activated by pressing the wiper stalk switch to the full forward 
position. The washer pump operates followed by two full wiping cycles. The wipers will then 
switch to the intermittent wiping mode. Additionally, the system automatically controls the 
following safety and convenience features: 

• Wiper interrupt with the rear glass opened 

• Wiping interrupt with a blocked wiper arm 

• Continuous wiping when the vehicle is shifted into reverse 

When the transmission is shifted into reverse, the wiper will switch to continuous operation 
until the vehicle is shifted out of reverse. This signal (high) is provided by the LCM III when 
it activates the back up lights. 


11 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 






Rain Sensor (AIC - if equipped) 


Purpose of the System 

The Windshield Wiping System is also available with an optionally equipped Rain Sensor. 
The Rain Sensor provides added driver convenience and enhances safety by automatical¬ 
ly activating the intermittent function of the windshield wipers when water droplets are 
detected on the windshield. 

System Components 

Rain Sensor: The unit is mounted on the top center area of the interior windshield surface 
directly behind the rear view mirror. The unit contains: 

• Optical Prism Body: This portion of the unit is per¬ 
manently fixed to the windshield. It can not be 
removed and can only be replaced with a replacement 
windshield. 

The prism body has a reflective surface that faces the 
back of the windshield. The prism body also acts as 
the windshield mount for the Rain Sensor Control 
Module. 



12510112.jpg 


• Rain Sensor Control Module: The control module incorporates the following; 

- Infra Red Emitter and Detector Diodes 

- Optics heater (prevents condensation from forming on diodes and prism) 

- Optics evaluation and control electronics 

- Photo cell to detect night driving 


The control module requires four signals for operation; KLR, KL31, Windshield Wiper Motor 
Park Signal Feedback and K-Bus interface. 



12510113.eps 


12 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Principle of Operation 

The optical infra red portion of the sensor operates by the principle of refraction (bending 
of a light ray). The rain sensor control module activates the emitter diode which sends a 
beam of infra red light through the windshield on an angle. The set angle is important 
because it provides the beam with a calculated reflective path back to the detector diode. 


The beam is reflected back into the windshield due to the density difference of the glass 
compared with the ambient air on the outside surface of the glass. When the windshield is 
clean (no rain drops, moisture or dirt) the detector diode receives 100% of the infra red light 
that the was sent by the emitter. With this condition, the rain sensor evaluation electronics 
determines the windshield is free of rain drops. 



RAIN SENSOR PRISM OPTICS 


12510114.eps 


The density of water is closer to that of glass than air. When rain starts to accumulate in 
the sensor monitoring area, it causes part of the infra red beam to extend past the outside 
surface of the glass and into the rain drop. When this occurs, the beam is refracted and 
only part of the beam returns to the detector diode. 


The rain sensor evaluation elec¬ 
tronics determines the windshield 
has a few rain drops (or dirt) on it. 


droplet of water 



glass windshield 






12510115.eps 


The intensity of the returned infra red beam diminishes proportionally with an increase of 
water droplets. The rain sensor control module generates a signal proportionate to the 
amount of rain on the windshield and broadcasts it to the GM via the K bus. 


The GM activates the intermittent wipe cycle if the windshield wiper stalk switch is in the 
intermittent position. It also adjusts the frequency of wiping the windshield depending on 
the four position thumb wheel. 


13 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 

























Rain Sensor Function 


The rain sensor is online as soon as it receives KLR operating power. 

• When the windshield wiper stalk switch is placed in the intermittent position the GM sig¬ 
nals the rain sensor control module via the K-Bus of the request for intermittent wiping 
and the position of the knurled wheel (sensitivity). 

• As an acknowledgement, the rain sensor sends a command via the K Bus to activate the 
wiper motor. If more than 12 seconds pass before the GM receives the acknowledge¬ 
ment, the GM concludes the rain sensor has a defect and operates the intermittent wipe 
function as a system not equipped with a rain sensor. The wiper intermittent cycling is 
based solely on the knurled wheel setting. 

• The rain sensor continuously monitors the windshield for rain accumulation and signals 
the GM to activate the wipers based on the knurled wheel position and how fast the rain 
accumulates on the windshield. 

• The knurled wheel position signal (1 -4) via the K bus informs the rain sensor of the select¬ 
ed level of sensitivity. 

- Position 1 (least sensitive) delays the wiper activation signal. 

- Position 4 (most sensitive) sends the wiper activation signal to the GM sooner. 

• When the wiper motor park contacts signal the GM of the wiper arm position, the signal 
is simultaneously sent to the rain sensor as an indication that the windshield has been 
cleared of water drops and causes the rain sensor to reset the sensitivity delay timer back 
to 0. 

• If night time driving is detected via the integral photocell, the sensitivity to water droplets 
is increased causeing a shorter delay than day time driving. 

• Depending on the intensity of the rain the wipers will be operated continuously as if set in 
the normal wiper stalk switch position regardless of the knurled wheel setting. For this 
reason, the vehicle speed signal on the K bus is not utilized on rain sensor equipped wiper 
systems. 


14 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



• If the ignition switch is turned off with the wiper switch in the intermittent position, the rain 
sensor will only become active after the ignition is switched back on and one of the fol¬ 
lowing occurs: 

- The stalk switch is moved from the intermittent position and then back. 

- The knurled wheel setting is adjusted. 

- or the wash function is activated. 

The reasoning behind this switching strategy is to have the driver make a conscious deci¬ 
sion to activate the system themselves. 

Rain Sensor Control Module Adaptation 

The rain sensor control module adapts to the optics system environment as follows: 

Windshield Aging: As the vehicle ages the possibility of stone chipping in the rain sensors 
monitoring area may occur which will cause a loss of light in the optics system. 

The control module adapts for loss of light based on the intensity of the detected infra red 
light with a cleared windshield (wiper motor park signal). Therefore, the rain sensors func¬ 
tion is not adversely affected due to windshield aging. 

Dirty Windows: The rain sensor adaptation reacts less sensitively to a dirty windshield 
(dirt, road salt, wax residue) after a completed wipe cycle. A dirty windshield has a film on 
it that diminishes the ability of the infra red to refract into present water droplets. This caus¬ 
es a delay in the rain sensor detection capabilities which lengthens the time intervals on an 
intermittent wipe. 

Windshield Wiper System Failsafe Operation 

The GM provides failsafe operation of the wiper system if faults are detected with any of the 
following input signals: 


Function 

Faulted Input Detected 

Failsafe Function 

Intermittent Wipe 

Short or open circuit of 
the knurled wheel signal 

Delay value for 
setting 3 used. 

Intermittent wipe 
with Rain Sensor 

Faulted Rain Sensor or 
K-Bus Signal corrupt 

Normal Intermittent 
wipe implemented 

Wiper Motor not 
Functional Moving 

Park contact feedback 
signal takes longer than 

16 seconds 

Wiper motor control 
deactivated for 3 
minutes 


15 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 






Workshop Hints 

Windshield Wiper Blade Service 

To access the wiper blades for cleaning or replacement,the following is required: 

• With the ignition switched on (KL15), switch the wiper stalk to the “Intermittant” wipe 
mode. 

• Switch the ignition off when the wiper arms are in the “upright” position. 

CAUTION: Do not allow the wiper arm to spring back against the windshield, glass 
breakage will occur! 


Rain Sensor Equipped Vehicles 

Make sure the wiper blades are in perfect condition. Only use window cleaner to clean the 
windows. Dirty windows can cause the Rain Sensor controi moduie to set a fault 
due to the end limits of its adaptation abilities. 


Rear Window/Wiper 

The wiper arm and driveshaft are connected by 
splines. 

Special tool #61 1 320 is required to hold the drive 
shaft in the park position prior to installing the wiper 
arm on to the drive shaft. 


Windshield Wiper System Diagnosis 

The GM monitors the following circuits: 



WIPER ARM 
DRIVE SHAFT 


CONTROL 

MODULE 


GEAR DRIVE 

MOTOR 


12510117.jpg 


□ RIVE WHEEL 


PER 
EASE 
HOUSING 


[SPRING LOADED 
□RIVE PIN 
IvdrlwwhfleMO' 
flipjiii rf-ni i!rivu illu^- 


WIPER 

ARM 


SPRING 


WIPER 

ARM 

NUT 


• Wiper Potentiometer • Wiper Motor • Terminal 30 

• Double Relay • Windshield Washer Pump 


Note: The wiper/washer operation will be interrupted during engine cranking. The GM pro¬ 
vides this “unload” feature to preserve the battery voltage for the starter motor. 


16 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Central Locking 


Purpose of the System 

The Central Locking System provides locking/ 
unlocking of the entire vehicle from one central 
exterior point. From the driver’s door or the 
remote (key-less) entry, a lock/unlock request will 
lock/unlock all exterior doors, luggage compart¬ 
ment and the fuel filler flap. 



12510117.jpg 


From inside, the vehicle can be locked/ unlocked using a cen¬ 
tral locking button located in the center console. Individual 
doors can be unlocked manually by pulling twice on the inte¬ 
rior door handle. 

From 2000 MY - if the vehicle has been double locked, press 
the central locking button and pull the interior door handle 
twice (alarm will sound when the door opens). 

Locking the vehicle from the central switch will “single lock” all 
doors, luggage compartment and not lock the fuel filler flap. 



The Central Locking System utilizes the GM III and Door Modules to carry out all of the lock¬ 
ing/unlocking features: 


• Remote (key-less) entry is standard. 


• When locked from the outside, the vehicle will double lock and arm the DWA System. The 
ignition must be switched off and the driver’s door must be opened and closed. 

• Selective unlocking from the outside of the vehicle. Unlocking from the driver’s door or 
remote transmitter will only unlock the driver’s door and disarm the DWA System. A sec¬ 
ond request will unlock the remaining doors and luggage compartment. This feature can 
be modified for individual users in Key Memory to open all doors from a single request. 

• A single central locking button is installed in the center console that will operate when all 
of the doors are closed. Locking the vehicle from the central switch will “single lock” all 
doors, luggage compartment and not lock the fuel filler flap. When unlocking, a single 
request will unlock the driver’s door only. This feature can be modified for individual users 
in Key Memory to open all doors and luggage compartment from a single request. 


17 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 







• A remote luggage compartment button is installed in the left kick panel (center console 
in the E53) to open the luggage compartment from inside the vehicle. 

• The EWS is interfaced for double lock monitoring and unlock function. With the presence 
of an accepted EWS key in the ignition, the vehicle will be unlocked and disarm DWA. 

• The automatic locking feature (> 99 MY) activates the door locks when a road speed 
signal of 5 MPH and engine RPM is detected via the K-Bus. The factory default setting 
of this feature is off (can be encoded on for individual users with Key Memory function). 



WHEN CORRECT KEY IS INSERTED INTO THE LOCK 
THE TUMBLER ENGAGES WITH THE OUTER BARREL 
ALLOWING PROPER LOCK OPERATION. 



Door 

Button 

Lock 


• In the event of an accident (ignition on), the GM will be signalled to unlock all doors. 

V 

Hardware Features: 


The external lock cylinders are located in the 
driver’s door and luggage compartment lid 
(E53/E39 Sport Wagon does not have a tail¬ 
gate lock cylinder). 

The driver’s door and luggage compartment 
incorporates an overrunning lock cylinder. The 
lock cylinder will free wheel or spin If any key 
other than the vehicle key or tool, such as a 
screw driver, is inserted into the cylinder. The 
lock cylinders can be manually locked/un¬ 
locked by turning the key “past” lock/unlock. 


The door lock buttons are mechanically uncoupled from the 
lock actuators when locked. 

The door lock buttons “mechanically” lock the individual 
doors. This provides manual locking in the event of a central 
locking malfunction. 


Child safety locks (located in 
the rear doors) are actuated 
by inserting a key in the slot on 
the door latch or by sliding a 
lever (dependent on model). 

The door can now only be 
opened from outside. 




CP 

Q. 

CD 

CD 


O 

C\J 

LO 

CM 


CP 

Q. 

CD 

rC 


o 

CM 

LO 

CM 


1£510121.eps 



12520120.eps 

18 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 






• The luggage compartment can be manually 
locked with a “Master Key” and leaving the 
lock cylinder in the horizontal position which 
prevents opening by any other method (sec¬ 
ured for valet). 

The luggage compartment release button in¬ 
side the vehicle will also be ignored by the GM. 

Prior to 2000 MY the vehicle could be locked/ 
unlocked using the luggage compartment lock 
cylinder. 



12520120.jpg 


• The glove box has a lock cylinder to secure the 
contents by manual locking with a “Master 
Key” and leaving the lock cylinder in the hori¬ 
zontal position which prevents opening by any 
other method (secured for valet). 

• The E38 has a lever behind the glove box han 
die which permits locking the glove box with¬ 
out a key. Opening still requires a key. 



12520121 .jpg 


The valet key is not mechanically capable of 
entering either of these lock cylinders. 


• The Fuel Filler Flap mechanical release is found 
in the right side of the luggage compartment. 

The “pull tether” is behind the button as shown 
on the right. 


51500002.tiff 



Note: Continuous operation of locking/unlocking will cause a timed arrest of the 
locking system. When activated, the timed arrest lasts for 2 minutes (or recycle 
the ignition KL15). The “crash” signal will override the timed arrest and unlock the 
vehicle. 


19 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



System Components 
- with the Principle of Operation 


Driver’s Door Lock: The lock/unlock signals 
from the driver’s door lock cylinder are input to 
the driver’s door module from the two micro 
switches on the lock cylinder. The driver’s door 
switchblock module carries out the locking func¬ 
tion of the driver’s door. 



- UNLOCK 

"" — 

- DWA DISARMED 


- CONVENIENCE 


OPENING 


(HOLD UNTIL 

—-V 

ACTIVATED) 

/\ ^ 


MANUAL 
UNLOCK' 



LOCK 

DWA ARMED 
CONVENIENCE 
CLOSING 
(HOLD UNTIL 
ACTIVATED) 

MANUAL 

LOCK 


The windows and sunroof can be closed or 

opened by holding the key in the lock/unlock 12520123 eps 

position (convenience closing/opening feature). 

The signal to lock the remaining doors and fuel filler flap is passed over the P-Bus to the 
GM III and passenger’s door module. The locking of the passenger’s door is carried out by 
the passengers door module. The rear doors, luggage comparment and fuel flap locking 
are carried out directly by the GM III. All four doors will be pulled into the double lock posi¬ 
tion when locking from the driver’s door. 

The control of the actuators in the front doors is through final stages in the door modules. 
The rear doors, trunk and fuel filler flap actuators are controlled by internal relays in the GM 
III. When locked, the GM III will not carry out any opening commands from the central lock¬ 
ing button or luggage comparment interior release button. 


Luggage Compartment Lock Cylinder (except E53/E39 Sport Wagon): The vehicle 
can be locked/ unlocked (prior to 2000 MY) from the luggage compartment lock cylinder. 
The lock/unlock micro switch inputs are processed in the GM III and the locking commands 
are carried out. 


The signal is passed over the P-Bus to the 
door modules to lock/unlock the front 
doors and the GM III locks the rear doors 
and fuel filler flap. 


UNLOCK 
DWA DISARMED 



- LOCK 

- DWA ARMED 


All door actuators are placed in the double 
lock position. Removing the key in the hor¬ 
izontal position will activate the valet mode 
and prevent the valet key from opening the 
luggage comparment. 


MANUAL 

UNLOCK 



VALET LOCK 
POSITION 

12520124.eps 


20 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




















Luggage Comparment Remote Unlock: The luggage com- 
parment can be opened from inside the vehicle with the 
remote release button. This feature is also functions when the 
doors are locked from the central button. 

The GM will disregard the remote release button input when 
the luggage comparment is mechanically locked with the 
Master Key (valet setting). 

The GM will also disregard the release input if the vehicle 
speed is > 4 MPH. 



The E53 remote release button is located in the center con¬ 
sole. This input will release the rear liftgate following the same 
criteria stated above. 



Crash Signalling 


12520124.eps 


The Multiple Restraint System (MRS) control module provides a switched signal to the GM 
in the event of an accident. This signal was previously provided by the crash sensor locat¬ 
ed in the left front kick panel (< 9/96 MY). 


The signal is an output function of the MRS control module and becomes active when MRS 
determines a crash has occurred. The GM unlocks the vehicle, switches on the interior 
lights and flashes the exterior lights when this signal is active. 


KLR 


2 

-C- 


KLR 


2 

<- 


ELECTRONIC 

ACCELERATION 

SENSOR 


_ 



SIGNAL 

GENERATOR 

<9 



ELECTRONIC 

ACCELERATION 

SENSOR 


SIGNAL 

GENERATOR 


DRIVER'S 
SIDE IMPACT 
SENSOR 


■> 


<- 





PASSENGER'S 
SIDE IMPACT 
SENSOR 


<- 




oc 

o 


o 


< 

CD 

CO 


ELECTRONIC 

ACCELERATION 

SENSOR 


_1 


i 

TRIGGER 

LOGIC 

_5 

i 

COMPONENT 

ACTIVATION 


MRS 

CONTROL 

MODULE 


<H 


CRASH 

SIGNAL 

OUTPUT 


GENERAL 

MODULE 


+ > TO PYROTECHNIC DEVICES 


12520125.eps 


21 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 

























































System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


KL 30 KL 30 



22 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 

















Door Lock Actuators: A door lock actuator contains an electric motor and an integrated 
microswitch (position switch). The rotary motor movement through the gear drive mechan¬ 
ically moves the locking latch. 


When the lock actuator is operating, the motor is powered until the position switch signals 
the “locked” position. If the vehicle is locked from the exterior, the motor is powered further 
and the the gear mechanism is moved beyond the locked position into the “double lock” 
position. The motors must be powered (in reverse) to release the double lock. The inside 
door handles will not unlock a “double locked” vehicle. 


• Door lock key position (driver’s door only) 

• Door open/closed status (replaces door jamb 
switch). 

The GM monitors the lock cylinder positions over two 
wires. The signals are generated by two hall effect 
sensors (Hall Sensor 1 & 2) located in the actuator. 

When the key is turned, a plastic cylinder in the lock 
actuator is simultaneously rotated by the lock tumbler 
extension rod. 



E53 Door Lock Mechanism: The E53 utilizes a door latch combined with dual actuator 
motors. This type of actuator is sealed, self contained units with no replaceable parts. The 
door lock actuators use hall effect sensors in place of pin contacts/microswitches to pro- 


An asymmetrical shaped magnet is incorporated in the plastic cylinder, which when rotat¬ 
ed changes the magnetic influence on the hall sensors. The presence of a magnet in close 
proximity to the sensing surface of either hall sensor creates a coded input over the two 
wires that the GM uses to determine the key position. 


• Magnet in front of sensor, current flow through the sensor is <5 mA (0). 

• Magnet rotated away from sensor, current flow through the sensor is >12 mA (1). 

Hall effect sensors improve the actuators reliability since they are impervious to moisture 
and there are no wear contacts. 


23 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



• Key in the neutral position, both sensors are 
simultaneously influenced by the magnet - 

0 / 0 . 

• Key turned to the unlock position from neu¬ 
tral, hall sensor #1 magnet segment moves 
away from hall sensor -1/0. 

• Key turned to lock position from neutral, hall 
sensor #2 magnet segment moves away 
form hall sensor - 0 / 1 . 


I 



PLASTIC CYLINDER 
WITH ASYMMETRICAL MAGNET 
(Shown in the Lock Position) 


HALL SENSOR 1 


There are two motors incorporated in each actuator 
that provide two separate functions: 

Single lock/unlock function: Also known as central 
lock, this motor controls the mechanical lock mecha¬ 
nism when the central lock button is pressed to single 
lock the vehicle. 

The lock mechanism is fully locked at this point but can 
still be opened from the interior by pulling the appropr¬ 
iate interior door handle twice or by pressing the cen¬ 
tral lock button again. When single lock function is acti¬ 
vated, the fuel filler flap actuator is not locked. 


Double lock/unlock function: Also known as central 
arrest, this motor is activated only when the vehicle is 
locked from the exterior at the driver’s door lock with a 
key or when the GM receives a lock request from the 
Key-less entry system. In this case the double lock 
motor is activated simultaneously with the single lock 
motor. 

The function of the double lock motor is to mechani¬ 
cally offset an internal rod disabling it from unlocking 
the vehicle from the interior. This prevents the doors 
from being unlocked by any means except from an 
unlock request at the driver’s door or via the Key-less 
entry. 



WHEN IN DOUBLE LOCK AN 
INTERIOR ACTUATED UNLOCK 
ROD IS OFFSET PREVENTING 
THE LOCK MECHANISM FROM 
BEING MECHANICALLY 


UNLOCKED 



24 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 







Door Contact Hall Sensor: Also included in the drivers door actuator is a third hall effect 
sensor. This sensor signals the door open/closed status to the GM. This sensor replaces 
the door jamb mechanical switch of previous systems. The rotary latch plate position acti¬ 
vates the door contact hall sensor. 


• When the door latch is closed, current flow 
through the sensor is <5 mA (0). 

• When the door is open, current flow through 
the sensor is >12 mA (1). 

The passenger side front door and both rear 
door lock actuators only include this hall effect 
sensor (hall sensor 3). Hall sensors 1 & 2 are 
not required. 


DRIVER'S DOOR 
LOCK ACTUATOR 

HALL 


©i 


SENSOR 1 


HALL 


o—c 


SENSOR 2 


I- 

SINGLE 

(M)LOCK 
'w 7 MOTOR 

DOUBLE 
(M)LOCK 
'w' MOTOR 


HALL 



LEFT REAR DOOR 
LOCK ACTUATOR 


O—C 


-X 


SENSOR 3 
LATCH PLATE 



o—c 






KL 30- 






12520131 .eps 


Trunk Lid Close (E38 SCA)/Tailgate and Window Latching System (E39/E53): The 

tailgate/trunk lid is opened by any of the three input signals: FZV, remote button and unlock 
switch pad (push - trunk lock cylinder E38). 


These inputs request the rear latch 
actuator control circuit to be 
switched to ground (exception: 
presence of road speed signal, 
key on with FZV request.) 

The rear latch actuator unlatches 
the mechanism and signals the 
GM of the open latch status. The 
SCA motor rotates the striker 
180°. Feed-back signalling stops 
the motor. E38 - When closing the 
trunk lid the trunk latch micro¬ 
switch signals the GM to activate 
the SCA motor to pull the lid 
down. 


j— 






X253 

TAILGATE 10 



REAR WINDOW SWITCH 


GM II 


w 


H 


</) 


HI 


D 


O 


LU 

> 

cc 

* 


o 


O 


_l 


z 


D 



REAR LATCH K70 

ACTUATOR 

RELAY 



SCA ON/OFF 
REQUESTS 




SCA POSITION 


FEEDBACK 


REAR WINDOW 
ACTUATOR RELAY 

+ + 



E39 Sport Wagon 
Shown 


LATCH 

MECH. 


REAR LATCH 
- ACTUATOR 


X254 




SCA MOTOR 


REAR WINDOW 
ACTUATOR 


615200097.eps 


Rear window unlatching is requested by the rear window switch ground signal. This signal 
initiates activation of the rear window actuator relay control circuit which activates the rear 
window actuator. The actuator unlatches the mechanism opening the window. The latch 
simultaneously provides an open window signal for the rear window wiper motor module 
as well as an interior light on request (via the wiper module). 


25 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 















Remote (Keyless) Entry FZV 


Purpose of the System 

The Remote Entry System offers the following: 

• Locking/unlocking of doors, luggage compartment (tailgate), fuel filler lid. 

• Selective unlocking of driver’s door (same as with key in the lock cylinder). 

• Arming/disarming of DWA alarm system. 

• Remote unlocking of the trunk (tailgate) only. 

• Comfort opening of windows and sunroof. 

• Interior lighting activation (search mode). 

• Panic mode alarm activation. 

• Changing code signals - coded signals from transmitter change with every operation. 

• Automatic correction for up to 1000 erroneous activation signals. 

• Transmitter initialization procedure - including up to four key operation and Key Memory. 

• Replacement batteries. 

• Low transmitter battery in vehicles equipped with Check Control. 



KL 30- 


KL 31 - 


REMOTE 
LOCK/ 
UNLOCK 
RECEIVER 
MODULE 
(IN "C" 
PILLAR) 


LOCK ACTUATOR 


(/) 

D 

CO 

■ 

Q. 


I= n 


_ 


DRIVER'S 

DOOR 

SWITCHBLOCK 

MODULE 

(PM-FT/SB) 


<M> 

Xm> 


FUEL FILLER 
FLAP RELAY 


K BUS 


PASSENGER'S 

DOOR 

MODULE 

(PM-BT) 


WINDOW MOTOR 
LOCK ACTUATOR 




WINDOW MOTOR 


SUNROOF 

MODULE 

(PM-SHD) 





SUNROOF MOTOR 

INTERIOR LIGHTS 


<M> 


REAR DOOR LOCK 
ACTUATORS 

REAR DOOR POWER 
WINDOW MOTORS 


<M> 

<M> TRUNK LID ACTUATOR 




FUEL FILLER FLAP 
ACTUATOR 


DWA ALARM SIREN 


TO LCM FOR ACTIVATED 

ALARM LIGHTS FLASHING 61 5200098.eps 


26 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 
























































The Remote Entry System incorporated minor changes since the original introduction 
which includes: 


• The control electronics are incorporated into the GM III. 


• The antenna is incorporated into the rear window lower heater grid. 


• The remote key receiver is installed in the left “C” pillar. The receiver produces a digital 
signal based on the transmitter command and sends it to the GM for processing. The GM 
then carries out all remote entry operations either directly or through the door modules 
for the front doors. The frequency at which the key transmits the radio signal to the ant¬ 
enna amplifier is 315 MHz. 



615200099.eps 


Adjust Setting of Seat 
For Key #1 


Vehicle/Key Memory 


The Vehicle/Key Memory feature provides the flexibility of allowing the owner to customize 
certain functions of select vehicle systems and automatically identifies users of the vehicle 
by a key identification signal provided by the remote keyless entry system (FZV). 


Vehicle & Key memory is marketed as a combined feature but is actually two separate func¬ 
tions of the select vehicle control systems. 


27 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 
















































Vehicle Memory: The owner is provided with a list of available system functions that can 
be customized to their liking. Prior to delivery, the DISplus or MoDiC is used to encode the 
owner’s chosen selections into the appropriate control modules. 

These choices become a permanent function of the control module and can only be 
changed by re-encoding with the DISplus or MoDiC at a BMW Center. 

This feature has been available for some time via the ZCS Conversion Feature but has 
never been fully utilized or officially presented to the vehicle owner as a feature of their vehi¬ 
cle. 

Key Memory: This feature provides the added convenience of identifying users of the vehi¬ 
cle whenever a lock or unlocked signal is generated via the individual FZV keys. A maxi¬ 
mum of four FZV keys can be used with the Key Memory feature. 

Each of the four keys generate a unique key identification signal (key number) that is trans¬ 
mitted simultaneously with the lock/unlock signals to the General Module. Key Memory 
does not respond to Lock/Unlock requests from the drivers door lock. 

Most of the key memory functions require the vehicle be configured using the “KEY MEM¬ 
ORY” function of the DIS or MoDiC. However, there are a few features that store settings 
automatically without configuration such as IHKA blower speed and temp setting. The key 
ID signal alerts the GM to communicate with select control systems over the K Bus to store 
(when locked) or reset (when unlocked) certain driver adjustable settings. 

There are features that function as both a Car & Key Memory feature. 

Example; the Automatic Seat Adjustment feature is encoded as a Car Memory Function 
with the following possibilities: 

• When unlocking, 

• When opening a door after unlocking 

• Or not active at all. 

If active, the seat positions are stored and reactivated by the Key Memory function for indi¬ 
vidual users of the car. 

Notes: 


28 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




System Components 


Remote Key: 


BUTTON #1 


PRESS ONCE = 

• LOCKING, 

• DWA ARMING 
(if equipped), 

• INTERIOR LIGHTS 
ON WHEN 
VEHICLE LOCKED 

PRESS TWICE WITHIN 
10 SECONDS = 

• DEACTIVATE UIS & 
TILT MONITORING 

BUTTON #2 


PRESS ONCE: 

• UNLOCK 
DRIVER'S DOOR 

• DWA DISARMED 
(if equipped) 

• INTERIOR LIGHTS 
ON 

PRESS TWICE: 

• TOTAL UNLOCKING 

HOLD: 

• CONVENIENCE 
OPENING 

BUTTON #3 




615200100.eps 


MOMENTARILY PRESS: PRESS AND HOLD: 

• TRUNK LID OPENS • PANIC MODE (ALARM- 

If equipped) 


Features: 

• 3 volt lithium battery (commercially available CR 2016) 
is used as the power supply for the key transmitters. 

• An EEPROM is used to store the key data. 

The data is not lost when the battery is re¬ 
placed and initialization is not required. 


The key incorporates an LED that signals the opera¬ 
tor of signal transmitting, key initialization status and 
key self test indication. 




Green t Ke y 2 


Hod - Key 1 


Blue - Kty 4- 



• The keys are delivered 
with a four color label 
sheet containing differ¬ 
ent colored labels for 
each of the four pos¬ 
sible FZV keys. 

This is helpful to differenti¬ 
ate the FZV keys during initialization preventing the pos 
sibility of mis-assigning the key ID which would change 
the encoded Key Memory functions. 


615200049.eps 


/ 


Model Year 2000 Key 

Visual Changes: 

• New appearance with blue and white BMW roundel. 

• New button arrangement (larger buttons) with seq¬ 
uential operation (enhanced operating convenience). 
Functions the same as the previous key. 

• Rechargeable battery replaces replaceable batteries. 
Charged by EWS ring antenna. 

• The key housing is encapsulated and can not be 
opened. 



• The LED has been omitted. 


29 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Workshop Hints 


Remote Key Initialization: The initialization of the FZV keys is required to establish the 
Lock/Unlock signal synchronization with the GM. The initialization procedure provides the 
GM with a key identification number and a “rolling code” for each key. If the initialization is 
not performed, the GM will not respond to the key signals. 


Up to 4 remote keys can be initialized. They must be initialized at the same time. Key ini¬ 
tialization is only possible with the vehicle unlocked. 


Procedure: 

1. Close all doors and have all keys available. 

2. Using key number 1, turn the ignition switch to KL 
R, then switch off within 5 seconds and remove the 
first key. 

3. Within 30 seconds of turning the ignition switch to 
“off” Press and hold button #2. 

4. While holding button #2, press and release {“tap”) 
button #1 three times within 10 seconds. 

5. Release both buttons. The LED in the key will flash 
momentarily (except 2000 MY). The GM will imme¬ 
diately lock and unlock the doors signaling a suc¬ 
cessful initialization. 

6. If additional keys need to be initialized repeat steps 
3 - 5 within 30 seconds. 

7. Switching the ignition to KL R completes the initiali¬ 
zation. 

NOTE: The key memory function of the GM responds 
to the key identification number of each key. If the keys 
are not initialized in the same order prior to initialization, 
the key memory functions activated by the keys will not 
be assigned correctly. Always initialize the keys in 
the same order. 




30 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 










































LED Status (Keys equipped with LED): 

The following functions can be checked with the LED: 

• Flashing LED when pressing a button. 
Indicates that the data is being transmitted, 
(battery voltage between 3.2 - 2.6 volts) 

• No LED activity when pressing a button: 


1. ZKE responds to pressed button only to 
unlock a locked vehicle. Indicates the bat¬ 
tery is between 2.6 - 2.2 volts. Replace bat¬ 
tery. 

2. No unlock of vehicle. Indicates battery is 
below 2.2 volts. Replace battery. 

FZV Key Test: Pressing the trunk release and lock buttons together activates the key test. If 
the battery and FZV key EEPROM are “OK”, the LED will come ON for approximately 1 sec¬ 
ond. 



FZV Key Rechargeable Battery 

From KL R, the battery inside the key head is charged inductively by the EWS ring antenna 

via a coil antenna integrated in the key. The charging process is controlled by electronic 

circuitry integrated in the key. 

• The service life of a radio-control key used under normal conditions corresponds to the veh¬ 
icle lifespan. 

• If the FZV keys are not used (ie: stored in a drawer), the battery will be discharged after 
approx. 1.5 years. 

• The time required to fully charge a discharged battery is approx. 30 hours. 

• The remote control can be operated about 15 times after a charging period of approx. 30 
minutes (driving time). 


31 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



The key data is stored in a transponder chip. The transponder chip is a wireless read and 
write EEPROM. It is powered via the ring coil at the steering lock. Power is applied elec- 
tromagnetically when the key is in the ignition switch from KL R. 

The power supply is used both for data transfer as well as for charging the battery. This has 
been made possible by new development of the transponder chip. 

As with previous systems, every press of an FZV key also provides the battery charge con¬ 
dition. When the FZV electronics receives a low power condition message three successive 
times, the GM sets a fault indicating a low battery within a specific key. The LCM is also 
informed via the bus system and alerts the driver via an instrument cluster matrix message. 

If the battery is recharged (used operate car), the fault will be automatically deleted when 
five successive messages are received indicating a charged battery condition. 

The battery has no affect on the EWS III communication function! 









32 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Anti-Theft (DWA) System 

Purpose of the System 


The DWA alarm system offers vehicle protection by monitoring the doors, hood, interior, 
luggage compartment and vehicle tilting. When activated, DWA deters theft by sounding 
an alarm siren for 30 seconds, flashing the low beam headlights (high beam on Xenon 
equipped models) and four way flashers for 5 minutes. 


The control electronics for DWA are integrated in the general module. The DWA - LED 
indicator is located in the rear view mirror (E38 in the top center IHKA grille). 




The system is “armed/disarmed” from the driver’s door lock cylinder, remote transmitter or 
luggage compartment lock cylinder. The alarm is immediately deactivated when disarmed 
with the key in the driver’s door lock cylinder (may be deactivated in Conversion) or remote 
transmitter. 


The GM utilizes existing components and/or circuits as part of the DWA system: 

• Door latch switch/sensor contacts (door open/closed). 

• Trunk lid switch contact (monitored for closed trunk). 

• Trunk lock key position switch (located on the trunk lock, this switch signal prevents 
DWA from activating if armed when the trunk is opened with the key). 

• Hood switch (monitored for closed hood, located under the hood). 

• DWA status LED (part of rear view mirror). 


The additional components required are: 


• Interior Sensor 


• DWA Siren 


• Tilt sensor 


33 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 
















System Components 


Interior Sensor FIS (up to 99 MY): The interior sensor is mounted in the center of the 
headliner panel. Due to the design of the vehicles interior, the sensor is uni-directional and 
must be installed in the proper direction to ensure proper operation of the system. 

SENSOR IN HEADLINER PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SENSOR 



When the alarm system is armed, the sensor emits electromagnetic waves at a frequency 
of 2.45 GHz. As long as nothing is moving in the vehicle, the waves as bounced back to 
the sensor at the same frequency. The sensor monitors these bounced back waves as an 
indication that nothing is disturbed within the vehicle. 

If a foreign object enters the vehicle, the frequency of the bounced back signal changes. 
The sensor monitors the changed frequency and triggers the alarm. 


Every time the DWA system is armed, the 
sensor adapts to what ever objects might be 
stationary in the interior. 

This allows packages or objects to be left 
inside the car without effecting the operation 
of the system. The sensitivity of the sensor is 
set so that the moving object must be at least 
as large as a bumble bee. This prevents a 
false alarm from occurring from small insects 
that might be caught in the vehicle. 


FIS SENSOR 



615200103.eps 


The FIS is switched OFF when the vehicle is locked two times within ten seconds. The LED 
will flash one time for confirmation. This allows the sensor to be switched OFF to avoid false 
alarms when the windows are left open for venting. 


34 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 








Interior Sensor UIS (after 99 MY): Similar to the FIS, the UIS monitors the vehicle interi¬ 
or for motion. The UIS uses ultrasonic sound wavs instead of microwaves (less suceptable 
to magnetic interference). The UIS is a combined transmitter and receiver. 


The interior sensor is mounted in the center of the headliner panel. Due to the design of the 
vehicles interior, the sensor is uni-directional and must be installed in the proper direction 
to ensure proper operation of the system (trim cover ensures directional installation). 


SENSOR IN HEADLINER 


PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SENSOR 



Every time the DWA system is armed (signal STDWA), the sensor adapts to what ever 
objects might be stationary in the interior. The sensor emits ultra sonic waves in a pro¬ 
grammed timed cycle. It receives echos of the emitted waves. 


The UIS amplifies the received sound wave signals and compares them with the transmit¬ 
ted waves. The UIS also checks the incoming echos for background hiss (wind noise 
through a partially open window) and adapts for this. 


• If the echos are consistently similar, no movement is detected. 

• If the echos are altered, (inconsistent), the UIS determines motion in the interior com¬ 
partment. 


If motion is detected, the UIS changes to a constant cycle and the echo is compared again. 
If the inconsistency is still present the UIS sends the activate siren signal (INRS) to the GM. 

The UIS is switched OFF when the vehicle is locked two times within ten seconds. The LED 
will flash one time for confirmation. This allows the sensor to be switched OFF to avoid false 
alarms when the windows are left open for venting. 


35 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 












Tilt Sensor (Liquid Type - E38/E39 to 97 MY): The Tilt Sensor consists of a conductive 
liquid chamber, a processor board and metal probes (located in the luggage compartment). 
The probes are submersed in the liquid and produce a resistance value dependent on the 
tilt of the sensor (angle of vehicle). This resistance value becomes the static point when the 
DWA System is armed. 


If the vehicle is jacked-up or lifted, 
the angle of the liquid changes 
producing a change in the resis¬ 
tance value. The sensor recog¬ 
nizes this change and signals the 
GM to activate the DWA alarm. 

The resets at the new angle. This 
allows the DWA to remain armed 



and re-activate the alarm if 
vehicle is moved again. 


1. DWA ARMED, TILT SENSOR REGISTERS 
the RESISTANCE VALUE THROUGH FLUID. 
SIGNAL HIGH TO GENERAL MODULE 



2. VEHICLE TILTED, FLUID MOVES AND CHANGES 
RESISTANCE VALUE BETWEEN PLATES. HIGH 
SIGNAL MOMENTARILY GOES LOW SIGNALLING 
GM TO ACTIVATE THE ALARM. 

625200107.eps 


As with the interior sensor, the tilt sensor is also switched OFF when the vehicle is locked 
two times within ten seconds. The LED will flash one time for confirmation. This allows the 
sensor to be switched OFF for transportation purposes. 


Tilt Sensor (Electronic Type from 98 MY): Located in the luggage comparment area, 
the tilt sensor is an electronic sensing device with the sole purpose of monitoring the vehi¬ 
cle's parked angle when DWA is armed. 

The sensor requires three signal wires to func¬ 
tion: 

• KL 30 - Constant battery voltage 

• Signal "STDWA"; switched ground input sig¬ 
nal provided by the GM indicating DWA 
armed/disarmed status. 

The tilt sensor is used as a splice location for 
the STDWA signal to the Siren and UIS int¬ 
erior protection sensor. 



36 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



• Signal "NG"; switched ground output signal provided to the GM. The signal is used for 
two purposes, 

1. As a momentary acknowledgment that the tilt sensor received STDWA and is cur¬ 
rently monitoring the vehicle angle. 

2. If the tilt sensor detects a change in the vehicle's angle when DWA is armed, signal 
NG is switched to inform the GM to activate the siren. 

When the tilt sensor receives the STDWA signal from the GM it memorizes the vehicle's 
parked angle. The angle of the vehicle is monitored by the solid state electronics. Once 
armed, if the angle changes, the tilt sensor provides a switched ground signal to the GM 

to activate DWA. 

As with the interior sensor, the tilt sensor is also switched OFF when the vehicle is locked 
two times within ten seconds. The LED will flash one time for confirmation. This allows the 
sensor to be switched OFF for transportation purposes. 


Glass Breakage Sensors (Early E38 - before FIS Sensor): The door windows (includ¬ 
ing the rear quarter glass wire loop) are monitored by inductive sensors mounted on the 
inside of the door behind the trim panel. A closed window is recognized by a magnetic plate 
on the glass lining up with the sensor. 

If the glass is broken, the plate falls away and the signal from the sensor changes and the 
GM will activate the alarm. 


Alarm Siren: The alarm siren is mounted in the rear wheel well, behind the inner wheel 
housing cover (early E38 used an alarm horn). The E53 alarm siren is located in the left side 
of the engine compartment. 


The siren contains electronic circuitry for producing the warn¬ 
ing tone when the alarm is triggered. The siren also contains a 
rechargeable battery that is used to power the siren when the 
alarm is triggered. 

The rechargeable battery will allow the siren to sound if it or the 
vehicle’s battery is disconnected. The siren battery is 
recharged, from the vehicle’s battery, when the alarm is not in 
the armed state. 



CONNECTOR 


625200108.eps 


37 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



The siren has four wires connecting it to the system; KL 30, KL 31, activate siren signal 
(SIRENE) and the arm/disarm signal (STDWA). 

The arm/disarm output signal from the GM is provided to the Tilt sensor, FIS/UIS sensor 
and the siren. The arm/disarm signal is a switched ground that signals the components of 
an armed/disarmed status. 


97 MY E38 Shown 



ARM / DISARM SIGNAL 


The activate siren signal to the siren is high whether DWA is armed or disarmed. If a mon¬ 
itored input activates the alarm, the high signal to the siren is switched to a 50% duty cycle 
at the GM. The control circuitry in the siren activates the siren driver. 

If the DWA is armed and the battery is disconnected the siren recognizes the normally high 
“SIRENE” signal as suddenly going low, the siren is activated. 

Notes: 


38 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





TILT SENSOR 


System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


KL 30 

DRIVER'S DOOR 



DOOR LOCK 
A MICROSWITCH 





KL R 



HOOD SWITCH 


DRIVER'S DOOR 
JAMB SWITCH 


PASSENGER'S DOOR 
JAMB SWITCH 


ARM/ 

DISARM 




RIGHT REAR 
DOOR JAMB SWITCH 



ACTIVATE ALARM 


KL 30 


(§©] 

— C-| 

u 

^J 



TRUNK LOCK 
MICROSWITCH 


TRUNK LID 
SWITCH 


— c- 



TRUNK LID 


97 MY E39 Shown 


P-BUS 

->- 3 - 0 - 


KL 30 


x 




l-BUS 

(540i) 


o 

LO 


->■—-O 

K-BUS 



KL 31 


DWAH 

0 KL 30 



DWA SIREN 


TO TILT 
AND FIS 
SENSORS 


KL 31 



KL 30 

DWA 

LED 


KL 31 


39 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 














































































































Principle of Operation 
DWA Arming/Disarming 

• The DWA is armed every time the vehicle is locked from the outside with the door lock 
cylinder or FZV key. 

• The DWA LED flashes as an acknowledgment along with the exterior lights and a 
momentary chirp from the siren. 

• The GM monitors all required input signals for closed status (door closed, luggage com¬ 
partment closed, etc.) The inputs must be in a closed status for a minimum of 3 sec¬ 
onds for the GM to include them as an activation component. If after 3 seconds any 
input signal not in the closed status is excluded (this is acknowledged by the DWA LED) 
preventing false alarm activations. The hood switch can be “lifted” to the service posi¬ 
tion to test the alarm with the hood open. 

• If the DWA is armed a second time within 10 seconds, the tilt sensor and interior pro¬ 
tection sensor are excluded as alarm activation components. This function is useful if 
the vehicle is transported on a train or flat bed truck to prevent false alarm activations. 

• While armed, the trunk can be opened with out the alarm being triggered as follows: 

- If opened with the trunk remote button via the FZV, the GM prevents the alarm from 
activating. (This feature is customizable under the Car Memory function). 

- If opened with the key at the trunk lock cylinder the trunk key position switch sig¬ 
nals the GM and in the same manner prevents the alarm from activating. 

In either case, when the trunk is returned to the closed position, it is no longer con¬ 
sidered as an activation signal. 


Panic Mode Operation: When the trunk button is pressed and held, the GM is signaled 
to activate the siren for the Panic Mode. The panic mode is function with either an armed 
or disarmed DWA system. 


Emergency Disarming: Emergency disarming occurs automatically if a key is used to turn 
the ignition switch on and the EWS accepts it. The EWS signals the GM to unlock the doors 
and deactivate the DWA. 


40 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



Alarm Indication 

When the alarm is triggered, the siren will sound for 30 seconds. At the same time the low 
beam headlights (high beams on Xenon equipped vehicles) and four way flashers for 5 min¬ 
utes. The GM signals the LCM via the bus system to flash the lights. 

Following an alarm activation, the system will reset and activate again if further tampering 
occurs. 


DWA LED Status: 


DWA STATUS 

DWA LED CONDITION 

Disarmed 

OFF 

Armed 

Continual slow flash 

Armed with one or more monitored 
inputs not in closed position 
(ie: trunk not fully closed, etc) 

Rapid flash for 10 seconds, 
then continual slow flash. 

Alarm activated 

Rapid flash for 5 minutes, 
then continual slow flash. 

Rearmed in less then 10 seconds. 

ON for 1 second 

Disarmed after activated alarm 

Rapid flash for 10 seconds, 
then OFF. 


Notes: 


41 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





Power Windows/Sunroof 


Purpose of the System 

The features of the power windows and sunroof system include: 


• One-touch operation in both directions (up/ 
down) on all four windows. 

• The cable design window regulator is used 
for all windows. 

• Anti-trap detection is through the use of the 
pressure sensitive finger guard. 

• The control of the front window motors is 
carried out in the respective door modules. 

• The control of the rear windows is carried 
out in the GM III. 

• The switch block/module on the driver’s 
door panel controls all four windows and the 
rear window lock out feature. 

System Components 

- with the Principle of Operation 


Each window switch has four positions. 

Two for the standard mode of operation: 

• Push to first detent and hold to raise/lower 
the window (1). 

Two for the one-touch mode: 

• Push to second detent and quickly release 
(quick strike) to automatically raise/lower 
the window (2). 




The signals from the switch block pass through 
the driver’s door via the P-Bus and on to the 
GM III and passengers door module. 


42 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





















All window operations signals are digital inputs to the door module and GM III. 

• Comfort closing/opening of the windows from the driver’s lock cylinder. The remote key 
provides opening only. 

• When the ignition key is in accessory or “on” position press the switch to open or close 
the windows. Window operation is possible with the ignition switched off until a front 
door is opened or 16 minutes (maximum) has elapsed. 

• Window load switching is through relays. The front window control relays are located in 
the door modules, the rear window relays are in the GM III. The GM III monitors the cur¬ 
rent draw for end limit position. The maximum run time for the window motors is limit¬ 
ed to 6 seconds in the one-touch mode. This allows the motors to be switched off if the 
end limit load sensing fails. 

E53 Style Window Switches: The E53 power window switch design is a push - pull type 
switch. Each switch provides the GM with the coded ground signaling strategy as previous 
two wire switches. 

Pushing a switch to the first detent and holding 
provides a single ground signal on one wire 
requesting the GM to operate the window 
motor in the down direction. 

When released, the ground signal is removed 
and the window motor stops. 

Momentarily pushing the switch to the second 
detent and releasing provides an additional 
ground signal on the second wire requesting 
the “one touch mode”, operating the window 
motor automatically. 

The motor runs the window down until it reach¬ 
es the end stop. 

The switch functions in the same manner for 
the upward run of the window motor but the 
ground signal sequencing is reversed. 


43 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



Rear Window Child Lockout Switch: The rear window child lockout switch is incorpo¬ 
rated in the driver's side window switch block. It provides a constant ground signal to the 
GM preventing the windows from being operated from the rear door switches. 

The lockout switch ground signal is overridden by the GM if the MRS crash signal is acti¬ 
vated (MRS III equipped vehicles). 

Window Anti-Trap Detection: Each pressure guard at the top edge of each door frame 
consists of two contact strips that close when subjected to pressure. This provides anti¬ 
trap for the full travel of the window. 

When the contact strips close, the window will reverse direction. The contact strip does not 
require that the anti-trap feature be initialized prior to operation. 

The finger guard has a resistance of 1.2 KOhm and it is monitored for open circuits. Faults 
with the anti-trap system require that the window switch be held to close the window. 



The example shown represents the driver’s door window control and monitoring carried out 
by the Driver’s Door Switchblock Module (PM- FT/ SB). 

The passenger door window is controlled and monitored by the Passenger door module 
(PM-BT) and the rear door windows are both controlled and monitored by the General 
Module. 


44 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 

















System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


DRIVER'S DOOR 


PASSENGER'S DOOR 



ANTI-TRAP 
CONTACT 


P-BUS 











-> 


<- 


K-BUS 


c- 





WINDOW 

MOTOR 





ANTI-TRAP 
CONTACT 



POWER 

WINDOW 

SWITCH 


rO 


LIGHTING 


GM III 


KL 30 





X 







WINDOW 

MOTOR 




ANTI-TRAP 
CONTACT 



LIGHTING 


■@-1 


POWER 

WINDOW 

SWITCH 


LEFT REAR 
DOOR 


KL 31 


RIGHT REAR 
DOOR 


45 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 


->• I 1 
























































































































































Power Window Motors: The window motors are mounted on the cable regulators. The 
window motor control circuit consists of two wires for operating the motor in both direc¬ 
tions. 


The motors are activated by relays in the GM of door 
modules (front doors). The relays provide either power 
or ground depending on the direction of window travel. 

The GM controls the polarity of the motor based on a 
request to run the window (window switch, 
Convenience Opening/ Closing). 

The windows are run to the limit stops which is detect¬ 
ed by an amperage increase in the control circuit. 
Additionally, the window run cycle is limited to a 6-8 
second duration if in case the amperage increase is not 
detected or there is a malfunction with the regulator. 



FRONT DOOR 
REGULATOR 


615200114.eps 


Window Motor Limit Stop Function: If the windows are run up and down continuously 
a limit stop function is activated to prevent the window motors from overheating. The GM 
monitors the number of times the window motors are activated. Each cycle is counted and 
stored in memory. 


If the repetitive window activation (up/down) exceeds one minute, the GM deactivates the 
internal relays and disregards any further input requests. The GM provides motor activation 
after a short duration but not for the full one minute monitoring cycle. Over time, the GM 
slowly reverses the stored count of activation until the stored number equals 0. 

Convenience Opening/Closing: The GM provides the convenience open/close feature 
providing control of the power windows (and sunroof) from outside the vehicle with the key 
in the driver’s door lock cylinder. The FZV provides the same function for the opening only. 

• The anti-trap feature is active during convenience closing from the driver’s door lock. 

• The convenience open feature provides outside activation of the windows and sunroof 
in the same manner. 


• If the GM receives a request to operate convenience close or open for more than 110 
seconds, the function is deactivated and a fault code is stored. 

• The Car Memory Feature can activate and deactivate the Convenience Open Feature 
from the FZV’s control. 


46 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Sunroof 

Purpose of the System 

When the ignition key is in accessory or “on” 
position press the switch or slide it to the desired 
direction to lift (2), open (1) or close the sunroof. 
When lifting, the headliner retracts several inch¬ 
es. The sunroof can continue to operate after 
the ignition has been switched off as long as one 
of the front doors has not been opened. 



Mechanically, the sunroofs are similar in design. 
Some vehicles are equipped with the steel roof 
while others are equipped with the glass (moon) 
roof. 

The anti-trap feature of the sunroof uses a hall 
sensor to detect obstructions while the sunroof 
is closing. The initialization procedure must be 
carried out to allow the sunroof to operate in the 
opening direction and allow the anti-trap feature 
to function. The anti-trap is shut down 4mm 
prior to full closed and during the tilt closing 
function. 



System Components 

Sunroof Switch: Mounted in the sunroof motor trim cover, the switch provides coded 

ground signals for system operation. The following signals are generated over three wires: 

• Rest position. 

• Slide open request (press and hold switch - first detent of 
open position). 

• Automatic slide open request (press further to second 
detent and release). 

• Tilt open (press and hold). 

• Slide close request (press and hold switch - first detent of 
close direction). 

• Automatic slide close request (press further to second 
detent and release). 



47 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





Sunroof Motor/Module (SHD): The motor is powered to open, close and lift the sunroof 
panel. The motor contains two hall effect sensors that monitor the motor shaft rotation pro¬ 
viding sunroof panel position. 

The hall sensors also provide the end limit cut 
out function for the SHD once the system is ini¬ 
tialized. The SHD counts the pulses and cuts 
the motor out prior to the detected end run of 
the sunroof panel. 


The combined motor module has a pin con¬ 
nector for interfacing the switch, and vehicle 
harness (power, ground and Bus.) 

The electronic controls and relays are contained in the sunroof module (PM-SHD). The 
module is connected to the P-Bus (E38 >99 MY on the K-Bus) for comfort closing/open¬ 
ing and diagnosis/fault memory purposes. 



System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



48 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 














Principle of Operation 

Initialization: Initialization is required for the SHD to learn the end positions of the motor's 
travel. The hall sensors provide pulses for motor rotation, the SHD counts the pulses and 
determines where the panel is by memorizing the stored pulses. 

If the system is not initialized, the sunroof will only operate in the tilt up and slide close posi¬ 
tions. Initialize as follows: 

• Press and hold the sunroof switch in either the tilt up or slide close positions for 15 sec¬ 
onds. 

• The sunroof motor operates momentarily signifying initialization acceptance. 

The SHD memorizes the pulses from the hall sensors on the next activation of the motor 
by driving the panel to its end run positions. The SHD senses an amperage increase and 
determines the end run position. The counted number of pulses is then used as the basis 
for calculating the panel position. 

Anti-Trap Feature: The anti-trap feature of the sunroof uses a hall sensor to detect 
obstructions while the sunroof is closing (pulse frequency slowed down) in the automatic 
close function. The anti-trap feature is shut down prior to full closing (4mm from full closed) 
to allow the sunroof to seat into the seal. 

Note: The anti-trap feature is not functional when the switch is held in the manual close 
position. 


Notes: 


49 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Workshop Hints 


SHD Self Diagnosis 

The SHD monitors operation and stores fault codes if a defect is determined. The SHD 

monitors the following conditions: 

• SHD motor relays: The relays are checked for sticking contacts (plausibility) and non 
functional contacts. 

• Hall effect position sensors: The SHD must detect a pulse frequency from the hall 
effect sensor(s) during operation. 

• Sunroof Switch: The SHD monitors the signal plausibility of the coded signaling from 
the sunroof switch. 

Sunroof Fault Response Characteristics 

If a fault occurs with any of these functions, the SHD responds as follows: 

• Overrides the end run detection. 

• Switches the motor off if the relay contacts stick for more than 500 ms. 

• Switches the motor off if pulses are not received. 


Emergency Operation of the Sunroof 

If the sunroof motor does not respond to the switch signals, the hex key in the trunk lid tool 
kit is used to manually turn the motor shaft drive. 



50 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Interior Lighting 

Purpose of the System 

The GM controls the interior lighting automatical¬ 
ly with the status change of several monitored 
inputs. The lighting can also be manually con¬ 
trolled using the interior light switch. 

In addition to the various time controls, the inte¬ 
rior lights are also subject to the 16 minute shut 
down of the GM (consumer protection). 

Principle of Operation 

The interior light switch is a push button switch that will carry out the opposite command 
of the current status of the lights, (ie: if the interior lights are currently on, pushing the but¬ 
ton will switch the lights off.) 

• If the interior lights are switched “ON” by the button with the ignition switched ON, the 
interior lights will remain on until they are switched off by the button. 

• If the interior lights are switched “ON” when the ignition is switched OFF, the lights will 
remain on for 16 minutes (consumer cutout). 

• Pressing the interior light button for longer than three seconds will switch the lights to 
continuous off. This feature is intended for workshop use. Pressing the button again will 
return the lights to the normal operational status. 

• Locking the vehicle from the outside will immediately switch off the interior lights. 

The ON/OFF conditions for the interior lights in the automatic mode are as follows: 



ON Conditions 

• Door Open. 

• Switching off ignition after exterior 
lights have been switched off. 

• MRS Control Module crash input. 

• Unlocking with FZV or pressing FZV 
lock button when the vehicle is 
already locked (interior search fution). 


OFF Conditions 

• All doors closed with ignition on. 

• All doors closed with ignition off after 20 
seconds. 

• 20 seconds after switching off ignition with 
lights off. 

• 8 seconds after remote control activation. 

• 16 minutes with door(s) open. 

• When doors are locked. 


51 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



52 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 







System Components 


Door Contacts: As mentioned in the Central Locking Section, the existing door contacts 
opened/closed are also an input for the interior lighting function. The E53 uses the Hall 
effect sensors for the purpose of monitoring door open/closed status (located directly 
behind the rotary latch plate encased in the actuator). The sensor is activated by the rotary 
latch plate's position. 

• Door closed, the rotary latch plate is in the latched position. Current flow through the 
hall sensor is < 5 mA. 

• Door open, the rotary latch plate is in the open position. Current flow through the hall 
sensor is > 12 mA. 

A change in current flow informs the General module when a door is opened or closed. 


Front Seat Interior/Map Light Unit:The overhead front seat interior light unit contains a 
single main interior light. The light is controlled by the GM automatically or by momentarily 
pressing interior light switch located on the light assembly. 


The switch provides a momentary ground signal that the GM recognizes as a request to 
either turn the light on (if off) or turn the light off (if on). 


If the switch is held for more than 3 seconds, the 
GM interprets the continuous ground signal as a 
request to turn the interior light circuit off for the 

Workshop Mode. 

The workshop mode is stored in memory and 
will not come back on even if the GM is removed 
from it's power supply and reconnected. The 
switch must be pressed to turn the lights back 
on. 



There are two reading/map lights also located in the assembly. Each map light is mechan¬ 
ically controlled by depressing the corresponding on/off switch. The power supply for the 
map lights is supplied by the GM through the Consumer Cut Off circuit. 


53 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Rear Seat Interior/Reading Light Units: In 

each C pillar trim panel is an interior/reading light 
unit. 

These units each contain an interior light that is 
controlled with the front interior light and a 
mechanically switched reading light on the con¬ 
sumer cut off circuit. 


Front Footwell Lights: In each front footwell, 
there is also a courtesy light. These lights are 
only operated when the GM provides power to 
the interior lighting circuit. 

On E38 and E53 the doors also contain courtesy 
lights at the lower edge of the door panel (1). 

Door Warning Lights (E38): The additional 
“red” warning lights are installed in the edge of 
the doors (2). These lights are illuminated when 
the doors are opened. 




H$1 015? 


Illuminated Transmission Shift Indicator 
(E38): The E38 uses a microprocessor for dis¬ 
playing the shifter position in the center console. 

The processor receives shift position signals 
from a console mounted range switch. The 
processor illuminates the LED corresponding to 
the position of the range selector. 

The park position LED will remain “on” after the 
ignition is switched off and stay on until the GM 
goes into the “sleep” mode. 



Soft Lighting Feature: The GM provides progressive voltage (up to 12v) providing the soft 
on feature to the interior lighting circuit when the interior lights are required. The GM grad¬ 
ually reduces the full 12 volt power supply providing soft off when interior light deactivation 
is required. 


54 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 













































Visual Entry Aid (E38/E53) 

Purpose of the System 

The E38 (>99 MY) and E53 is equipped with the “Visual Entry Aid” lighting system which 
enhances operator convenience and safety. All interior door handles are supplemented with 
soft glow lighting for ease of locating the interior door handles. When activated, the exteri¬ 
or door lighting illuminates providing a subtle underglow for the exterior door handles on 
the E38 and exterior rear view mirrors on the E53. 

• The interior door handle lighting (including later E53) is provided by slim profile LEDs 
and controlled directly by the LCM III. 

• The exterior door handle lighting is provided by halogen bulb light sources in each 
door and fiber optic tubing. The light sources are controlled by a Visual Entry Aid Control 
Module which activates the lights simultaneously when the GM III activates the vehicle 
interior lights. 



System Components 


Interior Door Handle Lighting: The light¬ 
ing is provided by orange glow light strips 
illuminated by LED’s. 

• The light strips are part of the door han¬ 
dle shell and are not replaceable. 

• The LED’s are individually replaceable. 


“Orange Glow” 
Light Strip 



The LED’s are connected to the KL 58g interior panel lighting circuit. KL 58g is an output 
pulse width modulated control signal from the LCM III. The duty cycle changes when the 
LCM III detects a change in the voltage drop at the light dimmer input signal. 


55 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





















































Exterior Door Handle Lighting: The Visual 
Entry Aid Control Module is located in the elec¬ 
trical carrier forward of the glovebox. 

To control the system, the Visual Entry Aid con¬ 
trol module requires: 

• KL 30 

• KL 15 

• KL 31 

• Interior Light control signal (GM Output) 


The GM controls the soft on/off feature of the vehicle interior lights by a pulse width mod¬ 
ulated control signal. This signal is also an input to the Visual Entry Aid control module 
which requests simultaneously control (soft on/off) each exterior door light source. 




Light Source Modules: Mounted in each door 
are the light source modules. 


The light source modules are made up of the 
housing, halogen bulb and reflector. The reflec¬ 
tor holds the bulb and focus the bulbs light into 
the housing. 

The bulbs are are available for individual replace¬ 
ment. 




615200123.eps 


56 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




















































Fiber Optic Light Conductor Cable: The fiber optic cables carry the light to their respec¬ 
tive light output modules at each exterior door handle. 

Installation Note: The bending radius of the fiber optic cable should be less than 20mm 
when installing. 



615200131.eps 


Light Output Modules: The exterior door handle frames have an additional mount to 
accept the light output module. 

The light output modules carry the light from the conductor cables to the exterior door han¬ 
dle recess as well as casting a soft exterior light on the outside floor area. 


Principle of Operation 

Lights ON: The exterior visual entry aid lighting is activated “on” when the vehicle interior 
lights are activated “on” automatically by the GM. 

Lights OFF: Immediately after KL 15 recognition (immediate off - no soft off function). Soft 
off after a short delay once all doors are closed. 

After a maximum of 20 seconds “on” time, the control module switches exterior visual entry 
aid lighting off regardless of interior light status. 


57 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 













Seat/Mirror/Steering Column Memory 


Purpose of the System 

The front seats, outside rearview mirrors and steering column (if equipped) positions are 
electrically adjustable. The “customized” adjustment positions can be memorized and 
stored for three diferent users and recalled back to the individual positions (with the excep¬ 
tion of the passenger seat - not in memory). 

The basic features of seat/mirror/steering column operation, as well as the memory posi¬ 
tions is integrated into the ZKE III system. 


System Components: 


Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


• Seat/Steering Column Memory 
Module (PM SM). 

• Driver’s Door Switchblock Mod¬ 
ule (PM FT/SB - early E38 was 
separate). 

• Passenger’s Door Module (PM 
BT - E53 combined with window 
switch). 

• General Module (GM III). 

• 3 Position Memory Switch. 

• Seat Switch. 


E38/E39 Shown 



MEMORY 

SWITCH 


MIRROR 

SWITCHES 



DRIVER'S DOOR 
SWITCHBLOCK 
MODULE 
(PM-FT/SB) 




O 


P-BUS 


DRIVER'S 

SEAT 

MEMORY 

MODULE 

(PM-SM) 


STEERING 

COLUMN 

SWITCH 




5 DRIVER'S _ x 

MOTORS (C(w(w(WW) 


o 



(m)(m) 

2 STEERING 

COLUMN 

MOTORS 


• Steering Column Switch. 



DRIVER'S 

DOOR 

MIRROR 


PASSENGER'S 

DOOR 

MIRROR 



• Seat/Steering Column/Mirror 
Motors. 


The Seat/Steering Column Memory Module communicates with the DISplus or MoDiC for 
diagnosis and Vehicle Memory encoding. 


58 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




System Components 
- with Principle of Operation 

Manual Operation: The manual adjustments of the seat, mirrors and steering column are 
carried out with the respective switches as with the previous systems. 

The mirror adjustment switch is located in the driver’s switch block. The mirror operation 
input is a digital signal that is processed by each respective module for mirror positioning. 

Memory Storage: The parameters for storing memory positions are are as follows: 

• With the transmission range 
selector in “P” and the mirror 
change over switched to the left, 
switch the ignition on and press 
the “M" on the memory switch. 

• The memory indicator lamp swi¬ 
tches on for 7 seconds. 

• Press one of the three position 
switches (1,2 or 3) within the 7 
second memory period. 

• The current positions of the mir- memory switch 

rors, seat and steering column 
are stored for recall. 

The positions of the mirrors are stored in the respective door 
modules based on the position of the feedback potentiome¬ 
ters. The positions of the seat and steering column are stored 
in the seat module, based on the ripple count. 

Recalling a memory position setting is possible by either 
pressing and holding the recall switch (1, 2 or 3) with KL 15 
“ON” or tapping the recall button (1,2 or 3) with: 

• The driver’s door open and KL 15 “OFF”. 

• KL R ON and KL 15 “OFF”. 

The recall movement can be interrupted at any time by touching any of the adjusting 
switches. 




59 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 

















Mirror 


Principle of Operation 

The output stages and memory storage of mirror positions is handled by the respective 
door modules. The positioning of the mirrors is signaled from the driver’s door switch 
block/module. The signal passes over the P-Bus to the passenger’s door module. 


The memory/recall for the driver’s mirror comes directly into the door module from the 
memory switch. The operation for the passenger’s side mirror is carried out over the P-Bus 
from the driver’s door module to the passenger’s door module. 


E39 Shown 



TRANSMISSION 

RANGE 

SELECTION 


AIR TEMP 



IKE 

(540i) 

-or- 

Instrument 

Cluster 

(528i) 


K-BUS 


DRIVER'S 

DOOR 

SWITCHBLOCK 

MODULE 

(PM-FT) 


GM III 


P-BUS 

o 

I 


PASS. 

DOOR 

MODULE 

(PM-BT) 



DRIVER'S 

DOOR 

MIRROR 


PASSENGER'S 

DOOR 

MIRROR 



The memory positions are stored in each respective module. The memory position is rec¬ 
ognized by the feedback potentiometers located on each mirror motor. 

The reverse gear tilt feature for the passenger's mirror is signaled from the GM, over the P- 
bus, when reverse is selected and the mirror switch is set for the driver's side . 


Mirror heating is controlled by each respective door module. The GM receives the outside 
temperature from the IKE and passes it to the door modules. The “ON” time for mirror heat¬ 
ing is adjusted based on the outside temperature. 

A pulsed heating cycle is used for the mirrors based on the outside temperature. 


Temperature 

<-10°C 

-10 to 0°C 

0 to 15°C 

15 to 25°C 

>25°C 

ON - duration 

100% 

75% 

50% 

25% 

5% 


60 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


- REVERSE GEAR SIGNAL 

- OUTSIDE TEMPERATURE 



61 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





Driver’s Seat (E38/E39) 

Principle of Operation 


Each motor for seat adjustment contains a micro-processor (called a Ripple Counter) that 
receives a digital signal from the seat control module for motor activation. The motors are 
connected to KL 30 and KL 31 and respond to the signals generated by the seat module 
when seat movement is requested. The seat adjustment switch provides ground input sig¬ 
nals to the module when seat movement is desired. The module processes these input sig¬ 
nals and sends output signals to the seat motor processors. The seat motor processors 
activate the motors and the seat moves to the desired point. 

The circuitry of the Ripple Counter detects the motor activation current. As the armature 
segments of the motor rotate passed the brushes, the current flow rises and falls produc¬ 
ing a ripple effect. The peaks of these ripples are counted and stored in the Ripple Counter 
module. The memory function of the seat module uses this ripple count instead of feed¬ 
back potentiometers to memorize and recall seat positions. 

Ripple Count Recognition: 

When the seat is installed and the 
battery is connected, the ripple 
counter uses the initial position of 
the motors as the “Zero Position”. 

Any movement from this point is 
counted as “+” or pulses as 
the motors move in either direc¬ 
tion. 

615200137.eps 

The pulse position of the motors is stored in the seat module, in an EEPROM (of the PM- 
SM), before the ZKE goes into its “Sleep Mode”. 

This prevents the position recognition from being lost. If the battery is disconnected before 
the 16 minute sleep mode activation, the memory positions of the seat will be lost and 
reprogramming will be required. 

Diagnosis: The PM-SM communicates with the DISplus or MoDiC. The PM-SM monitors 
the seat motors and circuits as well as it's internal operation. Any detected faults are stored 
in the PM-SM fault memory and are called up when diagnosing the system with the Fault 
Symptom diagnostic plan. The PM-SM also provides status display to the DISplus of the 
input and output control signals as well as component activation. 



62 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





Passenger’s Seat (without memory) 

Principle of Operation 

The passenger seat control switch is purely a mechanical switching module that activates 
the passenger seat motors without position monitoring capabilities. Due to the limited op¬ 
eration requirements, the passenger seat control switch is not equipped with on board 
diagnostics. 

The Passenger Seat control switch is equipped with an overload protection function. If 
excessive amperage is drawn due to a defective motor or a switch is stuck driving a motor 
to the end limit, the function activates opening the motor control circuit. 

Passenger Seat Motors: Each motor is individually controlled by the Seat Control Switch. 
Each position motor is connected to the seat position switch by a two wire circuit provid¬ 
ing motor activation in both directions (no position recognition). 

Passenger Seat Adjustment: Operation of the passenger seat is always possible regard¬ 
less of the ignition key position. Moving a position switch operates a the motor control con¬ 
tacts directly, the switch applies voltage and ground path directly to operate the motor. 
Reversing the switch simply changes the motor polarity. More than one passenger seat 
motor can be run simultaneously. 


Optional Seat Back Lumbar Support 

The optional air bladder lumbar support system is similar in all 
vehicles (if equipped). Each seat contains the following com¬ 
ponents: 

• Four position circular rocker switch in the seat base trim in 
the area of the seat switches. 



• Electrically controlled air compressor with over pressure cut 
out under each seat. 

• Two solenoid activated air controlling valve blocks (one per 
air bladder). Each valve block includes an inlet and an outlet 
valve. When energized they direct air into the bladder(s) to 
inflate or relieve trapped air to deflate the bladders. 

• Connecting hoses and air bladders in lower seat back. 



63 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Principle of Operation 


The lumbar support system can be operated at any time regardless of key position. The 
four position circular rocker switch provides power switching to operate the system as fol¬ 
lows: 


• Position 1: The internal switch contacts provide a power and ground path for both valve 
block inlet valves and the air compressor. Both bladders inflate until the switch is 
released. If the switch is held continuously, an overpressure bypass valve opens on the 
compressor preventing damage to the bladders. 


• Position 2: Compressor activated, upper bladder inflates, lower bladder deflates. 

• Position 3: Compressor activated, lower bladder inflates, upper bladder deflates. 

• Position 4: Compressor is not activated. Upper and Lower bladders both deflate. 





h.L JU 






3b 


This function is not stored in memory for recall. 


Diagnosis 

The seat lumbar support system is purely electro-pneumatic control system. No electron¬ 
ic diagnostic communication is possible. 


64 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





Comfort Seats (standard on E38 750iL, other models if equipped) 


This option provides additional back support in the 
shoulder area. An additional adjustment in the upper 
backrest allows forward “contour” that is controlled by 
a rocker switch in the side panel. 

When the ignition is on or off, the two way rocker switch 
can be pushed until the desired setting is achieved (for¬ 
ward/backward tilt). The motor drive operates the same 
as the seat motors. 

The shoulder support adjustment is also stored in 
memory for recall. 



Active Seat (E38 - if equipped) 

Purpose of the System 

Actively changing the surface of the seat helps to prevent muscle tension and fatigue par¬ 
ticularly on long trips or sitting in one position for a long period of time. The seat causes 
weight transfers which are slight and imperceptible enhancing driving comfort. The basic 
seating position is not changed by this. 



In the seat’s upholstery beneath the surface of the seat is a cushion of fluid on the left and 
right. The fluid is slowly circulated back and forth between the cushions by a pump. 


65 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 









Principle of Operation 


To activate this feature, the ignition must be in 
the KL R or KL 15 and press the switch located 
in the Center Console Switch Center (driver and/ 
or passenger front seat). 

The switch provides a ground to the control 
module and an LED in the switch will illuminate. 

If there is a fault in the system the LED will not 
illuminate. 

The control module, fluid bladders (2 and 3) and 
pump (1) is contained in each seat. The pump 
contains a Hall sensor to monitor the number 
motor revolutions and two pressure sensors to 
monitor each bladder for vacuum (indicating 
empty). 

The fluid bladders (2 per seat) contain water- 
glysantin mixture and are connected to the fluid 
pump. The fluid bladders are equal in volume at 
rest (15 mm. high) and will raise from 0 up 30 
mm. when filled alternately from left to right. 

Note: The pump unit and fluid bladders are replaced as a unit. 

The control modules (one per seat) are connected to the P-Bus. The driver’s side control 
module contains an acceleration sensor that monitors transverse acceleration of the vehi¬ 
cle. Active Seat operation is temporarily interrupted during high acceleration. 

Rear Power Seat (E38 750iL) 

The rear seats in the 750iL provide electric adjustments for: 

1. Backrest Angle - Control switch powers the motor. 

2. Headrest Height - Control module behind each upper seat. 

3. Lumbar Support 

The headrest automatically extends when a passenger fastens 
the safety belt and will automatically retract when the safety 
belt is released. The power rear seat is a purely electric control 
system. No electronic diagnostic communication is possible. 





66 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 












Seat Heating Operation (from 99 MY) 

Principle of Operation 


The front seat heaters are adjustable through three ranges of 
heating output temperature. 

Pressing the respective seat heater button once provides 
stage 1: 

• All three LEDs illuminate and the heating elements are provided regulated output current 
producing a seat temperature of 111°F. 

Pressing the button a second time provides stage 2: 

• The top LED switches off and the heating elements are regulated to an output tempera¬ 
ture of 102°F. 

Pressing the button a third time provides stage 3. 

• The top and middle LEDs are off and the heating elements are regulated to an output tem¬ 
perature of 95°F. 

The SZM monitors the seat heating element temperature via an NTC feedback signal to 
regulate the output current which maintains the seat temperature. 

Seat heating is switched off by pressing the button a fourth time, pressing and holding the 
button for more than 1 second or when the ignition is switched off. 



System Components 


Carbon Fiber Heating Pads: In each seat is a two 
section heating pad wired in parallel. The heating pads 
are resistors which when powered produce radiant 
heat. 

The seat base heating element also contains a temper¬ 
ature sensor for feedback to provide the temperature 
regulation output control. 



615200139.eps 


67 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 












Center Console Switch Center (SZM): From 1999 MY E38, E39 and E53 vehicles are 
equipped with a SZM to control the front seat heating and provide a diagnostic interface 
with the DISplus/MoDiC via the K BUS. 


The SZM directly controls: 


• Front Seat Heating 

• Rear Window Roller Blind 


SZM also provides a unitized switching center 
for: 

• Park Distance Control (PDC) 

• Dynamic Stability Control (DSC III) 

• Electronic Damper Control (EDC). 

The switch signal output for these systems is a direct output signal. All diagnosis functions 
are carried out through their respective control systems. 



SZM Monitoring of Seat Heating 

Battery Voltage: The SZM switches current supply to the heating elements off when bat¬ 
tery voltage drops below 11.4 volts. However, the heating stage LEDs remain on. 
Regulated output current resumes when battery voltage raises above 12.2 volts for more 
than 5 seconds. 

SZM Internal Temperature: The power output stages for the seat heating elements gen¬ 
erate a considerable amount of heat when in stage 1 operation. The SZM monitors it’s own 
internal temperatures and reduces the heating output when internal temperatures rise to a 
temperature of 185°F or switches it off completely above 203°F. As with battery voltage 
monitoring, the heating stage LEDs remain on when these temperatures are exceeded. 

Fault Monitoring: The SZM monitors the temperature sensors and heating mats for faults. 
Detected faults are stored in the SZM. Fault Symptom Troubleshooting in conjunction with 
stored faults will initiate the diagnostic paths using the DISplus/MoDiC. The following faults 
can be recognized: 

• Shorts or opens in the wiring circuits. 

• Shorts or opens in the temperature sensors. 

• Open in heating element. 

If a short is detected in the temperature sensor, the seat heating is switched off to prevent 
overheating. The Stage LEDs are also switched off with this fault present. 


68 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 











Rear Window Roller Sunblind Operation 

The roller sunblind is activated by momentarily pressing and releasing (one touch) the sun- 
blind rocker switch in the SZM. The SZM activates the motor in the appropriate direction. 
The SZM switches the motor off when the motor amperage increases indicating the blind 
has reached the end of its intended travel. 


Fault Monitoring: The SZM continually monitors the motor drive amperage loads to deter¬ 
mine jamming or blockages. If current values exceed preset values, the motor is switched 
off immediately. 


Faults are stored in the SZM for opens or shorts in the motor or motor’s wiring circuit. The 
SZM also provides diagnostic requests to monitor the switch input status via the DISplus/ 
MoDiC. 


System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


ri~ia_o~n- 


ciiim 


KL 30 (BATTERY) 


KL 31 (GROUND) 


KL 15 (IGNITION ON) 


KLR (ACC) 


KL 87 (OPERATING POWER) 


58G (PANEL LIGHTING) 

•^ 




LCM III 



3 





SZM 


■■■© 

--Q 

-Q 

■■■© 




DRIVER’S SEAT HEATING 




+A •-1 ‘— 

‘n 

L-o o 


PASSENGER’S SEAT HEATING 


V? b 

L-o o 


DIS & 
MoDiC 



REAR WINDOW 
( M ) ROLLER 
V BLINDS 


PDC CONTROL 
MODULE 



EDO CONTROL 
MODULE 


DSC 

CONTROL 
MODULE 




I ^ 

ACTIVE SEAT 

CONTROL 

MODULES 


69 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



















































































































































Steering Column 


Principle of Operation 

The electrically adjustable steering column used in the various 
models (if equipped) is similar in components, mechanical link¬ 
ages and electrical operation. 

The steering column adjusting switch is mounted on the left 
side of the steering column and provides for four directions of 
column movement. The steering column switch inputs are 



processed by the seat module. 

Motor Drives: 

Forward/Back (T alescope) 

A flexible drive shaft operates a 
screw drive which causes a for¬ 
ward/back movement of the stee¬ 



ring column. 


Up/Down 

A flexible drive shaft moves an off- 
center lever causing up/down 
steering movement. 



The motors for tilt and length also employ ripple 
counter modules for motor control and memory 
recall. 

The control electronics for the steering column 
are integrated into the seat module. 

The output signals are sent from the seat mod¬ 
ule to the steering column ripple counter mod¬ 
ules for motor activation. 



70 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 


System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



FORWARD UP & DOWN SEAT BASE BACKREST HEADREST 

& BACK TILT ANGLE ANGLE UP & DOWN 


Entry/Exit Aid 

The Steering Column Memory provides the feature of raising the steering column to ease 
in exiting the vehicle and return it to the previous position after the vehicle is entered. 

Raising the Steering Cojumir Lowering, the Steering. Columm 

• The ignition is switched “off”. • The ignition is switched to KL 15. 

• The ignition is switched to KL R • The Handbrake is released or the door is closed, 

and the driver’s door is opened. 

• The ignition is switched to KL 15, The steering column recall movement can be inter- 
driver’s door open with the hand- rupted at any time by tapping the adjusting lever. 
brake applied. 


71 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Servotronic (E38 only) 

Purpose of the System 

The servotronic steering system is based on a conventional power assisted steering sys¬ 
tem. An additional electro-hydraulic solenoid and oil passageways are added to the con¬ 
ventional worn and roller type steering box. The GM monitors the vehicle’s road speed and 
regulates an electro-hydraulic solenoid. The servotronic steering system provides the fol¬ 
lowing: 

• A light steering effort at low speeds and while parking. 

• Increased steering effort as road speed increases. 


PUMP 



The "Direct Hydraulic Reaction" provided by the system allows the frictional forces between 
the front wheels and road surface to be transmitted to the driver. This allows the driver to 
make a better judgment in regard to the driving conditions. 

This principle of direct hydraulic reaction can be used with the servotronic system because 
of the spool valves that are already used with the worm and roller steering box. 


Refer to ST056 Chassis Dynamics for further “mechanical” details of Servotronic. 


72 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




















































































System Components 


Electro-Hydraulic Solenoid: The solenoid regulates the 
amount of power steering assist for the servotronic system. It 
contains a needle valve that can restrict oil flow. When current 
is applied, the needle valve closes against spring pressure to 
restrict the oil flow. 

With maximum current applied, the valve is closed. This is the 
condition of the valve for slow speed driving and parking. 

Without current applied, the needle valve is held open by 
spring pressure. This is the condition of the solenoid during 
higher driving speeds. 



Electro-Hydraulic Solenoid Control: The GM monitors the road speed input and sup¬ 
plies the electro-hydraulic solenoid with power. The road speed signal “A” is supplied from 
the IKE (and K-Bus) on E38 vehicles and from the DSC Control Module on E39/E53 vehi¬ 
cles. 



The solenoid is pulse width modulated for control and varies the amount of assist based 
on the road speed. The maximum assist is available while parking and driving at slow 
speeds. 


73 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 









































































Principle of Operation 


Control logic (example E38) includes: 

• Servotronic control electronics active with KL R being switched "ON" - ensure no delay 
in operation if engine is started and vehicle is immediately driven. 

• Plausibility check for speed signal - the control electronics monitor both the Speed sig¬ 
nal "A" from the IKE and the vehicle speed signal on the K-Bus. 

• The ability to detect both acceleration and deceleration from the two speed signals - the 
speed signal from the IKE is updated every two seconds. 

• The servotronic assist is reduced gradually when the vehicle is under acceleration. 

• The servotronic assist is adopted to the lower direct reading during decel or braking. 


Electric/electronic failures with the servotronic system will result in the following: 

• Power/electronic failure of the control module or solenoid - steering assist the same as 
high speed driving (increased effort). 

• Vehicle speed signal missing - control module retains the assist mode in effect when the 
speed signal was lost. 

• Speed signal implausible - steering assist the same as high speed driving (increased 
effort). 


The GM also provides the diagnostic “gateway” to the Servotronic status and Component 
Activation via the DISplus/MoDiC. 


74 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 



General Functions of ZKE III 


Consumer Cut Off 


The Consumer Cut Off function interrupts battery voltage to circuits preventing inadvertent 
battery drain if one of these consumers were to remain activated. Circuits controlled by 
consumer cut off will be switched off as the GM enters into the sleep mode. 


For example, the interior lights are connected to the consumer cut out circuit (KL 30) and 
can remain on if one of the control switches are left on. The consumer cut off will deacti¬ 
vate KL 30 to the interior lighting after 16 minutes (or with the DISplus/MoDIC). 


The following circuits are con¬ 
trolled by consumer cut off: 

• Map/Reading Lights 

• Glove Box/Luggage Compart¬ 
ment Lights 

• Transmission Range Indicator 
Light 

• Overload Protection Relay for 

- Power Seat Motors 

- Steering Column Motors 



KL 30 


16 MINUTE PRE¬ 
SLEEPMODE 
OUTPUT VOLTAGE 




MAP 

LIGHTS 

GLOVE BOX 
LIGHT 

TRUNK 

LIGHT 


TRANS RANGE SELECTOR INDICATOR MODULE 


REST FUNCTION SIGNAL (Rest function is cancelled 
when this signal goes low after 16 minutes) 


CONSUMER CUTOFF/ 
OVERLOAD PROTECTION 
RELAY MODULE 


SEAT 

MEMORY 

MODULE 


2 STEERING 

COLUMN 

MOTORS 


5 SEAT 
MOTORS 


i L_t _1 l_f_ 

1 1 l _ ] || • pxcrrrTTTTill HI j [ _ 

1 .... 1 i '1 ;■ 

i_ i 

i i 

1 1 : : III 1 : 

_ 


Overload Protection 


The seat and steering column motors receive 
operating power through the consumer cutoff/ 
overload protection relay module. The consumer 
cutoff signal from the GM signals the relay to 
maintain operating power to the consumers. 

If the relay module detects an increase in amper¬ 
age (overload) the relay will open. The relay mod¬ 
ule (K-72) is located in the electrical carrier 
behind the glove box. The relay is reset by 
switching the ignition “off” for 16 minutes, dis¬ 
connecting the relay or the DISplus/ MoDIC. 


E38 Shown 


9 



Overload 
Protection Relay 



Modul 

nrl 

e 

hf 


-n i 

MJ® 

-n i- 

-i 

Oil 




75 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 








































































































































































Sleep Mode 


To lower the constant battery draw when the vehicle is parked, the complete ZKE system 
will go into the “Sleep Mode” 16 minutes after the ignition has been switched off and no 
further ZKE function is active. 

For example, the approximate E39 (528i) Battery draw is: 

• Ignition switch off = approx 750 mA. 

• One minute after = approx. 560 mA. 

• After 16 minutes (sleep mode) = approx. 18 mA. 

All modules in the ZKE system will go into the sleep mode. The P-Bus remains active, how¬ 
ever no data transfer takes place until a wake-up request is received. The general module, 
door modules or keyless remote module can wake the system up and put the ZKE back 
on line. The K-Bus is active (high) in the sleep mode. 

Sleep Mode Criteria: KL R, KL 15 OFF and no further function activated for 16 minutes. 
Wake Up Criteria: KL R or 15 “ON” or a change in one of the signals listed below. 


SIGNAL 

ACTIVITY 

ORIGINATING 

MODULE 

K-BUS 

High 

General Module 

Door jamb switches (possibility of 4) 

Low 


Trunk lid lock cylinder microswitch 

High 

tt 

Trunk lid pushbutton microswitch 

Low 

u 

Interior Trunk lid pushbutton microswitch 

Low 

a 

Central locking button 

Low 

n 

Hood microswitch 

Low 

n 

Trunk Lid microswitch 

Low 

n 

Interior light switch 

Low 

u 

FIS sensor 

Low 

a 

Tilt Alarm sensor 

Low 

tt 

FBZV operational signal 

High 

FBZV Module 

Driver’s door lock microswitch - (lock) 

High 

PM-FT/SB 

“ “ “ “ - (unlock) 

High 

it 

Passenger door lock microswitch - (lock) 

High 

PM-BT 

“ “ “ “ - (unlock) 

High 

tt 


76 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 






Battery Status 

The GM monitors KL R on a dedicated circuit. If the ignition is switched on and detected 
via the KL R circuit but the GM does not receive KL R status via the K Bus, the GM mon¬ 
itors the KL R voltage level. If after an additional 0.3 seconds there is no K Bus activity, the 
GM initiates an emergency running program. 

A substitute value for vehicle speed is used to allow the GM to operate certain functions. 

The emergency running program will terminate if the GM detects a vehicle speed or KL R 
status via the K bus. 


Diagnosis/Troubleshooting 

The GM contains an EEPROM fault memory. Diagnosis and troubleshooting is carried out 
with the DISplus or MoDiC. The diagnostic link is through the Instrument cluster over the K 
bus to the GM. 


Notes: 


77 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 




Control Module Locations 


E39 Sport Wagon 


3ij n ro-3 l" 

Module 




iklii'iii Aiiipimei 


□MEAGE 


m 


DSC III 


ll 


Ij 

a ■. 

ii 

V 

li 

i 


Audi? 

■VffbBiM 
twiih wn; 


FZWFM2 

AniinnH 

ArinplllVer 


VtniHlHr 
"I p*F Eiefi 


-*—* 

r - 






>1 




J 


- 


p. 

■* , 


vv 


m 

i 

i 

P 

i T C 

i 

_ 

/ 

r 

r i 

A 

<m' 

i 


A 

l l 

ri 


1 1 



*** 


LCM III 


D « ,r BBE MftB 
x- Module 


=' --L-J 


TIN 5e*iwr 
B.m 1 Li;i i' 

>!i fusee 


Eht 


XENON JS- „ 


#//» 


IWC III 

*^5 i 

-INftA 
-MID ar ’ 

-BZM 

Tape - 
f'inyHr 

HltQII l^i□ n NAV> 


i I GM lIP^ 
■ EMyfi 
“ UVR 

□■PS Amentia 


U| 

■ i 

¥ ■ 

yl 

T 


Ml L 



Ittnicthu 

Or NKI linn _ 

■ 

| UIS ■ 

tvnnwf 

Module 

Hadla 

EhinErnnica 
|Wlth NAYl j 


mvifu 

A^**piilkT 


vi 



I 


FZWFHfZ 
Anl ■ nmi 


&3W Module 
S^iknUock 


NAV-Cwtip 4,rF,pllh<,r 


unroo 




GPS Antenna 


Door Module 
Switchblock 


=fti . FZV/FM2 

Radio NAVComp Antenna 

Electronics Amphfier 

when NAVeauiooed 


78 

Central Body Electronics ZKE 


























Review Questions 


1. List the functions directly controlled by the GM III. 



2. How does the GM III communicate with other control modules? 



3. What effect does road speed have on the wiper system? What effect does it have on 
an AIC equipped vehicle? Where does the road speed come from?_ 


4. How does the GM III recognize the key position from the drivers door? 


5. Describe the procedure used by the GM III to recognize an FZV key. Can the GM 
differentiate between different keys? How many can it recognize?_ 


6. What “convenience” features are available from the FZV key? 


7. Describe what happens when the GM receives the crash signal from the MRS. 


8. Why does the SHD (sunroof) module require initialization but the windows do not? 


79 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 





9. What type of sensor is used to detect the position of a seat with Memory? What type 

of signal does it produce?_ 

10. How does the Seat Module communicate a request for a stored memory position with 
the mirror modules? 


11. On an E38 with Servotronic, why is the speed signal provided to the GM from both 
the IKE “A” signal and the K-Bus?_ 



12. An E38 customer complains that when exiting the vehicle the steering wheel moves 
up. What is the cause of this?_ 


13. How does the SZM monitor the Seat Heating temperature? 



14. What circuits are controlled by Consumer Cut Off? 



15. If a technician double locked a 2000 MY E39 while still inside the vehicle, how could 
he/she exit the vehicle? 



18. What functions will deactivate the exterior door handle lighting? 


80 

Central Body Electronics ZKE III 












