Subject Page 

Lamp Module and Xenon Lights .72 

Lamp Module (LM).73 

LM I.P.O.75 

Input Signals.76 

Emergency Operation.77 

Light Check Module (LCM).78 

Light Check Module III (LCM III).79 

Xenon Headlights.80 

Xenon Bulb Monitoring.83 

Xenon Headlight Testing.84 

LWR- Headlight Beam Throw Control.85 

LWR Components.86 

Functional Description.87 

LWR I.P.O.88 

Multi Information Displays .89 

E38 Multi Information Display.90 

MID Self Tests.92 

On-Board Computer (BC).93 

E39/E53 Multi-Information Display (MID).96 

MID Self Test.98 

MID Removal.99 

On-Board Computer..100 

Multi Function Steering Wheel (MFL) and Cruise Control II (GRII) .101 

Multi Function Steering Wheel (MFL).102 

Heated Steering Wheel.103 

GR II.104 

Components of the system.105 

GR II I.P.O.109 

Plausibility/Safety Features.110 

Diagnosis/Encoding.Ill 

Audio Systems. 112 

E38 Without Board Monitor..113 

Radio Test Functions.114 

E39/E53 Without Board Monitor..115 

Radio Test Functions.115 

New Generaton Radios.116 

Park Distance Control (PDC) .124 

PDC Components.125 

System Operation.127 

Diagnosis.128 


Review Questions 


129 












































LAMP MODULE (LM, LCM, LCM III) AND XENON LIGHTS 
Model: E38, E39, E53 

Production Date: From start of production 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the various changes made to the LM/LCM over the years. 

• List the functions performed by the LM/LCM. 

• Describe how the LCM monitors the external lights. 

• Explain how the LCM stores redundant data. 

• Describe the operation of Xenon lights. 

• Know how to troubleshoot a Xenon light circuit. 

• List the components used in the LWR system. 


72 

Driver Information Systems 





Lamp Module (LM) (E38 start of production up to 9/95) 


The Lamp Module (LM) is designed to control and monitor all the outside lights on the 
vehicle. Various displays and switches are also illuminated by an LM function. 

The LM incorporates power transistor output stages with internal protection circuits. This 
eliminates the need for fuses and relays that are found on earlier lamp control systems. 

The LM is located in the passenger side kick panel behind the footwell speaker. This 
location provides an airflow across the external heatsink to cool the LM. 


The LM reduces a number of components 
that were used in the past. Eliminated are: 

• Numerous relays 

• Flasher unit 

• Crash control unit (relay) 

• Cold check relay 



• Dimmer 

• The LM transmits and receives status 
information concerning light operation. 
The LM transmits bulb status to the check 
control module. 

• It also communicates to the IKE when 
turn signal, highbeam, and fog light 
indicators need to be activated. 

• The LM is informed by ZKE when a 
crash has occurred or the alarm was 
tripped for headlight / flasher activation. 

• When reverse is selected, the LM is 
signaled to turn on the back-up lights. 

All of this communication takes place over 
the Bus system. 



BULB MONITORING 




▲ 


l-BUS 


-► 

CCM 


▼ 





73 

Driver Information Systems 
























The LM monitors most of the vehicle’s lighting circuits with warm and cold check functions. 

• The warm check is performed by electronic diagnosis at the output stages. 

• Cold checking is done by switching on the light circuits briefly. In other words, it is 
a very rapid warm check. This is repeated in timed cycles. 


HOT MONITORING COLD MONITORING 



In order to simplify wiring in the E38, the LM operates the brake lights with inputs received 
from an electronic brake light switch. 

For safety purposes, the LM is designed with emergency functions in case of failure. The 
failure of any one component doesn’t disable the entire system. 

Important vehicle-specific data is stored in the LM. Replacement of this module is covered 
in the IKE module of this training handout. 


BULB MONITORING 

Bulb 

Watt 

Rating 

Monitoring 
Hot Cold 

The extent of bulb checking is governed 





by LM coding. Certain monitoring 

Low Beam Headlight 

65 

X 

X 

functions can be shut down. For 

High Beam Headlight 

55 

X 

X 

instance, if Xenon low beam lights are 

Foglight 

55 

X 

X 

installed, low beam cold check is turned 

Front Side Light 

5 

X 

X 

off. 

Blinkers 

21 

X 



Blinker Indicators 

5 



Faulty turn signal bulbs and circuits are 

Tail Lights 

5 

X 

X 

indicted by rapid flashing of the cluster 

License Plate Lights 

10 

X 

X 

indicator. 

Brake Lights 

21 

X 

X 


Back up Lights 

21 

X 

X 


74 

Driver Information Systems 


































LF SIDE BLINKER/ 
PARKING LIGHT 

LF BLINKER/ 

PARKING LIGHT 

LF LOW BEAM 
LF HIGH BEAM 

LF FOG LIGHT 

RF FOGLIGHT 

RF HIGH BEAM 
RF LOW BEAM 

RF BLINKER/ 
PARKING LIGHT 

RF SIDE BLINKER/ 
PARKING LIGHT 

LR BLINKER 

LR STOP LIGHT 
LR PARKING LIGHT 
LR BACK UP LIGHT 

RR BLINKER 

RR STOP LIGHT 
RR PARKING LIGHT 
RR BACK UP LIGHT 

LICENSE PLATE LIGHT 
LICENSE PLATE LIGHT 

KL 58g 


75 

Driver Information Systems 























Input Signals 

Input signals to the lighting module are from the following switches: 

• Park / low-beam light switch 

• High-beam/headlight flash switch 

• Turn signal switch 

• Fog light switch 

• Hazard switch 

• Brake light switch 

• Dimmer control 

These inputs are ground switched except for the brake light switch. 

Brake Light Switch - Brake light switch is a hall-effect transmitter with three connections. 
The first connection is power, supplied from KL R, with the second being ground. The third 
connection is the signal wire to the LM. 

If the brake switch or it’s circuits fail, the brake lights will be permanently on from KL R. 


+ ELECTRONIC 
BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 




Brake pedal down = 
Signal High 


Brake pedal up = Signal Low 


Dimmer - The LM control KL 58g (instrument cluster, LCD, and switch back lighting). By 
using a pulse-width modulated power supply, dimming commands are input to the LM by 
way of a potentiometer wired to ground. 

Light switch illumination - A separate circuit is used to back light the symbol of the light 
switch. The symbols are fully illuminated when KL R is switched on and the lights are off. 
After the lights have been turned on, the switch back lighting is reduced to the same 
intensity as KL 58g. 


76 

Driver Information Systems 





























EMERGENCY OPERATION 


If there is a failure of the LM processor, an emergency circuit is activated within the LM. This 
will allow the following lights to function for driving safety. 

• Side marker/tail lights 

• Low-beam lights 

• Brake lights 

• Turn signals 

In emergency operation the following lights will not operate 

• Dimming control (full bright) 

• Hazard lights 

• High-beam lights 

• Headlight flash 

• Fog lights 

• Back-up lights 

The l-BUS communication to the LM will also be interrupted. 



77 

Driver Information Systems 





Light Check Module (LCM) (E38 and E39 from 9/95 to 9/98) 


The Light Check Module (LCM) combines the functions of the Check Control and Light 
Modules previously installed in the 1995 E38. The LCM provides a cost savings by 
combining the two functions into one processor. 

It is installed in the right kick panel where the LM of 
the 95 E38 was installed. Both versions of instrument 
clusters use the LCM for processing Check Control 
data and controlling the exterior lighting functions of 
the vehicle. The LCM communicates with other 
modules over the “I” and “K” busses. Functions of the 
LCM include: 

• Monitoring of all check control inputs 

• Formation and output of check control messages or signals 

• Control of all vehicle external lighting 

• Monitoring of all external lighting for operation 

• Instrument panel illumination dimming (KL 58g) signal 

• Control of instrument cluster indicator lights - for high beam, turn signal and fog light 
indicators. 








HIGH CLUSTER CONFIGURATION 


BASE CLUSTER CONFIGURATION 


For proper operation of the Check Control and lamp control functions, the LCM must be 
coded with the Central Coding Key (ZCS) if replacement is required. 


78 

Driver Information Systems 


















































Light Check Module III (LCM III) (E38, E39, E53 from 9/98) 


The light check module LCM was redesigned as of 9/98 production. It is identified as the 
LCM III. 

The module itself has been redesigned with new semi-conductor final stages that produce 
less heat in operation. This has allowed for the elimination of the protruding heat sink found 
on the previous LCM. 

The total scope of function and features has been expanded to improve the comfort and 
safety for the driver and passengers of the vehicle. Feature and functional changes to the 
LCM III include: 

• Replacement lighting for the parking lights 

• Limiting of output voltage to the lamps 

• Follow Me Home (delayed exit) lighting 

Replacement Lighting 

The LCM can use substitute bulbs for various lights if a failure should occur, for example: 

• Front Parking Lights: If one of the parking lamps should fail, the LCM will illuminate 
the turn signal bulb on the affected side. The lamp will be dimmed by the LCM so that 
the intensity is the same as the parking lamp. 

• Rear Taillights: If one of the rear taillights should fail, the LCM will switch on the brake 
lamp on the affected side. The lamp will be dimmed to the intensity of the tail lamp. 

Output Voltage Limiting Function 

The output voltage applied to the parking and tail lamps is regulated to increase the life of 
the lamps. If the voltage at the LCM increases over 12.5 volts, the LCM will reduce the 
voltage to 12 volts. 

Follow Me Home Lighting 

This convenience feature provides lighting for the driver and passengers to leave the vehicle 
and enter their homes. 

The feature is switched "ON" by pulling the headlight flasher switch after the headlights and 
ignition have been switched OFF. The feature is switched OFF after a coded time delay or 
by switching the ignition ON. 



79 

Driver Information Systems 



Xenon Headlights 

Overview 


The automotive industry/press often identify xenon lighting systems as HID (high intensity 
discharge) systems. Xenon headlight technology was first introduced to the US market 
exclusively on the E32 750il_ in 1993. BMW xenon headlight systems have evolved and 
their availability as optional equipment has spread throughout the model lineup. 


Blue/White in color and using ellipsoidal technology Xenon headlights provide improved 
night time visibility in all driving conditions compared with traditional Halogen bulb head¬ 
lights. 


Benefits: 

Xenon headlights provide the following benefits: 


• Longer bulb life. Typically, xenon bulbs will last from 3 to 5 times longer than halo¬ 
gen. 


• More light output. Xenon headlights produce from 2.5 to 3 times more lumens than 
halogen. 


• Blue/White light (simulates natural daylight). Xenon bulbs produce a blue/white light 
while halogen bulbs produce a yellow light. The light color of a light source is measured 
in color temperature (not to be confused with thermal temperature). Color temperature 
is measured in Kelvins (K). The higher the color temperature the whiter the light. 


Natural daylight = 4,500 to 5,000 K 
Xenon headlights = 4,000 to 4,500 K 
Halogen headlights = 3,200 K (yel¬ 
low in color) 

• Better driving visibility. The 

combination of higher lumens and 
higher color temperature provide a 
superior lighting source. 

The beam is wider and brighter in 
front of the vehicle than convention¬ 
al halogen bulbs improving safety 
and driver comfort. 

• Lower operating temperature. 

• Lower power consumption. 




80 

Driver Information Systems 






































































































































































































































































































































































































































Version Identification & System Summaries 

Version identification is specific to vehicle model with the exception of the E38. 

There are two E38 Xenon systems. The early system identified as Generation 2.1 and 
equipped on 95-98 model year 750iL vehicles. The headlight design of this version has a 
flat bottom edge. 

The Generation 3 system was introduced on 1999 model year E38 vehicles. This sys¬ 
tem can be visually identified by the rounded bottom edge. 

LWR: All Xenon systems from M.Y. 99 are also equipped with LWR (Headlight Beam Throw 
Control). This system automatically adjusts the vertical position of the headlight beams to 
compensate for vehicle loads ensuring optimum beam throw. LWR components and func¬ 
tion is described further on in this section. 

Headlight Replacement Parts: In previous model years, individual replacement parts 

were not available for headlight assemblies. This was due to the Federal Motor Vehicle 
Safety Standards (FMVSS) relating to pitting or corrosion of the reflector components in 

non-sealed beam light assemblies. 

BMW has recently submitted corrosion test data for headlight replacement components 
which have passed the FMVSS providing availability of headlight assembly spare parts. The 
approval has been given for all Bosch headlight assemblies (including halogen systems). 


Vehicle/ 

Model 

Model 

Year 

Manufacturer(s)/ 
Version ID 

LWR- Head 
Light Beam 
Throw Cont. 

Individual 

Replacement 

Parts Available 

E32/ 

750iL 

93-94 

Hella (Light & 

CM "control module”) 
Generation 1 

No 

No 

E38/ 

750iL 

95-98 

Bosch (Light & CM) 
Generation 2.1 

No 

Yes 

E38/ 

All 

99-01 

Bosch (light) 

Hella (CM) 

Generation 3 

Yes 

Yes 

E39 

All 

99- 

Hella 

Generation 3 

Yes 

No 

E46 

99- 

Bosch (Light & CM) 

Yes 

Yes 


81 

Driver Information Systems 





















Xenon High Intensity Discharge Bulbs 


Xenon bulbs are identified as D-2S (D=Discharge). 
Xenon bulbs illuminate when an arc of electrical cur¬ 
rent is established between two electrodes in the bulb. 

The xenon gas sealed in the bulb reacts to the electri¬ 
cal excitation and heat generated by the current flow. 
The distinct bluish/white brilliant light is the result of the 
xenon gas reacting to the controlled current flow. 


Phases of Bulb Operation: II II 

Starting Phase: The bulb requires an initial high voltage starting pulse of 18-25kV to estab¬ 
lish the arc. 

Warm Up Phase: Once the arc is established the power supply to the bulb is regulated to 
2.6A generating a lamp output of 75 watts. This is the period of operation where the xenon 
gas begins to brightly illuminate. The warm up phase stabilizes the environment in the bulb 
ensuring continual current flow across the electrodes. 

Continuous Phase: Once the warm up phase is completed, the system switches to a con¬ 
tinuous mode of operation. The supply voltage for the bulb is reduced and the operating 
power required for continual bulb illumination is reduced to 35 watts which is less than a 
conventional halogen bulb. 

Functional Description 

To regulate the power supply to the bulbs, additional components are required. The xenon 
control modules (1 per light) receive operating power from the lighting control module (LCM 
E38/E39/E53) when the headlights are switched on. The xenon control modules provide 
the regulated power supply to illuminate the bulbs through their phases of operation. 



The igniters establish the electric arcs. Integral coils generate the initial high voltage start¬ 
ing pulses from the control module provided starting voltage. Thereafter they provide a 
closed circuit for the regulated power output from the control modules. 





82 

Driver Information Systems 








Xenon Bulb Monitoring 

Xenon bulb function is monitored by the Lighting Control Module (LCM E38/E39/E53). The 
bulbs are only “hot” monitored. Cold monitoring is not possible since the lighting control 
module is not in direct control of the xenon bulb. For this reason cold monitoring for low 
beam headlights is encoded off in the lighting control module for Xenon headlight equipped 
vehicle. 


The lighting control module detects xenon bulb failure via a reduction in current flow to the 
xenon control module. When a bulb fails, the xenon control module’s current consumption 
drops to 60mA indicating unsuccessful xenon bulb illumination. The lighting control mod¬ 
ule then posts the appropriate matrix display message or LED illumination in the Check 
Control Pictogram display of the E53 and E39 Low Instrument Clusters. 


Xenon Headlight Assembly Components (Example - E53) 


Xenon Control 
Module Cover 

Xenon Control Module 


LWR Stepper Motor 


Gasket Seal 


H-7 Halogen Bulb 
(High Beam) 



Rubber Cover Boot 

/ 


Igniter 


D-2S Xenon Bulb 
(Low Beam) 


Light Frame Assembly 


Replaceable Lens Cover 


83 

Driver Information Systems 




Xenon Headlight Testing 


Warning: Xenon headlight control systems generate high output voltage. Prior to head¬ 
light removal or testing observe the vehicle warning labels and be cautious by following 
safeguards to prevent accidental injury. 


Xenon headlight systems (control 
module, igniter and bulb) produced 
prior to 9/98 can be tested with 
Special Test Adapter (P/N 90 88 6 
631 000) in conjunction with the DIS 
Pre-set Measurements System. 

The DIS Measuring System includes all 
of the cable connection information 
and procedures for the test. 


Generation III Xenon lights on vehicles 
produced after 9/98 are tested with a 
different tool. Xenon test adaptor P/N 90 88 6 631 010 is used along with DIS/MoDiC pre¬ 
set measurements “Xenon lights after 9/1998”. 



The Generation III test adaptor uses the 50 amp test cable with both the MoDiC or DISplus. 



1&2 Adaptor connected in series with 
headlight harness. 

3 MFK 1 Pos. and Neg. input leads. 

4 50 Amp clip on probe. 



wsa i bid 


Xenon Generation III Test Light Cable (90 88 6 
631 010) 


In addition to the Measurement System tests there are also Test Modules available in the 
Diagnosis Program to diagnose vehicles with Generation 3 Xenon lights. 


84 

Driver Information Systems 






LWR - Headlight Beam Throw Control 

Overview 

LWR automatically adjusts the vertical positioning of the headlights to maintain optimum 
headlight beam positioning for maximum driving visibility and to prevent undue glare for 
oncoming motorists. The system compensates for vehicle load angle changes (ie: dimin¬ 
ishing reserve of gasoline in fuel tank during a long journey, overloaded cargo weight, etc.) 

LWR has been available on BMW vehicles in other markets for quite some time. Starting 
with the 1999 model year all US market vehicles with Xenon Lights incorporated LWR as 
standard equipment. LWR is not available with standard halogen headlights. 

LWR monitors the vehicle’s loaded angle via two hall effect sensors mounted to the front 
and rear suspension members. When an adjustment is necessary, LWR simultaneously 
activates two stepper motors (one in each headlight assembly). 

The stepper motors drive a threaded rod that moves the lower edge of the headlight carri¬ 
er plate forward and backward (depending on driven direction). The upper edge of the 
headlight carrier plate is fixed on a pivot. The pivoting movement adjusts the vertical posi¬ 
tion of the headlight beam. 


NORMALLY LOADED VEHICLE 



OVERLOADED VEHICLE (EXAGGERATED) 



85 

Driver Information Systems 




















































































LWR Components 

Control Electronics 

LWR Control Module - E38 & E39 Vehicles: 

The LWR control module is located in the electronics carrier forward of the glovebox. The 
control module connects to a single, 26 pin, yellow harness connector. The control mod¬ 
ule has diagnostic capabilities and communicates with the DIS/MoDiC via the K bus - IKE 
gateway to the D bus. 




E38 LWR Control Module Location E39/E53 LWR Control Module 

Location 


Level Sensors 


A lever is connected to the moving suspen¬ 
sion member which changes the sensors out¬ 
put linear voltage signal as the suspension 
moves up and down. 


Note: E39 sport wagon vehicles with EHC 
have a dual output sensor at the right rear 
location. This sensor shares the same hous¬ 
ing as the EHC systems right rear level sensor. 



The sensors 


LWR monitors two hall effect level sensors to 
are mounted to a fixed point on the suspen¬ 
sion carriers of the front and rear axles. 


determine vehicle load angle. 


86 

Driver Information Systems 










Headlight Adjustment Stepper Motors 


One stepper motor is located inside each 
headlight assembly. 

The 4 wire stepper motors are controlled 
by the LWR control electronics to change 
the vertical headlight position. 



Functional Description 

The E38/E39 system comes on-line when the lights are switched on. 

The LWR control electronics then cycles the stepper motors through their full range of 
motion and stops at a default position. 

The control electronics monitors the level sensor input signals to determine the vehicles 
load angle and adjusts the beam position accordingly. As the vehicle is driven it continual¬ 
ly monitors the level sensor signals and if necessary updates the headlight beam positions 
every 25 seconds on the E46 or momentarily on the E38/E39 system. 

Abrupt fluctuations of the sensor signals are filtered to prevent unnecessary adjustment as 
well as monitoring road speed and brake pedal application as correction factors. 

HEADLIGHT ALIGNMENT 

The procedure for aligning Xenon Headlights with LWR is the same as conventional halo¬ 
gen bulb systems with one additional step. Wait at least 30 seconds for the LWR to cycle 
and adjust to it’s calculated position. 

LWR DIAGNOSIS 

The LWR control module of the E38/E39 is diagnosible using the DIS/MoDiC. The head¬ 
lights must be switched on in order to start diagnosis. 

The E46 LSZ incorporates LWR diagnosis program. 


87 

Driver Information Systems 




LWR SYSTEM IPO SCHEMATICS 




FRONTAXLE LEVEL SENSOR 




REAR AXLE LEVEL SENSOR 




PROCESSED RIGHT FRONT 
WHEEL SPEED SIGNAL 



◄ 




LEFT 

HEADLIGHT 

STEPPER 

MOTOR 



RIGHT 

HEADLIGHT 

STEPPER 

MOTOR 


88 

Driver Information Systems 



































































MULTI INFORMATION DISPLAYS 
Model: E38, E39, E53 

Production Date: E38: from start of production to 3/99 

E39/E53 from start of production 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Explain how information is sent to the MID. 

• Describe what operations are possible using the MID. 

• Know how to perform a self-test on various MID units. 


89 

Driver Information Systems 




E38 Multi-Information Display 

One of the design parameters of the E38 was to create a more tranquil interior. 

The objectives were: 

• Reduce the number of control buttons 

• Easier operation 

• Displays that are easier to understand 

• More precise information 

• Higher visibility of text 

• High Quality appearance 

These objectives are achieved with the multi-information display (MID). 

The MID incorporates the controls for the audio system, telephone and on board computer. 
Since the same format is being used to control each of these systems, operation is more 
convenient. 

The MID doesn’t perform any calculations. It is an input request / display unit using signals 
to and from the IKE. 

The MID is designed with two displays 

• Main display- A 32 character display for presentation of primary information 

• Menu Display- 6 small displays for labeling the button functions. 


MAIN DISPLAY 


MENU DISPLAY 



90 

Driver Information Systems 





























• Menu buttons - The buttons are designed as rover switches having a left side and right 
side contact. The function of each button changes as the different systems are sel¬ 
ected. 

• Selector buttons- These buttons are used to select the desired system to be used: 

• Audio - calls up radio, tape, and CD control for operation and programming 
functions. 

• Telephone - used to program and call up phone numbers. 

• Time/BC - calls up clock and BC function for programming and display. 

• Search Button - 

• Radio - Will activate search for radio stations in either up or down scale directions. 

• Tape - activates music search in forward or reverse tape direction. 

• CD - activates title search up or down the title list. 


SEARCH BUTTON 

SELECTOR BUTTONS 



STATUS LEDS 

VOLUME CONTROL MENU BUTTONS 


• Volume control 

• Push button that turns the audio system on and off. 

• Rotary knob that controls the volume of the audio system and telephone hands free 
speakers. 

• Status Led 

• LEDs that are red, yellow, green for signaling the status of the telephone. 

• A red fan symbol that signals to status of parked car ventilation. 

Because of the increase in size of the main display, information from more than one system 
can be displayed at the same time i.e. radio station and time. 


91 

Driver Information Systems 






































MID Self Test 

The MID test function is activated by pressing the first and last menu buttons while 
switching the ignition on. The following items can be tested. 

Unit Identification - This information appears for approximately 3 seconds when the 
ignition is switched on. The ID information displayed is: 

• Hardware number 

• Software number 

• Variant index 



All other test functions must be activated while the ID information is displayed. If this is not 
done, the MID test is cancelled after the ID information is posted. 

Display Test: Activate this test by pressing the display menu button. All elements of the 
main and menu displays are illuminated with different check patterns. 

Button test: Start the test by pressing the button test menu button. All the buttons on 
the MID have been assigned an alphabetical letter that will appear when the button is 
pressed. 

Volume control test: The test is carried out by pressing the menu button and turning the 
volume knob. Numbers from 01 to 36 appear on the display indicating each step of knob 
rotation. 

Status LED test: Activate the test by pressing the menu button. All status LEDs are 
illuminated. 


92 

Driver Information Systems 


















On-Board Computer (BC) 

The processing and display of the on-board computer functions is carried out by the IKE. 

The IKE receives and evaluates all of the BC required data. The BC functions can be called 
UP for display on the MID or the Instrument Cluster matrix. 

The following BC functions are available for display. 

• Time • Distance • Limit 

• Date • Arrival Time • Timer/Stopwatch 

• Average speed • Average fuel • Code 

• Range consumption 

The outside temperature measurement is not a BC function. The temperature is 
continuously displayed in the instrument cluster and is used to activate the freeze warning. 

BC OPERATION 

Operation and programming the BC functions has changed to suit the new MID layout. 

Entering time/date 

1. Press clock button 

2. Set time with menu buttons 

3. Press set button to start the clock 


W : S B 


AUDIO 


o 



nminUHimil ^ 




Date is automatically displayed 
Program the date with the same proce¬ 
dure. 


© © ® © 


Reset time 

1. Call up clock with clock button 

2. Press clock button again 

3. Press the “Set” button 

4. Reset time 

5. Press set button to restart clock 


Reset date 

1. Press the clock button twice 

2. Select the date function 

3. Press the “set” button 

4. Reset the date 

5. Press “set” button to acknowledge the 
new date 


93 

Driver Information Systems 

























The remaining BC functions can be displayed by pressing the BC button. Each function is 
called up by pressing its menu button. 

Programming functions 

• Call up functions to be programmed 

• Using menu button 

• Press “set” button - menu switch to numbers for entering data 

• Program function 

• Press “set” button to acknowledge data 

Resetting non-programming functions 

• Call up function using menu button 

• Press “set” button - function is reset 

Change over button: The change over button is the left toggle of the set button. 



• 12H or 2HH is displayed in the change over menu when resetting the time. Pressing the 
button will change all time calculations between a 24 hour and 12 hour clock display. 

The date change over is activated with the clock change over. A 12 hour clock yields a 
month/day/year date display. 

• HLS or K/7 is displayed in the change over menu when a distance or speed function is 
called up. Pressing the button will change all distance between kilometers and miles 
readings and speed. 

• nPGORL/Kll \s displayed in the change over menu when a consumption function is called 
up. Pressing the button will change both consumption displays at the same time. 


94 

Driver Information Systems 























BC information can be displayed in the instrument cluster by pressing the remote switch on 
the end of the turn signal lever. The matrix display is blacked out when the remote switch 
is pressed after the last function is posted. The order and quantity of functions to be 
displayed in the instrument cluster can be programmed. 

1. Press and hold remote switch until “Prog 1” appears in both displays. The 
programming feature is now active. 

2. Use MID buttons to select functions to be displayed in the cluster. The function title 
appears in the MID. 

3. The programming function is acknowledged by pressing the “set” button on the MID. 



95 

Driver Information Systems 























































E39/E53 Multi-Information Display (MID) 

Both the E39 and E53 not equipped with Navigation will use the MID for control and display 
of the radio/tape/CD changer and On-Board computer. 

If installed, the Digital Sound Processor (DSP) will also be adjusted and controlled through 
the MID. 

The MID does not perform any calculations, it is only an input/display device. 


The MID contains two sets of displays: 

MAIN DISPLAY - A 32 character display for presentation of primary information. 

MENU DISPLAY - 6 small display blocks above each button switch for labeling the switch 
functions. 


HIGH VERSION FOR USE WITH HIGH CLUSTER 


MAIN DISPLAY 



OPTIONAL 


AUDIO DSP 


BASE VERSION FOR USE WITH BASE CLUSTER 


MENU DISPLAY 





OPTIONAL 


AUDIO 




+ 


y 


Note: The Telephone button is installed on Base version MIDs as of 3/97 production. 


96 

Driver Information Systems 















































































































MENU BUTTONS - the buttons are designed as rocker switches having a left and right 
side contact. The function of each button changes as the different systems are selected. 

SELECTOR BUTTONS - These buttons are used to select the desired system to be used 


• Audio - calls up the radio/tape/CD control functions for operation and programming. 

• Telephone - used to program and call up stored telephone numbers. 

• Time/BC - calls up the clock and BC control functions for programming and display. 


SEARCH BUTTON 


SELECTOR BUTTONS 



VOLUME CONTROL 


MENU BUTTONS 


STATUS LEDS 


SEARCH BUTTON 

• Radio - will activate the search for radio stations in either direction 

• Tape - activates music search in forward or reverse directions. 

• CD - activates title search up or down the music list. 

The integrated “m” button is used to switch over to a “manual” search of the functions listed 
above. An “m” is posted in the display when in this mode. The “m” button is also used to 
activate the radio test. 

VOLUME CONTROL 

• Push button for ON/OFF control of audio system. 

• Rotary knob for volume control on the audio system and telephone hands-free 
speakers. 

STATUS LEDs 

• Red, yellow and green LEDs indicate status of telephone operation. 

• A red fan symbol indicates the status of the parked car ventilation system’s operation. 


97 

Driver Information Systems 





























































MID Self Test 


Operation of the MID can be checked through the test function sequence on the MID panel. 



The following items can be checked: 

UNIT IDENTIFICATION - The following information appears for approximately 3 seconds 
when the ignition is switched on 

• Hardware number 

• Software number 

• Variant index 


All other test must be started within three seconds, while the identification data is displayed. 
If not the MID will exit the test mode. 

DISPLAY TEST - Activate this test by pressing the display menu button. All elements of 
the main and menu displays are illuminated with different check patterns. 

BUTTON TEST - Start this test by pressing the button test menu button. All buttons on 
the MID have been assigned an alphabetical letter that will appear when the button is 
pressed. 

VOLUME CONTROL TEST - This test is carried out by pressing the volume menu button 
and turning the volume knob. Numbers from 01 to 36 appear in the display indicating each 
step of the knob’s rotation. 

STATUS LED TEST - Activate this test by pressing the menu button. All status LEDs are 
illuminated. 


98 

Driver Information Systems 








































































MID Removal 


The E39/E53 MID is removed from the center console as follows: 

1. Pull the volume knob off the MID. 

2. Insert a T10 torx wrench into the recessed hole beneath the volume knob shaft. 

3. Turn the wrench 90° to the left until a stop is felt. 

4. While maintaining tension on the wrench in the stopped position, use the torx wrench 
as a pull handle to pull the left side of the MID out of the center console. The right side 
of the MID acts as a hinge on the center console. 


The radio/tape player is removed by turning the 2.5mm alien head bolts to unlatch it from 
the center console as on previous radios. The radio alien head bolts are visible once the 
MID is removed. 





I 

V 



RECESSED 

HOLE 


INSERT A T10 TORX WRENCH INTO RECESSED HOLE. 
TURN WRENCH 90° COUNTER-CLOCKWISE AND 
HOLD TENSION. 

PULL MID OUT WITH WRENCH FROM LEFT SIDE. 
RIGHT SIDE HINGES AND THEN RELEASES. 


99 

Driver Information Systems 











































































































On-Board Computer (High version) 

The BC processing is a function of the IKE and can be displayed in the cluster matrix 
display or on the MID. 

The following BC functions are available for display: 

• Time/Date • Distance • Limit 

• Arrival Time • Stop Watch • Average Speed 

• Code • Range • Average fuel consumption 

• Two Timers for programming parked car ventilation 










AUDIO 


o 




+ 


J 


Operation and programming of the BC is carried out with the MID. 

The menu displays change as each function is called up for programming/resetting 
purposes, this includes the changeover functions for the clock, mileage and MPG displays. 

BC functions can be displayed in the cluster matrix by pressing the turn signal lever as in 
the past. 

The cluster displays can be programmed for number of displays and order of appearance. 

Setting a code with the BC will override the EWS cancellation of the drive away protection 
when the correct key is used. 

An emergency deactivation is possible for the CODE function. A 10 minute wait time is 
required after disconnect/re-connection of the battery before the code is canceled. 


100 

Driver Information Systems 

























































MULTI-FUNCTION STEERING WHEEL (MFL) & 

CRUISE CONTROL II (GR II) 

Models: E38, E39, E53 

Production Date: From start of production 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Describe how the MFL communicates signal requests to various control modules. 

• Explain the changes made to the MFL since it’s introduction. 

• Describe the operation of the heated steering wheel. 

• Identify the components used in the GR II system. 


101 

Driver Information Systems 




Multi-Function Steering Wheel (MFL) 

The MFL is a system that allows the driver to make various switching requests without 
having to look away from the road or remove a hand from the steering wheel. 

The steering wheel incorporates the control switches for: 


AUDIO / TELEPHONE 



The switches are arranged on the left and right 
side of the Airbag pad. Both of the switch 
panels are micro processors that take the input 
request and produce digital signals that are 
sent to the Multi-Function Steering Wheel 
Control Module. 

As introduced up to 9/96 the MFL-CM is 
located below the left side of the steering 
column behind the knee bolster. 



MFL control 
up to 9/96. 


unit 


After 9/96 the MFL-CM was deleted and the 
electronics were incorporated into the right 
button pad. 

The input signals from the control switches are processed in the MFL and sent to the 
respective control modules for system operation. 


The signals for the control of telephone, audio system and re-circulation operation are 
passed over the l/K-Bus. The signals for cruise control operation are passed to the cruise 
control module or DME through a separate data link from the MFL. 

The MFL-CM contains a fault memory that monitors the steering wheel control switches. 
Diagnosis is carried out with the DIS/MoDiC. 


102 

Driver Information Systems 



Heated Steering Wheel 

The heated steering wheel system consists of the following components: 


• A heating filament integrated into the steering 
wheel cover. 

• An NTC temperature sensor, in the filament circuit, 
to regulate the heating current. 

• A push button mounted in the right side MFL key 
pad. 

• The control module located behind the air bag 
assembly. 

• Slip ring assembly for the power and ground supply. 

OPERATION 

When KL 15 is switched ON, the heated wheel can be switched ON by pressing the button. 

A green LED illuminates to indicate system operation. Maximum current is supplied and 

heats the filament to its operating temperature (surface temperature of approximately 90°F). 

The NTC detects the temperature of the filament and causes the control module to cycle 

once the wheel is heated. Cycling is carried out with a pulse width modulated signal. 

The system is not connected to the diagnostic link, however the control module does 

monitor operation of the system. 




103 

Driver Information Systems 






































































GR II (SPEED CONTROL II) 


INTRODUCTION 

GRII was introduced for the first time on the E38 740i. GR II is a speed control system for 
vehicles not equipped with EML. It is similar in operation to the former system (FGR) found 
on older models. It offers improved control electronics to ensure that the set speed is 
reached and maintained without the sensation of fast acceleration or deviations of more 
than 1 MPH from the set speed. 

The GR II offers the following advantages: 

• Fatigue-free driving over long distances with a set speed. 

• The constant travel speed results in lower fuel consumption. 

• By setting a speed, speed limits are observed automatically. 

Like most of the other systems in the E38/E39, the GR II utilizes digital signal processing. 
This eliminates the amount of wiring required to achieve system operation and improves the 
reliability of cruise control operation. 

The driver’s request for cruise control functions is activated by the button pads of the MFL. 

An ON / OFF main switch ensures that the cruise control system is not inadvertently 
engaged while driving the vehicle. 


PRMDH35 

n 


ft 


T) A 

n 



The GR II cruise control 
indicator lamp illuminates when 
the system is active (switched on). 

The graphic symbol denotes constant 
speed maintenance. 



104 

Driver Information Systems 





COMPONENTS OF THE SYSTEM 


The GR II system consists of the following components: 

MAIN SWITCH (Up to 9/97)- The main switch is mounted 
on the right side of the dash panel below the instrument 
cluster. It produces a momentary ground signal to the GR II 
control module. When pressed the GR II control module 
switches on and the cruise enable indicator lamp in the 
instrument cluster (green in color) is illuminated. 

After 9/97 the main switch was deleted and combined with 
the “OFF” switch located on the MFL. 

CRUISE CONTROL SWITCH - The cruise switch pad is 



mounted on the right side of the steering 
wheel. 

All of the request functions ( SET, ACCEL, 
DECEL, RESUME AND OFF) are activated 
from the cruise switch pad. 

These request inputs are processed by the 
switch and transmitted to the Steering 
Wheel Control Module (MFL-CM) over a 
data link. 

STEERING WHEEL CONTROL MODULE 


Up to 9/96 the MFL-CM is mounted on the 
left side of the steering column behind the 
left side knee bolster. After 9/96 the MFL - 
CM is integrated into the right button pad. 

The cruise control requests are processed 
and transmitted to the GR II cruise control 
module over a dedicated data link. 

CRUISE CONTROL MODULE - The 

cruise control module is mounted in 




105 

Driver Information Systems 








the E-box between the the DME and AGS 
control modules. 

It has one blue 26 pin ELO type connector. 

CRUISE CONTROL ACTUATOR - The 

cruise control actuator is mounted on the 
left fender well and contains the actuator 


GR II CONTROL MODULE 



motor, feedback potentiometer and actuator clutch. 

The actuator is connected to the throttle valve with a 
bowden cable parallel to the accelerator cable. 



COMPONENT COMMUNICATION 


The cruise control 
switch pad provides 
momentary ground 
signals and converts 
them into a dynamic 
digital signal. 


The signal is sent to 
the steering wheel 
control module and 
passed through a 
gateway to the GR II 
control module. 


The GR II carries 
out the systems 
functions based on 
this dynamic digital 
signal and other 
input signals. 


The actuator is 
controlled by final 
stage activation at 
both sides of the 
motor. 



106 

Driver Information Systems 






























CRUISE CONTROL SWITCH OPERATION 


When the main switch is turned on and the vehicle speed is above 20 mph, the cruise 
control can be set or adjusted at the cruise control switch pad. 



OFF: Pressing the off button will disengage 
the cruise control. The previous set speed 
is stored in memory until it is over written or 
the vehicle is switched off. 

In addition to switching off via the cruise 
control switch on the steering wheel, the 


RESUME: Briefly pressing the resume 
button will cause the vehicle to 
accelerate/decelerate to the stored speed 
value in the cruise control module. 


SET/ACCELERATE/TIP-UP: Pressing the 
set button will engage the cruise system and 
maintain the vehicle’s current speed. 

Pressing and holding the set button will 
cause the vehicle to accelerate. When 
released, the vehicle’s current speed will be 
the set speed. 

Tapping the set button will cause the speed 
to increase by approx. 1 MPH. The number 
of times the tip feature will function is limited 
to 8. 


DECELERATE/TIP-DOWN: Pressing and 
holding the decelerate button will cause the 
vehicle to slow down. When the button is 
released, the current speed is the new set 
speed. Tapping the button will cause the 
vehicle speed to decrease by approx 1 MPH. 
The number of times the tip feature will 
function is limited to 8. 


system can also be switched off by: 

• Depressing the main switch on the instrument panel. 

• Applying the brakes. 

• Shifting the transmission into neutral. 


107 

Driver Information Systems 




CRUISE CONTROL MODULE 


The cruise control module contains control logics for smoother operation. The control logics 
prevents the maximum acceleration/deceleration feel that was characteristic with the earlier 
FGR system. 

The rate of acceleration in SET ACCELERATE and RESUME is based on the current road 
speed of the vehicle. The rate of acceleration is high at low vehicle speeds and gradually 
decreases as vehicle speed increases. This gives the feeling of steady smooth acceleration. 

The rate of deceleration when the DECELERATE button pressed is linear until the throttle 
valve closes. The decel rate is then dependent on the engine braking effect and road 
conditions. This results in a smooth speed reduction. 

If the set speed can not be maintained due to unusual operating conditions (severe up hill 
grades), the control module adopts a special resume mode. Once the unusual operating 
condition is overcome, the set speed will be resumed at a reduced acceleration rate. This 
feature is designed to prevent a sensation of rapid accelerating. 

The cruise control module is connected to the AGS control module through a data link. 
When cruise control functions are activated, the AGS shift program is adapted to match the 
requirements of the requested cruise control function. For example, when the GR II is set 
at a specific speed and a severe down hill grade causes the vehicle to overcome the set 
speed the GRII signals the AGS to downshift a gear. This will occur as needed to maintain 
the set speed as closely as possible. 



FGR ACELERATION IN RESUME 



108 

Driver Information Systems 






KEY ON POWER 



GR II MAIN SWITCH 


GR II CONTROL SWITCH PAD 
ON THE MULTI-FUNCTION 
STEERING WHEEL 



MFL CONTROL 
MODULE 


+ 



ELECTRONIC 
BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 
(Hall Sensor) 


T 


TO LM 


Brake pedal down 
Signal High 


Brake pedal up = Signal Low 



RANGE SELECTOR 
SWITCH (P/N) 



SPEED SIGNAL "A" 


FEEDBACK 


GR II 


As Introduced 


GR II INDICATOR 
CONTROL 


SHIFT 

CHARACTERISTIC 

REQUESTS 

n_n_n_r^^ 




i u r 


DIAGNOSIS 



THROTTLE PLATE 



CLUTCH 

SOLENOID 


MOTOR 



FEEDBACK 

POTENTI¬ 

OMETER 



ACTUATOR 


109 

Driver Information Systems 
















































































































































































PLAUSIBILITY/SAFETY FEATURES 

To avoid malfunctions or unsafe conditions, the GR II continuously monitors the input and 
output signals. Redundant (or dual signal) processing ensures that the input signals are 
plausible and prevents unsafe cruise control operation from being carried out. The following 
safety measures are also included in the total scope of cruise control operation. 

• Minimum speed - The minimum speed threshold for cruise control operation is 30 km/h 
( approx. 20 MPH). If the speed drops below this value the cruise control will not 
operate. 

• Shut off priority - The brake pedal and transmission neutral switch have priority for 
switching the system off. If a malfunction caused several commands to be called up at 
the same time, the brake switch signal would disengage the system. 

• If the set speed is exceeded by more than 8km/h (approx. 5MPH), the system will dis¬ 
engage by the actuator clutch. When the speed drops below the threshold, the clutch 
will re-engage and the cruise will continue operation. 

• The data link from the cruise control switch is continuously checked for signal integrity. 


110 

Driver Information Systems 




DIAGNOSIS/ENCODING 


Diagnosis of the GR II system is carried out with the DIS tester. The cruise control module 
stores faults that occur with the input/output signals for cruise control operation. The Multi- 
Function steering wheel control module stores faults that occur with the cruise control 
switch. 

There is only one control module for all model versions that use the new GR II system. 
Encoding is required if the control module is changed. To code a new control module, go 
to the coding application in DIS and carry out a coding procedure as stated on the screen. 

An uncoded module will allow limited cruise control operation. 


Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Control unit code E38 SERIES 


10 

IKE 

11 

ZKE III 

13 

CCM 

14 

LM 

19 

AIRBAG 

29 

GR II 

30 

IHKA/IHKR 

50 

ABS/ASC V 

54 

EDC III 




/ 

Help 






111 

Driver Information Systems 































































































AUDIO SYSTEMS 

Models: E38, E39, E53 

Production Date: From production start 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the various methods of controlling the audio system. 

• Know how to perform the radio self-tests. 


112 

Driver Information Systems 




Audio Systems 

E38 without Board Monitor: 


• MID - for ON/OFF, Volume control, Station select and Station presets. 



• Radio/Tape player- houses 
radio electronics, tape 

player, 

Treble/Bass/Fader/ 

Balance adjustments. 

• Amplifier - mounted in the 



trunk. 


• Digital Sound Processor with Amplifier (if installed) - for setting the sound quality 


(concert hall, jazz club, cathedral or user selected set¬ 
tings). 

• CD player (if installed) - mounted in the trunk. 

• Speakers - 10 with standard sound system. 

- 14 with DSP system. 



• MFL controls - mounted on the steering wheel. 

The radio/tape player deck contains the electronics for radio/tape operation. The ON/OFF- 
volume control and station display are incorporated into the MID. This configuration renders 
the radio useless if stolen from the vehicle. The radio is not coded. 


The main control for radio operation can be carried out from the MID or the steering wheel 
controls. The secondary controls are incorporated into the radio/tape player. 

If installed, the Digital Sound Processor / Amplifier (DSP) is an electronic graphic equalizer 
that can adjust the sound quality (spatial simulation) of the audio system. The DSP has 
three preset sound amplification modes. These include: 


• CONCERT HALL 


• JAZZ CLUB 


• CATHEDRAL 


113 

Driver Information Systems 























































Selecting one of these settings will adjust the sound amplification and reverb from the 
speakers to simulate the selected listening mode. There are also three driver selected 
modes that the driver/passenger can use to set the sound amplification to their own liking. 

All control and adjustment of the DSP is carried out through the three control buttons 
located on the face of the DSP. 



DSP Button - is used to turn the DSP ON/OFF 



Right/Left arrow button - is used to.select the listening mode and adjust the 
reverb, room size simulation and levels of the graphic equalizer bands. 



Down arrow/Set button - is used to select and activate the various 
adjustments and acknowledge the set inputs. 


All adjustments and modes are displayed on the face plate of the DSP. This includes a 
menu line to display the current mode or adjustment. Once the DSP is set and a listening 
mode is activated, the face plate of the DSP remains blank. 


Any listening mode can be turned ON/OFF, any time the radio is on, by pressing the DSP 
button. 


The DSP is an available option that cannot be retro-fitted to the vehicle. The system 
includes a different wiring harness, DSP amplifier and speakers for audio system operation. 

The DSP control panel and DSP amplifier are connected to the 1-Bus for data 
communication with the audio system. 


RADIO TEST FUNCTIONS 

With the ignition switch in KL R the radio can be switched into the test function mode by 
pressing and holding the WB (weather band) until the MID displays a serial number in the 
MID main display. 

The test functions include: 

• Radio serial number, • Radio Production Date • DSP Recognition 

• Road speed dependent volume control (GAL 1 -4) • Station signal strength 

The road speed dependent volume control can be adjusted to make the volume increase 
more audible (4) or less audible (1). 


114 

Driver Information Systems 













E39/E53 audio system without Board Monitor: 


• Radio/Tape 
player - houses 
radio 

electronics, tape 
player, treble, 
bass, fader, 
balance 
adjustments. 




OPTIONAL 

HB35B5S3I 



• MID - for ON/OFF, volume control, station 
selection, digital sound processor (DSP) 
control, etc. If the DSP system is installed, 
the audio button in the MID has a second 
position to activate the controls. 



Except for the number of memory positions 
for DSP programming, all of the features of 
the separate E38 DSP switch panel are 
incorporated into the MID. The memory 
feature of the E39 DSP has two memory 
positions whereas the E38 has three. 

• Amplifier - Mounted in the trunk. 

- The standard 200 watt amplifier for the 10 
speaker non DSP audio system 

- The optional 12 speaker 440 watt amplifier 
for the 12 speaker DSP audio system. 








• CD Player - mounted in trunk if installed. 


• MFL Controls 


RADIO TEST FUNCTION: To activate the test, switch the radio on and within 8 seconds 
press and hold the “m” button for more than 8 seconds. The displayed tests include: 

• Radio Serial Number • Radio Production date • DSP Recognition (1/0) 

• Station signal Strength • Road speed dependent volume control (GAL 1 -4) 

Adjusting the GAL makes the volume increase more noticeable (4) or less noticeable (1). 


E46 Dri 


Driver Information Systems 







































































































































































“NEW GENERATION” (NG) RADIOS 
Model: E39, E46, E52, E53 
Production Date: Starting from 9/00 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the new features of the “NG” radios. 

• Identify the components that interact with the radio system. 

• Describe the features of the MIR. 

• Review how to access the radio service mode. 


116 

Driver Information Systems 




Introduction 


Starting September 2000, a family of new generation radios will begin to be phased into 
production. The exception to this is the E52 which has been available with the MIR (multi¬ 
information radio) NG radio since series launch in mid 2000. 

The NG “New Generation” radios will have increased functions: 

• Radio can be operated without KL R. 

• Radios are world frequency. 

• Car memory programming. 

• Audio mixing on vehicles equipped with navigation. 

The radios external appearance has not changed. NG radios can be identified by their “53” 
designation. 


Overview of the Radios for Each Model 


RADIO 

TYPE 

MANUFACTURER 

MODEL 

INTRODUCTION 

DATE 

C53 

Business with 

cassette 

Philips 

E46 

3/01 

CD53 

Business with in¬ 
dash CD 

Alpine 

E46 

3/01 

C53 

Business with 

MID control and 

cassette 

Phillips 

E39/E53 

9/00 E39 

10/00 E53 

CD53 

Business with 

MID control and 

in-dash CD 

Alpine 

E39/E53 

9/00 E39 

10/00 E53 

C53 

Business MIR 

without cassette 

VDO 

E52 

Start of production 

BM53 

Business with 

BM control 

Becker 

E46/E39/E53 

03/01 E46 

02/01 E39 

04/01 E53 


117 

Driver Information Systems 




KL 30- 

KL 31- 

KL R- 

FROM 

UNLOADER 

RELAY 



RF Cable 


"RADON" 

signal 


DIVERSITY 

ANTENNA/ 

FZV RECEIVER 


AM 

FM 1 

FM 2 

FM 3 



SPEAKER OUTPUT 
TO AMPLIFIER 


l-BUS 


z> 

CL 


O 

o 


O 

z> 

< 

LU 


DSP AMP 


TELEPHONE E 

WITH INTERFACE a 


MUTE SIGNAL 




SPEAKERS 


MFL 



NAV 

AUDIO 


MK III NAV 



L 


R 


G 


B 



BMBT 


IKE 



K-BUS 


GENERAL MODULE 


KL 58g 


LCM III 



DIGITAL OUTPUT 



NG Radio System Overview 

Example: E39 with MK III navigation and BMBT 


118 

Driver Information Systems 


KEY USED 






























































































































Functional Overview 


NG Radios 

Radio Operation with KL R off 

Operation is possible with the key off on the C53 and CD 53 radios. If the radio is turned 
on with KL R off, it will operate for 16 minutes until the General Module sends the sleep 
command. The radio can be turned on and off as many times desired. 

Diversity Antenna 

Antenna diversity has been adapted to the new generation of radios. When the radio is in 
operation, the diversity control unit is activated by the “RAD ON” signal. 

World Frequency Radio 

Radios on vehicles sold in the U.S. are world radios. Specific country settings can be made 
using the service mode. The settings are stored in an EEPROM. 

Car Memory 

If programmed, when locking the vehicle using the remote transmitter the: 

• last station 

• Volume setting 

• Last audio mode (Tape, FM, CD etc.) 

are stored according to the key number used. Unlocking the vehicle with the same 
transmitter will restore the settings. There is a maximum setting for volume which may be 
lower than the setting when the radio was last operated. 

Clock 

Time can also be displayed when KL R is off by pressing the clock button on the 
Radio/MID. 

Backlighting 

The LCM/LSZ produces two signals for the control of radio backlighting. 

• Hardwired KL 58g 

• Lights on/off over the K/l Bus. 

The radio contains a photo-cell for adjustment of backlighting to ambient conditions. 


119 


E46 Driver Information S vstems 



Reset and Voltage Monitoring 

A radio reset is triggered by under voltage or the internal processor monitor. The reset 
function restarts the radio, similar to turning it off and back on again. Operating voltage is 
measured at the KL 30 input. The radio is switched off if the system voltage exceeds 17V 
to protect the radio, it will switch on when the voltage falls below 16V. 

GAL (Speed Dependent Volume) 

The speed signal from the IKE/KOMBI is available to the radio over the K/l Bus. GAL is not 
a feature on vehicles equipped with DSP. 

Bus Communication 

The radio communicates with other modules via the K bus or I Bus dependent on the 
model. The information shared over the bus line includes: 

• IKE/KOMBI - Terminal status (KL 15, KL R) 

• LCM/LSZ - Lights on 

• IKE/KOMBI link to TXD - Diagnosis 

• MID or BMBT - button or rotary knob status. 

• GM - Key used to lock or unlock vehicle 

• MFL - audio controls status 

NG radios do not use anti-theft codes. Operation of the radio is only possible if 
connected to a bus line and the detection of at least one other component. 


Multi Information Radio (MIR) 

The Multi-Information Radio (MIR) is used in the E52 Z8 and is the first of the NG series of 
radios. The MIR contains the radio receiver, display screen, and control panel all in one unit. 
A cassette player is not included. 

The MIR is used to control and display the: 

• GPS-Navigation System 

• Audio system including CD Changer 

• Telephone 

• Outside temperature 


120 

Driver Information Systems 




Station Search Button 


Menu Button-recalls main menu for display 



Left Knob-radio volume control 


Station Keys-radio/CD 


Mode Button-switches between radio and CD operation 


Control Knob-used to control 
operation of systems in display 


Every time the MIR is switched on it looks to see if a navigation computer is installed and 
displays the correct menu options. Text and symbols on the display are generated by the 
navigation computer and transmitted to the MIR via the “Navigation” Bus. If the MIR does 
not detect that a navigation computer is connected, the MIR itself will generate it’s own dis¬ 
play signals. The screen display is monochrome only. 

The navigation elements of the MIR will be discussed in the MK3 module. 

Audio Mixing 

Audio mixing allows the vehicle passengers to listen to navigation instructions without 
muting the radio or CD player. 

On-Board Computer Functions 

Outside temperature is the only on-board computer display possible for the Z8. 


121 

Driver Information Systems 








































Workshop Hints 


Service Mode for NG Radios 

A service mode is available as on previous radios as a diagnosis tool and for changing radio 
settings. Entering the service mode varies by the device used to control the radio. 

To enter the service mode: 

C53/CD53 with and without MID: 

• Turn on the radio. 

• Within 8 seconds, press and hold the “m” button for 8 seconds. 

• Scroll through functions using the “+” and keys or the station < > search buttons. 

• Turn off the radio to end the service mode. 

C53 MIR: 

• Turn on the radio. 

• Within 8 seconds, press and hold the “SEL” button for at least 8 seconds. 

• Scroll through functions using the station < > search buttons. 

• Turn off the radio to end the service mode. 

BM53 with board monitor: 

• Turn on the radio. 

• Press and hold the “RDS” button for at least 8 seconds. 

• Scroll through the functions using the station < > search buttons. 

• Turn off the radio to end the service mode. 

BM53 with Widescreen board monitor: 

• Turn on the radio. 

• Within 8 seconds, press the “INFO” button. 

• From the info screen select RDS 

• Press and hold the BM control knob for at least 8 seconds. 

• Scroll through functions using the station < > search buttons. 

• Turn off the radio to end the service mode 


122 

Driver Information Systems 



Service Mode Functions 


1. Serial Number: Display of the radio serial number. 

2. Software version: Display of the radio software version. Displayed as (calender 
week, year, version) 

3. GAL: Speed-sensitive volume control. Can be adjusted from level 1 -6 using the 6 pre¬ 
set audio buttons. Vehicles equipped with DSP do not use this feature. 

4. Field strength and Quality (F/Q): The station currently displayed can be assessed 
for field strength and quality. An “F” (i.e. FI 5) number is used to indicate the strength of the 
signal being received by the radio. This is a good test of the antenna system, station sig¬ 
nal, and the radio itself. A “Q” (i.e. Q-00) number is used to determine the quality of the 
radio station including both the audio and RDS signal if applicable. 

5. DSP: This function provides information about whether the vehicle is fitted with DSP. 
The value is displayed as a one (fitted) or zero (not fitted) and is communicated by the DSP 
amplifier via the l/K bus. 

6. TP Volume: Provides adjustment for traffic report minimum volume. Not used in the 
US. 

7. AF: Alternative Frequency tracking setting. Not used in the US. 

8. Area: Used to select the appropriate market setting (USA, Canada, Europe, Japan and 
Oceania). Adjust using the pre-set buttons. 

9.Index: Display of the revision index. 


123 

Driver Information Systems 



PARK DISTANCE CONTROL (PDC) 

INTRODUCTION 


The Park Distance Control is a safety/convenience system that uses ultra-sonic sensors to 
detect the close proximity to other objects when maneuvering the vehicle in tight spaces 
(such as parallel parking or parking in a narrow garage). 

The PDC monitors both the front and rear of the vehicle. The driver is warned, through an 
audible gong system, when the vehicle comes close to another object. As the object gets 
closer, the audible gong increases in frequency until a steady tone is produced. 

As the distance to the object increase, the steady tone will return to a beep and stop when 
the vehicle moves away from the object. 

The PDC is automatically switched “ON” when the ignition is switched on. However it does 
not become active until the vehicle is shifted into reverse. 

The system can be manually switched “ON/OFF’ with the console mounted switch. 



124 

Driver Information Systems 




PDC COMPONENTS 


The PDC system consists of the following components: 

PDC Control Module - Mounted in the right side of the trunk behind the trim cover. 

The PDC control module activates the ultrasonic sensors mounted in the bumper cover. 
After activation, the control module monitors the signals coming back through the sensors. 
Through this signal, the PDC is able to determine the distance to any objects close to the 
bumpers of the vehicle. As the vehicle comes close to an object, the PDC control module 
will activate the respective gong (front/rear) at a specific frequency tone. 

The PDC control module is linked to the l/K-Bus for the following: 

• Vehicle speed 

• Transmission range selection 

• Diagnosis 

Gong/Speaker - The PDC control module activates a gong and a speaker to alert the 
driver of the detected object. The front mounted gong is the existing check control gong 
located under the glove box. The rear mounted speaker is located under the right side of 
the parcel shelf. 



4 ULTRA-SONIC SENSORS 
IN FRONT BUMPER TRIM 



4 ULTRA-SONIC SENSORS 
IN REAR BUMPER TRIM 



125 

Driver Information Systems 





















































PDC Switch - Mounted in the center console or SZM below the 
IHKA control panel. The system can be switched “ON”/”OFF” at any 
time using the switch. The LED in the switch will flash simultaneously 
with the gong/speaker tones when the system detects an object 


Eight Ultra-sonic Sensors - Four sensors each front and rear, mounted in the bumpers. 
The PDC sensors are small transmitter/receiver modules. They are specifically designed for 
automotive use. The sensors are limited to the following angles of monitoring: 


• 90° on the horizontal plane 

• 60° on the vertical plane 


The vertical angle is reduced to avoid unintentional signalling on steep grades. 
TRANSMITTING MODE 


The control module sends a 40 KHz signal to the sensor. The control module activates the 
sensors in a specific sequence (firing order). The ceramic element in the sensor vibrates and 
produces an ultra-sonic sound wave that is sent out from the bumper. 



DIAPHRAGM 


ULTRA-SONIC WAVES 



CONNECTOR 



PIEZO-CERAMIC 

ELEMENT 


RECEIVING MODE 

If the wave contacts an object, the wave is bounced back to the sensor. The returning wave 
causes the ceramic element to vibrate creating an electrical signal to be fed back to the 
control module. 

The control module determines the distance to the object by the time difference between 
the sent and received ultra-sonic wave signals. The complete send/receive cycle, for one 
sensor lasts approximately 30ms (milli-seconds). 


126 

Driver Information Systems 




































































SYSTEM OPERATION 


When KL15 is switched “ON”, the PDC system is switched “ON”, in the standby mode. The 
system performs a self-check of the ultrasonic sensors and control electronics. 


When the transmission is shifted into reverse, the system is activated and the sensors are 
activated in the pre-determined order. 


6 

2 


ORDER OF ACTIVATION 




The system stays active up to approximately 20 MPH. Above this, the system reverts to the 
standby mode. 

If an object is detected within the operating range of the sensors, the control module will 
activate the respective gong/speaker (front/rear). The sensor closest to the object will 
receive additional activations to determine if the object is getting closer. 



As the distance to the object decreases to approx. II /2 feet, the control module increases 
the activation frequency of the sensor. The output frequency of the gong will increase 
linearly up to a distance of approx. 3 A of a foot. At this time the frequency will change to a 
constant tone. 

As the distance to the object increases, the frequency of the sensor and gong activation 
decreases until the object is out of the monitoring range of the sensor. 


127 

Driver Information Systems 





SWITCH LED CONTROL 


*■ 



4 FRONT MOUNTED SENSORS 


OPERATING POWER 



PDC SWITCH 
IN CENTER CONSOLE 





PDC 






4 REAR 
MOUNTED 
SENSORS 



DIAGNOSIS 

The PDC system is 
connected to the 
diagnostic link through 
the l-Bus/K-Bus. 

The DIS is used for 
diagnosis and 
troubleshooting 
procedures when faults 
occur with the system. 

Fault Symptom 
troubleshooting paths 
should be used to 
troubleshoot failures with 
the PDC system. 



REAR 

SPEAKER 



BEEP 


TO IKE: 


FROM IKE: 




128 

Driver Information Systems 

















































































































































































































Review Questions 

1. Where is mileage and SIA Data stored in an E36 instrument cluster produced after 
1997? How is the manipulation dot extinguished?_ 


2. Are E36 lights cold monitored by the Check Control system? How is the driver of an 
E36 warned of a Check Control monitored problem? 


3. Describe the changes made to the IKE after 9/97. 


4. Where is mileage and Service Information stored redundantly on a vehicle equipped with 
an IKE? How is this information exchanged and what could be the cause of the 
manipulation dot illuminated in the cluster? 


5. How does the CCM transmit check control data to the IKE? 


6. Describe the principle differences between the Base cluster and the IKE. When did the 
CAN bus become an input to the KOMBI? _ 


7. Which Base instrument cluster test would be useful in diagnosing a fuel gauge 
complaint? 


8. Describe how the IKE controls and monitors external lights. If there was a software 
failure of the LCM, what lighting functions would still operate in emergency mode? 


9. Why are Xenon lights only warm monitored? 


10. What input devices are used by LWR to detect the vehicle load angle? What type of 
signal is produced? Where are they located?_ 


129 

Driver Information Systems 



Review Questions, continued 


11 .What modules produce the display signals for the MID? 


12. Describe how to enter the Radio Test Function in an E39 vehicle equipped with an MID. 


13. Describe the changes made to the MFL since its introduction in the E38. 


14. How does the GR II or the DME receive cruise control inputs from the MFL? 


15. Where was the GR II main switch moved to after 9/97? 


16. How can the “NG” radio be distinguished from an earlier radio? 


17. Which was the first “NG” radio to be used in a production vehicle? 


18. What is the maximum vehicle speed that PDC can operate at? 


19. What diagnosis is available to address a PDC complaint? 


130 

Driver Information Systems 



