Table of Contents 


Car Information Computer 

Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

New Features.5 

WMA File.7 

Hard Disk Drive (HDD) .7 

Music Track Database (Gracenote®) .7 

ID3-Tag.7 

System Overview .8 

System Components.12 

Car Information Computer.12 

Advantages of the Car Information Computer .14 

8-wire LVDS.16 

2-wire LVDS.16 

Modular Design of CIC Components .18 

Working on Electronic Components.20 

Optical Drive (CD/DVD Player).21 

Hard Disk Drive.22 

Front Panel.24 

Fixed Components .25 

Fan.26 

Gateway Processor.26 

GPS Receiver Module.27 

Yaw Rate Sensor.28 

Analog Tuner Modules .29 

FM and AM Station List .29 

IBOC System/HD Radio .30 

CIC Application Board with Processors.32 

Power Board .32 

Principles of Operation.33 

Central Information Display (CID).33 

Controller.34 

CD/Multimedia Overview.37 

Music Collection .37 

Storing Music Data on the HDD .38 


Initial Print Date: 09/08 


Revision Date: 02/09 




































Subject 


Page 

Rip Function .39 

Copying Data via the CD/DVD Drive.40 

Copying Data from the USB.41 

File System .43 

Data Saving (Backup).44 

Music Search.45 

Updating the Music Track Database (Gracenote®) .48 

Radio .49 

FM Stations.49 

AM Stations.50 

IBOC.51 

SDARS.51 

Stored Stations .51 

Telephone.52 

Navigation.53 

Interactive Map .54 

Map Data .55 

Map Views.55 

Night View.56 

Points of Interest (POI).57 

Route Planner.57 

Contacts .59 

BMW Assist .60 

Vehicle Information .61 

Onboard Computer .61 

Trip Computer.61 

Vehicle Status.62 

Settings .63 

Language/Units.64 

Voice Recognition.64 

Favorite Buttons .65 

Service Information.66 

Unlocking the Service Menu Option.66 

Navigation .67 

Telephone and BMW Service .68 

TV .69 

Gracenote® .70 

Resetting the CIC .71 

Programming .71 










































Car Information Computer (CIC) 

Model: E82/88, E90/92/93 
Production: From September of 2008 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the differences between the CCC and the CIC systems. 

• Describe the different functions available with the CIC system. 

• Identify the components that make up the CIC system. 

• Service and repair the CIC system. 



3 

Car Information Computer 




Introduction 


The Car Information Computer (CIC) is incorporates many innovations and new 
features. The system has been introduced to the US market on the 1 Series and the 
3 Series from September of 2008 production. The 7 Series (F01/F02) will soon follow. 

The CIC replaces the Car Communication Computer (CCC) and will be offered as part 
of the navigation system option. 



iDrive system with CIC on an E90 vehicle 


4 

Car Information Computer 
























New Features 


The Car Information Computer (CIC) continues the path laid out by the earlier CCC 
system and takes it to the next level of development. The main noticeable feature of this 
Drive system is the newly designed controller that is now equipped with seven direct 
access buttons. These buttons provide shortcuts to the menus in the redesigned layout 
of the user interface. 

Compared to the CCC system, the number of CD/DVD drives in the CIC has been 
reduced to one optical drive. 

The CIC overall screen dimensions have remained the same. However, the number of 
pixels have doubled from 640x240 (CCC) to 1280x480. This provides improved visual 
quality by generating a sharper graphic display. 

The navigation system display has been enhanced with the following functions: 

• Full screen mode 

• Night view 

• 3D models in the perspective map view 

The use of an integrated HDD (hard disk drive) now allows navigation map data to be 
saved on the CIC hard disk. Previously, this map data had to be loaded from a navigation 
DVD for each destination entry. Maps can also be displayed much faster due to the 
increased processing power of the CIC. 

The hard disk drive in the CIC also makes it possible to compile and store a personalized 
music collection. An 8GB section of the total 80GB hard disk is dedicated to store music 
files. 

These files can be transferred from audio CDs, MP3 players or USB sticks. Along with 
the music data files, the music track database (Gracenote®) is also stored to be used for 
the music search function. 

An address database has been included in the "Contacts" menu, which can also be 
accessed from the Telephone and Navigation menus. This feature offers a single 
“location” for accessing contact information. The information contained is more 
comprehensive than before. 

Many external receiver hardware devices such as IBOC and GPS are integrated 
in the CIC. This adds flexibility and expands the system’s functions. 


5 

Car Information Computer 



The voice recognition system has been further developed to now enable even simpler 
and more fluid voice command inputs. 

The communication service BMW Assist has been adapted to the new layout of the user 
interface and expanded with additional services. 

Additional services available in BMW Assist effective September of 2008: 

• My info 

• BMW Search with Google Map database access 


6 

Car Information Computer 



WMA File 

A Windows Media Audio file (WMA) is an audio data compression technology. 

With WMA technology, audio signals that are deemed to be imperceptible to the hum 
an ear (heating limit) are deleted. Compared to MP3 at low data transmission rates of 
128 kbit/s, this technology offers a rich and detailed sound guality. 

Despite its very compact size (1 MB per song minute), a WMA file of 128 kbit/s is 
comparable in terms of sound quality, to an MP3 file of approximate 160 kbit/s. 

This compression technology was developed by Microsoft® and because of its DRM 
(Digital Rights Management) capabilities, it is the preferred platform for the majority of 
the online music industry. 

Hard Disk Drive (HDD) 

The HDD is a ferromagnetic storage medium, which uses a write/read head to write 
binary data on to the surface of a rotating disk. This device is comparable to the hard 
drive on a home computer or laptop. 

Music Track Database (Gracenote®) 

This is a music track identification technology created by the company Gracenote®. It 
makes available the data associated with the music tracks (metadata). Gracenote® is 
the industry standard in the field of music identification technology that provides 
associated content. 

The metadata contains the following information: 

• Artist 

• Track title 

• Album 

• Release year 

• Genre classification 

Note: These metadata are managed and distributed by Gracenote® 

(www.gracenote.com/music). Non-commercial users have free access. 

ID3-Tag 

The ID3-Tag is the identification byte of an MP3 file. 

A format for additional information (metadata) that can be contained in reserved parts of 
the storage space of an MP3 file. This metadata is used exclusively for displaying track 
title, artist, genre etc., in the display of MP3 players or vehicles. 


7 

Car Information Computer 




System Overview 


Block Diagram of CIC System 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central information display (CID 

4 

Application software 

2 

Car Information Computer (CIC) 

5 

Hardware 

3 

User interface (BO) 




8 

Car Information Computer 






















































































Bus overview E9x and E8x (not including E83, E85, E86) model series, CIC 









Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

ACSM 

Advanced crash and safety management 

FS 

MOST direct access 

CAS 

Car access system 

JB 

Junction box 

CDC 

CD changer 

SDARS 

Satellite radio tuner 

CID 

Central information display 

TCU 

Telematics Control Unit 

CIC 

Car Information Computer 

TOP- 

HiFI 

Top-HiFi amplifier 

CON 

Controller 

SBX- 

High 

USB interface box High 


9 

Car Information Computer 
































































































































































CIC System circuit diagram, in E9x and E8x model series (not including E83, E85, E86) 


© 



10 

Car Information Computer 

























































































































































































































Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Instrument cluster 

10 

AF output for audio jack (standard equipment) 
if no USB Audio interface is installed 

2 

Dynamic stability control 

11 

Antenna diversity module with antenna amplifier 

3 

Junction box 

12 

MOST distributor in rear area 

4 

Central information display 

13 

OBD interface (including Ethernet 
connection to CIC) 

5 

Car Information Computer 

14 

AF signals to speakers 

6 

USB Import/Export jack, glove compartment 

15 

MOST direct access 

7 

Future antenna expansion 

16 

Footwell module 

8 

Microphone for hands-free facility 

17 

Steering column switch cluster 

9 

Controller 




11 

Car Information Computer 









































System Components 

Car Information Computer 



Front View of the CIC 

The design principle of the CIC is similar to a personal computer, the Car Information 
Computer contains a processor, RAM (memory) modules and other peripheral 
components. 

The following CIC applications are stored on the integrated hard disk drive: 

• Music collection 

• Music track database (Gracenote®) 

• Navigation software (application) 

• Navigation (map material) 

• iSpeech (voice recognition system) 

• Contacts (database with address data) 

• System operating software 


12 

Car Information Computer 


















The CIC is the central control unit for the listed applications. It is linked to the central 
information display (CID) for the purpose of transmitting and displaying information. 

The Car Information Computer is also connected to the controller. The controller serves 
as a selection and input device for the user interface. 

The CIC is based on a modular design. The most important systems of the communica¬ 
tion network are integrated in the CIC in the form of modules. 

The CIC combines the following control units in one enclosure: 

• Navigation computer, HIP module and yaw rate sensor 

• Tuner (FM) 

• Tuner (AM) 

• Tuner (FM-TMC) 

• IBOC decoder 

• Audio system controller, and music search database 

• MOST-CAN gateway 

• Interface to control display (LVDS) 

The upper half of the CIC consists of the optical drive player where CDs and DVDs of 
digital audio media can be played. The player also has ability to playback video DVDs on 
the front CID. The video signal is only displayed when the vehicle is stationary with the 
Parking Brake on. 

For the navigation system, the optical drive can be used for updating the map material 
stored on the hard disk. 

The processors for the main board and application board are located in the lower half of 
the CIC. This section also contains the main memory, the individual modules as well as 
the hard disk drive. The CIC together with the controller and CID, make up the 
Drive system. 


13 

Car Information Computer 




Advantages of the Car Information Computer 

Combining several modules in one enclosure provides the following advantages: 

• The combination of several systems enhances the functionality 

• Outstanding software expansion options through suitable software interfaces 

• Fewer plug connections increases reliability 

• Less overall package space required for control units 



Front View of the CIC on the E9x and E8x (not including E83, E85, E86) 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rotary/push button for (ON/OFF) and 
controlling the volume of audio system 

5 

Station/track "forward-back" search button 

2 

Eject button for DVD/CD player 

6 

MODE button (Radio, CD/DVD 

3 

Favorite buttons 1 -6 

7 

FM/AM button selects between 
the two frequency bands 

4 

Slot for DVD/CD player 




14 

Car Information Computer 



























Rearview of Car Information Computer 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

LVDS signal for CID Connector 
color code: violet 

7 

16-pin connector (K-CAN, audio 
output AF; power supply, Rad-on signal) 

2 

USB connection for glove compartment 
connector color code: beige 

8 

GPS antenna signal Connector color code: blue 

3 

Ethernet connection Future expansions 
connector color code: pastel orange 

9 

(Not for US) 

4 

MOST connector 

10 

(Not for US) 

5 

12-pin connector; right-hand 
chamber (Ethernet, TEL_AF, AUXJn) 

11 

AM/FM tuner signal Connector color code: black 

6 

12-pin connector; left-hand chamber 
(video input signals - CSCC) 




15 

Car Information Computer 



































The transmission of picture data from the CCC to the CID was performed by means of an 
8-wire LVDS line. With the introduction of the Car Information Computer, the video signal 
is now transmitted through a 2-wire LVDS line. 

The change in picture data transmission in the vehicle reflect the changes made in PC 
technology. While the printer was formerly connected to the PC via a parallel cable, data 
transmission now takes place using serial USB technology. 

In the following graphics, 8-wire LVDS technology is compared to the new 2-wire 
LVDS technology: 

8-wire LVDS 

Transmission of video signals via 
8-wire LVDS technology with CCC 
and CID. 

(LVDS+ and LVDS- for each of the 
four signal lines and an additional 
synchronization line) 

2-wire LVDS 

Transmission of video signals via |h- / . 

2-wire LVDS technology with CIC UjM j _ ,. .V. -J _ A 

and CID. 


Signal transmission through this 2-wire LVDS line offers four distinct advantages: 

• Higher data transfer rate 

• Simplified wiring 

• Runtime differences between the individual lines are avoided 

• Serial 2-wire LVDS data transmission is now much more 
cost-effective than 8-wire LVDS technology 

The main advantage of using serial 2-wire LVDS is the resulting high picture resolution. 



CID 



16 

Car Information Computer 




























A 4-core, shielded cable is used for the 2-wire 
LVDS technology. The cable consists of the four 
cores, LVDS+, LVDS-, 2x ground and shielding. 

For Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) 
reasons, the unused wire is also connected to 
ground. 

In the illustration to the right, the advantages 
of both cores connected to ground are shown 
with the aid of field lines. 

The capacitive interference of the signals is 
deflected to ground. The wires connected to 
ground form a defined potential and cannot act 
as antennas. 

This ensures that additional interference is 
avoided. 



Graphical Illustration of EMC protection 
using 2-wire LVDS technology 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Two signal-carrying cores, two cores 
connected to ground 


17 

Car Information Computer 









Modular Design of CIC Components 



Individual replaceable components of the Car Information Computer 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Replaceable device CIC 

3 

Front panel 

2 

DVD/CD player including CIC housing cover 

4 

Hard disk drive 


The components listed above are defined as separate or modular. These components 
are attached to the main/complete head unit. 

Of these components, only the faceplate remains a serviceable and replaceable compo¬ 
nent. Failure of any other internal component will necessitate the replacement of the 
entire CIC unit once proper authorization has been obtained through PuMA. 

The functions of the individual components are briefly described in the following pages. 

The installation and removal instructions for the individual components and the complete 
CIC control unit are available in TIS (Technical Information System) or the workshop 
system ISTA. 


18 

Car Information Computer 



















It is essential to follow ESD (Electrostatic Discharge) guidelines when replacing individual 
components in order to avoid damage to internal components of the CIC. These require¬ 
ments also apply when storing or sending back components. 

Special packaging (ESD bags, ESD boxes with film or foam material cladding) is available 
for this purpose and should be used instead of conventional packaging materials. 


The following picture illustrates the effects of electrostatic discharge (ESD) on electronic 
components. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

ESD symbol (protection measures necessary) 

2 

ESD damage to a conductor (magnified 5000 times) 


Effects of ESD (Electrostatic Discharge) on electronic components 


19 

Car Information Computer 






Working on Electronic Components 

The following requirements must be observed when working on electronic components 
on the Car Information Computer. 

• The work must be performed on a conductive and grounded workbench 
(special tool 12 7 192 is used for this purpose). 

• The grounding cable must be connected to a secure grounding point (water pipe, 
heating pipe, electric socket ground). 

• The person carrying out the work must first put on the grounding cuff in order to 
ground himself before removing the components from the packaging. 

• The electronic components are placed on the anti-static mat which is also 
connected to a grounding cable. 



Anti-static mat Special tool 12 7 192 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Anti-static mat 

2 

Grounding cable for the mat 

3 

Anti-static cuff 

4 

Grounding cable for the component 



20 

Car Information Computer 
































Optical Drive (CD/DVD Player) 

The Car Information Computer is equipped with a DVD-ROM player. 

The optical drive is used for playing audio and video media. 

This drive makes it possible to play the following media file formats: 

• Audio CDs (CD Digital Audio) 

• Audio CD-ROM with MP3, WMA or AAC files 

• DVD Audio (only stereo track if contained on the data medium) 

• Audio DVD-ROM with MP3, WMA or AAC files 

• Video DVD 

Playing video on the (front) CID display is only possible when the vehicle is stationary 
and in the “Park” position. When the vehicle is moving or the Parking Brake is not on, 
only the audio track of the video will be played. 

Although the CD/DVD drive is no longer used for the navigation system (as in CCC), 
it may be used to update navigation map data from a navigation DVD. 



Key components of DVD player used in the CIC system 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

DVD player 

2 

Front panel connection 

3 

Ribbon cable connection, DVD player to CIC head unit 


21 

Car Information Computer 




















Hard Disk Drive 

With the development CIC, a hard disk for storing applications (programs) and data 
is used in a head unit of a BMW vehicle for the first time. 

A 2.5" hard disk drive with a storage a capacity of 80 GB is installed. 

This makes it possible to display complex graphics like 3D models in the perspective 
view of the navigation system. 

This system provides the option of converting, storing and playing music tracks. 

The hard disk makes it possible to maintain a music collection with a music track 
database (Gracenote®). 

The HDD (hard disk drive) also provides a data storage option for the three languages of 
the voice recognition system. 


22 

Car Information Computer 



The hard disk drive is a replaceable component of the CIC. Proper repair instructions 
and ESD guidelines must be followed when replacing the unit. 

The Music collection backup should only be performed by the customer and not the 
service technician. For more information refer to “Music Collection Backup” in the 
Principles of Operation section of this training material. 

The following illustrations show the hard disk location and the individual partitions. 



Hard disk location and the individual partitions 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Car Information Computer 

2 

Hard disk (slide-in tray) 

3 

Pie diagram with individual storage units on the hard disc (partition) 


23 

Car Information Computer 












Front Panel 

The front panel of the CIC can be replaced separately. 




Front and rearview of the CIC system front panel E6x vehicle 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Front panel - front view 

2 

Front panel - rearview 


Note: Currently only the faceplate is a serviceable and replaceable 
component. 

Failure of any other internal component will necessitate the replacement of the entire 
CIC unit once proper authorization has been obtained through PuMA. 


24 

Car Information Computer 















Fixed Components 

Some of the components that were modular in the Car Communication Computer are 
now integrated into the CIC as solid state components. 

In the event of defects to some of the components, it may be necessary to replace the 
entire head unit after submitting a PuMA case. 



Bottom open view of the CIC components 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

FM/AM aerial connection 

3 

FM/AM double tuner module 

2 

FM - TMC module 

4 

IBOC decoder 


25 

Car Information Computer 







































Fan 

Unlike with CCC, it is not possible to replace the fan of the Car Information Computer 
separately as part of a service procedure. 

The fan provides cooling for the entire hardware assembly, including the hard disk drive 
and the gateway processor (located directly below it). The exhaust air cools the cooling 
fins of the HiFi output stage in the power board as it is routed through a cooling channel 
out of the unit. 



CIC system’s Cooling Fan location 


Gateway Processor 

The gateway processor converts all relevant data of the K-CAN system into MOST-bus 
telegrams and vice versa. 

The electronic module is soldered into the board directly under the hard disk drive and 
cannot be replaced separately. 

The gateway processor has its own control unit address in the BMW diagnosis system. 


26 

Car Information Computer 























CIC system’s Gateway Processor location 


GPS Receiver Module 

The GPS receiver module is also known as the HIP module (Host Independence 
Positioning). 

Location and route of the vehicle are calculated in the navigation system with the data 
from the GPS receiver module. 

This module was already integrated in the head unit with the CCC system. It has the task 
of converting the signals received from the GPS antenna together with the data from the 
DSC control unit and yaw rate sensor. 

The following information is calculated in the GPS receiver module: 

• Longitude 

• Latitude 

• Altitude above sea level 

• Direction (bearing) 

• Speed 

This information is known as Almanac data and it is transferred to the navigation system 
for further processing. The Almanac data must be permanently stored for future refer¬ 
ence. One of the reasons for this is that it takes a long time for data to be received again 
from satellites after switching to terminal 15 from terminal status ignition "OFF". 

This Almanac data ensures the position of the vehicle is recognized immediately after 
starting the vehicle. Therefore the navigation system can also be used immediately. 


27 

Car Information Computer 





Compared to the GPS receiver module of the Car Communication Computer the GPS 
receiver module in the CIC has been greatly reduced in size while maintaining the same 
functionality. 

The graphic shows the size of the GPS receiver module compared to the main 
connection plug of the head unit. 



CIC system’s GPS receiver size compared to the Main Connector 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

GPS receiver module 

2 

CIC main connection plug 


Yaw Rate Sensor 

The Car Information Computer features a yaw rate 
sensor. It supplies the data relating to changes in 
driving direction for the navigation system. 

This data is required for the purpose of determining the 
exact position as satellite signals cannot be received 
everywhere (tunnels, underground parking lot etc.). 

The yaw rate sensor is a separate module soldered on 
the main board. It has been greatly reduced in size 
compared to the yaw rate sensor in the Car 
Communication Computer. 



Unlike with CCC, it is no longer possible to replace Location of the yaw rate sensor 

the yaw rate sensor separately from the entire unit. soldered to the CIC main board 


28 

Car Information Computer 















Analog Tuner Modules 

The tuner modules in the Car Information Computer have enhanced functions compared 
to the tuners used in the CCC system. The FM/AM and the traffic information (RTTI) 
range have been expanded. 

FM and AM Station List 

A double tuner module (see item 1) is installed in the CIC for the FM/AM range. 

While one tuner in the network receives the required station and outputs the music 
signal, the other tuner works in the background searching the station landscape for 
additional signals and shows them on the display. ("All stations" menu item). 

This function in the FM range is already known from the CCC and is now available 
in the AM range. 

The third module in the tuner network enables expansion of the FM-TMC (Traffic 
Message Channel) functions. The FM/AM double tuner module and the FM-TMC 
module combine to form the triple tuner. 



FM tuner module component location in the CIC 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

FM/AM double tuner module 

2 

FM-TMC module 

3 

Black FAKRA connector below the CIC heat sink 


29 

Car Information Computer 
























IBOC System/HD Radio 

The IBOC (In-Band- On-Channel) system is offered as the digital radio. With the intro¬ 
duction of the CIO, the control unit of the IBOC system has been integrated in the head 
unit as the IBOC decoder. 

The IBOC system was developed by the company Ibiquity and, with the aid of a decoder, 
enables the reception of HD (High Definition) radio through the FM/AM double tuner. 

This system simultaneously broadcasts an analog and digital signal. 

A special oscilloscope (spectrum analyzer) would show the digital components at both 
sides of the analog wave of the FM frequency (step shape). 

The IBOC system receives the signals with the aid of the FM double tuner module. 

These signals are then routed to the IBOC decoder which adds the digital data stream to 
the audible music signals. 



Location of the IBOC decoder in the CIC 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

FM/AM antenna connection 

4 

FM/AM double tuner module 

2 

FM-TMC module 

5 

IBOC decoder 


30 

Car Information Computer 







































;, aF fm 


3:01 am WPLJ HDl ^ 


4 * 


f 


On Manual 
✓ WPLJ HDl 
Brown 

donna 

FRESH 

HOT 97 
KISS FM 


IBOC Station List Menu 


There are two types of broadcast services: 

• MPS = Main Program Service 

• SPS = Secondary Program Service 

Both services differ to the effect that the signal previously broadcast analog in the MPS is 
now used in digital form. 

The decoder delays digital reception for several seconds until it is synchronous again with 
the analog signal previously heard. 

SPS offers additional radio stations that are only broadcast in digital form. Using the multi¬ 
cast method, it is possible to accommodate up to seven digital stations in the submenu 
of the SPS main station. Normally, however, a maximum of 3 sub-menu are offered in the 
SPS. 




v* FM 
AM 


Presets 

VYeaJ M 
\ 

Tone 


WPLJ HDl 

,f7wPUHDl 

WPU HD2 
WPLJ HD3 


3:07 am ^^IWPLJ HDl 


Sub-menu of the IBOC main station 

The system automatically switches over to analog FM reception if the digital signal is no 
longer available. 

HD radio is also available in the AM frequency range. In this case, the digital signals are 
transmitted on directly adjacent frequencies of the analog station. Multicast is not sup¬ 
ported on AM. The content of the digitally broadcast station is the same as that of the 
analog station. 

HD radio plays AM radio stations in near-FM quality and FM radio stations in near-CD 
quality. 


31 

Car Information Computer 







CIC Application Board with Processors 

The application board accommodates the 
main processor (CPU = Central 
Processing Unit) and the main memory 
modules (RAM = Random Access 
Memory) for the CIC. These components 
are soldered into the board and cannot 
be replaced. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

CPU - Central processing unit 

2 

Main memory (RAM) of the CIC 



CPU) and Main Memory Location 


Power Board 

The power board is located beneath the CIC heat sink and on the left next to the CIC 
main connector. It contains both the audio output stages for the speakers of the stereo 
system as well as the power supply unit for the CIC. 

The heat sinks and CIC fan cool the system by dissipating the heat from the power 
supply unit and amplifier. 

The unit interfaces with the vehicle’s electrical system (power supply, MOST link, etc.) 
through the main connector. 



CIC Main Board and Heat Sink Location 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Heat sink 

2 

Power board 

3 

Main connector of the CIC 


32 

Car Information Computer 




























Principles of Operation 

Central Information Display (CID) 


The display used on the CIC system in known as CID (central information display) and 
is similar to the one used for the CCC. The diagonal measurement for the CID on the 
1 Series and 3 Series remains the same as on the CCC equipped vehicle at 8.8 inches. 

The number of pixels of the CID has doubled from 640x240 in CCC to 1280x480 pixels 
in CIC. This improves picture quality by enhancing the display resolution. 

In addition to the display enhancements the graphic layout of the CIC user interface has 
also been totally redesigned. 



menu 12: ill 

CD/Multi media 

Radio 

Telephone 

Navigation 

Contacts 

BMW Services 

Vehicle information 

Settings 


Graphic User Interface on CID with a CIC equipped vehicle 


No signal 



"--sgsaMraiyjaasin.' EntertainITient 1 ■, 

100.3 FM 4 $ , 1:20am 09/18/2008 


Graphic User Interface on CID with a CCC equipped vehicle 


Note: For detailed description of how the individual functions of the CIC 
operate, refer to the respective Vehicle Owner's Manual. 


33 

Car Information Computer 










Controller 


The new controller has been completely redesigned. The most noticeable feature of the 
new CIC controller is the seven direct access buttons. 

It is now possible to access the following menus directly: 

• Main menu 

• CD/Multimedia 

• Radio 

• Navigation 

• Telephone 

The following menus can still only be selected from the main menu, with no direct 
access: 

• Contacts 

• BMW Services 

• Vehicle information 

• Settings 

The "Back" button is pressed to go back to the last display view. Up to 30 "back" steps 
are possible with this button. 

The “Option” button makes it possible to make fine adjustments or carry out special 
functions in the previously selected sub-menu. 

The direct access buttons replace the CCC "long push" function. 


Note: With the “Long Push” function is was possible to change from a 

sub-menu directly to another sub-menu in the CCC by pushing the 
controller in the corresponding direction for at least two seconds. 


34 

Car Information Computer 




The respective sub-menus are now selected directly by pressing the CD/multimedia, 
radio, navigation or telephone buttons twice. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Direct access button for Main menu 

5 

Direct access button for Options sub-menu 

2 

Direct access button for CD/Multimedia 

6 

Direct access button for Navigation 

3 

Direct access button for Radio 

7 

Direct access button for Telephone 

4 

Direct access button to go Back 




The star-shaped operating concept of "Turn-Press-Push" of the CCC has been 
redesigned for CIC. The sub-menus in the main menu now have been arranged in lists. 

One of the listed sub-menus can now be marked with the "turn" function in the start win¬ 
dow menu. The selected sub-menu is accessed with the subsequent "press" function. 

Several sub-menus can now also be selected by means of the direct access buttons 
on the controller. The "push" function is now used to further navigate in the selected 
sub-menu. The windows of the selected sub-menu are arranged horizontally one above 
the other. 

The following table shows a comparison between the previous menu items of the CCC 
and the menu items structure of the CIC. 


35 

Car Information Computer 





















CCC main menu 

CIC main menu 


\ r 1 ti ll! i<q (iijnpl 

CDrMufti media 

| m in ifnn:;i ■ i<:: n 2 

| Climate N^vig^tion 

hbF * ^ 

| ftadio 

Telephone 

Navigation 
^ ; COflttCtl 

flMw Services 

Vehicle- mlonnatisKi 

V | Settings 

Lri [i?rLBi Drne n r 

MY) 3 FM n# 1:20 4ffl DynttfZEWa 

Communication 

Telephone 

Telephone 

Telephone 

A-Z 

Telephone/Phonebook 

Telephone => Phonebook 


Navigation => Address Book 

Contacts (imported/self-entered contacts) 

Communication 

BMW Services 

Assist services 

BMW Services 

Navigation 

Navigation 

Navigation, onboard information, BC 

Vehicle information, onboard computer 

Air conditioning (climate control) 

Settings (limited) 

Entertainment 

CD/Multimedia 

CD, DVD, CDC 

CD/DVD 

Radio (FM, AM, IBOC) 

Radio (FM, AM, IBOC) 


Music collection 

Settings (5 th menu) 

Settings 

Audio 

Sound 

Display screen 

Central screen 

Time/Date 

Time/Date 

Language 

Language/Units 

Vehicle/Tires 

Vehicle information/Vehicle status 

Service 

Vehicle information/Vehicle status 


36 

Car Information Computer 






























CD/Multimedia Overview 

The CD/DVD, external devices and sound sub-menus are listed under CD/Multimedia in 
a similar configuration to the Drive "Entertainment" menu of the CCC. 

This Product Information mainly deals with the Music collection sub-menu. 

An innovative feature of this system is that video DVD can be played in the front CID. 

This function is only available with the vehicle stationary (Parking Brake on) and is 
enabled in the corresponding vehicle order. It provides the control option with which 
the video function is activated. 

Music Collection 

For the first time in a BMW vehicle, a music collection can be saved on an internal hard 
disk drive and accessed through its own sub-menu. The music collection feature is found 
under the CD/Multimedia menu of the CIC. 

A music search function has been implemented, which searches for information 
(metadata) on the individual music tracks (artist, album, etc.). A hard drive-based track 
database (Gracenote®) provides further information to the music track (metadata). 

Note: Metadata storage is a separate function to the conversion process from 
Digital Audio CD to a WMA file format which allows the system to per¬ 
form a music search. 


A Ignition switched on 

V 


CD/DVD 



V Music collection 
External devices 
Tone 


CD/Multimedia sub-menu with “Music collection” checked 


37 

Car Information Computer 




Storing Music Data on the HDD 

The music collection is stored in a partition on the internal hard disk drive (HDD) of the 
CIC. This device makes it possible to store a large selection of music data in the vehicle, 
while allowing the option to retrieve it when necessary. 

Up to 12 GB of the total 80 GB hard drive is set aside for the music collection. 

The following three options can be used to store music data on the hard disk: 

• Rip function from Compact Disc Audio format 

• Copying data via the CD/DVD drive 

• Copying data from the USB 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hard disk (HDD) 

3 

DVD/CD ROM with compressed audio data 
(WMA, CDA, MP3, AAC) 

2 

Commercially available audio CDs 
(Compact Disk Digital Audio CDA) 

4 

USB stick 


38 

Car Information Computer 





















Rip Function 

This function rips commercially available audio CDs (marked with the 
Compact Disk Digital Audio logo) and converts them to compressed 
music files. 



COMPACT 




DIGITAL AUDIO 


This function can be performed when the vehicle is stationary or while driving. 

The music on the CD can also be played back during the conversion and storage 
process of the rip function. 

The music data is converted at a speed between 3 and 12 times the playback speed. 
Following the conversion the music data is stored on the hard disk in WMA file format. 

The data is then displayed in the form of file folders in the music collection menu. 
These folders are identified with the corresponding title and with a round CD icon. 

After the conversion process the files will be displayed and can now be selected 
individually by using the music search function. 


Aucfio CD 


1:18 am 


1 


1 & 

John Mayer 


1 © 

Continuum 


s' ' t _ 

00:04 

1/13 

f r"-K * * 

"n M ► (*T—, 

\. \ if _ 

53 Store in vehicle 

. ] i 



Waiting On The World To Change 
f Don't Trust Myself (With Loving Y,„ 
Belief 


Start of rip function for a loaded Digital Audio CD 



Music collection 


1:19 am 

Qv Music search 
Current playback 
Top 50 

CIC Music File 
RENAMED 
USB 2 


'Z Continuum 


Music data (WMA) of a Digital Audio CD stored in the music collection 


39 

Car Information Computer 











Copying Data via the CD/DVD Drive 

Self-recorded CD/DVD ROMs with audio files in MP3, WMA or AAC (M4A) format 
can be read, copied and stored using the DVD player (drive). 

All CD/DVD formats (from CD-R to DVD Double Layer) are supported, except for 
CD-RAM and DVD-RAM. 


The audio data is then stored in the form of file folders in the music collection together 
with the title of the respective CD/DVD ROM. 


If the CD/DVD ROMs are untitled, they will be stored as "Audio-CD 1", "Audio-CD 2", 
etc. To facilitate identification, a folder icon is shown next to the file folder. 


Mull in d 


VI IJ .1 






Music coilection 11:11 

Musfc search 
I Current playback 

Top 50 

*7 Queer Rock Montreal: CD1 



Sang!,.The Greatest Hits Of Fr.., 
✓ AUDIO CE>1 


Copying a music file from a CD-ROM 


Ub 

50 

<§> 

3 

a 


40 

Car Information Computer 






Copying Data from the USB 

Data contained on a USB stick (music files in MP3, WMA or AAC format) can be 
imported via the import/export USB port located in the glove compartment. 


(gf ImpGit/export 


Import from USB device 


Music collection backup 

Store music on USB device 


Jj m 


Restore music from USB device 



Album data 


Store album data on USB 


Update album data from USB 


Copying USB music file using the import/export music feature 



Import/ export USB port in glove compartment 




Type A USB / symbol for USB 2.0 


Copying music data from audio devices such as an MP3 players or iPods using the USB 
connection is possible although not advisable. The folders and file structure of the MP3 
player are also copied when copying music files from these devices. 

In this case, the copied folder names are represented by means of cryptic characters 
instead of an album title. This makes it virtually impossible to search for a music file. 

Note: It is not possible to import music data via the USB-audio interface 

(SBX High) in the center console. The USB audio interface is intended 
only for the playback of external audio sources. 


41 

Car Information Computer 























The imported USB music data is stored in file folders with USB 1, USB 2 etc. in the 
music collection. These folders are also shown together with a folder icon as the files 
copied through the DVD drive. 


Music collection 12:54am'■f.i @ -6 



Music search 


Current playback 

UP 

Top 50 

50 

CIC Music Fife 

IP 

✓ USB 1 

IP 

USB 2 

IP 


Copied USB1 folder Stored in the Music Collection Menu 


Compatible USB sticks must be FAT formatted and must support the Mass Storage 
Class USB protocol. The format can be easily checked on any PC running the Windows 
operating system. 

USB hard drives, USB hubs and USB memory card readers with several slots cannot be 
read when connected to the USB jack in the glove compartment and therefore can not 
be used. 

The USB interface powers the USB stick with maximum 500 mA. 

The file system (FAT 16, FAT 32 or NTFS) is shown under properties of the USB stick in 
the Windows Explorer. The protocol which is used is shown by clicking the hardware icon 
in the windows information area. 

When using a USB stick device with several partitions, the music data files must be 
located in the first partition in order to be recognized and processed. 


Note: Simultaneously connecting a device to the USB import/export jack 
and a second interface to the (12 V socket, USB audio auxiliary 
interface) can cause damage to both the external devices and the 
connected control units. 


42 

Car Information Computer 



File System 

The folders of the converted or copied music files can subsequently be renamed in the 
Options menu. 

For this purpose, the corresponding album entry must be marked in the music collection 
and then the “Options” menu selected. 

It is important to note the following when coping music files with Digital Rights 
Management (DRM) protection to the music collection: 

• AAC music data in the M4P format (P = Protected) cannot be 
copied to the hard disk. 

• Only music data in WMA format with copy protection can be copied. 

This data will be shown in the music collection and in the music search. However, 
these protected tracks cannot be played. The track will be “skipped” or ignored and 
a different non-protected music track will be played. 

The reason for this is that it is not possible to provide purchaser authentication in the 
CIO because a link to the online provider cannot be established. It is suggested that the 
customer import the audio files using a self recorded Digital Audio CD. 

All music download portals allow the creation of a Digital Audio CD for the downloaded 
music track. However, the number of copies that can be created is limited by licensing 
legislation. 


43 

Car Information Computer 



Data Saving (Backup) 

The customer has the option of saving his/her complete music collection under the 
"Options" sub-menu. This is achieved by copying it back to a USB stick installed in 
the glove box port. It is necessary to ensure that the USB stick has sufficient storage 
capacity. A maximum storage capacity of 12 GB is required for saving the music collec¬ 
tion data. 



Gjf Import/export 

Import from USB device 
Music collection backup 
Store music on USB device 
Restore music from USB device 


Album data 

Store album data on USB 
Update album data from USB 


Import/export submenu screen shot showing how to back up music files 


The process is similar to the data saving procedure on a PC. This function makes it 
possible to import data when changing vehicles or when replacing a head unit or hard 
disk. 

Data saving will only be possible if the hard disk of the CIC has not been damaged 
and the interfaces to the CIC are still fully operational. 

Data back up should be done prior to programming the vehicle after replacing control 
units. Without data saving (backup), all of the music data could be lost. However, this can 
only be done by the customer prior to bringing the vehicle in for service. Detailed instruc¬ 
tions on how and where the data backup can be performed are provided in the Vehicle 
Owner's Manual. 


WARNING!!! 


For copyright reasons, the service personnel are not 
permitted to perform the data backup for the customer. 
The service personnel, can, however, instruct the 
customer on how to perform the backup procedure. 


44 

Car Information Computer 






Music Search 

The "Music search" sub-menu is provided in the music collection for the purpose of 
managing a large quantity of music files. 

The music search takes place in accordance with a special filtering process. The search 
can be started at any menu item in the music search. For example, if the menu item 
"Genre" is selected as the starting point, all albums of all artists together with all the 
tracks in this music direction will be made available for selection. 

In the next step, only the artist is selected and all his/her albums are displayed. 

The search is now filtered further with each step until at the end, only the required entry 
remains. 


The information for the music search is stored in the form of a metafile, similar to the 
ID3 tags of an MP3 file. 

An example of how these metafile or meta information could appear is shown below: 


Music search 

Search for: 

Example 

1 

Genre 

Rock 

2 

Artist 

Queen 

3 

Album 

Greatest Hits II 

4 

Track 

A Kind Of Magic 



($- Music collection 1:19am*'S.t ^ 3% 

Music search 


Current playback 

o 

Top 50 

50 

CiC Music File 

ID 

RENAMED 

ID 

USB 2 

ID 

V Continuum 

<sT] 


Music collection menu with a stored album selected 


45 

Car Information Computer 











(gr Music search 


2:51 am 


-2 



Genre ? (All genres) 


AH artists 
Alt albums 
All tracks 
Start play 
New search 


“Genre” selected in the Music Search sub menu 


Data management is achieved with the aid of a music track database. 

The music track database information is stored on the hard disk of the CIC for the pur¬ 
pose of managing the music file’s metadata. A 4 GB partition is allocated to the music 
search function. 

The CIC is equipped with special software provided by Gracenote® for the purpose of 
identifying the complete albums of ripped Digital Audio CDs. It provides additional infor¬ 
mation about the music track on the respective Digital Audio CD converted to WMA files. 

This music track database (Gracenote®) uses TOC (Table of Content) as the identification 
pattern. This means, complete albums on Digital Audio CDs are identified based on the 
number of tracks and the track length. 

The corresponding data (track, artist, etc.) is then accordingly assigned to the music files 
in the music search database. 

On conclusion of the conversion procedure to WMA files, the new metadata is automati¬ 
cally added to the directory structure in the music search. It is not possible to rename or 
edit this metadata after it is in the hard disk. 


Note: Albums with newly released metadata at the time of vehicle delivery 
will no longer be identified. The music track database would require a 
permanent link with the server in order to keep this data up to date and 
this is not possible. 


46 

Car Information Computer 




Unrecognized metadata of Digital Audio CDs is stored in the music collection as 
"Audio-CD 1", "Audio- CD 2", etc., together with the CD icon. 

The metadata for the music track database from copied CD/DVD-ROMs or USB sticks is 
adopted identically in the music search function. This metadata does not stem from the 
music track database but rather from the user/customer himself. 

The metadata, copied from a USB stick or CD/DVD ROM, cannot be renamed in the CIC. 

In order to correct the faulty metadata on a track or file, the file must first be deleted from 
the hard disk in the CIC. 

The user can then rename or add to these metadata files corresponding to the music 
track database structure (genre, artist, album and track) by using software on a personal 
computer. 

When the file is imported back into the CIC hard disk, the correct metafiles will be dis¬ 
played. This procedure also ensures that the music search will also find the copied music 
data with the music track, artist, etc. 

Updating unknown music tracks is only possible with WMA files from ripped Digital Audio 
CD. If the user/customer does not follow this procedure, in time the music search will 
become unusable. 

A “current” version of the music track database is stored in the vehicle on delivery. 

The information about music CDs (Digital Audio CDs) released after the vehicle delivery 
will not be found in the vehicle's music track database. 

Note: If the metadata is not found because the Gracenote database in the CIC 
is outdated, the tracks will not be recognized. 


47 

Car Information Computer 



Updating the Music Track Database (Gracenote®) 

To keep the entire contents of the music track database (Gracenote®) up to date, 

BMW Service is equipped with the latest CD of the music track database (Gracenote®). 

This update takes place in connection with the media package, which also contains the 
Gracenote Update CD. 

The CD can be loaded directly in the CIC drive and updated via the Service menu of the 
CIC (See Service Information). 

The update of the music track database (Gracenote®) will become effective in the WMA 
music files only after subsequent conversions (rip function) of Digital Audio CD. 

Metadata will no longer be added to files that were ripped before the update of the music 
track database (Gracenote®). 

The reason for this is that the music track database is only accessed when a Digital Audio 
CD is loaded and subsequently ripped. 


* 


gracenote 


PC 

Cpt Information Computer 


Gracenote OB 


09/2000 


ft rTS K'ttYz- : Vi 
h'lbVu ifiiw- 

Hi 3+TSftE Wl 


Gracenote Update CD 


48 

Car Information Computer 



Radio 


FM Stations 

The layout of the "FM stations" in the Radio menu has been adapted to the new operat¬ 
ing concept. 


The former layout of the “All stations" list in the form displayed by the CCC has been 
replaced in the CIC by a list layout. 


1 E=3I fM * <*> 


•* Autostore > 




wmmmm 

rwjs. KTU 9 96.3 

[ | . iffsesH - 

6 Yolk's V 

3 WLBS FM 

\\\ t , 

||[j 4100.’ 

> ?.wwpr-» 

i oi .y r m 

1 


FM menu "All stations" in CCC 


1 V FM 




l \ Manual 



v WPLiHDI 
Brown 
DOPINA 
FRESH 
HOT 97 
KISS FM 


■3:01 am ■* WPLJHDI 

1 


a 


\ 


FM menu "All stations" in CIC as list 


4 FM ^ <• 

V 


4 Manual ► 



88 90 92 94 96 98 100102104106108 

|1 00.3 m 


100.3 FM 1:23am 


Manual station search in a CCC system 



Manual station search in a CIC system 


49 

Car Information Computer 









AM Stations 

A double tuner has now made it possible to receive the "All stations" list in the AM range. 
However, no station information can be displayed because the RDS data is not transmit¬ 
ted for AM. 



AM stations list 



AM stations manual setting 


50 

Car Information Computer 







IBOC 

The IBOC functions in connection with the IBOC decoder which is now installed inside 
the CIO. IBOC makes it possible to receive digital radio signals. The IBOC components 
are described in detail in the "System Components" section of this training material. 


SDARS 

The Satellite radio service is available with a subscription to Sirius satellite radio. 
An example of how a station list would look like in the CIC with channels that have 
not yet been subscribed to is shown in the illustration below. 






Satellite radio _«j- 

& Boom Bip 
at] Roads Must Roll 


Chill 


131 

ESPNHisp 

ti 

182 

CNN Es p 

I5TI ■+ 

183 

Korea 

ms 

184 

Weather 


185 

TWN 

IE 1 


Station list with SDARS channels still disabled 


Stored Stations 

Under the menu item "Stored stations", the required stations from all frequency 
ranges can be stored in a common menu and then selected at a later time. 

The following frequency bands are available for storage: 

• FM 


• AM (SW, MW, LW) 

• IBOC 



Stored stations 


51 

Car Information Computer 











Telephone 


The pairing assistant for the Bluetooth® connection 
can be found under "Bluetooth" in the Telephone 
menu. 

Up to four mobile phones can be paired. One of the 
mobile phones already paired must be removed from 
the displayed list in order to pair a fifth mobile phone. 


\ 1 

F nse pair j Uliirtoalt ahnre. 

•'/l ■ 

j 

1 1 BUtftwQi mtftj 

1/ 

j. f i 

r 


Follow the steps below to pair a Bluetooth telephone: 


• After selecting "Add new phone" the identifica¬ 
tion number of the vehicle is shown in the display. 

• The pairing assistant now receives the message 
that it is necessary to proceed with the mobile 
phone. 



Ab.BlrK-lh 


11 ■JTlfT' 


P ejse uzc p*kmei rc:ommp-nriidhy 
F 1 M 1 # Trtf fci*M |ifcrierrr>- 1 pf- 


Ad-J HHT,' ctKi'ie 


• A search for new Bluetooth devices should now 
be conducted on the mobile phone. 


• If the search was successful, the identification 
number of the vehicle will be shown in the 
mobile phone display. 


\ \ 

'■ £ ?II.Hlii:1 t i |]iinni| llidJ .- Ti 

\ 1 

L P N 5 E i'art Mar c :_ Inr EilLKncth 


yimr P pPo-«r 


Th r. iiihir.lr- -■ Iflcifmnfjtf eji, :he 

r ft 

following rnSTrc 

ft 

i 



• A free random PIN-CODE must now be en¬ 
tered in the mobile phone which must then be 
repeated in the vehicle. 



Following successful pairing, the data of the paired 
mobile phone device is now displayed in the phone- 
book or contact. This procedure can take from several 
seconds up to several minutes to complete depending 
on the amount of entries stored. 




Yd :m 


iihrfv ChI 


-.fW P ’o "iis rt-ionincrided sry 
HMW lor pest M^rlui HirtC* 


’ AJil ncivplKinc 
CrririHilml: 


.l.ihnly Zc-I 


52 

Car Information Computer 









View of the Navigation System’s “Speller” for Entering Destinations 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Speller 

3 

Selection menu 

2 

Fast access 




To simplify the destination entry procedure, the speller entry interface has been 
developed for the navigation system of the CIC. 

The menu located at the top right, next to the speller, shows the last three place names 
entered, which can also be selected at any time. 

Navigation destinations can also be entered based on their ZIP code using the speller 
symbol 1 @+. 

After entering several letters, a preview map will be shown in the assistant window. This 
makes it easier to select the desired destination. This function is particularly useful for 
identifying place names that share the same name and/or appear several times in one 
town, city or country. 

The map shown in the assistance window is independent of the main map. Both the 
scale as perspective can be adjusted separately from each other. This setting is made 
under the Options menu. 

Compared to the CCC, entering the destination using the voice recognition system has 
been made considerably easier. Many new commands are now possible using the voice 
recognition system. 


53 

Car Information Computer 

























Assistance Window with Different Zoom Factor Compared to the Main Window 

Interactive Map 

The interactive map is another option for entering destinations. 

In addition to horizontal and vertical navigation there is also the option of diagonal 
navigation. Since the CIC does not directly have a diagonal sliding option, the following 
solution was found. 

The auxiliary line for entering the destination can also be moved diagonally by pushing, 
pressing and turning the controller. 

Various diagonal graduations can now be selected to facilitate destination selection. 

A destination location appears in the crosshairs, it is shown highlighted and now it can be 
selected as the destination. 



Interactive Map View 

Note: The interactive map is an excellent tool for checking the controller func¬ 
tions. Since the controller can be moved in all directions, it is possible to 
detect if there are any defects in the controller or CIC head unit. 


54 

Car Information Computer 

















































Map Data 

The navigation Map material data is already pre-installed and enabled in all US vehicles. 

The maps data can be updated in two different ways: 

• Updating the BMW programming system 

In this case, the map data in the CIC is updated through the Ethernet connection in 
the diagnostic connector. The data is enabled by means of an enable code that 
needs to be downloaded and entered into the BMW programming system. 

• Using a complete DVD set 

The DVD is loaded directly into the head unit. The enable code can then be entered 
directly into the Drive system by the customer or service technician using the 
"speller”. The customer can still continue navigating with the old map material after 
loading the CD and starting the update procedure. A reset is triggered in the CIC 
immediately on completion of the update procedure and the customer continues to 
navigate with the new map material. The navigation destination, last destination and 
contact data are retained. The update can be interrupted at anytime and continued 
when ever the trip is resumed. 

Map Views 

Separate map views are possible in the main window and assistance window. The scale 
for each of the two maps can be selected individually. The map view can be selected in 
the icon bar on the left half of the screen. 

The following maps can be selected: 

• North-up 

• Perspective 

• Direction-up 

• Arrow view 


55 

Car Information Computer 



Full screen mode can be activated by pressing the "Scale" icon twice or via Options while 
in the Navigation menu. 

The assistance window can be activated under the "Options" menu. 

The various map views for the main window and further display options are available in 
this assistance window. 

The increased display resolution of the CIO display (1280 x 480) is particularly noticeable 
in full screen mode. 



Full Screen Mode 


Night View 

A night view for map presentation can be activated under Options - Map Options. 
This view uses colors that are easy on the eye in darker conditions. 



Night View of the Navigation Screen 


56 

Car Information Computer 
















Points of Interest (POI) 

Addresses of navigation destinations as well as service stations, service areas, cinemas 
etc. can be selected via the "Special destinations" (Points of Interest) menu or by using 
the icon bar in the map view. 

The Points of Interest pictograms can be selected under the "Options" menu item. 

A POI search is possible while displaying the traveled route with the system in full 
screen mode. 


Route Planner 

Up to 30 stages can be entered when selecting a destination with the route planner. 
The trip or route planner is located in the Options menu of the navigation system. 
The entry "Trip with several stages" must be selected to activate this function. 


{ Cfc? Options 

Navigation 




□ Trip with severa[ destinations 
Store position as new contact 
Add position to existing contact 

G7' Receive Traffic Info 

□ Dynamic guidance 
Navigation system version 


Trip/route Planner in Options Menu of the Navigation System 


Ct? Trip entry 



sj 



1 WOODCLIFF LAKE 
CHESTNUT RIDGE,,, 250 

2 BERGEN CO., BMW PLZ1 

3 LATTE N LOVE CAFE 
WOODCLIFF TICE BL„ 


An other des ti natio n in th e trip j 
Start guidance 



Trip/route Planner in Options Menu of the Navigation System 


57 

Car Information Computer 














The individual stages are then marked with their own flag in the map views. 
These on-route destinations can be rearranged at anytime. 



Trip/route Planner Screen 


58 

Car Information Computer 





















Contacts 


The Contacts menu is a database for managing names, addresses and telephone 
numbers. 


Data that is displayed both in the phonebook as well as in the navigation system is 
stored in this central address database. 


The phonebook data is transferred through the currently paired mobile phone using 
a PBAP protocol (Phonebook Access Profile). 



My contacts 


1:13 am *f.t A -5 


Petra 


Petra Casa 


PHIL'S PIZZERIA & RESTAURANT 




Pirates Pizza 



Pito 


Pizza Dominoes 


Pizza Pirates 


© 

© 

Ql 

© 

© 

© t 

© 


New Contact Menu Option Selection 


The imported entries from a paired bluetooth phone are identified by the Bluetooth icon 
next to the telephone entry. 

An option for exporting all contact data back into the mobile phone is not provided. 

Entries made under "New contact" are retained even after uncoupling the telephone 
and can be edited at any time. Initially, these contacts are shown without a symbol. 

A navigation symbol is added at the end of the entry when an address has been added. 


59 

Car Information Computer 



BMW Assist 


With the introduction of the CIC several innovations have been implemented in the 
vehicle regarding the BMW Assist. 


The system has been changed to a push services, where an incoming message is 
shown in the display immediately. 

These push services make it possible to immediately view receipt of the following 
data packages: 

• BMW Search 

• Destination addresses from Google Maps 

• Destination addresses sent from the BMW 
Assist information service and their 
immediate display 



Under the Assist menu, the Service status option lists the services that are available, 


© BMW Assist 


\ 



TeleDia gnosis 
Customer Relations 
Service Request 
Data transfer 


-/ Service status 



/ 


Service status sub-menu in the BMW Assist Menu 



p Available services Johnly Cel 

Services currently available for your 
vehicle: 


Service Request 
Customer Relations 
Automatic Service Request 
Roadside Assistance 


Available services availability 


60 

Car Information Computer 








Vehicle Information 


There are three sub-groups that can be selected in the "Vehicle info" menu: 

• Onboard computer 

• Trip computer 

• Vehicle status 



Onboard Computer 

The onboard computer takes the place of the trip computer previously known 
from the CCC. 

The information available: 

• Range 

• Distance to destination 

• Arrival time 

• Average fuel consumption 

• Average speed 

Trip Computer 

The onboard computer 2 takes the place of the trip computer previously known 
from the CCC. 

The information available: 

• Departure time 

• Time remaining 

• Distance remaining 

• Average fuel consumption 

• Average speed 




Trip computer 

1:15 am - 

1 6+ 

J 

Departure time 

© 

29 min. 

Duration 


0 mfs 

Distance 

ft 

6,0 mpg 

Consumption 


0,4 mph 

Speed 

Reset 




61 

Car Information Computer 






Vehicle Status 

The functions found under Vehicle Status are: 


• TPMS (tire failure indicator) 



• TPMS initialization 


• Service Required 


• Vehicle Information - 
Check Control Messages 



^ l ire pressure 


1, Correctly adjust pressure in ali tires (ateo after a 
l tire change). 

( 2. Reset TPM (only while stopped, with Ignition on 

or e ngine running). 

Resetting TPM? 


Sfemce required 


/ foK Engine oil _ 

ok Brake fluid 
a* I vehicle inspection 
ni: Vehicle check 
c* Front brake pads 
ok Rear brake pads 



62 

Car Information Computer 












Settings 

The following settings can be edited under the Settings sub-menu: 


Component 


Setting 


Head-up display 


Central screen 


Time/Date 


Language/Units 



Air conditioning (climate control) 


Lights 


Door locking 


Trunk lid /Tail gate 


Brightness 


Brightness 


Time, date, format 


Languages 


Voice dialog: Standard/Short 


Fuel consumption: l/km, km/I, mpg 


Distance: km, mis 


Temperature: °C, F 


Treble, bass, etc. 


Volume adjustment: Speed Volume 


Volume adjustment: Navigation 


Volume adjustment: PDC 


Volume adjustment: Gong 


Setting limit, acceptance limit 


Parked Car Ventilation 



Home lights 


One-touch indicators 


Daytime driving light 


Welcome light 


High beam assistant 


Remote control key, lock automatically etc. 


Adjust opening angle 


63 

Car Information Computer 







































Language/Units 

There are three different languages that can be selected: 

• English US 

• French 

• Spanish 


07 Language/Units 



2:56am AM 1010 


\ Language: 

English US | 

Speech dialogue: 

Default 

Consumption: 

mpg 

Distance: 

mis 

Temperature: 

°F 


Language options in the Settings menu 


Voice Recognition 

The CCC command "Options" in the voice recognition system has been renamed to 
"Language options". The reason for this is that the newly created "Options menu" is 
accessed with the "Options" command. 

In addition to the display language, the input and output language used in the voice 
recognition system can also be selected. Beeps are no longer heard between the 
individual dialog steps and it is possible to choose between “Default” and “Short” 
voice dialog commands. 

Default dialog: 

SYSTEM: "Please name the town" 

USER: "Munich" - shown on display 

SYSTEM: "Name the number of the correct entry and say new entry" 

USER: "Entry one" 

Short dialog: 

SYSTEM: "Town" 

USER: "Munich" - shown on display 
SYSTEM: "Which entry"? 

USER: "One" 


64 

Car Information Computer 




Favorite Buttons 

There are six favorite buttons available in the CIC. 

The favorite buttons have the following operating modes: 

• Short press, activates the button’s assigned function 

• Long press, storage of functions currently displayed and selected in the CID 

The Long press function is capable of storing the following selections: 

• Radio stations 

• CD, DVD player 

• DVD changer access 

• Phone numbers 

• Navigation destinations (these must already be stored under "Contacts" 
or entered from "Last destinations") 

A new feature in this system is the option of assigning any of the sub-menus such 
as "Navigation" or "Vehicle info" to the favorite buttons. 



Demonstration of the Long press favorite button function 


65 

Car Information Computer 









Service Information 

Unlocking the Service Menu Option 

Several important functions can be checked directly at the CIC with the aid of the 
Service menu. This menu can be used to select and adjust settings that are not visible 
for the customer. 

The procedure for starting the Service menu with the "safe grip" has changed compared 
to the CCC system: 

• Call up Start menu 

• Push controller in up direction for at least 10 s 

• Controller 3 notches to the right 

• Controller 3 notches to the left 

• Controller 1 notch to the right 

• Controller 1 notch to the left 

• Controller 1 notch to the right 

• Press controller once 

• The Service menu is now added as the last submenu to "Settings" 

Four selection menus are available in the Service menu of the CIC: 

• Navigation 

• Telephone and BMW Service 

• TV (Not for US) 

• Gracenote 



Service menu hidden Service menu “unlocked” 


Note: Although it appears in the Service menu,TV is not available on 
US vehicles. 


66 

Car Information Computer 








Navigation 



CIC Service menu with Navigation item selected. 


Navigation 

Screen content (example) 

Explanation 

GPS 



GPS 

Status Latitude: 12 0 34'56"N 

GPS position data 

GPS 

Tracking 01: 03 14,3, 02 xx, yy, z 

GPS satellites 

GPS 

Version Receiver SW Version/Date 

Software version and date of manufac¬ 
ture of GPS receiver 

Sensor test 

Wheel sensors, GPS satellites, Gyro 

Check of input signals 

Map version 

Map Database: 1.067 

Map version number Database: 1.067 

Location entry 

Location Entry: Entry 

loop same as destination entry 

Voice output test 




Note: Although it appears in the Service menu, TV is not available on 
US vehicles. 


67 

Car Information Computer 
















Telephone and BMW Service 



Service menu 


Navigation service 

^ Telephone service 
TV 

Gracenote 


CIC Service menu with Telephone and BMW Service selected 


Telephone 

Screen content (example) 

Explanation 

BT Name 

BMW 57502 

Bluetooth name of BMW vehicle for pairing 

NAD 

51 dBm 

GSM signal level of built-in telephone module 

MCC/MNC 

262 01 

Mobile Country Code + Mobile Network Code; 
unique code for country and network provider with 
which the phone is currently registered. 

ICC ID 

89490200000537151529 

Integrated Circuit 
identifier = Identifier of SIM card 

IMEI 

351231004373763 

International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) 
is a unique 15-digit serial number of 
the telephone transceiver 

Registration status 

Registered 

Registered = SIM card enabled and logged 
into network; Not registered = SIM card 
enabled but currently no 

Reception 



Signal strength 

20/100 

Relative signal strength of the built-in 
telephone module in percent (max 100 %) 

GPS T/D 

14:41:57 27.05.2008 

Assist cannot be enabled if time and 
date are incorrect 


Note: Although it appears in the Service menu, TV is not available on 
US vehicles. 


68 

Car Information Computer 


















TV 



Screen Shot of the TV Sub-menu in the Service Menu 


There are five sub-menus which can be selected under the TV sub-menu: 

• Ch = channel currently tuned in 

• Frequency in MHz 

• Channel information (transmission standard, bandwidth and program name) 

• DVB-T parameter (modulation type, analog, digital TV distinction) 

• Antenna information (field strength in dB|iV (Decibel micro Volt) 

Note: Although it appears in the Service menu, TV is not available on 
US vehicles. 


69 

Car Information Computer 




Gracenote® 



07 Service menu 

Navigation service 
Telephone service 

\ ™ _ 

► iH Gracenote 


The sub-menu for Gracenote under the Service menu 


The music track database can be updated under the menu item 
Gracenote. 

Once the update CD has been loaded in the CIC drive, it is 
possible to compare the currently installed data status with 
the data status of the CD in the Service menu selection 
(See illustration below). 


Ctf I 'iiF MKr- 


'graccHTOtjn- 


Gi ljcunuLu DE3 


If the CD corresponds to the current status, the latest version 
of the Gracenote® music track database is downloaded after 
selecting "Start installation". The previous version is overwritten. 



No data is added to unrecognized music tracks. The update only serves the purpose of 
identifying music tracks in connection with future music data storage converted with the 
aid of the rip function. 



c-7 Gracenote 


GNDB HDD Version = 1 - 01/08 


GNDB Update Version = 1 - 04/08 


start nsta ation 


The sub-menu for Gracenote/Start installation under the Service menu 


70 

Car Information Computer 






Resetting the CIC 

The Car Information Computer can be reset by pressing the rotary push button 
(ON button) for 25 seconds. After 25 seconds, the control display becomes 
blank as a confirmation that the CIC is being restarted. 



CIC Start Screen After a Successful Reset 


Note: When resetting the MOST control unit, the MOST gateway 
is muted for 2 seconds. 

Programming 

Programming the CIC is done with the use of the respective optical testing and 
programming interface modules. 

The interface modules OP(P)S or ICOM (A+B) are simultaneously connected to the 
OBD interface and to the MOST interface of the vehicle. 


71 

Car Information Computer 


TED 7-1774 




