Table of Contents 

E63/64 Car Communication Computer 

Subject Page 

Car Communication Computer.3 

Components.4 

Service Concept for the Car Communication Computer.6 

Electronic Parts .6 

Mechanical Parts .6 

Working on Electronic Components .6 

Preparatory Work.6 

Replacement .7 

System Functions.8 

Voice Control System .8 

System Integration .8 

Functional Principle of Voice Control System .9 

System Start/End .9 


Initial Print Date: 02/04 Revision Date: 
















Car Communication Computer (CCC) 


Model: E63/64 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Recognize the CCC 

• Identify the main CCC components 

• Disassemble and repair the CCC 

• Understand the operation of the CCC 


2 

E63/64 CCC 




Car Communication Computer 

In principle, the structure of the car communication computer corresponds to that of a 
personal computer. In the same way as a personal computer, the car communication 
computer contains a processor as well as RAM modules and other peripheral compo¬ 
nents. Certain functions such as the voice input control system are integrated in the form 
of software in the car communication computer. 

The car communication computer is the central control module for all applications. It is 
always coupled with the 8.8" split-screen central information display. The car communi¬ 
cation computer also features the high variant of the controller with haptic feedback. 

The car communication computer is based on a modular design, i.e. the main systems of 
the communication network are integrated in the form of modules in the car communica¬ 
tion computer. It can be configured and expanded corresponding to requirements. At the 
time of market launch, the following modules/functions will be integrated in the car com¬ 
munication computer: 

• Radio double tuner 

• DVD navigation system, Professional (map presentation) 

• Voice control system 

• ASK functions 

• MOST-CAN gateway functions 





The following advantages are achieved by combining several control units in one module: 

• Increased functionality by combining several systems 

• Easy to expand/upgrade by means of software with corresponding interfaces 

• Fewer plug connections therefore fewer potential fault sources 

• Reduced package space for control units 


3 

E63/64 CCC 













Components 


The car communication computer consists of several components: 


Housing 

CD-ROM drive 

DVD drive 

HIP-module 
(host independence 
positioning module) 



The car communication computer is accommodated in an 
aluminium casing. The size of the car communication 
computer corresponds to two radio DIN casings. 



The following types of CD can be played on the CD-ROM 
drive: 

- Audio CD 

- Audio CD-ROM with MP3 files 


Gyro sensor 
Tuner module 
Main board 



When the navigation system is not in use, the DVD drive 
can also be used to play audio CDs or audio CD-ROMs 
with MP3 files. 


Power board 
Audio board 



The HIP module contains the GPS receiver that has the 
task of converting and decoding the signals received from 
the GPS aerial.: 


Memory module 


Front panel 

Front panel with Bluetooth 
module (not at SOP) 

PMC-card 1 for rear 
compartment entertainment 
(not at SOP) 



The gyro sensor is a separate module that is connect¬ 
ed via plug contacts to the main board and is secured 
by a screw. 


DJWO.fli 

*!> 



In addition to the CPU (Central Processing Unit) fur¬ 
ther processors and main memories are mounted 
on the main board. The main board also contains 
plug-in slots for expansion boards. 


PMC-card 2 open 

PCMCIA-card for memory 
expansion (not at SOP) 

Electric fan 



The power board is located at the rear of the car 
communication computer. The FAKRA main con¬ 
nector for the power supply and the MOST connec¬ 
tor are secured on the power board. The main con¬ 
nector provides the interface to the vehicle electrical 
system. 


The ASK functions are located on the audio board. 
Two digital sound processors facilitate simultaneous 
conditioning of the audio signals and operation of 
the voice control system. 


4 

E63/64 CCC 
























D V 



Rear view of car communication computer 


1. 12-pin connector, left 

2. 12-pin connector, right 

3. 16-pin connector 

4. MOST connector 

5 . Cover for expansion card 

6. Connection for fan motor 


7. Cover for expansion card 

8. LVDS connector 

9. GPS aerial connector 

10. Fan motor 

11. Radio aerial connector 




03033.02 


5 

E63/64 CCC 


1. Audio Board 

2. Power Board 

3. Main Board 



































Service Concept for the Car Communication Computer 

The service concept is such that individual modules and parts of the car communication 
computer can be replaced in the event of malfunction, thus serving to reduce repair 
costs. A differentiation is made between electronic and mechanical parts. 

Electronic Parts 

Replacement of the following electronic parts is planned: 

CD drive DVD drive Tuner module HIP module 

Gyro Front panel Audio board Memory module 

PMC cards Electric fan 

Mechanical Parts 

Following mechanical parts are available: 

Top cover Bottom cover 

CD retaining fixture DVD drive holder 

Cover PMC slot Cover PCMCIA slo 


DVD drive retaining fixture 

CD drive holder 

Rubber mount for electric fan 


Particular attention must be paid to electrostatic discharge ESD when working on the car 
communication computer. Disregard of the safety requirements may result in damage to 
the electronic components in the car communication computer. 

Working on Electronic Components 
Preparatory Work 

The following points must be observed when working on electronic components of the 
car communication computer corresponding to the service concept. 

All work must be carried out on a conductive and earthed workbench. 

The special tool 12 7 192 is additionally used for this purpose. 

The earthing cable must be connected to a secure and reliable earthing point (water pipe, 
heating pipe, socket outlet earth). Before taking the parts out of their packaging, the per¬ 
son working on the components must first put on the wrist cuff in order to discharge him¬ 
self. The electronic components are placed on the antistatic mat and also connected with 
the earthing cable. 


6 

E63/64 CCC 



Replacement 

The electronic components must be replaced as described in the repair instructions and 
following the procedure described on SIP Electrostatic Fundamentals, while observing 
ESD safety measures. 



1. Antistatic Mat 

2. Ground Strap 
Antistatic Mat 

3. Wrist Strap 

4. Ground Strap 
Component 


Note: The Antistatic Mat at your Center may look different than the one shown 
here or at the training center. Remember the following when using the 
Antistatic Mat: 

• Ground the Antistatic Mat to the workbench using the attached lead 

• Attach the Grounding strap to the component being serviced 

• Always wear the wrist cuff. 



7 

E63/64 CCC 







































System Functions 

The car communication computer comprises the following functions: 

• Radio 

• DVD navigation, Professional (map presentation) 

• Voice control system 

• Online platform 

• Audio management 

• ASK functions 

• Driver for central information display 

• MOST CAN gateway 

Voice Control System 

A voice control system High is integrated in the car communication computer. With this 
system, all functions shown in the CID can be controlled by voice commands. This sys¬ 
tem has the advantage that the hands need not be taken off the steering wheel while dri¬ 
ving in order to change settings. 

The SES can be used to control the following systems: 

• Entertainment 

• Communication 

• Navigation 

• Climate 

• "5th Menu" setting 

The voice control system makes use of specific voice commands. The voice control sys¬ 
tem sets up a dialogue with the user. Repeat requests are issued if the system did not 
understand a command. 

System Integration 

The voice control system is loaded as pure software in the car communication computer. 
The voice control system makes use of the memories and processors in the car commu¬ 
nication computers as well as the hardware of other systems (e.g. microphones). 

The two hands-free microphones in the front roof console are used in connection with 
the voice control system. The hands-free microphones are connected directly to the 
telematics control unit (TCU). The TCU sends the microphone signals via MOST to the 
car communication computer where they are processed in the DSP in order to execute 
the required functions. 

8 

E63/64 CCC 





Functional Principle of Voice Control System 
System Start/End 

The voice control system is activated/deactivated via the push-to-talk button (PTT) on 
the multifunction steering wheel or on the controller. For the first time, the PTT button on 
the controller makes it possible for the passenger to use the voice control system (SES). 
The SES is activated for the driver by briefly pressing the button and for the passenger by 
pressing and holding the button longer. 

The SES is deactivated by again pressing one of the PTT buttons. Activation of the SES 
is indicated by a graphic display (PTT logo) in the status line of the CID. The system is 
active for about 5 seconds. If no input takes place during this period of time, the user is 
informed that no voice input was detected and the request for voice input is repeated. 

The voice control system is deactivated if again no input is made within 5 seconds. 



9 

E63/64 CCC 





















Workshop Exercise - CCC Disassembly 


With the Instructor’s assistance, remove and disassemble the CCC mockup using 
the Antistatic Mat. 


1. Remove CCC face plate 


2. Remove housing top plate and Tuner Module (on RH side) 


3. Remove CD -ROM drive and disconnect harness 
(shown on the right) 


4. Turn CCC upside down and remove bottom cover plate 




Remove HIP module - slide upwards and disconnect harness 
(shown on the right) 



6. Release single screw and remove the gyro sensor 
(shown on the right) 


7. Remove the Main Board surface screws 

- disconnect top ribbon cables (3) 

- disconnect bottom ribbon cables (2) 

- release fiber optic connector from rear main plug block 
(in housing) 

- remove main board (shown on the right) 


8. Remove DVD drive from the front 
(shown on the right) 


9. Remove Audio Board 
(shown on the right) 


10. Remove the power board by sliding it out of the housing 
(shown on the right) 


10 

E63/64 CCC 




































