Table of Contents 

E63/64 Head-Up Display (HUD) 

Subject Page 

Head-Up Display.3 

Advantages of the Head-Up Display .3 

Components.3 

Control Elements.4 

Image Sources.4 

Functional Description .4 

Mirror.5 

Eyebox.6 

Windshield .6 

Color Selection .7 

Light Switch with Operating Unit.7 

Instrument-Lighting Dimmer .7 

Adjusting HUD Brightness .8 

Service Information .8 

Operating-Hours Counters .8 

Windshield.8 

Replacing Head-Up Display.8 

Test Functions .8 

Image Defects .9 


Initial Print Date: 02/04 Revision Date: 






















Head-Up Display 


Model: E63/64 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• List the advantages of the HUD 

• Name the components of the HUD 

• Explain HUD operation 

• Perform HUD self test 

• Align HUD with special tools 


2 

E63/64 HUD 




Head-Up Display 


The HUD projects a virtual image into the driver's field of vision. 


Depending on the equipment installed in the vehicle, this virtual image contains informa¬ 
tion that is of relevance to the driver, such as e.g.: 

Cruise control FGR 

Active Cruise Control ACC 

Navigation 

Check Control messages 
Road speed 

The size of the virtual image is approx. 200 mm x 100 mm, 



Advantages of the Head-Up Display 

The virtual image in the driver's field of vision allows the driver to concentrate more on 
the road ahead than previously. Driving is thus rendered less fatiguing. The driver switch¬ 
es his vision between e.g. the instrument cluster and road traffic less frequently. 

Components 

The HUD is made up of the following components: 

• Cover glass 

• Mirror 

• LED power supply 

• LED array 

• Light well 

• TFT projection display 

• Shutter 

• Main board 

• Secondary board 

• Housing 

Additionally required components: 

- Windscreen 

- Light Module 

- Rain/light sensor 

- Safety and information module 

3 

E63/64 HUD 





Control Elements 


• HUDs control buttons and light switch 

• Instrument-lighting dimmer 

• Controller 

Image Sources 

The following control units supply the necessary signals for the displays: 

• Active cruise control ACC 

• Car Communication Computer CCC 

• Instrument cluster KOMBI 

• Steering column switch cluster SZL 

• Digital motor electronics DME 

Functional Description 

The HUD can be compared to a projection device. An LED field is required as the light 
source for the purpose of projecting the HUD information. The image content is created 
by the TFT projection display. The TFT projection display can be compared to a filter 
which admits or blocks light. An optical imaging element determines the shape and size 
of the HUD images. The image is projected onto the windscreen and appears freely sus¬ 
pended over the road surface. 


<\ 


FRANKFURTER 

RING 



500 m 



1. LED array 

2. TFT projection display 

3. Curved mirror 

4. Curved mirror 

5. Flat mirror (glass) 

6. Curved mirror 

7. Windscreen 

8. Observer's point of vision 

9. Projected image 




4 


E63/64 HUD 









20 ) 19 , , 6 ) 


\D 

•si) 

0 

•si) 





1. HUD finisher 

2. Cover glass 

3. Housing frame 

4. Curved mirror 

5. Flat mirror (glass) 

6. Mounting points, front bulkhead 

7. Adjusting device 

8. Curved mirror 

9. LED power supply 

10. Heatsink 

11. LED array 

12. Light well 

13. Fixture, TFT projection display 

14. TFT projection display 

15. Shutter 

16. Main board, activation of LEDs 

17. Housing frame 

18. Curved mirror 

19. Secondary board, activation of shutter 

20. Housing section 

21. Housing 


Mirror 

The HUD incorporates four mirrors. These mirrors reflect the display content onto the 
windscreen. Three of the mirrors are curved. These mirrors adapt the display content to 
the screen. 


This mirror determines the size and distance of the HUD projection. The curved mirrors 
are made of plastic while the plane mirror is made of glass. 

The course of projection is shown in the following illustration. 

The projected HUD image content appears at a distance of approx. 2.2 m from the eye. 


1. Head-Up Display 

2. Windscreen 

3. Projected image 

4. Projection distance 



5 

E63/64 HUD 



























Eyebox 

The eyebox is the movement space in which the driver can move without his view 
of the image in the HUD being impaired. 

The freedom of movement within the eyebox is roughly: 

• 130 mm horizontally 

• 90 mm vertically 

Outside the eyebox limits the image in the HUD is no longer clearly visible. 


FRANKFURTER 

jt I FRANKFURTER 

m 1 FRAN' 

RING 

f BRING 

{ Iring 

500 m 

1 500m 

1 500 

^ — 

xtn/h \ 

4 

160 km/h \ 

160 km/fc 

2 ) 

V 



r i 


160 


SOOm m 


km.'h 


\ 



FRANKFURTER 

RING 


500 m 


160 


km/h 





FRANKFURTER 

RING 


500m ^ 2 j 





1. Point of vision inside the eyebox HUD image OK 

2. Point of vision displaced to the left HUD image 
distorted to the left 

3. Point of vision displaced to the right HUD image 
distorted to the right 


1. Point of vision inside the eyebox HUD image OK 

2. Point of vision displaced downward HUD image 
distorted downward 

3. Point of vision displaced upwards HUD image 
distorted upwards 


Windshield 

The windshield is a "special" windshield and is an integral component vital to projecting 
the displays. The outer and inner glass panes are connected to a plastic film, which is 
wedge-shaped over the entire length of the windshield. 

The wedge-shape prevents double displays (ghosts) of the HUD by positioning both 
images one above the other. The wedge tip points downward and starts at a distance 
of approx.10 cm to the bottom edge of the windshield. 

The end of the wedge is located at approx. 2/3 windshield height. In the top third of the 
windshield, the plastic film runs parallel to the outer and inner glass panes. The thickness 
of the wedge tip is 0.8 mm. The thickness of the end of the wedge is 1 mm. 


6 

E63/64 HUD 


1. Outer glass pane 



'-// HUD “double display” 

4.5-™^ mam 


If a non-specified (normal) windshield is used, the image is reflected on both the outer 
and inner glass panes. Overlapping causes the image to be displayed twice. The plastic 
wedge in the windshield places the images of the outer and inner pane over each other 
thus preventing double displays (ghosts). 


Color Selection 

The HUD background color is transparent. 

Symbols (such as e.g. warning symbols) are specified by the individual control units. 
This color specification is adopted for the display in the HUD. 

2D symbols are used for optimum visibility and legibility. 

The colors are: 

• Orange as the standard color 

• Red or yellow for warning messages 

• Green for the setting speed 


Light Switch with Operating Unit 

The HUD button is located in the operating unit. The control button is resistance-coded 
and routed directly to the HUD. The HUD can identify the button signals ora button fault 
using the resistance coding. 


Instrument-Lighting Dimmer 

The dimmer setting is also used for the HUD with active headlights. The dimmer signal 
is emitted by the light module. 


7 

E63/64 HUD 











Adjusting HUD Brightness 

The brightness of the HUD can be individually adjusted. The CID is the display instru¬ 
ment and the controller the control element for brightness adjustment. 

The brightness offset is adjusted from the main menu as follows: 

The main menu is activated as soon as terminal 15 is on. 

• Press the controller, the "Settings" menu will appear. 

• Select "Display settings" and confirm 

• Select "Brightness of head-up display" and confirm 

• Set brightness and confirm the entry by pressing the controller. 

Service Information 

Operating-Hours Counters 

The HUD incorporates operating-hours counters for both the HUD and the LED array. 
When the HUD is replaced, the operating-hours counter must be initialized at 0. 

Windshield 

Bear in mind when replacing the E60 or E63 windshield that the HUD requires a special 
windshield. 

Replacing Head-Up Display 

A faulty HUD must be completely replaced. A new HUD must be adjusted once it has 
been installed. The CID must be removed for this adjustment work. 

This adjustment is performed at a screw on the supporting tube. This screw incorporates 
an eccentric which serves to adjust the angle of the HUD in relation to the windshield. 

A special tool is required for adjustment. 

Test Functions 

Different functions can be selected in service without the Service Tester. 

Press the HUD button for 30 s to call up the test functions. As soon as the first test func¬ 
tion is displayed, further test functions can be called up by briefly pressing the HUD but¬ 
ton. Press the HUD button for more than 2 s to terminate the function. 

Function selection: 

- Identification 

- System test 

- Unlocking 


8 

E63/64 HUD 



- Rain/light sensor 

- Road speed 

- Operating voltage 

- Language 

- Unit 

- Car & key memory 

- Reset. 





03105 . 0 - 



Image Defects I 

Incorrect installation of the HUD or of the wind- J/M 

shield may result in faulty HUD projections. 

The incidence of light onto the windshield or into 
the HUD in an inconvenient situation causes the 
image to fade. Excessive heat in the HUD will 
also cause the image to fade. . 

03107 03 


9 

E63/64 HUD 
















Workshop Exercise - HUD Adjustment 


With the Instructor’s assistance: 


1. Access the HUD test functions (with KL 15 on, depress HUD button for 30 sec). 
Activate the System Test as an example. To unlock the HUD (test 19) for addi¬ 
tional tests, add the last 5 numbers of the VIN. 

2. Verify the vehicle is equipped with the correct windshield. Fold back the weath¬ 
er strip at the lower A pillar corner (base of windshield) on the passenger’s side. 

Look for HUD identification label. 

3. Lower steering wheel, unclip sun visors and swivel to the side. Place a large 
covering over the driver’s side windshield (sheet of paper). Remove the on¬ 
board monitor, position special tools (62 1 121 & 62 1 122) in place. 

4. Using the DISplus/GT 1, perform a short test on the HUD. 

Select >Control Module Functions>Component Activation>Test Picture for 
Height>Activate. 


Note: Do not activate longer than 30 minutes to avoid overheating of the HUD! 

5. The height adjustment is measured at the upper limit test image only. The 
upper limit test image must beat 215 mm +/- 5 mm. If not, use special tool 

62 1 122 to release the lock nut and turn the eccentric screw until the upper 
limit is at the correct height. Tighten the lock nut. Deactivate Test Picture as 
soon as the adjustment is complete. 


10 

E63/64 HUD 




