Table of Contents 

E64 Convertible Top 

Subject Page 

Convertible Top.3 

Mechanical Components.3 

Rear Window Module .4 

Removal Procedure .4 

Hydraulic Components.5 

Electrical Components.7 

Convertible Top Lock .8 

Sensors .8 

Tensioning Rod .8 

Main Pillar.9 

Convertible Top - Compartment Locked .9 

Convertible Top - Compartment Up .9 

Kinematics Box .9 

Microswitch - Convertible Top Compartment.10 

Convertible-Specific SBFA Buttons.10 

Door Module.10 

Basic Body Module KBM.10 

CVM5.12 

Signal Sequence.12 

Top Operation .13 

Normal Operation .13 

Emergency Operation.13 

Rear Window Emergency Operation .14 

Emergency Closing .14 


Initial Print Date: 02/04 Revision Date: 



























Convertible Top 


Model: E64 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the components of the Electrohydraulic convertible top. 

• Remove the rear window module. 

• Relate the convertible top opening/closing sequence. 

• Perform convertible top emergency operation 


2 

E64 Convertible Top 




Convertible Top 

A technical highlight of the E64 is the fully automatic, electrohydraulic convertible 
top. 



1. Convertible top latch (driven by 
electric motor) 

2. Convertible top cover 

3. Headliner 

4. Fixed, heated rear window 

5. Fin 

6. Kinetics box 

7. Convertible top hydraulic system 

8. Rear window module 

9. Front brace 

10. Window seal 


The electrohydraulic convertible top consists of mechanical, electrical and hydraulic 
components. 


Mechanical Components 

<0 0 00 0 



3 0 0 © 0 


1. Front brace 

2. Brace 

3. Control arm 

4. Tensioning bar 

5. Main control arm 

6. Corner brace 

7. Fin 

8. Main bearing 

9. Main pillar 

10. Roof control arm 

11. Seal 


3 

E64 Convertible Top 




































In addition to the convertible top frame, other important mechanical components of the 
convertible top include the headliner and the convertible top cover with their mounting 
elements. 

Rear Window Module 



1. Rear window 

2. Electric motor for rear 
window drive 

3. Cover for rear window 
module 


The rear window module, however, represents a completely new mechanical element in 
the convertible top of the E64. 

The rear window module can be removed as a complete unit. This is recommended if 
major repairs need to be performed. 

Removal Procedure 

• Unplug cables (remove rear side trim, rear seat and rear seat backrest) 

• Remove cover for rollover protection system 

• Unclip cover on rear window module 

• Unscrew retaining bracket under cover 

• Remove hydraulic unit (four screws) 

• Loosen six side screws at rear window module (if necessary, mark position before¬ 
hand) 

• Unscrew cover for rear window module (nine screws, partly under module) 

The complete rear window module can now be removed. 


4 

E64 Convertible Top 








Note: 

It is sufficient to detach the cover of the rear window module if only the rear 
window is to be replaced. 

Continue as follows: 

• Screw on clamps 

• Disconnect two cables for rear window defogger 

• Lift out rear window 

When installing, the rear window must first be placed on the bottom slide and centered. 
The rear window is then firmly clamped. 

The rear window must also be removed beforehand if the electric motor for the rear win¬ 
dow drive is to be replaced (refer to repair instructions for details). 

Any leaks in the area of the rear window can be rectified by releasing the upper mounting 
screws of the rear window module and tilting the seal or changing the seal pressure. If 
this measure is not successful, the rear window must be shifted correspondingly in its 
clamp mounting. 

Hydraulic Components 

Tv 

1. Cylinder for convertible top 
compartment lid 

2. Cylinder for tensioning rod 

3. Valve block 

4. Hydraulic pump 

5. Electric motor for hydraulic pump 

6. Hydraulic pump relay 

7. Main pillar cylinder 

8. Hydraulic lines 


A pair of cylinders each acts on the main pillars, convertible top compartment lid and ten¬ 
sioning rods. The cylinders are double-acting, i.e. operated both from the piston as well 
as from the rod end. 

The operating direction of the main pillar cylinders depends on the direction of rotation of 
the hydraulic pump. 

The convertible top compartment lid is extended by corresponding actuation of the 
changeover valve 6. The cylinders for the convertible top compartment lid are designed 
such that the pressure on the piston rod end is always prevalent. The tensioning rods are 
extended and retracted by correspondingly switching the changeover valves 4 and 5. 



5 

E64 Convertible Top 














Changeover valve 7 is responsible for depressurizing the hydraulic system. Changeover 
valve 7 is activated for as long as the hydraulic pump is operating and/or pressure is 
applied to the piston end of the cylinders for the convertible top compartment lid so as to 
maintain pressure in the hydraulic system. Changeover valve 7 is no longer actuated 
when no pressure is applied to the piston end of the cylinders for the convertible top 
compartment lid and the hydraulic pump is stationary. The pressure is then reduced via 
changeover valve 7, thus depressurizing the hydraulic system. 

The pressure relief valves open at a system pressure of approx. 190 bar. 


Hydraulic Diagram 


L 



J 


1. Main pillar cylinder 

2. Convertible top compartment lid cylinder 

3. Tensioning Rod cylinder 

4. Changeover valve, extended tensioning rod 

5. Changeover valve, retract tensioning rod 

6. Changeover valve, extended top compartment lid 

7. Changeover valve, depressurize system 


8. Pressure relief valve 

9. Hydraulic pump 

10. Electric motor for hydraulic pump 

11. Silencer 

12. Pressure relief valve 

13. Pressure relief valve 

14. Oil reservoir 


6 

E64 Convertible Top 

















































































































































The hydraulic oil need not be changed (lifetime filling). If it is necessary to top up the 
hydraulic oil due to leaks, particular care must be taken to ensure that only approved 
hydraulic oil is used for this purpose (see electronic parts catalogue). Top up hydraulic oil 
only up to the mark on the oil reservoir. 

If the noise level is excessively high during operation of the convertible top, open and 
close the convertible top several times in succession in order to bleed the system. 

The hydraulic system is bled automatically in the oil reservoir. 

A temperature sensor measures the temperature of the electric motor in the hydraulic 
unit. The convertible top can only be closed once automatically as from a temperature of 
90°C and can then no longer be opened. 

Electrical Components 

The following electrical components are mounted on the electrohydraulic convertible top 
of the E64: 

• Electric motor for releasing and locking the catch hooks at the cowl panel 

• Two Hall sensors for detecting the release/lock status of the catch hooks 

• Two angle rotation sensors for detecting the position of the convertible top frame 

• Two Hall sensors in the main bearings for detecting the lock status of the convertible 
top compartment lid 

• One Hall sensor on the top left cylinder for the convertible top compartment lid for 
detecting the upper position of the lid 

• One Hall sensor on the left-hand kinematics box for detecting the bottom position of 
the convertible top compartment lid. This Hall sensor additionally checks the lock 
status of the convertible top compartment lid. 

• One microswitch for the convertible top compartment for detecting the position of 
the floor of the convertible top compartment. 

Further electrical components include: 

• Driver's switch block with Convertible-specific switch for opening/closing all 5 win¬ 
dows and separately opening/closing the rear window 

• Switch cluster in the center console for opening/closing the convertible top 

• Convertible top module 5 CVM 5 control unit for the electrohydraulic convertible top. 
This control unit is mounted behind the rear left side panel. 


7 

E64 Convertible Top 




1. Hall sensor, catch hooks closed 

2. Hall sensor, catch hooks open 

3. Drive shaft 

4. Electric motor 


Convertible Top Lock 

The catch hooks for the convertible top lock at the cowl panel are driven by an electric 
motor. 

The Hall sensors are installed on the left-hand side of the front brace. They signal the 
"Convertible top locked at cowl panel" and "Convertible top released at cowl panel" sta¬ 
tuses. 


1. Angle of rotation sensor, 
tensioning rod 

2. Kinematics box 

3. Hall sensor, convertible top 
compartment lid down and 
locked 

4. Hall sensor, convertible top 
compartment lid up 

5. Angle of rotation sensor, 
main pillar 

6. Hall sensor, convertible top 
compartment lid locked, left 


Sensors 

Tensioning Rod 

The angle of rotation sensor is designed as a poten¬ 
tiometer and is installed on the left-hand tensioning rod. 
The output voltage changes at the wiper contact of the 
potentiometer during convertible top operation. 

The CVM 5 converts the voltage values to angle values. 
The CVM 5 uses the angle value to recognize the main 
pillar angle of 1070 for instance. The convertible top lid 
is not release and opened before this angle is reached. 

8 

E64 Convertible Top 






















Main Pillar 

The angle of rotation sensor is designed as a potentiometer and is 
installed on the left-hand main pillar. The output voltage changes 
at the wiper contact of the potentiometer during convertible top 
operation. 

The CVM 5 converts the voltage values to angle values. 



Convertible Top - Compartment Locked 

One Hall sensor is fitted on the left-hand main 
bearing and the other on the right-hand main 
bearing of the electrohydraulic convertible top. 

The two Hall sensors signal the "Convertible 
top compartment lid locked at main bearing" 
status to the CVM 5. 


Convertible Top - Compartment Up 

The Hall sensor for "Convertible top compart¬ 
ment up" is installed at the top end of the left- 
hand cylinder for the convertible top compart¬ 
ment lid. 


Kinematics Box 

The cylinders press the convertible top compartment lid into the down position such as 
to operate the cable assemblies that in turn engage the catch hooks. The cable assembly 
runs from the kinematics box to the main bearing of the convertible top. After the cable 
assembly has been operated, the Hall sensor signals the "Convertible top compartment 
lid down and locked" status to the kinematics box. 


9 

E64 Convertible Top 






Note: The convertible top compartment lid can no 
longer be locked after opening the electrohydraulic 
convertible top using the emergency facility. 
Consequently, the driving wind can rip the convertible 
top compartment lid out of its hinge. 

Microswitch - Convertible Top Compartment 

The microswitch is installed on the right-hand side on the 
convertible top compartment. The CVM 5 evaluates the sig¬ 
nal from the microswitch. The CVM 5 receives a low signal 
when the convertible top compartment is in the down posi¬ 
tion. 


Convertible-Specific SBFA Buttons 


In the SBFA, the buttons for the rear power window addi¬ 
tionally feature Convertible-specific functions. These func¬ 
tions are: 


• Raise or lower all 5 windows simultaneously 

• Raise or lower the rear window 


The functions are controlled with the buttons for the rear 
window defogger. Two additional buttons in the SBFA acti¬ 
vate the corresponding function. A green LED in the corre¬ 
sponding button indicates when a function is active. 


Door Module 

Convertible-specific power window functions When one of 
the doors is opened, the TMFA orTMBF recognizes this status 
via the respective door contact.The side windows are then low¬ 
ered by approx. 2 cm in order to protect the seal. The side win¬ 
dows are lowered by approx. 10 cm when opening or closing 
the convertible top. The CVM 5 sends the request to lower the 
power windows via the K-CAN to the CAS 2. 


1. Button for all 5 windows 

2. Power window button, rear 
driver's side 

3. LED button, all 5 windows 
activated and at standby 

4. LED button, rear window 
activated and at standby 

5. Power window button, rear 
passenger's side 

6. Button, rear window 


Basic Body Module KBM 

Convertible-specific power window functions Since the rear power windows feature no 
anti-trapping circuit, the KBM evaluates and forwards the following statuses: 

• Power window in Open position 

• Power window between Open/Close or Close/Open position 

• Power window in Closed position 

The power window Open or Closed positions are detected based on the blocking current 
of the power window motors. 

10 

E64 Convertible Top 







Convertible Top Schematic 


1. 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 
9. 

10. 

11 . 

12. 




FT 


L 

KOMBl^ 


Kl. 15 WUP 

1, 

L 


) DSC 




je>(S 

<)CAS2J 


:3 

28, (K) HUD 

P 

1 


K'CAN 

! 29 eV’^iszM 




Driver’s Door Lock 
Window Motor L/F 
Anti-trap L/F 
Door Module L/F 
Switch Block 
SGM 

Window Switch R/F 
Door Module R/F 
Anti-trap R/F 
Window Motor R/F 
Window Motor L/R 
Window Motor R/R 


13. Trunk Lock 25. 

14. Sensor Top Cowl Open 26. 

15. Sensor Top Cowl Clsd 27. 

16. Sensor Top Lid L/S 28. 

17. Valve Tension rod 29. 

18. Hydraulic Temp Sensor 30. 

19. Pump Relay closed 31. 

20. Hydraulic pump motor 32. 

21. Pump Relay open 33. 

22. Valve Tension rod 34. 

23. Valve top lid 35. 

24. Sensor lid open 36. 


Sensor lid locked r/s 37. 

Motor top lock 38. 

KBM 39. 

HUD 40. 

SZM 41. 

CVM5 42. 

Switch top lid down 43. 

Sensor lid bottom left 44. 

Relay r. window down 45. 

Relay r. window up 
Sensor Main Pillar 
Sensor tension rod 


03997_03 


CAS2 

CID 

Outside temp sensor 

Remote 

KOMBI 

DSC 

Sensor wheel speed 
Motor rear window 
Sensor r. window down 


E64 Convertible Top 














































































































































































































































































































CVM5 



1. Basic body module 

2. Door module, 
passenger's side 

3. Centre console 
switch cluster 

4. Convertible top 
module 5 

5. Door module, 
driver's side 

6. CAS2 


Signal Sequence 

The center console switch cluster SZM recognizes the switch position "Open convertible 
top" and this information is sent via the K-CAN to the CVM 5. Following a safety enquiry 
performed by the CAS2, the CVM 5 activates the power window motors via the front 
door modules and KBM. The motors lower the 4 side windows a little. The rear window 
motor completely lowers the rear window (activated by CVM 5). 

The CVM 5 then drives the electric motor in the front brace. This motor releases the 
catch hooks at the cowl panel and slightly raises the front brace. 

The CVM 5 now activates the hydraulic module. First, the fins and front brace are raised. 
The convertible top compartment lid is then released and opened. When the Hall sensor 
on the cylinder for the convertible top compartment lid signals the "Convertible top com¬ 
partment lid up" status, the CVM 5 switches over the pump in the hydraulic module 
(hydraulic pump turns in other direction) and the convertible top is folded by means of the 
main pillar cylinders into the convertible top compartment. 

When the angle of rotation sensors on the convertible top frame signal to the CVM 5 that 
the convertible top is positioned in the convertible top compartment, the changeover 
valve for driving the cylinders of the convertible top compartment lid is switched off and 
the convertible top compartment lid is closed by means of the cylinders. The convertible 
top compartment lid is locked by means of a cable assembly from the kinematics box to 
the main bearing. The Hall sensor on the left-hand kinematics box signals to the CVM 5 
that the convertible top compartment lid is closed and locked. The CVM 5 and KBM 
send a signal indicating that all 5 windows are now closed. 


12 

E64 Convertible Top 











Top Operation 

Normal Operation 

In addition to the correct position of the base of the convertible top compartment, further 
conditions must be met before the convertible top can be operated: 

• Boot lid must be closed 

• Vehicle speed must be less than 30 km/h 

• Outside temperature must not be below -10°C 

• Key in ignition lock turned to at least position R 

Once these conditions have been met, the following operating procedure is initiated by 
pressing and holding the button to open the convertible top: 

• Side windows are lowered slightly 

• Rear window is lowered completely 

• Front brace of convertible top is released at cowl panel 

• Fins are raised 

• Convertible top lid is released and raised 

• Convertible top is folded into convertible top compartment 

• Convertible top compartment lid is closed and locked 

• Side windows and rear window are raised 

The convertible top can also be opened with the key. The key must be held in open 
direction in the driver's door during the entire convertible top opening procedure. 

Auto-remote opening with remote control is also possible. An auto-remote closing fea¬ 
ture is not provided for safety reasons. 

Emergency Operation 

The convertible top can also be operated manually in the event of electrohydraulic sys¬ 
tem failing. 

Emergency closing of convertible top: 

1. Slightly lower side windows and completely lower rear window. 

2. Release emergency top compartment lid from the luggage compartment using the 
emergency release facility (left and right) and open. 

3. With the aid of a second person, lift the convertible top out of the convertible top 
compartment and raise the fins. 


13 

E64 Convertible Top 




4. Close convertible top compartment lid. 

5. Lower the fins onto the convertible top compartment lid. 

6. Remove cover at middle of front brace. 

7. Using the cranked socket head wrench from the vehicle tool box, lock the convertible 
top at the front brace. The cranked hexagon socket head wrench engages in the 
gear unit of the electric motor and locks the catch hooks at the cowl panel. 

Rear Window Emergency Operation 

Emergency Closing 

- Remove cover between the rear headrests 

- Fit the cranked hexagon socket head wrench from the vehicle tool box on the screw 

and turn in counter clockwise direction until the rear window is closed. 


14 

E64 Convertible Top 



Check-Control Messages 


CC-Message 


Rear window Emerg. 
operation 


Lower soft-top 
compartment base 


Soft top not engaged 


Soft top max. 30 km/h 


Soft top Emergency 
operation 


End of convertible top 
movement 


CC-Indicator 


Message in CID 



Rear window Malfunction: 

Operation of soft top only possible after emer¬ 
gency operation of rear window. 

For emergency operation of rear window, see 
Owner's Handbook. 

Have the problem checked as soon as 
possible by BMW Service. 



Soft-top comp, base 

Base not lowered, soft top cannot be 

operated. 

Lower soft-top compartment base and open 
soft top. 




Soft top 

Automatic locking faulty. 

Lock soft top manually, see Owner's 
Handbook. 

Have the problem checked by BMW Service. 


Soft top 

Automatic soft top may only be opened or 
closed at speeds of up to 30 km/h. 

Reduce speed and resume operation of soft 
top. 



Soft top 

Control electronics failed. 

For emergency operation of soft top, see 
Owner's Handbook. 



End of convertible top movement. 



Roll-over protection fault 


Boot open 




Roll-over protection Malfunction: 

Have the problem checked by the nearest 
BMW Service. 


Please close boot lid. 


15 

E64 Convertible Top 























Workshop Exercise - Convertible Top Assembly 


Rear Window Module Removal 

With the Instructor’s assistance: 

1. Remove the RR interior trim panel (armrest and speaker panel). 

2. Remove rear seat (upper and lower), rear headrests, upper seat and 
URSS trim panels. 

3. Remove rear window base seal. 

4. Unscrew hydraulic unit (4 screws) and slide rearward. 

5. Remove retaining bracket screws (2). Loosen the side screws (3 per side) 
on the rear window module. 

6. Unplug the rear window motor wiring harness (at the body). 

7. Manually lower the rear window (if up), slide the rear window module out of the 
retaining bracket and remove for bench top service. 

8. With the module on the bench, remove the remaining cover screws to expose 
the electric motor and window drive. 

9. Reassemble and install in vehicle. 


Convertible Top Emergency Operation 

1. With top open, open trunk, access and pull the release cables (Left and Right). 

2. Switch ignition off, wait a few seconds for the hydraulics to bleed down. 

3. With 2 people, lift the top storage cover and fold the top up and out. Close the 
storage cover lid and unfold the top into the closed position. 

4. The crank handle (in tool kit) is required to lock the top at the front brace 
(windshield frame). Using the same tool, remove the access panel between 
the rear headrests and crank the rear window up. 


16 

E64 Convertible Top 




