TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Subject Page 

Introduction .2 

Body.3 

Specifications.4 

Hood/Front Grille .6 

Doors/Mirrors.7 

Interior .9 

Climate Control Systems .15 

Cargo Area.22 

Tailgate.25 

D rivet rain .28 

Front Suspension .31 

Rear Suspension .33 

EHC Control System and EHC 2 .35 

Steering .60 

Brakes .61 

Wheels & Tires .62 

Fuel Supply System .63 

Exhaust System .64 

Power Distribution .65 


Component Locations 


66 






















Introduction 


The X5 marks BMW’s introduction into the luxury “Sports Activity Vehicle (SAV)” niche seg¬ 
ment of the Sport Utility Vehicle market. While carrying the designation X5, the vehicle is not 
based on the 5 Series but it is its own new car-like platform. The X5 is offered with two 
engine variants: 


• The 4.4 liter M62 TU engine equipped with the A5S 440 Z automatic transmission. 

• The 3 liter M54 engine with either the GM 5 automatic (A5S360R) or 5 speed manual 
transmission (S5D280Z). 


The X5 incorporates the following 
features: 


• Four wheel independent sus¬ 
pension (BMW tradition) 

• Full time - all wheel drive 
(planetary gear transfer case) 

• All road vehicle (ON/OFF road 
capabilities) 

• High ground clearance 

• Unitized body and Chassis 
(car like ride and handling) 

• Double pivot front suspension 

• “Integral Link” rear suspen¬ 
sion with air spring self level¬ 
ing 

• X5 specific traction control 
system 



Two different suspension options are offered (standard and sport) with different springs, 
shock absorbers and stabilizers. 

The X5 has 180 mm ground clearance, for both suspensions to allow off road travel. 
However, the suspension travel is the same as the E39 which allows the X5 to retain a car 
like feel when driven every day. 


2 




















Body 


The design of the X5 originated in California at BMW’s Design Works. The SAV look was 
further developed and refined in Munich. Traditional BMW features such as the Kidney 
grilles, quad headlights, reverse link rear side window trim and typical rear tail light treat¬ 
ment allow the X5 to assume a BMW identity. Yet the unique side and hood treatments as 
well as the large wheel house openings and high ground clearance set the X5 apart as its 
own distinctive vehicle. 

The design criteria for the X5 was to develop a vehicle with the superb handling and sporty 
driving characteristics that are typically BMW, yet produce an all wheel drive vehicle that can 
also be used off-road. This was achieved through the use of independent front suspension 
and multi-link rear suspension components that are taken from the E38/E39 vehicle design 
and expanded by the addition of front drive components. 


The entire body shell/frame assembly of the 
X5 is reinforced to ensure optimized body 
rigidity. 


In addition to the cross bracing on the front 
suspension/engine carrier, an additional 
panel is installed between the bulkhead and 
transmission tunnel. 


The floor pan of the X5 is reinforced with 
additional ribbing and cross braces to 
increase the lateral rigidity. A continuous seat 
cross brace is connected to the floor pan 
and side sill for reinforcement. 





3 



















Specifications 






00530011-1 

4 











































































































Specifications 


Dimensions: 


X5 3.0i 

X5 4.4i 

X5 4.6is 

Doors 

5 

5 

5 

Length 

4666 mm 

4666 mm 

4666mm 

Width 

1872 mm 

1872 mm 

1872mm 

Height 

1717 mm 

1717 mm 

1717mm 


Engine: 


X5 3.0i 

X5 4.4i 

X5 4.6is 

Designation 

M54B30 

M62 TU B44 

M62 TU B46 

Engine Management Syst. 

MS 43 

ME 7.2 

ME 7.2 

Horsepower (HP) 

225@5900RPM 

282@5400RPM 

340@5700RPM 

Torque 

214@3500RPM 

324@3600RPM 

350@3700 

Bore 

84mm 

92mm 

93mm 

Stroke 

89.6mm 

82.7mm 

85mm 

Compression 

10.2:1 

10.0:1 

10.5:1 


Vechicle Weigth withTransmission: 

X5 3.0i 

X5 4.4i 

X5 4.6is 

Automatic 2015 Kg 

Manual 1990 Kg 

2085 Kg 

Not Available 

2188 Kg 

Not Available 


General 


X5 3.0i 

X5 4.4i 

X5 4.6is 

Fuel 

921 

921 

921 

Drag Coefficient 

0.35 

0.36 

0.38 

Payload 

610 kg 

555 kg 

N/A 

Roof Load 

150 kg 

150 kg 

150 kg 

Gross Weight 

Manual Trans. 

2600 kg 

Not Available 

N/A 

Gross Weight 

Auto Trans. 

2625kg 

2650kg 

N/A 

Cargo Volume 

16.1/54.4 cu ft. 

16.1/54,4 cuft. 

16.1/54,4 cuft. 

Towed Weight Braked 
Manual 

1600 kg 

Not Available 

N/A 

Towed Weight Braked 
Automatic 

1700 kg 

750 kg 

N/A 

Turning Circle 

39.7 ft. 

39.7 ft. 

39.7 ft. 


5 


















Hood/Front Grille 


The hood on the X5 is distinctive, with two IHKA air intake hood scopes in the center lead¬ 
ing down to the traditional BMW twin grilles. 


Workshop Hint: 

Hood prop tool number 90 88 6 512 170 


Hood Scoops 




The grilles are integrated into the hood with 
the secondary hood latch springing out from 
the grille when the hood is opened. 


The four round headlights complete the front 
end with Xenon low beans as an option for 
the X5. The fog lights as well as the headlight 
washers are integrated into the bumper. 



6 
























Doors/Mirrors 


The doors on the X5 incorporate side bars which serve as side impact protection without 
the use of the metal hooks found on the sedans. The mirrors are aero style that includes 
cascade lighting at the bottom of the mirror for vehicle entry at night. The lights are switched 
on when the vehicle is unlocked to light the ground around the door. The cascade lighting 
is optional. Control relay for the cascade lighting is located in the electrical carrier above the 
glove box. 



Running boards, integrated into the rocker panels, provide ease of entry on the left 
and right sides. 



7 




Door Handle 


The door handles are similar in design to the 
E46 and pull out and upward for opening. 
Removal of the handles is also similar to the 
E46. 

There are no serviceable components on the 
lock/latch. The assembly must be replaced as 
a unit. 

The lock cylinder is removed by removing the 
torx screw through the access hole in the door. 
Once the screw is removed, the lock cylinder 
can be pushed out of the handle assembly. 



The handle is removed by loosening the hex 
nut holding the handle to the latch mechanism. 



The handle is then removed by pulling it out 
and down to release it from the latch. The han¬ 
dle is turned down to the left to release it from 
the door latch assembly. 



8 
















Interior/Seats 


The instrument cluster and dashboard layout is similar to other BMW models with all of the 
controls in easy reach of the driver. The instrument cluster variations (high and base) are 
taken from the E39 as are all driver information electronic systems. 


High Cluster 


Base Cluster 




62530012 


62530013 


The center console contains the radio or navigation system and the climate control panel 
along with the central switch panel (SZM). 





64530003 


9 


































































































































Interior 


Located above the windshield in the center is the overhead console that contains the uni¬ 
versal remote switch panel, interior lighting/map panel, sunroof switch and grille for the tele¬ 
phone hands-free microphone. The light panel contains a single bulb which is controlled by 
the ZKE, as well as two map reading lamps. The switch provides a ground signal which the 
GM recognizes as a request to either turn the interior lights on or off. If the switch is held > 
3 seconds, the lights are switched off in the work shop mode as on other models. 


Left Map Light 


Interior Light 



Right Map Light 



Universal Remote 


Incorporated into the overhead con¬ 
sole, behind the universal remote 
switch, is a sunglass storage com¬ 
partment 



63530002 


Sunglass Holder 


10 










































































































Interior/Seats 


Two interior seat options (comfort and sport) are available for the X5. The seats are mount¬ 
ed high in the cabin for good visibility and offer 8-way power, memory adjustments with 
lumber support. The seat/mirror memory control module and switch assembly is located on 
the side of the driver’s seat. 



11 



Rear Seats 


The rear seating area on the X5 offers 1472mm width and 977mm of head room for com¬ 
fortable seating for the rear passengers. Rear cup holders are installed in the center con¬ 
sole below the IHKA outlet grilles which incorporates a separate blower fan for the rear 
seating area. 



The rear seats have a 60/40 split with the fold down center arm rest on the left seat back. 
The center arm rest also includes the optional folding ski bag. 


60 Split 



40 Split 


12 

































Rear Seat Backrest Adjustment 


Electric rear seat backrest adjustment is 
available on the X5 as optional equipment. 
Each backrest can be adjusted individually 
up to 20 degrees, the backrest adjustment 
option consists of the following: 


• Left/Right adjusting motors with gear 
drive and seat back hooks - located 
behind the seat backs on the shock 
towers. The rear seat backs lock into 
the “D" shaped hooks on the backrest 
adjustment linkage. 




Left/Right adjusting switches - located 
in the interior light housing in the head¬ 
liner panel. 



• Left/Right adjusting switches - located 
in the rear on the left and right sides of 
the “D” pillar behind the upper tailgate. 



13 

































































































System Operation 

The seat backs are adjusted from the two different locations as follows: 

• The switches in the interior light housing receive operating power through the seat back 
relay when the ignition is switched on KL 15. The GM controls the operation of the relay 
and the switches provide the ground. 

• The switches in the “D” pillar receive KL 30 and allow seat back adjustment whenever 
the rear tailgate is opened to gain access to the switches. 

• The adjustment motors receive power and ground directly from the switches. 


KL30 



14 


























































































































Climate Control Systems (IHKR/IHKA) 

Two climate control systems are offered on the X5, the manual IHKR system is standard 
equipment on the 3 liter X5 and the IHKA system is available as an option. The IHKR is a 
new system for US production and the IHKA is taken from the E39 vehicles. 

Condenser/Receiver Dryer 

The X5 incorporates a new design air conditioning condenser/receiver dryer for both the 
manual (IHKR) and the automatic (IHKA) systems. The dryer cartridge and condenser are 
one component with the dryer integrated on the left side. The dryer cartridge contains a 
replaceable filter screen and dryer unit. 

The condenser is partitioned which divides the condenser into cooling sections. The hot 
refrigerant flows across the condenser and into the dryer through inlet holes at the lower 
1/3 section of the cooling fins. After the refrigerant passes through the dryer it returns to 
the evaporator through the outlet hole and bottom 1/3 section of the condenser. 


Condenser Side View 



64530000 


15 



































































Climate Control System (IHKR) 


The manual system is controlled through the use of bowden cables for air distribution and 
electronic control for temperature regulation and blower speed. One stepper motor is used 
for the fresh/recirculated air intake. 

The IHKR incorporates the following features: 

• Fresh air intake grilles integrated into the hood - the fresh air passes through the single 
micro filter installed in the center of front bulkhead. 



Intake 
Fresh Air 


The air then passes through the air duct, which is bolted to the bulkhead, and enters the 
heater - A/C unit through the non-return flaps. 



16 
























IHKR Control Unit 


• Integrated control module with oper¬ 
ating panel. 



• IHKR heater/air conditioner unit with 

- 1 heat exchanger temperature sensor 

- 1 evaporator temperature sensor 

- 1 footwell temperature sensor 

- Blower motor 

- 1 stepper motor (high speed fresh/rcirc air) 



17 






















































































































































































































































































IHKR Operation 

IHKR system operation is as follows: 

• Temperature Control - The desired interior temperature is set with the rotary knob on the 
control panel. Control of the interior temperature is carried out electronically by the con¬ 
trol module’s cycling of the water valve to regulate coolant flow through the heat 
exchanger. 

• Air Distribution - Air distribution is set mechanically through the use of gear linkages and 
bowden cables. The air can be set for: 

- Footwell or blended between footwell/face vent or footwell and defrost 

- Defrost or blended between footwell/defrost or defrost/face vent 

- Face vent or blended between face vent/footwell or face vent/defrost 

• Blower Control - Blower fan speed is controlled through a final stage with infinitely vari¬ 

able speed control. 

The push buttons on the control panel are used to: 

• Switch between fresh air and recirculating air inlet modes 

• Request for A/C activation 

• Activation of the rear window defogger 



18 



























IHKR IPO 


KL31 





KL30 


eiiiih 




Fan Speed 


Request 


A/C Compressor 



Recirculation 


nwmm=, 


Rear Defrost 



Temperature 
^T^Control 



Evaporator 
Temperature Sensor 



Refrigerant Pressure Sensor 


WATER 

OUTLET 

A 



TEMP 

SENSOR 


IHKR 


Blower Relay 




Washer Jet Heater 


Blower 


Blower Motor Ouput Stage 


Rear Window Defoger Relay 


iiP 


Aux. Fan Speed Relay Control 




Fresh Air Flap Motor 



Water Valve 


DIS & Modic 



64530006.cdr 


19 



















































































































































































Climate Control System (IHKA) 


The IHKA is standard equipment on the X5 with the M62 engine and optional equipment 
on the M54 version. The IHKA system is taken from the E39 sedan and includes all func¬ 
tions and features of the IHKA currently installed in the E39. 

Features of the IHKA system include: 

• Integrated control panel/module. 

• Separate temperature control for the driver and front passenger. 

• Air flap control through the use of bussed stepper motors. 

• Automatic Recirculation Control (AUC). 

• Recirculation air flap control from the MFL. 

• “REST” function for residual heat when vehicle is stopped. 

• Service station feature that closes the water valves when stopped to prevent hot water 
circulating into the heater cores. 

• A/C compressor clutch activation through a final stage control. 

• Center face vent stratification control through a bowden cable. 

• Separate blower motor for rear passenger compartment 



The rear blower motor is located below the center storage box behind the center air outlet 
grilles. The blower speed control is mounted in the panel below the outlets. Cool or strati¬ 
fied air is available at the center outlets. 


20 













































IHKA Air Flow 


The micro filter for the IHKA system is installed in the engine compartment in the center of 
the engine bulkhead. 



64530005 



21 

























Cargo Area 


The cargo area of the X5 offers 450 liters/15.9 cuff of space and has a load capacity of 440 
pounds. The retractable, removable cargo cover is standard equipment. Storage com¬ 
partments are located on the left and right sides in the rear. 




The left side storage compartment contains the NAV 
computer when installed and the telephone transceiv¬ 
er and CD changer. 


The right side storage compartment 
contains the rear power distribution 
fuse box as well as the sub-woofer 
for the stereo system. Mounted in 
front of the right side storage com¬ 
partment are two 12 volt accessory 
power sockets. 


22 


























Cargo Area 


The sliding load floor is available as an option on the 
X5. It is mounted through two sliding bushing on two 
steel rails 



51530000 


The load floor is held in position by the 
locking bowden cable mechanism that 
latches when closed to prevent the 
floor for sliding while the vehicle is 
moving. The load floor incorporates a 
shear point that will cause the floor to 
collapse upward in a rear collision. 



51520002 


23 










Cargo Area 


The full size spare tire is mounted 
below the load floor with the LVA air 
supply system for the air springs 
located beneath the spare. 



The battery is mounted below the LVA 
in a molded plastic battery box, along 
with the EHC control module and the 
PDC control module. If the optional 
trailer towing package is installed, the 
trailer module is also installed in the 
module carrier. 




24 
















Tailgate 


The tailgate on the X5 is two sections that 
open up and down. The upper section has a 
fixed bonded rear glass that incorporates the 
rear window wiper and motor assembly. Two 
gas strut pistons are used on the upper sec¬ 
tion for opening. An electric actuator is incor¬ 
porated in the upper section with the micro 
switch for operation located between the two 
license plate lights. The actuator locks into 
the lower tailgate section when closed. 




A micro-switch positioned in the center console switch 
panel is used to open the tail gate from inside the 
vehicle. 


Operation of the upper tail gate is con¬ 
trolled from the GM which locks the 
operation of the gate when the vehicle 
speed is over 5 MPH. A dealer installed 
class three trailer hitch is available as an 
option with a towing capacity of 6000 
pounds. 



25 

































Tailgate 


The lower tailgate section also uses an electric actuator for its operation. The actuator is 
positioned in the center of the tailgate and operates two latches though bowden cables. 
The latches are positioned on the left and right sides of the tailgate. Two springs are used 
to dampen the operation of the lower tailgate section. 




51530003 



51530005 


Adjustments of the rear tailgate are car¬ 
ried out at the tailgate body latch on the 
left and right sides. 



26 












Tailgate (Emergency Opening) 


Both sections of the tailgate incorporate emergency release mechanisms for opening the 
tailgate in the event of electrical or component failures. 

The upper tailgate release is a plastic pull tab positioned on the right side of the inner trim 
cover. Pulling the release tab will mechanically release the upper actuator. 



Emergency Release 



The lower tailgate emergency release is accessed by removing the trim cover on the tail¬ 
gate section. With the gate closed, only the top section will be able to be loosened. The 
mechanical release is actuated by inserting a small screwdriver into the opening and press¬ 
ing the latch to the left. 

Emergency Release 



27 










































Drivetrain 

The transfer case, driveshafts, final drives and half shafts make up the drivetrain assembly. 
The transfer case is always mounted in the same position on the X5. This applies to other 
markets and future models that will utilize different transmissions for different engine con¬ 
figurations. With these models, the transmission tail shafts will be modified to match up with 
the transfer case. 

The rear driveshaft is a two piece unit using a center bearing, while the front drive shaft is 
a single piece that is splined to the transfer case and bolted to the front differential. 



The breather vents for both differentials and the transfer case are mounted higher up on the 
chassis to prevent water from entering if the vehicle is driven off road through water. The 
front breather passes up into the engine compartment and is mounted under the left side 
ignition coil cover. The rear breather passes along the under side of the body and is mount¬ 
ed behind the left side wheel arch cover. The breather vent for the transfer case is mount¬ 
ed up high in the driveshaft tunnel. 



28 





Drivetrain-Transfer Case 


The transfer case is manufactured by New Process Gear Division of New Venture Gear 
Company. It is identified as model NV 125. 

It incorporates a planetary gear set and chain to provide the torque split and all wheel drive. 
The output torque of the transmission is applied to the planetary carrier of the gear set. The 
rear drive shaft is connected to the annulus gear and the front drive shaft is connected to 
the sun gear through the chain drive. 

As the output shaft of the transmission turns, the planetary carrier rotates, causing the 
planetary gears to drive the sun gear and annulus gear. 



A torque split of 68% rear/ 32% front is provided through the gearing of the planetary set. 



68°/c 

32°/c 


26530004 


29 










Drivetrain-Final Drives 


The final drives for the front and rear axles are conventional differentials. The DSC system 
provides anti-spin/slip control for both the front and rear axles on the X5. 


The rear differential is the HAG 188K 
(compact) unit with a ratio of 3.64 : 1 



The front differential is the VAG 174 
unit with a ratio of 3.64 : 1. 



30 

















Front Suspension 

The front suspension design is taken from the E38/E39 double pivot system. The compo¬ 
nents are larger in size and made from all steel for the expected harder use that the X5 sus¬ 
pension will receive. This includes the sub-frame which is also larger in size and supported 
by two hydraulic mounts for vibration absorbion. The front suspension carrier incorporates 
an aluminum stiffening plate that is bolted to the carrier. It adds to the front axle kinematics 
by reducing flex in the front suspension. It also provides protection for the oil pan and front 
end components when off-road and improves the Cd by providing a smooth surface for air 
flow under the vehicle. 



Front Axle Technical Data 

TRACK: 1576mm 
TOE-IN: 18’ +/-10’ 

CAMBER: -12’ +/- 20’ 

S.A.I: 12 Degree’s 48 Feet 
CASTER: 7 Degree’s 8 Feet 


31 


















Front Suspension Alignment 


The front suspension is adjustable for 
toe-in and camber. The camber cor¬ 
rection is limited to +/- 12 minutes 
through the elongated slots at the top 
of the strut towers. 



The locating pin at the strut mount is 
pressed in place and must be pried out 
for removal in order to make any cam¬ 
ber corrections. 



32 












Rear Suspension 

The rear suspension is the “intragal” multi-link design taken from the E38/E39 vehicles. 
Several components AER made from aluminum to erduce the unsprung weight. The X5 
with the M62TU engine uses the EHC (air spring) suspension system. The EHC functions 
the same as the E39 Sport Wagon with only minor differences to the components and lay¬ 
out of the system. The X5 with the M54 engine will use standard springs in the rear with the 
EHC system as an option. The rear struts on the X5 are mounted to the body instead of the 
sub-frame. 

The rear axle sub-frame is mounted to the body through four bushings (larger than E38) for 
increased load and comfort. The rear differential is mounted through three rubber bushings 
two in the front and one hydromount in the rear. The wheel bearings are similar to the E39 
but incorporate different seals - designed for off-road use. 



Rear Axle Technical Data 

Track: 1576mm 


Toe In: 18 Feet 


Camber 1 Degree 50 Feet 


New special tools are available for adjusting the rear suspension due to the limited space, 


33 


















Rear Suspension Alignment 

As with other BMW multi-link suspensions, the X5 rear suspension is adjustable for Camber 
and Toe-in. Due to the limited space, special tools have been produced for aligning the rear 
suspension. 

The Camber is adjusted through the eccentric bushings at the upper control link arm. 


v 



Camber Eccentric 





-32530002 


The toe-in is adjusted at the lower control arm mount. 



34 






Overview of EHC Control System 

The control philosophy of EHC is to "Initiate a control sequence only when necessary". 
The system offers the following advantages: 

• The control system operates independently from the vehicle’s engine (no engine driven 
hydraulic pump system as per previous self leveling systems). 

• Individual control of the rear wheels is possible 

• An uneven load is identified and compensated for 

• Uneven road surfaces are identified and not compensated for 

• Automatic control is interrupted when cornering 

• The system is diagnosable using the DIS or MoDiC 

The air suspension system consists of the following components: 



37530000 


35 



























EHC System Components 

Control Module 


The Control Module is mounted in the module carrier box in the luggage compartment on 
the right side. It contains the processing electronics and final stages for operation of the 
EHC system. 


The control module receives the follow¬ 
ing inputs for its processing functions: 

• KL 30 & 31 (Power/Ground) 

• KL 15 

• Left & Right Ride Height Sensors 

• K Bus for; 

- Vehicle speed 

- Engine running 

- Door/tailgate - open/closed 



The control module incorporates two filters (slow/rapid) for processing the input signals 
from the ride height sensors. Depending on the operating mode, either the slow or rapid fil¬ 
ter is used to check the need for a regulating sequence. 

The slow filter is used during the normal operation mode to prevent normal suspension trav¬ 
el from causing the system to make adjustments. 




The rapid filter is used during the pre-run and tailgate (LID) modes to ensure that the sus¬ 
pension is adjusted quickly while the vehicle is being loaded or checked prior to operation. 


36 












































































Air Springs 


The air spring is made from a flexible rubber material. It 
forms an air tight cavity which provides the calculated spring 
rate required for the sport wagon. 

As the spring compresses downward the bottom edge of 
the rubber material rolls along the vertical surface of the 
base mount cylinder. 

Air is added or removed from the air spring through its top 
port. The top port of each spring is connected to a reser¬ 
voir and the air supply pipes. The reservoirs are required to 
hold additional air due to the compact design of the springs. 

Rear Axle Level Sensors 



Hall effect sensors are mounted on the left 
and right sides of the rear suspension for ride 
height detection. They are pivoted by a cou¬ 
pling rod through the rear axle swing arms. 

The hall sensors produce a varying voltage 
input to the control module as the suspension 
height changes. 

If the vehicle is equipped with Xenon head¬ 
lights the right side sensor contains an addi¬ 
tional sensor for the automatic headlight level 
adjustment system. 

Warning Display 



If the system is faulted and off-line or set in the transport mode, the following is displayed: 


High Cluster: A message is posted in the high cluster matrix display. 



37 






















































Air Supply System (LVA) 


The air supply system is identified as the LVA in the diagnosis program and in the repair 
manual. It is mounted in the spare tire well compartment. The components are housed in 
a sound deadening carrier, through rubber bushings, to prevent operating noises from 
being transmitted through the vehicle’s interior. 

With the exception of the compressor relay, individual replacement parts for the air supply 
system are not available. If diagnosis determines a defect in any of the other air system 
components, complete replacement is necessary. 


The air supply system consists of the following components: 



Compressor assembly with; 

- Piston compressor 

- Electric motor 

- Air dryer (desiccator) 

- Pressure relief solenoid valve 

- Pressure maintenance valve 

- Check valves 

Compressor Relay (Replaceable) 

Solenoid Valve Block (2 - two way valves) 


37530001 



Securing block 
— - — Soundproofing 


Solenoid valve block 


Compressor relay 
(replaceable) 


— — Air desiccator 


Pressure relief valve 


Compressor 


Electric motor 


Housing 


37530002 


38 























































Air Supply System (LVA) Operation 

The single stage piston compressor produces a maximum pressure of 13.5 Bar. The com¬ 
pressor is maintenance free - provided it is used in a dust free environment. This includes 
the compressor’s intake air filter. 

The compressor is driven by a DC motor that is controlled by the compressor relay through 
the control module. 

When the compressor is activated, the pressure builds up to a working pressure of 11.4 
Bar (+0.8/-1.5 Bar). This is controlled through the pressure maintenance valve. The air 
under pressure is fed through the dryer and check valve to the solenoid valve block for the 
air springs. 

There is one solenoid valve in the valve block for each air strut. This allows the system to 
compensate for uneven loads in the vehicle and maintain the vehicles ride height at all 
times. 

Pressure is drained through the left or right solenoid valve (energized open) the pressure 
relief solenoid valve, restricter, check valve and dryer back to the inlet side of the compres¬ 
sor pump. 


39 




LEFTAIR SPRING 

40 


RESERVOIRS 


RIGHTAIR SPRING 




































































































































EHC System Operation 

A fully functional EHC system is controlled by one of three different modes of operation. 
The operation mode is selected by the control module based on current conditions provid¬ 
ed by the monitored input signals. The main modes of operation are: 

• Pre-Run/Post-Run Mode 

• Normal Mode 

• Tailgate Mode 

Two special operating modes are also included in the control module programming. 

• New/replacement mode (pre ZCS encoded). This mode provides basic operation. 

• Transport Mode - Transport mode is set at the factory and raises the vehicle 30mm to 
prevent vehicle damage during transportation. It must be deactivated with the DIS/ 
MoDiC prior to customer delivery. 


Pre-Run/Post-Run Mode 

The Pre-Run mode is activated when the vehicle is parked and the control module is in the 
sleep mode. Opening a door or the tailgate initiates a system wake up and the control mod¬ 
ule comes on-line. 

The control module performs a self-check of the control electronics and sensors. If no fault 
is found, the system will check the ride height and institute a rapid regulation if the height 
varies by more than 40mm. 


KL 30 KL31 


22 



•Control module 
in sleep mode 
•Tailgate or Door 
opened 
•KL 15 - OFF 
•Engine - Off 


L LEVEL 
SENSOR 


R LEVEL 
SENSOR 




OOOOOOO. 


OOOOOOO. 


i 


SIGNALS 


1 


i 


MODE OF OPERATION 
- PRE/POSTRUN MODE 


1. K-Bus signaling provides 
control module wake up and 
vehicle data status. Control 
module checks fault memory. 


2. EHC control module 
determines the vehicle 
height and compares it 
with stored values. 


3. Control module will rapidly raise the vehicle if the monitored vehicle height is lower 
than the stored value by more than 40mm. If the monitored level is not correct but 
less than 40mm the control module will adjust the vehicle level once the engine is 
running to prevent unnecessary battery loads. 



41 






























Normal Operation Mode 

Once the rear lid is closed, KL 15 switched ON and the engine started, the system switch¬ 
es into the normal operation mode. In the normal mode, the control module will constantly 
monitor the input signals from the ride height sensors and will activate a correction if the 
ride height deviates by at least 10mm. 


GM III 


KL 30 KL31 



D 

O 

I- 

3 10 



•Tailgate closed 
•KL 15 - ON 
•Engine - ON 


L LEVEL R LEVEL 
SENSOR SENSOR 



MODE OF OPERATION 
- NORMAL MODE 


1. K-Bus signaling provides 
changed vehicle data status 


2. EHC control module 
continually monitors 
the vehicle height 
through the slow filter. 


3. Control module will raise or lower the vehicle height if it deviates more than 10mm 
fora long duration of time. The constant rapid signal changes caused by uneven road 
surfaces are filtered out. 



Tailgate Operating Mode 

The tailgate operating mode is activated if the gate is opened with KL - 15 On and the 
engine running. The difference between this mode and the normal operating mode is the 
response time is rapid instead of slow . 


GM III 


KL 30 KL31 



D 

o 

t 

« 10 



•Tailgate OPENED 
•KL 15 - ON 
•Engine - ON 
•Roadspeed = 0 


L LEVEL 
SENSOR 


R LEVEL 
SENSOR 








\ 


SIGNALS 


1 


i 


MODE OF OPERATION 


-TAILGATE MODE 


1. K-Bus signaling provides 
changed vehicle data status. 


2. EHC control module 
switches from the slow 
filter to the rapid filter for 
vehicle height monitoring 


3. Control module will rapidly raise or lower the vehicle height if it deviates more than 
10mm. The rapid signal change from loading or unloading the cargo area causes the 
control module to rapidly respond to the change in vehicle height. 



42 




























































Special Operation Mode 

• Assembly Line Mode (New control module) 

The assembly line mode refers to control module manufacturing. New control modules 
are stored in a deactivated state. The control programming is not active and must first 
be ZCS encoded. 

After installing a replacement control module, it must be coded using the DIS or MoDiC. 
The instrument cluster fault display will remain illuminated until the control module is 
coded. 

Control Interrupts 

Cornering 

To prevent unnecessary suspension adjustments while driving through corners, a “control 
interrupt” is built into the system. Above 30MPH the control module monitors the left/right 
ride height sensors for a difference of 30mm. Exceeding this difference will put the system 
into a control interrupt and no adjustment will take place. The control interrupt last for a 
duration of 5 minutes. 

Vehicle Lifting 

The ride height control is interrupted when the vehicle is raised on a lift or with a jack. The 
system monitors the ride height sensor inputs and when the height limit of 90 mm is 
exceeded, the control is switched OFF until the vehicle is lowered again. 


43 


EHC Service Information 

Diagnosis / Coding 

• The EHC control module is connected to the diagnostic link. The EHC control module 
activates the fault display in the instrument cluster to alert the operator of the off-line sta¬ 
tus of the system. The EHC control module stores up to three electrical/electronic 
faults. 

• Diagnosis/troubleshooting of EHC is carried out using the fault symptom troubleshoot¬ 
ing program of the MoDiC or DIS. The EHC system has an extensive diagnosis program. 

• Replacement control modules are shipped in the factory mode. The control modules 
must be ZCS encoded using the DIS or MoDiC to activate the operating parameters. 


Print 



Change 


End 


Services 



Help 



BMW Diagnosis FAULT SYMPTOMS 


U Fault display in instrument cluster 
f§ Leakage in system 

§ Car positioned too high/too low on 
one/both side(s) 

§ Compressor running noise too loud 
[f Compressor does not start up, 

compressor runs continually or too often 

PI None of the fault symptoms indicated 
is applicable. 

Do you want to continue troubleshooting? 
s Yes 
1 No 


A 


V 


Quick test 


Note 

# 




Function 


Document 


Test 




_ 

System 



selection 




Schedule 






D> 


Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


Help 


BMW Diagnosis TEST MODULES 


[E Control unit 

§ Voltage and earth supply of control 
unit 

§ Height sensor, left 
§ Wire, height sensor, left 
i§ Height sensor, right 
j§ Wire, height sensor, right 
Wire, consumer-cutout signal 
jf K bus 

P Air-supply system (LVA) 

@j| Voltage and earth supply of 
air-supply system (LVA) 

@3] Wire, drain valve 
pljj Wire, compressor relay 
3 Wire, valve, left 
EH Wire, valve, right 
i!| Compressor relay 
ill Pneumatic springs, air pipework, 
screw connections 


A 


V 


Quick test 


Note 

# 




Function 


Document 


Test 




System 


\l 


selection 




Schedule 


\i i> 





o 


Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


Help 


Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


Help 


BMW Diagnosis DIAGNOSIS REQUESTS 

Ignition lack in position 2* 

Terminal 15: ON 
Engine status:OFF 
Warning lamp/message:OFF 
Journey detection:MO 
Cornering: MO 

Lifting platform/wheel change: 

YES 

Inclination:NO 

Mode, end of assembly line:NO 
Transportation mode:NO 
Valve, rear right:OFF 
Valve, rear left:OFF 
Compressor relay:OFF 
Drain valve:OFF 

System voltages: 

Sensor supply: 5.Ovolts 


Function 


Document 


Test 


-^ 

selection 

Is 




Schedule 





A 


M 

System 


BMW Diagnosis Mechanical components 

n 


Additional information: 

Leaks in the screw joints between LVA, 
pneumatic lines or air spring strut can 
result in excessively long control times. 


Possible effects of a leakage: 

During a control process or the attempt to 
correct the car height for the purposes of 
height offset, the fault of control-time 
monitoring can be set. 

Observe fault memory. 



In this case, the compressor inside the LVA 
is deactivated so as to prevent overheating 
caused by excessive compressor running time. 
The LVA is able to respond only 
after an extended period of waiting. 


V 


Function 


Document 


Test 



selection 

Lr 




Schedule 













































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































DIS/Modic Service Funnction Program 

The Service Functions program of the DIS/MoDiC provides the Transport Mode activa¬ 
tion/deactivation and Ride Height Offset functions (see next page). 

Once the transport mode has been released, or if the system requires left to right side 
height adjustment, the ride height "OFFSET" must be carried out to ensure that the vehi¬ 
cles suspension has a base ride height level starting point. 

The "HEIGHT OFFSET" is adjusted using the DIS or MoDiC. The procedure is as follows: 

• Place the vehicle on a level surface unloaded. 

• Access the Height Offset program in the service function menu. 

• Measure the base ride height from the lower edge of the wheel housing to the center of 
the wheel hub. 

• Check measured height against the specifications listed 

• Use the DIS/MoDiC to correct the ride height if the value differs from the listed specifi¬ 
cation. 




Print 


Change 


End 


Services 



Help 



BMW Diagnosis HEIGHT OFFSET 


Press the appropriate keys to move the 
car to the correct position 
(measurement with tape measure?). 

Each key actuation changes the car ride 
level by 5 to 10 ram. 


Dimensions apply from lower edge of wheel 
house to centre of wheel. 

Specified ride levels: 

E39 saloon : 360 mm +/- 3mm 

E39 touring : 360 mm +/- 3mm 

E39 touring with 

sports chassis : 345 ram +/- 3mm 


<1 


Function 

selection 


Document 


Test 

Schedule 


< > 


A 


V 


System 


Quick test 


Note 

# 


► 


Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Diagnosis HEIGHT OFFSET 


Additional information: 

Car must be in the normal position, 
i.e. in a compensated state. 

Car must be standing on a level surface. 

Instruction; 

One-sided loading and parking 
on uneven surfaces must be avoided? 

If necessary, wait until vehicle has 
corrected itself. 

Measure distance from lower edge of wheel 
house to wheel centre with tape measure. 

Specified ride levels: 

E39 saloon : 360 mm +/- 3mm 

E39 touring : 360 mm +/- 3mm 

E39 touring with 


◄ 


Function 

selection 


Document 


Test 

Schedule 


<1 l> 


A 


V 


System 


Help 


Quick test 


Note 

# 


► 


Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Diagnosis HEIGHT OFFSET 


sports chassis : 345 nun +/- 3mm 
Check: 

Is the vehicle height in the specified 
range? 


360 mm +/- 3ram 
360 mm +/- 3nmt 


Specified ride levels 
E39 saloon 
E39 touring 
E39 touring with 

sports chassis : 345 mm +/- 3mm 

S Yes 
1 No 






<] 


Function 

selection 


Document 


Test 

Schedule 


◄ 

► 














A 


V 


System 



Help 



Quick test 


Note 

# 


P> 


Print 




Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Diagnosis HEIGHT OFFSET 


U Left A 
§ Left V 
§ Right A 
| Right V 

m Height O.K. 


◄ 


Function 

selection 


Document 


Test 

Schedule 


< > 


A 


□ 


System 



Help 



Quick test 


Note 

# 


o 


45 








































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Two Axle Air Suspension 

Purpose of the System 

The two axle air suspension system (EHC2) offers advantages over the single-axle air sus¬ 
pension with respect to ride comfort and off-road capability. 

Lowering the entire body makes it easier to enter, exit, load and unload the vehicle. 

The vehicle's off-road capability was improved by providing the possibility for increasing the 
ground clearance of the body. 

The driver can now choose between three different ride levels which can be set with a rock¬ 
er switch, as required. Automatic ride-height control for payload compensation and 
automatic inclination compensation continue to be fitted. 

Deficits of the old system 

The automatic payload compensation facility for the single-axle air suspension did not per¬ 
mit driver control. The driver could not actively control the system to make it easier to enter 
and exit or load the vehicle. 

Ride level was compensated via the rear axle only. 

Advantages of the new system 

The new system allows the ride-height control system to be controlled actively by the dri¬ 
ver. 

The twin axle air suspension allows both axles to be lowered evenly and in parallel. 

As a result, it is easier for the occupants to enter, exit, load and unload the vehicle. 

History 

BMW previously supplied ride-height control systems as both optional equipment and, in 
part, as standard equipment on the 7 Series - E23/E32(not in the US market), 6 Series - 
E24 (L6/M6) and 5 Series - E28 (M5). On the E39, the load of the complete rear axle was 
born for the first time by air suspension in combination with the optional ride height control 
system. The system was controlled automatically under all operation conditions, and there 
was no possibility for driver intervention on the X5, the rear axle previously had single axle 
air suspension only. The air supply unit and the control unit were adopted from the E39. The 
air springs were adapted to the X5. 

There is a standard version and a sports version. 

The ride-height control system (EHC) was supplied as standard in combination with the 
M62 engine and is available as an optional extra in combination with the M54 engine. 

EHC2 is optional on both the M62 and M54 versions of the X5 and not available on the 
4.6is X5. 


46 


System components 


The X5 Two Axle Air Suspension System (EHC2) utilizes the air supply unit from EHC 
mounted in the luggage compartment, with the following components added or modified: 


• Air Supply Unit (with redesigned compressor and drier) 

• Pressure Accumulator 

• Valve Unit 

• Ride Height Sensor 

• Air Suspension Strut 

• Control Unit 

• Switch Assembly 



Pneumatic System of EHC2 


1. Air Supply Unit 

2. Rear Axle Air Bellows 

3. Ride Height Sensors 

4. Pressure Accumulator/ 
Valve Unit 

5. Front Axle Air Bellows 

6. Control Unit 


Air Supply Unit 

As on vehicles with single axle air suspension, the air supply unit is located in the luggage 
compartment under the spare wheel. As with the single axle air suspension, the auxiliary 
tanks for the rear air spring bellows are located in the luggage compartment. 

The air supply unit is configured similarly to the single axle air supply unit for the ride-height 
control system of the E39, which is currently in production. 

The functions are implemented by activating a compressor and various valves in the air 
supply unit and on the air accumulator valve unit. 

The maximum pressure of the air supply unit is 21 bar. 


47 



6 1 


2 


6 3 



6 5 4 7 


1. Pneumatic Drain Valve 

2. Electric Pilot Control Valve 

3. High Pressure Vent Valve 

4. Air Drier 

5. Compressor 

6. Sintered filter 

7. To Pressure AccumulatorA/alve Unit 
NW Size of opening/tubing in mm. 


Air Supply Unit 
Pneumatic Drain Valve 

The Pneumatic Drain Valve is activated pneumatically by pressure from the control valve. 
This causes the drain valve to open allowing the pressure supply line to vent to atmosphere. 
This design allows for large air volumes to be discharged quickly and eliminates the need 
for a solenoid valve with high current consumption. 

The 21 bar pressure limiting valve is integrated in the drain valve. 

Electric Pressure Relief Valve 

The electrically activated pressure relief valve controls normal system pressure. The con¬ 
trol valve performs this function in conjunction with the drain valve. 

High Pressure Vent Valve 

The High Pressure Vent Valve serves as a comfort valve and is used to release system pres¬ 
sure after the accumulator has closed and the compressor is still running. When the high 
pressure vent valve has opened the compressor can be stopped quietly. 

Air Drier 

In the air drier, the air which is drawn in passes over a water absorptive filter material in the 
form of filter nodules which extract moisture from the air. As long as the air contains more 
moisture than the filter material, the individual nodules absorb and accumulate the mois¬ 
ture. When the air flows back, it is drier than the filter material, with the result that the air is 
re-humidified and the moisture is discharged into the open air. The maximum 
water storage capacity of the filter is 30 g. 


48 




















































Compressor with Drier 



Ni p,. Ni (j, 

H. C 





Top: Air Drying 

Bottom: Dissipation of water to air 


Compressor 

Compressor operation is the same as in EHC with the following technical improvements: 

• Addition of a temperature sensor (Located on the compressor cylinder head) 
Temperature sensor switches off the compressor at temperatures above 110°C. 

• Extended compressor ON time (180 seconds) 

• Redesigned air drier to compensate for additional air volume. 


Pressure Accumulator 

The twin axle air suspension system now features a pressure accumulator which forms an 
air accumulator valve unit in combination with the valve. The air accumulator valve unit is 
located beneath the vehicle floorpan in the right-hand sill area. 


Pressure Accumulator Unit which 
includes: 

Pressure Accumulator 
Pressure Sensor 
Valve Unit 


Front 



49 















The pressure accumulator decreases the load on the compressor and significantly reduces 
the time required for large changes in ride height. 

The EHC 2 control module monitors system pressure via a pressure sensor mounted on 
the accumulator. Normal system pressure is 15.7 +/- 0.7 bar. Minimum system pressure 
is 9 bar. 

The pressure accumulator's charge is sufficient to fill the four suspension struts once from 
the Access position to the normal position and compensate for vehicle load up to maximum 
gross weight. 




Accumulator/Valve Unit Valve Unit 

1. Air Lines 1. Connections for Air Lines 

Yellow-Black Front 2. Pressure Accumulator valve 

Red-Blue Rear 

2. Pressure Accumulator 

3. Connecting Cable 

4. Pressure Sensor 

5. Valve Unit 


Valve Unit 

In the valve unit, four bellows valves and the pressure accumulator valve are activated. 

The bellows valves and the pressure accumulator valve are solenoid valves which are 
closed under spring pressure when de-energized. 



50 






















































































































































































Ride Height Sensor 

The control unit obtains information about the ride height of the vehicle via a ride height sen¬ 
sor attached to each of the four wheels. 


60° Rear Axle 



Ride Height Sensor 


The ride height sensor is an angle Hall sensor which is activated by a ring magnet. The ring 
magnet is polarized vertically from north to south. 

The magnetic field line of the ring magnets intersect a Hall cell. The Hall cell is arranged in 
such a way that only the horizontal components of the field lines are evaluated. This results 
in different field line strengths at different positions of the ring magnet. The Hall cell mea¬ 
sures the field strength of the magnetic flux and converts it into an analog signal with a volt¬ 
age level between 0.5 and 4.5 V. 


1 



Sensor Principle of 
Operation 

1. Ring Magnet 

2. Hall Cell 

3. Longitudinal magnetic 
field lines, low voltage 
0.5V 

4. Transverse magnetic 
field lines, high voltage 
4.5V 


51 





































Air Suspension Strut 
Rear 

Minor modifications were made to the rear axle air springs. The air springs and the dampers 
are configured separately at the rear axle. 

Front 

The air suspension replaces the steel suspension at the front axle, i.e. the spring bellows is 
attached to the damper. The front air suspension strut and the impact absorber form a 
complete unit. 




Air Suspension Strut 

1. Auxiliary Spring 

2. Air Bellows 

3. Damper 


Control Unit 

The EHC2 Control Unit is located behind the glovebox adjacent to the General Module. 
The connector is a black 54 pin connector. 

Inputs received directly into the control unit are: 

Ride Height Level Sensor (X4) Up and Down requests from the switch assy. 

General Module (Load cutout signal) CAN Bus Inputs 
K Bus Inputs Pressure Sensor 

Compressor Temperature 

Outputs include: 

Air Unit Control (Activation) Front and Rear Axle Valves 

LED’s for Switch Unit Compressor Relay 

Pressure Accumulator 


52 

















































































Switch Assembly 



The dash mounted switch assembly supplies a momentary switched ground to the EHC2 
Control Unit requesting a ride height change in the up or down direction. Three LED’s pro¬ 
vide current ride level selected and target ride level if a request for change has been made. 
The LED for the current ride height will always be illuminated. The LED for the target ride 
level will flash until the new ride level is reached. 

Notes: 


53 
















Principle of Operation 

Ride Height Control Operations 

In addition to the automatic ride-height control system for payload compensation, the dri¬ 
ver can set three different vehicle ride heights. 

• Off-road (+25 mm), high ground clearance to a max. speed of 50 km/h 

• Standard (0 mm), normal ride level 

• Access (-35 mm), for entry and exit, loading and unloading to a max. speed of 35 km/h 
or can be activated in Standard mode at road speeds < 25 km/h 

The various heights are selected by scroll rocker. Light emitting diodes indicate the present 
ride height setting. 

Ride height can be adjusted from terminal 15 and with the doors closed. The hood and tail¬ 
gate may be open. 

The system also controls inclination automatically, like the single axle air suspension. 

All control operations are executed without stopping at intermediate levels. The vehicle is 
configured pneumatically in such a way that the front and rear axles can be lowered in par¬ 
allel in any load situation. Depending on the load situation, either the front axle or the rear 
axle is slightly quicker. On account of the different control speeds, a difference in height 
between the two axles is possible during all control operations. If a max. permissible thresh¬ 
old is exceeded, the quicker axle is stopped briefly. 

The various levels can be preselected while travelling. Changeover between ride levels is 
effected at the speed threshold values defined in the control unit. The control unit monitors 
the change-over. 

As soon as the driver sets a new target ride level by pressing a button or when a change¬ 
over is initiated automatically by a specific driving condition, the LED for the current ride 
level remains lit and the LED for the target ride level begins to flash. 

When the new level is reached, the LED for the previous level goes out and the LED for the 
new level reached stays lit permanently. 


54 


Down button 
or 

>50km/h 



Off-Road 
(+25 mm) 


Down Button and 
<80km/h 
and 

Accumulator pressure 
^threshold 
and/or 
compressor temperature 
threshold 


Standard 
(0 mm) 


Access 
(-35 mm) 


<25km/h 



Up button 
and 

<50km/h 


Up button 
or 

>35km/h 


The various levels can be preselected while travelling. Changeover between ride levels is 
effected at the speed threshold values defined in the control unit. The control unit monitors 
the change-over. 

As soon as the driver sets a new target ride level by pressing a button or when a change¬ 
over is initiated automatically by a specific driving condition, the LED for the current ride 
level remains lit and the LED for the target ride level begins to flash. 

When the new level is reached, the LED for the previous level goes out and the LED for the 
new level reached stays lit permanently. 

If a ride level selection is not allowed, the LED indicating the momentary ride level of the 
vehicle flashes for 3 seconds. 

A special case is preselection of Access levels while travelling. The Access LED flashes and 
the LED for the original ride level is lit permanently. However, this does not mean that a con¬ 
trol operation has already begun. The control operation does not actually begin until the 
speed threshold which the Access level allows is reached or undershot. 


55 










In addition to the LED indicator, the following text messages can 
be displayed in the instrument cluster: 

• TRAILER MODE 

A coupled trailer is identified via the trailer connector. To avoid damaging the trailer and 
the vehicle, changes of vehicle level are generally avoided. The standard level is "frozen." 
If the trailer is coupled at a level other than the Standard level, the vehicle ride level is 
not changed to Standard unless a button is pressed or the speed threshold for auto¬ 
matic change-over is reached. The standard level is then "frozen" until the trailer con¬ 
nector is disconnected. 

• RIDE HEIGHT CONTROL INACTIVE 

Faults in the system and on the control unit which are only identified by the instrument 
cluster, e.g. control unit disconnected 

• RIDE HEIGHT CONTROL INACTIVE + MAX. 60 km/h 

For safety-critical faults (vehicle is too high or at inclination) 

Control Modes 
Sleep mode 

If the vehicle is parked, it enters Sleep mode after 16 minutes. No further control opera¬ 
tions are executed. A "watch dog" wakes up the control unit for a few minutes every 6 
hours (wakeup mode) in order to compensate for possible inclination of the vehicle. (Vehicle 
height may only be corrected once as air supply unit only operates with engine running.) 

Wake-up 

In wake-up mode, the control unit is woken up for a set period of time in order to com¬ 
pensate for possible inclination of the vehicle. Inclination of the vehicle can be caused by 
large temperature differences or by minor leaks. Adjustments to the front and rear axles 
ensure that the vehicle is visually level. To minimize power consumption, the vehicle is low¬ 
ered only. The nominal level of the lowest wheel serves as the nominal level for all other 
wheels. The lowest nominal level to which the vehicle is lowered is the Access level (-35 
mm). 

Exception: if the vehicle is parked at Access level, the vehicle is lowered to max. -50 mm 
in wake-up mode. If the vehicle is parked for a prolonged period of time and there is a leak 
in the system, further loss of pressure does not produce a change of ride level since the 
weight of the body is born by the auxiliary suspension and the residual tire pressure. 

Advance /Overrun 

When the vehicle is woken out of sleep mode by the load-cutout signal (VA), it normally 
enters advance / overrun mode. Since the engine is not (no longer) running in this mode, 
however, there are restrictions on the control operations that can be performed in order to 
conserve the battery. Ride level compensation is restricted to tolerance ranges of 20 mm 
and 25 mm in the up and down directions respectively. This serves to reduce the frequen¬ 
cy of control operations. 


56 


All control operations in advance / overrun mode are executed as long as pressure is avail¬ 
able in the accumulator. When the accumulator is empty and the engine is turned off, con¬ 
trol operations are directly driven by the compressor. User-activated changes of ride level 
and filling of the accumulator are not possible. 

Terminal 15 

As soon as the ignition is turned on (terminal 15), the user is allowed to lower the ride level 
as required. 

However, it is still not possible to raise the ride level or fill the accumulator. 

Ride level is compensated outside a narrow tolerance range of 10 mm upwards and 10 mm 
downwards. 

Engine "on" 

Ride level compensation, raising and lowering the vehicle's ride height as well as filling the 
accumulator are permitted when the engine is running. The compressor also starts up dur¬ 
ing every control operation. 

Ride level is still compensated outside the narrow tolerance range of ±10 mm. 

As long as the vehicle is stationary, high speed filtered ride level signals are used to detect 
a change of load. This allows the system to react immediately to changes in ride level. 

As soon as the vehicle is travelling, it changes over to low speed filtered ride-level signals. 
The system no longer reacts to bump movements caused by road surface unevenness. A 
mean value is formed over a prolonged period of time, i.e. payload is only altered by the 
progressive emptying of the fuel tank. 

The high speed filter is not used until the vehicle is stationary again and a lid is opened. If 
no lid is opened, the vehicle logically cannot be loaded or unloaded. 



57 

























Workshop Hints 

If a threshold level is exceeded on all 4 wheels when the vehicle is stationary, the control 
unit assumes that the vehicle has been raised on a workshop platform. 

There are three possible reset conditions for workshop platform recognition: 

• The original level values are undershot at all four wheels, 

• A selection is made by button, 

• A speed of >40 km/h is recognized for 3 s. 

Vehicle jack 

If the lowering speed at a wheel is too low during the lowering operation, the system 
assumes that the wheel is jacked up. However, the downward velocity must be less than 
a certain preprogrammed speed threshold. If the system detects a jacked wheel, it stores 
the height of this wheel. 

Car jack recognition is reset when the stored ride height is again undershot. When a trav¬ 
elling speed of 40 km/h is maintained for at least 3 s, another control attempt is performed. 
The carjack recognition can also be reset by button selection. 

Please note that the system also controls ride height in diagnostic mode. For this reason, 
Belt Mode must be activated before carrying out work on the system or before setting the 
vehicle ride height. 

Belt Mode: 

Heights are fixed and are not compensated. If Belt Mode is set, the function LED is off. The 
text message "ride-height control system inactive" appears in the instrument cluster. 

Transport Mode: 

The Transport Mode setting is for transportation purposes. When the ignition is turned on, 
the message "ride-height control system inactive" appears. Heights are increased or 
decreased depending on ignition key status, e.g. ride height is reduced when the vehicle is 
lashed to a ship or train and raised when the "Engine on" signal is generated and when the 
vehicle is transported on a transporter truck. 

The correct ride height is set to ± 5 mm via "Activate components." The left and right ride 
levels are set separately at the rear axle. The ride levels are then set at the front axle. The 
left and right air springs are adjusted jointly for this purpose. 

Following this, the new ride height for the front and rear axles is stored via the "Offset func¬ 
tion." 

Before replacing components, the system must be depressurized! This is done in the diag¬ 
nostics via "control unit functions," "Component activation," "Pressure-relieve front axle/rear 
axle." Repeat the activation procedure 6 times. 


58 


If the fabric of the bellows is visible, then the bellows must be replaced. 

Upon completion of repair work, the air suspension system of the vehicle raised on the 
workshop platform must be refilled with air via the diagnostics. The activation procedures 
must also be repeated 6 times. This prevents the bellows from being folded incorrectly. 
The vehicle must with be set down on its wheels when the suspension struts are depres¬ 
surized! 

Important Workshop Hint 

Similarly, a defective vehicle with leaky pneumatic system must not be raised on the work¬ 
shop platform. If depressurized, the bellows would contract under suction forming incorrect 
folds. These folds could result in malfunctions later on. 

Areas on the air bellows which can possibly become leaky are the O-ring at the piston rod 
and the seal carrier on the roll piston. 

The connectors attached to all cables are identical to the connections on the single-axle air 
suspension. 6 mm cable is used. The tightening torque is 3+1 Nm throughout the system. 
Special care must be taken when handling breakage-prone plastic parts of air suspension 
elements. 

Upon completion of repair work, Belt mode must be deactivated via the diagnostics. The 
function LED on the button comes on. No text message appears in the instrument cluster. 
The system is OK and ready for operation. 


59 


Steering 


The X5 utilizes a power assisted rack and pinion steering system due to all wheel drive con¬ 
siderations. The power steering pump is a vane cell design. 

The turning radius of the X5 is 12.2 meters. 

The steering column is electrically adjustable for length and height that includes the mem¬ 
ory function incorporated into the seat/mirror memory system. 



60 


















Brakes 


The X5 brake system is the dual circuit (black/white) division with Electronic Brake Force 
distribution (EBV) through DSC control. The system is similar to the E38 with: 


Front Brakes 

Brake Rotor - 332mm diameter - 30 mm thick 
Caliper - single piston 60mm diameter 
Pads - asbestos free 



Vacuum booster with tube jet amplifier 

Tandem master cylinder with two central valves for DSC operation 
Brake fluid reservoir with reed contact 
Vented front rotors/Solid rear 
Single piston calipers 
DSC hydraulic unit with integrated control 
module 

Pre-load pump for DSC operation 


Rear Brakes 

Brake Rotor - 324mm diameter - 12mm thick 
Caliper - single piston 42mm diameter 



61 








Wheels and Tires 

Light alloy wheels are standard equipment on the X5. 
The wheels sizes include: 

3 Liter version 

• Standard Wheel - 7.5J xl 7 SEH2 

• Standard Tires - 235/65R - 17 H rated all season 
Front and Rear 

4.4 Liter version standard suspension 

• Standard Wheel - 8.5J x 18 EH2 

• Standard Tires - 255/55R - 18 H rated all season 
Front and Rear 


4.4 Liter version sports suspension 

• Standard Wheels - 9J x 19 EH2 FRONT 

10J x 19 EH2 REAR 

• Standard Tires - 255/50R -19 Front/285/45R - 19 
Rear V rated 


The X5 uses a two piece lug bolt that incorporates a spacer wash¬ 
er and features anti-corrosion coating. The tightening torque on the 
lug bolts is 130Nm +/- lONm. Advantages of using the spacer 
washer include: 

• Longer expansion length for the bolt. 

• A better fit to the wheel 

• The spacer washer is fixed to the wheel when tightening and 
the lug bolt turns relative to it. 




62 












Fuel System Supply 


The fuel tank is constructed from molded plastic and is mounted under the rear seat and 
extends along the left side of the vehicle. It is the saddle tank design with a siphon jet pump 
in the right side to transfer fuel to the left side where the fuel pump is mounted. 



The fuel filter/pressure regulator is 
mounted in front of the tank along with 
the charcoal canister. The components 
are covered by a plastic plate to protect 
them when driving off-road. 


The liquid/vapor separator is mounted 
on the right side up in the wheel arch 
opening next to the filler neck. 


The Leak Diagnosis Pump (LDP) is 
mounted in the left rear side wheel arch 
opening behind the wheel housing 
cover. Operation of the LDP will be cov¬ 
ered in the engine electronic section of 
this program. 



63 

















Exhaust System 

The exhaust system of the X5 is made from stainless steel and consists of three main 
pieces after the exhaust manifolds. The front section consists of two monolith catalytic con¬ 
verters with pre and post-oxygen sensors. The two converters converge into one center 
muffler on the right side of the vehicle. 

The two rear sections consists of the tail pipes and main mufflers that are mounted at the 
rear of the vehicle. 


The front and rear exhaust components are bolted together with spring bolts 



64 





Power Distribution 


The maintenance free 90 AH battery 
in the X5 is mounted in the rear below 
the spare tire and EHC compressor 
unit. The battery box is formed of 
molded plastic and the positioning of 
the battery aids in weight distribution. 
As with all BMW vehicles, the battery 
is equipped with the BST on the pos¬ 
itive battery cable. 



Power distribution for the vehicle and 
systems is through two fuse carriers 
mounted in the right storage com¬ 
partment in the rear and above the 
glove box in the front. 



The battery jump/charge point is 
located in the engine compartment on 
the left side of the fire wall. 



61530013 


65 
































Component Location 


Sunroof 

Module 


FZV/FM2 

Antenna 

Amplifier 



PDC 


Door Module 
Switchblock 


FZV/FM2 

Radio / NAVComp Ante ^ a 
Electronics Amplifier 

(when NAV equipped) 


66 








































































































































