TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Subject Page 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC III).2 

Comer Braking Control.9 

Electronic Brake Proportioning (EBV).10 

Dynamic Braking System .11 

DSC New Functions.12 

DSC New Feature .15 

Control Module Hydraulic Unit.18 

Rotation Rate/Transverse Acceleration Sensor.19 

Brake Pressure Sensor.20 

DSC III Components.21 

Steering Angle Sensor .22 

Brake Fluid Level Warning Switch .23 

Diagnosis.24 
















DYNAMIC STABILITY CONTROL (DSC III) 

DSC FOR THE X5 
INTRODUCTION 

The X5 is equipped with DSC III for its stability control system. The components are the 
same as the DSC III system (version 5.7) currently installed in the E38/E39 vehicles. 
However the software and programming are changed to allow for new functions associat¬ 
ed with all wheel drive and off-road use. 

New/changed functions of the DSC III include: 

• New Hill Decent Control (HDC) function 

• New Differential Brake Control (ABD) function 

• Changed traction control function 

• Changed ABS function 

DSC - X5 OVERVIEW 

The DSC system for the X5 provides all of the functions and features of the DSC III system 
currently in the E38/E39 vehicles, these functions/features include: 

• Maintaining traction under all driving conditions 

• Maintaining the directional Control (Longitudinal Stability) 

• Providing Lateral Stability (Correction for oversteer/understeer) 

• Providing Corner Braking Control (CBC) 

• Providing Dynamic Braking System features of - Dynamic Braking Control and 
Maximum Braking Control (DBC and MBC) 

• Providing Electronic Brake Proportioning (EBV) 


2 




TRACTION CONTROL SYSTEM OVERVIEW (ASC) 

THEORY OF TRACTION CONTROL 

Traction Control Systems are referred to as Automatic Stability Control (ASC), Automatic 
Stability + Traction Control (ASC+T), Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) or All Season Traction 
(marketing term). The traction control system has gone through several changes since its 
introduction in Model Year 1988. While each new version offered new innovations, the prin¬ 
ciple of traction control remains the same for any of these versions. 

The link between the vehicle and its driving environment is established by the frictional con¬ 
tact between the tires and the road surface. The ability to control the vehicle while driving, 
is lost as a result of excessive wheel spin or slip if either rear tire exceeds its ability to: 

• Maintain traction 

• Accept side forces to maintain directional control (lateral locating forces) 

The primary function of the traction control system is to maintain traction and stability of the 
vehicle regardless of the road surface condition. This is achieved by reducing the drive 
torque applied to the rear wheels or pulsing the rear wheel brakes to eliminate wheel slip 
depending on the version of traction control installed. 

The electronics for traction control operation are incorporated in the ABS control module 
and share many of the same components and sensors. The module determines the speed 
of the vehicle through a calculated average of the four wheel speed sensor inputs. Wheel 
slip/spin is then recognized by comparing the speed of the driven wheels to the front 
wheels. 

A critical slip ratio of greater than 5% between the wheels will cause the traction control regu¬ 
lation to begin. This slip ratio is established when the control module detects a wheel speed 
difference of 2 MPH or higher. 


3 



THEORY OF ELECTRONIC CONTROL 


An electronic control system is used because of its ability to react quicker and more pre¬ 
cisely than the driver. It backs up the driver’s decisions and contributes to active safety, 
even under extreme driving conditions. 

Advantages: 

• optimum traction at all speeds 

• increased stability by retaining lateral (side to side) locating forces. 


NOTE: The system is limited to the extent that no system can overcome the laws 
of physics. 




4 



























DRIVER’S INTENDED 
POINT 


WHEEL 

SLIP 

BEGINS 



ASC+T 

REGULATION FACTORS 

• WHEEL SLIP % 

• ROAD SPEED 

CONTROLS: 

• THROTTLE 

• IGNITION TIMING 

• REAR BRAKING 


5% 25% 50% 75% 



WHEEL SLIPPAGE 


HIGH 


LOW 


3 


START 


LATERAL LOCATING FORCE 


5 


TIME 














































































DYNAMIC STABILITY CONTROL (DSC II) 


Dynamic Stability Control II (DSC II) is a further development to the ABS/ASC+T5 traction 
control system. DSC I was introduced in other markets on the E32 and E31 vehicles with 
the M70 engine. 

The DSC system is designed to improve the lateral stability of the vehicle in all driving situ¬ 
ations. Whereby ASC+T is primarily designed for longitudinal stability and providing the 
optimum traction for driving off, DSC adds lateral stability control to the already proven sys¬ 
tem. 

For any given turning angle and speed of the vehicle, there is a set difference between the 
rotational speeds of the front wheels. If the rotational speeds of the front wheels vary from 
this set difference, it means the vehicle is understeering or oversteering through the turn. 
This could lead to an unstable condition and possible loss of control. 

The DSC system is designed to monitor this rotational difference and react to any changes 
or deviations that might possibly occur. The DSC provides ASC control for the vehicle while 
driving through corners or any time the vehicle is not moving straight ahead. 

In essence, the ASC+T5 becomes a Dynamic Stability Control System with this added fea¬ 
ture. 



6 












DYNAMIC STABILITY CONTROL (DSC III) 


All of the familiar braking and straight line traction control features and system communi¬ 
cation carry over from DSC II. Based on select high/select low logic, the DSC III control 
module selects a vehicle stabilizing strategy based on the specific input signal values it is 
monitoring at the moment. For all DSC strategies this begins with engine intervention to 
reduce torque: 

• For the 750iL this is handled via CAN communication, DSC III to EML to minimize the 
throttle angle of the DK motors (750iL). For the 740i/iL and 540iA this is handled by 
direct DSC III activation of the ADS II throttle housing. 

• If additional torque reduction is necessary, DSC III informs DME over CAN to: 

• Retard ignition timing 

• Shut down the fuel injection to individual cylinders 


DSC III monitors under/oversteer conditions through the following components: 


• The driver’s desired steering angle - steering angle signal over CAN bus. 

• Vehicle speed and speed differential at front wheels - wheel speed sensors 

• Dynamic forces of lateral acceleration and yaw placed on the vehicle. This is possible 
with two new components which are discussed further on. The results are as follows: 


3. VEHICLE 
COMES OUT 
OF TURN 
SUCCES- 
FULLY 


UNDERSTEER CORRECTION 


1. VEHICLE APPROACHES TURN: 

- Driver steers into turn 

- Brakes are applied 



WITHOUT 
DSC 


- regulated brake slows 
wheel down (and helps to 
reduce vehicle speed). Wheel on 
outside of curve speeds up due to power transfer thru differential. 
Vehicle pivots in favor of curve. Combined, this forces the vehicle into the turn. 


7 


The expanded hydraulic control of individual wheel circuits is apparent when stabilizing a 
vehicle exhibiting an oversteer condition as follows: 


3. VEHICLE COMES 
OUT OF TURN 
SUCCESFULLY 

WITH DSC 


OVERSTEER CORRECTION 


1. VEHICLE APPROACES TURN AT HIGH RATE OF SPEED: 
- Driver steers into turn and applies brakes to slow down. 



2D. The torque reduction and rear brake regulation 
should stabilize the vehicle at this point. If not 
the left front wheel has a high degree of lateral 
locating force and is momentarily regulated. 

This action deliberately causes the wheel to shed 
a calculated degree of it's locating force. This 
counteracts oversteer yaw at this wheel and also 
aids in slowing the vehicle down to correct it. 


2B. Driver tries to compensate by oversteering which 
diminishes lateral locating force even further. 
Simultaneously, rear of car starts to slide out. 

2C. DSC III determines an OVERSTEER condition. 
Engine torque is reduced via CAN Bus signalling. 
Outside rear wheel is momentarily regulated to 
counteract severe yaw angle (also helps to reduce 
drive torque further.) 


Transmission system intervention also occurs during any ASC/DSC regulating phase. 
Through CAN bus communication the AGS control module is informed to delay any gear 
changes during regulation. This prevents any unwanted driveline dynamic changes during 
DSC regulation. 

Though DSC III provides state of the art, electronic correction of undesirable vehicle han¬ 
dling characteristics, it is important to remember vehicle stability is always subject to the 
physical laws of centrifugal force and extreme road conditions. Good judgement and 
common sense on the part of the driver are still required. 


8 



CORNER BRAKING CONTROL (CBC) 


Corner Braking Control (CBC) was an additional feature first added to the ASC/5 system of 
the E39 at introduction. CBC improves stability control while braking through curves. 

As the vehicle enters a curve, the weight of the car shifts to the outside of the curve. With 
non CBC equipped vehicles if the driver brakes while driving through a curve an equal 
hydraulic force is applied to each wheel. Though the pressure is equal, the braking effort 
is unequal at the tire footprint due to the increased weight of the vehicle on the outside 
curve. 


With a CBC equipped sys¬ 
tem, the feature regulates 
the apply pressure to the 
wheels based on the turn¬ 
ing angle (curve recogni¬ 
tion). When the driver 
brakes in the same situa¬ 
tion, an unequal hydraulic 
pressure is applied to each 
side of the vehicle. 
Though the apply pressure 
is unequal, the dynamic of 
the vehicle’s weigh transfer 
compensates for the 
unequal apply pressure, as 
a result braking effort is 
equal at the tire footprint. 

The ASC control module 
monitors the speed signals 
from all four wheels to 
determine when this regu¬ 
lation is required. 

This is a feature found on 
vehicles equipped with the 
Dynamic Stability Control 
System (DSC), however 
this ASC/5 system does 
not incorporate full DSC 
control. 



9 
























ELECTRONIC BRAKE PROPORTIONING (EBV) 

Electronic brake proportioning allows the DSC system to adjust the braking force to the rear 
wheels based on the vehicle’s loading to maximize the braking force at all wheels. 

The DSC control module monitors the wheel speed sensors inputs when the brakes are 
applied, for activation of this feature. The control module compares the speed at which the 
front and rear axles are slowing down to determine vehicle loading. 

If the rear axle is slowing at a similar rate to the front, it indicates that the vehicle is loaded 
and more braking force can be applied to the rear calipers to slow and stop the vehicle. 

If the decel rate of the rear axle is much less than the front, the vehicle is lightly loaded and 
less force can be applied to the rear. If the same force were applied, then the vehicle could 
become unstable. 

OPERATION 

The values for the decel rate are programmed in the DSC control module. Equal force will 
be applied to the front and rear axles until the threshold values are exceeded. At this point, 
the DSC control module will cycle the inlet valves at the rear calipers to reduce the braking 
force on the rear axle. 


10 



DYNAMIC BRAKING SYSTEM 

The dynamic braking system is designed to enhance the braking control of the DSC for the 
driver of the vehicle. The dynamic braking control and maximum braking control are func¬ 
tions that are programmed into the control electronics of the DSC with no additional hard¬ 
ware changes. 

DYNAMIC BRAKING CONTROL (DBC) 

The DBC function is designed to provide the maximum braking force available during rapid 
(panic) braking situations. The DSC control module looks at the inputs from the brake pedal 
switch and the signal from the brake pressure sensor on the master cylinder. The criteria 
for activation of DBC is how rapidly is the brake pressure built up with the brake pedal 
depressed. The total criteria required for DBC activation includes: 

• Brake switch ON 

• Brake pressure build up > threshold value 

• Vehicle road speed > 5MPH 

• Vehicle not in reverse 

• Not all wheels in ABS regulation 

If the threshold for DBC activation is achieved, the DSC control module will activate a pres¬ 
sure build up regulation phase through the hydraulic unit. The pressure at all wheels is 
increased up to the ABS regulation point. This occurs even if the driver does not achieve 
the ABS regulation point with the pedal. 

The rear axle brakes are controlled with select-low regulation and the front axle brakes are 
controlled individually. ABS regulation will continue until the driver releases the pedal and 
the pressure in the master cylinder drops below the threshold value stored in the DSC con¬ 
trol module. 

MAXIMUM BRAKE CONTROL (MBC) 

The MBC function is also designed to enhance a driver initiated braking procedure. The 
MBC will build up the pressure in the rear brake circuit when the front brakes are already in 
an ABS regulation cycle. The additional braking pressure at the rear wheels will shorten the 
stopping distance. The following criteria must be met before the DSC control module will 
activate MBC: 

• Both front wheel brakes in ABS regulation 

• Vehicle speed > 5 MPH 

• Vehicle not in reverse 

• DBC and pressure sensor initialization test OK 

• Rear wheels not in ABS regulation 


11 



DSC NEW FUNCTIONS 


HILL DECENT CONTROL (HDC) 

Hill Decent Control (HDC) is designed for off road use to automatically slow the vehicle and 
maintain a steady speed on steep gradients. This function allows the driver to focus on 
steering and controlling the vehicle without having to use the brakes to slow the vehicle. 

HDC is activated manually through the push button switch located in the center switch 
panel located in the console. When activated, the vehicle’s speed is held to approximately 
5 MPH by the DSC system pulsing the brakes to maintain the speed. 

The following conditions must be met before the HDC will activate: 

• Push button pressed - LED “ON” 

• Vehicle speed: < 25 MPH 

• Accelerator pedal pressed <15% 

• Downhill driving recognized 

Downhill is recognized from the vehicle’s speed and engine load from the engine control 
module. The accelerator pedal and engine load signals are passed over the CAN bus to the 
DSC control module. 

The HDC switch can be pressed at speeds < 37MPH and the LED will come on to indicate 
standby mode. However the system will not activate until the vehicle’s speed is below 25. 

The driver can accelerate with HDC active up to approximately 20% engine load. The HDC 
will stop regulating as long as the driver is requesting a speed increase. If the vehicle’s 
speed is > 37 MPH, the HDC function is automatically switched OFF. 

r 





12 













DSC - NEW FUNCTIONS 


AUTOMATIC DIFFERENTIAL BRAKE (ADB) 

On dry pavement with no wheel slip, the vehicle’s driving torque is split 68% rear and 32% 
front through the planetary gear differential transfer case. 

If one or more wheels spin or slip, the DSC will activate a regulation process and the brakes 
on the effected wheel(s) will be pulsed. The driving torque will be distributed through the dif¬ 
ferential to the remaining wheels with a good coefficient of friction 

The driving torque will be applied through the differential as follows: 

• Three wheels - with one wheel spinning. 

• On two diagonal wheels with two wheels spinning on different axles. 

• One axle only with two wheels spinning on the same axle. 

Once the spin or slip is under control, the drive torque will again be applied to all wheels. 



13 





















































14 

































































































DSC - NEW FEATURE 


TRACTION CONTROL 

The traction control feature of the DSC III on the X5 cannot be switched OFF with the DSC 
switch. Pressing the button will only switch off the dynamic stability control function of the 
DSC. 

The traction control feature is needed at all times to provide anti-spin control especially 
when driving the vehicle off road. The DSC warning lamp in the instrument cluster will still 
come on when the system is switched off manually or there is a fault in the system. 

Off road traction control or HDC regulation places an additional load on the brakes. To pre¬ 
vent overheating of the brakes and rotors, the temperature of the rotors is calculated over 
time from the road speed and amount of brake application. If the temperature of one or 

more rotors goes above 600° C, the traction control or HDC function for that wheel will be 

cancelled temporarily. Once the temperature of the rotor goes below 500° C, the traction 
application will be re-activated. 

The normal braking function (including ABS) is always active at any temperatures. 


DSC - NEW FEATURE 

OFF-ROAD ABS Control Module Programming 

The programming for ABS regulation have changed to allow a higher threshold for ABS reg¬ 
ulation when driving off-road in loose gravel or dirt. A locked wheel is more effective in slow¬ 
ing or stopping the vehicle because of the wedge that is built up in front of the tire. 

The programming in the DSC control module allows one or both front wheel(s) to lock up 
to a speed of 12 MPH as long as the vehicle is traveling straight ahead. If the DSC control 
module receives a signal from the steering angle sensor indicating a turn, ABS regulation 
will activate to prevent the lock and allow the vehicle to be steered. 


15 



ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 




KL 30 
KL 15 




-p 


DSC SWITCH 

— 

r • \i' • 

"• I - . '«\ 




HDC SWITCH 

i 


i 


/^s 





■— u 

i- 1 

WHEEL 



1 1 

SPEED 


>=0 

1 

1 1 

SENSORS 



1 rUlTI 


BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE 

SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


ELECTRONIC 
BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 



i 


TO LCM 



PARK BRAKE 
SWITCH 


DSC 



POWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 


PUMP 


INLET (4X) 


OUTLET (4X) 


CHANGEOVER (2x) 


PRE-LOAD (2x) 


hj— 

~mmr 


"IQflMflJ 


DSCIII 

HYDRAULIC 

UNIT 


POWER SUPPLY ,» 
GROUND 

SENSOR TEST 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


CHARGE PUMP 
CONTROL 




STEERING ANGLE 
SENSOR WITH 
INTEGRAL MICRO¬ 
PROCESSOR 



WHEEL SPEED X4 


EDO 

IKE&DME 
DIAGNOSIS 



16 
















































































































































































LOW BRAKE 
FLUID SIGNAL 


CHARGE 

PRESSURE 


1 ■ 1 


( ' i 



J 


RESERVOIR 




MASTER 

CYLINDER 




# um 


r 


V 





V# #v 



17 






























































































































































COMPONENTS 


CONTROL MODULE HYDRAULIC UNIT 

The control module is integrated into the hydraulic unit as one compact unit. This reduces 
the size and wiring required for DSC operation. Additionally the motor relay and valve relay 
have been replaced by solid state final stages in the control module. The hydraulic unit con¬ 
tinues to use: 

• Two pre-charge solenoid valves 

• Two changeover solenoid valves 

• Four intake solenoid valves 

• Four outlet solenoid valves 

• One return pump 



18 




ROTATION RATE/TRANSVERSE ACCELERATION SENSOR 


Located under the center console behind the MRS III control module, the rotation rate and 
transverse acceleration sensor provides two inputs to the DSC control module. The sensor 
is isolated from body/chassis vibrations through its rubber mounting. 

For rotational speed, the sensor produces a reference signal of 2.5 volts and a linear volt¬ 
age signal from 0.7 to 4.3 volts. This linear voltage input signal is used by the DSC control 
module as the degree of rotational rate (yaw). 

The sensor also produces a linear voltage signal for the lateral acceleration (G-force) that 
ranges from 0.5 to 4.5 volts. The DSC control module uses this input to determine the side 
forces acting on the vehicle for DSC regulation. 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ACCELERATION SENSOR INPUT 


<S> 


ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR/ 
ACCELERATION SENSOR 




1 / 





19 











































BRAKE PRESSURE SENSOR 


A brake pressure sensor is installed in the hydraulic unit to determine the degree of pres¬ 
sure build-up for Dynamic Brake Control. It is installed in the front axle brake circuit. 

The sensor receives its power supply from the DSC control module and produces a linear 
voltage input signal ranging from 0.5 to 4.5 volts depending on how hard the brakes are 
applied. 



20 



DSC III COMPONENTS 


HDC SWITCH 

The hill decent control function is activated by 
pressing the HDC switch located in the center con¬ 
sole. The LED will come on steady when the func¬ 
tion is in standby and flash when HDC is regulating 

DSC SWITCH 



The system is active whenever the ignition is 
switched on. When pressed, the switch provides a 
momentary 12 volt signal to the DSC III control 
module to switch the system off (DSC indicator in 
cluster illuminated.) When pressed again, the sys¬ 
tem switches back on (DSC Indicator in cluster 
goes off.) 



WHEEL SPEED SENSORS 


• 2 wire Hall Effect Sensor - “Square wave generator”. 

• 48 pulse incremental wheel incorporated in wheel bear¬ 
ing cover for contaminant protection. 48 pulses = one 
complete wheel revolution. 

• Stabilized 8 volt power supply to hall element on one 
wire, ground path for sensor through second wire back 
to control module. Signal is generated by the pulse 
wheel affecting voltage flow through hall element creat¬ 
ing a low of .75 and a high of 2.5 volts. 

• Sensors identical to DSC II and ASC V systems. 

• Sensors provide immediate vehicle speed recognition. 



run 
































































STEERING ANGLE SENSOR 


The Steering angle sensor is mounted at the 
bottom of the steering spindle (in front of the 
flex coupling). 

The sensor is equipped with a processor 
and is directly linked to the CAN bus to com¬ 
municate with the DSC III module. 



CAN BUS MICROPROCESSOR 


The sensor still utilizes two potentiometers to determine the steering angle and the rate of 
steering. These are the raw signals the CAN Bus microprocessor utilizes to create the steer¬ 
ing angle signal for broadcast on the CAN bus. 

The sensor requires calibration after repairs to the steering or suspension system (found in 
DIS Service Functions). Once the calibration is completed the sensor now also sends an 
identification number over the CAN bus to the DSC III module. The ID provides confirma¬ 
tion in the DSC module that the steering angle sensor is properly calibrated. 

If the ID differs due to component swapping it will not be possible to enter the DSC system 
for diagnosis. The DIS will request that the steering angle sensor be recalibrated using the 
service functions. Once complete a new ID number is generated and the DSC III control 
module and Steering angle sensor are properly mated. 

The DSC III logic checks the plausibility of the steering angle sensor against the other DSC 
III inputs (front wheel speeds, rotation and lateral acceleration sensors). If battery voltage 
is interrupted, the current steering wheel rotation is recalculated by the DSC module eval¬ 
uating the front wheel speeds. 

Replacement steering angle sensors must be ZCS coded when installed in the vehicle prior 
to the calibration procedure. 


22 



BRAKE FLUID LEVEL WARNING SWITCH 





A new fluid level switch is incorporated into the reservoir cap. 

• With sufficient fluid level the reed contact is closed. 

• When level drops below allowable limits, switch opens. 

Since the normal position is closed, this circuit is monitored 
for shorts to + and ground. 



The LCM constantly monitors the input. If the ground signal is momentary, the LCM sig¬ 
nals the Instrument cluster of the condition. The instrument cluster then informs the DSC 
III control module over the CAN bus. If the signal is received just prior to the activation of 
the charge pump, the charge pump activation is delayed. 


If the signal is present for more then 25 seconds, the LCM issues two I BUS message for 
the Instrument Cluster: 


1. Post “Brake Fluid Level” in the Matrix display 

2. Notify the DSC III via CAN that the Fluid level has been low for more than 25 seconds. 

The DSC III control module immediately switches DSC III functions off and continuously illu¬ 
minates the DSC indicator in the cluster. 


23 






























































DIAGNOSIS 


Diagnosis and troubleshooting of the DSC III system is carried out using the DIS Tester or 
MoDiC. The DSC control module performs a self check every time the ignition is switched 
on. The warning lamps for DSC and ABS will remain on during the self check. 

Any faults with the system will cause the lamps to remain on when the engine is started. 
Faults that only effect the DSC operation will cause the DSC warning lamp to remain on, 
however ABS can still function. 

If the battery has been disconnected, the DSC warning lamp will remain on until the vehi¬ 
cle receives road speed signals front the front wheel speed sensors and the steering angle 
sensor can calculate the direction of travel. 



O 

> 


TXD 





DSC 



DIS & 
MoDiC 


24 










































































































