TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Subject Page 

Introduction.2 

Power Distribution.4 

Windshield Wiping/Washing.6 

Optional Rain Sensor (AIC) .10 

Central Locking.14 

Remote RF Keyless Entry.23 

Model Year 2000 FZV Key.24 

Car Memory / Key Memory.28 

Power Windows .37 

Window Anti-Trap Detection .39 

Sunroof .40 

Interior Lighting .43 

Anti-Theft (DWA) System .46 

Tilt Sensor.48 

Interior Protection (UIS).49 

Alarm Siren .50 

Alarm Indication .52 

Seat Memory.53 

Mirror Operation .55 

Seat Operation .57 

Steering Column Operation .59 

General Functions of ZKE III.61 

DiagnosisTTroubleshooting .63 


Revised 6-96 


























INTRODUCTION 


The Central Body Electronics (ZKE III) equipped on the X5 includes the following sub¬ 
systems under the total scope of its control: 


• Windshield/tailgate wiping/washing, 
including windshield rain sensor (AIC). 

• Interior lighting 

• Central locking 

• Keyless entry 

• Tailgate release 


Power windows/Sunroof 

DWA alarm system 

Mirror - adjustment/memory/heating 

Seat adjustment/memory 

Steering column adjustment/memory 

Consumer cut-off/sleep mode 


The following is an overview of new or changed features found on the X5 ZKE III variant. 


• Passenger’s door module is now incorporated into the passenger’s door switchblock 
module. 


• Sunroof module (SHD) located on the K bus. 

• The Central Locking system uses a new style door lock actuator with hall effect sensors 
similar to E46. 


• The GM III is responsible for the Key Memory feature. It provides the added 
convenience of identifying users of the vehicle. Whenever the vehicle is locked or 
unlocked via the FZV keyless entry system, a unique key identification signal (key 
number) is transmitted to the General Module. 

The key identification signal alerts the GM to communicate with other control systems 
over the K Bus to store (when locked) or reset (when unlocked) certain driver adjustable 
settings for the driver using the specific key. The GM also resets certain driver 
adjustable settings that it controls directly. 


ZKE - 2 





The X5 ZKE III system continues to be a modular system consisting of the following: 

• General Module III; main controller for ZKE functions 

• PM - FT/SB; Driver’s door switch block and door module 

• PM - BT/SB; Passenger’s door module 

• PM - SHD; Sunroof module 

• PM - SM; Seat/Mirror/ Steering Column memory module 

• AIC; Rain Sensor 


All of these modules communicate over the K-Bus and P-Bus for signaling purposes and 
diagnosis. The ZKE III continues to utilize power transistors for final stage output control. 






1 


GM III MODULE 
LOCATED IN CARRIER 
FORWARD OF GLOVE BOX 




































































































POWER DISTRIBUTION 


The X5 utilizes a single high amperage fused 
power distribution center located to the left EHC 
air reservoir beneath the cargo area floor. 



The main fuse box is located inside the glove 
box above a hinged panel. This places the 
power distribution close to the main electronics 
carrier behind the glove box. 

The glove box mounted fuse box includes fuses 
1 - 64. 





Mounted on the top surface of the fuse panel are 
the following relays: 


FUEL PUMP 


HEATED STEERING WHEEL 


VISUAL ENTRY AID RELAY MODULE 

(OPTIONAL - REFER TO 1999 MODEL UPDATE) 
NOT SHOWN IN THIS PHOTO 


This view shown through passenger side airbag opening in dash panel. 

ZKE - 4 




















































WATER 

COOLED 

GENERATOR 

STARTER 


GLOVE BOX 
FUSE PANEL 


CARGO AREA 

FUSED POWER 

DISTRIBUTION 

CENTER 

(HI AMPERAGE) 


CARGO AREA 
FUSE PANEL/ 
RELAY CARRIER 


An additional fuse panel is located 
in an electrical carrier located at 
the right rear of the cargo area. 

The panel contains fuses 72 - 87. 

The carrier also contains the 
following relays 


REAR WINDOW 
DEFROSTER 
RELAY 


LOWER TAILGATE 
ACTUATOR RELAY 



m 

nl 


i > 


o ° 

8 00 

> 


IH 


o 

CM 


O 

CM 


O 

CM 


0 

o 

CM 

B 

0 

u 


duilli 


Equipment 

Fuse(s) 

Air suspension (EHC) 

78, 87 

Cargo Compartment Power 

Sockets 

83 

CD Changer 

72 

Central Locking in Tailgate 

84 

Central Locking FZV module 

86 

Heated Rear Window 

85 

Nav System 

72, 73 

On Board Monitor 

7, 72, 73 

Radio 

7, 72, 73 

Rear Seat Back Adjustment 

77 



Rear Washer Pump 

81 

Telephone 

7, 73, 74 

Trailer Socket 

78 


ZKE - 5 







































































































































































WINDSHIELD WIPING/WASHING 

• The GM III controls all of the windshield wiping/washer and headlight washing functions. 


• Output control of the wiper motor is 
through the windshield wiper double 
contact relay. The relay is located in the 
engine compartment E-box and is tan in 
color. 

• The system continues to have four wiping 
stages and four interval wiping speeds. 
The wiping stage inputs are coded signals 
through a two wire link with a combination 
of high/low inputs as on previous 
systems. 



• The Windshield Wiping System can also be supplemented with the Rain Sensor system 
as optional equipment. The Rain Sensor detects rain drops on the windshield and 
automatically activates the wipers when the stalk switch is in the intermittent position. 

Wiper Stalk Switch: 


SINGLE: Holding the wiper switch down in the single position provides a ground signal to 
activate the slow speed circuit providing wiper operation until the switch is released. 

INTERMITTENT: The intermittent wiping time inputs are provided by a potentiometer 
mounted in the wiper stalk switch. 


• The intermittent 
wiping intervals are 
dependent on the 
road speed. 

• As road speed 
increases, the 
wiping interval 
delay is decreased. 


SLOW (I) AND FAST (II): The stage I and stage II wiping speeds are also affected by road 
speed. The factory encoded settings are the same as previous systems: 

• Stage I automatically switches to intermittent when the vehicle is stopped 

• Stage II switches to stage I when stopped. 


WIPER TIME DELAYS (SECONDS) BASED ON SET POSITIONS 1 - 4 


THUMB 


VEHICLE SPEED IN MPH 


WHEEL 

POSITION 

<4 

5 - 22 

23-45 

46-60 

61 -87 

>87 

1 

26 

19 

17 

15 

15 

13 

2 

17 

12 

11 

10 

9 

7 

3 

10 

6 

6 

5 

4 

3 

4 

5 

3 

3 

2 

2 

2 


ZKE - 6 























REAR WINDOW WASHER PUMP 


(LOCATED IN WASHER RESERVOIR 
FRONT RIGHT FENDER) 











WINDSHIELD WASHING: 


Pulling the Windshield Wiper Switch rearward closes the “wash” contact providing a 
switched ground input to the GM. The GM activates the windshield washer pump directly 
via a power output final stage transistor. 


KL 30 



HEADLIGHT WASHING: 


When the headlights are on, the headlight 
washer pump is activated with the first 
activation of the windshield washer pump. 
The GM recognizes headlights on via K bus 
signalling. 

Within the same “on” cycle (ignition key has 
not been switched off), it is only activated 
again after five successive windshield washer 
cycles. 

The GM provides a ground on the headlight 
washer relay control circuit providing pump 
operation. The relay is located in the e-box. 

The X5 uses three separate washer pumps 
which are all easily accessible on the 5.3 liter 
washer fluid reservoir located in the engine 
compartment. 



HEADLIGHT WASHER 
RELAY 



ZKE - 8 


































REAR WINDOW WIPER/WASHER SYSTEM 


The tailgate window wiper/washer system is included in the scope of ZKE however is not 
controlled directly by the GM. The control electronics are integrated into the rear wiper 
motor assembly. It contains two hall sensors, one for monitoring park position and other 
for the end stop, or to signal reverse direction of the wiper motor. 


The rear wiper system is operator controlled 
through the wiper stalk switch providing the 
following functions: 

• Intermittent rear window wiping 

• Programmed rear window wiping interval 

• Operation of the rear window washer 

Pressing the wiper stalk forward to the first 
detent activates the rear wiper in the 
intermittent mode. 



The default timed interval is approximately 12 seconds. The full sweep and park positions 
are recognized by the two hall sensors on the motor gear assembly. If the wiper is switched 
OFF, the wiper blade will return to the park position. 



The programmed wiper interval procedure is identical to the E39 sport wagon; Briefly 
switch the rear wiper ON/OFF, Wait the desired interval time, Switch the rear wiper ON 
again. The OFF time will be the programmed interval - up to approx. 30 seconds 

Rear window washing is activated by pressing the wiper stalk switch to the full forward 
position. The washer pump operates followed by two full wiping cycles. The wipers will then 
switch to the intermittent wiping mode. 

When the transmission is shifted into reverse, the wiper will switch to continuous operation 
until the vehicle is shifted out of reverse. This high signal is provided by the LCM III when it 
activates the back up lights. 


ZKE - 9 





























OPTIONAL RAIN SENSOR (AIC) 


The Windshield Wiping System will also be available with an optionally equipped Rain 
Sensor. The Rain Sensor provides added driver convenience and enhances safety by 
automatically activating the intermittent function of the windshield wipers when water 
droplets are detected on the windshield. 

COMPONENTS: 

The rain sensor unit is mounted on the top center area of the interior windshield surface 
directly behind the rear view mirror. The unit contains: 

• Optical Prism Body: This portion of the unit is 
permanently fixed to the windshield. It can not be 
removed and can only be replaced with a 
replacement windshield. 

The prism body has a reflective surface that faces 
the back of the windshield. The prism body also 
acts as the windshield mount for the Rain Sensor 
Control Module. 

• Rain Sensor Control Module: The control module incorporates the following; 

- Infra Red Emitter and Detector Diodes 

- Optics heater (prevents condensation from forming on diodes and prism) 

- Optics evaluation and control electronics 

- Photo cell to detect night time driving 


The control module requires four signals for operation; KL R, KL 31, Windshield Wiper 
Motor Park Signal Feedback and K Bus interface. 




ZKE - 10 





























THEORY OF OPERATION: 

The optical infra red portion of the sensor operates by the principle of refraction (bending 
of a light ray). The rain sensor control module activates the emitter diode which sends a 
beam of infra red light through the windshield on an angle. The set angle is important 
because it provides the beam with a calculated reflective path back to the detector diode. 

The beam is reflected back into the windshield due to the density difference of the glass 
compared with the ambient air on the outside surface of the glass. When the windshield is 
clean (no rain drops, moisture or dirt) the detector diode receives 100% of the infra red light 
that the was sent by the emitter. With this condition, the rain sensor evaluation electronics 
determines the windshield is free of rain drops. 



The density of water is closer to that of glass than air. When rain starts to accumulate in 
the sensor monitoring area, it causes part of the infra red beam to extend past the outside 
surface of the glass and into the rain drop. When this occurs, the beam is refracted and 
only part of the beam returns to the detector diode. 


The rain sensor evaluation 



The intensity of the returned infra red beam diminishes proportionally with an increase of 
water droplets. The rain sensor control module generates a signal proportionate to the 
amount of rain on the windshield and broadcasts it to the GM III via the K bus. 


The GM III activates the intermittent wipe cycle if the windshield wiper stalk switch is in the 
intermittent position. It also adjusts the frequency of wiping the windshield depending on 
the four position thumb wheel. 


ZKE - 11 


























RAIN SENSOR FUNCTION: 


The rain sensor is online as soon as it receives KL R operating power. 

• When the windshield wiper stalk switch is placed in the intermittent position the GM 
signals the rain sensor control module via the K Bus of the request for intermittent 
wiping and the position of the knurled wheel (sensitivity). 

• As an acknowledgement, the rain sensor sends a command via the K Bus to activate 
the wiper motor. If more than 12 seconds pass before the GM receives the 
acknowledgement, the GM concludes the rain sensor has a defect and operates the 
intermittent wipe function as a system not equipped with a rain sensor. The wiper 
intermittent cycling is based solely on the knurled wheel setting. 

• The rain sensor continuously monitors the windshield for rain accumulation and signals 
the GM to activate the wipers based on the knurled wheel position and how fast the rain 
accumulates on the windshield. 

• The knurled wheel position signal (1 -4) via the K bus informs the rain sensor of the 
selected level of sensitivity. 

- Position 1 (least sensitive) delays the wiper activation signal. 

- Position 4 (most sensitive) sends the wiper activation signal to the GM sooner. 

• When the wiper motor park contacts signal the GM of the wiper arm position, the signal 
is simultaneously sent to the rain sensor as an indication that the windshield has been 
cleared of water drops and causes the rain sensor to reset the sensitivity delay timer 
back to 0. 

• If night time driving is detected via the integral photocell, the sensitivity to water droplets 
is increased causing a shorter delay than day time driving. 

• Depending on the intensity of the rain the wipers will be operated continuously as if set 
in the normal wiper stalk switch position regardless of the knurled wheel setting. For 
this reason, the vehicle speed signal on the K bus is not utilized on rain sensor equipped 
wiper systems. 

• If the ignition switch is turned off with the wiper switch in the intermittent position, the 
rain sensor will only become active after the ignition is switched back on and one of the 
following occurs: 

- The stalk switch is moved from the intermittent position and then back. 

- The knurled wheel setting is adjusted. 

- or the wash function is activated. 

The reasoning behind this switching strategy is to have the driver make a conscious 
decision to activate the system themselves. 


ZKE - 12 



RAIN SENSOR CONTROL MODULE ADAPTATION 


The rain sensor control module adapts to the optics system environment as follows: 

Windshield Aging: As the vehicle ages the possibility of stone chipping in the rain sensors 
monitoring area may occur which will cause a loss of light in the optics system. 

The control module adapts for loss of light based on the intensity of the detected infra red 
light with a cleared windshield (wiper motor park signal). Therefore, the rain sensors 
function is not adversely affected due to windshield aging. 

Dirty Windows: The rain sensor adaptation reacts less sensitively to a dirty windshield (dirt, 
road salt, wax residue) after a completed wipe cycle. A dirty windshield has a film on it that 
diminishes the ability of the infra red to refract into present water droplets. This causes a 
delay in the rain sensor detection capabilities which lengthens the time intervals on an 
intermittent wipe. 

SERVICE NOTE FOR VEHICLES EQUIPPED WITH THE RAIN SENSOR: 

Make sure the wiper blades are in perfect condition. Only use window cleaner to clean the 
windows. Dirty windows can cause the Rain Sensor control module to set a fault 
due to the end limits of its adaptation abilities. 

WINDSHIELD WIPER SYSTEM FAILSAFE OPERATION 


The GM provides failsafe operation of the wiper system if faults are detected with any of the 
following input signals: 


FUNCTION 

FAULTED INPUT DETECTED 

FAILSAFE FUNCTION 

Intermittent wipe 

Short or open circuit of 

Delay value for setting 3 


the knurled wheel signal 

used. 

Intermittent wipe 

Faulted Rain Sensor or K Bus 

Normal intermittent wipe 

with Rain Sensor 

Signal corrupt 

implemented 

Wiper motor not 

Park contact feedback signal 

Wiper motor control 

functional moving 

takes longer than 16 seconds 

deactivated for 3 minutes 


WINDSHIELD WIPER SYSTEM DIAGNOSIS 


The GM monitors the circuits of the wiper potentiometer, wiper motor, double relay, the 
windshield washer pump and terminal 30. 


ZKE-13 











CENTRAL LOCKING 

SYSTEM FEATURES: 

• The Central Locking system controls the door locks, tailgate locks and Fuel Filler Flap 
actuators. 

• The familiar single/double locking strategy is maintained from previous systems with a 
new style door lock mechanism combined with dual actuator motors similar to that 
of the E46 ZKE V system. 

• The automatic locking feature activates the door lock actuators when a road speed 
signal of 7.5 MPH is detected via the K-Bus. The factory default encoding of this 
feature is off, but can be encoded on for individual users with the Key Memory function. 

• The Driver’s door lock location is the only point outside of the vehicle where the key can 
mechanically control the central locking system functions. The lock incorporates the 
familiar overrunning lock cylinder that breaks away and freewheels if an attempt is made 
to destroy the lock with a screwdriver, dent puller, etc. 

• The selective unlocking feature is maintained. A single unlock request from the driver’s 
door with the key or via the remote transmitter unlocks the driver’s door only. A second 
unlock request unlocks the remaining doors and trunk. This feature can be modified 
for individual users with the new Key Memory capabilities to activate all lock actuators 
simultaneously. 

• When unlocked, the X5 upper tailgate can be opened by: 

- the tailgate button in the center console SZM, 

- trunk release switch pad located above the license plate, or 

- the trunk release button on an FZV key. 

• With the upper tailgate open, the lower tailgate is then opened by depressing the switch 
located along it’s top edge. 

• GM and EWS 3.3 interface via the K bus to monitor double lock status and to initiate 
double lock override. This feature allows the doors to be opened from the inside if an 
accepted EWS key is switched on in the ignition when double locked. 


ZKE - 14 




ZKE- 15 





























DOOR LOCK ACTUATORS 


The actuators are sealed, self contained units with no 
replaceable parts. The door lock actuators use hall effect 
sensors to provide: 

• Door lock key position (driver’s door only), 

• Door open/closed status. 

The driver’s door lock provides the following signals to 
the driver’s door switchblock module (PM-FT/SB): 

• Lock / Unlock, 

• DWA arm/disarm 

• Convenience closing and opening signals. 



DOOR LOCK POSITION HALL 
SENSORS 

The Drivers door switchblock 
module monitors these key positions 
over two wires. The signals are 
generated by two hall effect sensors 
(Hall Sensor 1 & 2) located in the 
actuator. 

When the key is turned, a plastic 
cylinder in the lock actuator is 
simultaneously rotated by the lock 
tumbler extension rod. 

A magnet is incorporated in the 
plastic cylinder, which when rotated 
changes the magnetic influence on 
the hall sensors. 

The presence of a magnet in close 
proximity to the sensing surface of 
either hall sensor creates a coded 
input over the two wires that the GM 
uses to determine the key position. 


• UNLOCK 

• DWA DISARMED 


NEUTRAL 
- 0 - 


• DOUBLE LOCK 

• DWA ARMED 



MANUAL 
UNLOCK 


• CONVENIENCE 
CLOSING (hold 
until activated). 

I 

MANUAL 


• CONVENIENCE 
OPENING (hold 
until activated). 



TUMBLER 
EXTENSION ROD 


HALL SENSOR 1 


HALL 

SENSOR 2 


PLASTIC CYLINDER WITH ASYMMETRICAL MAGNET 


(Shown in the Lock Position) 


• Magnet in front of sensor, current flow through the sensor is <5 mA ( 0 ). 

• Magnet rotated away from sensor, current flow through the sensor is >12 mA (1). 


Hall sensor 1 & 2 are not included in the front passenger door or rear door actuators. 


ZKE - 16 
















DOOR CONTACT HALL SENSOR 


Also included in the driver’s door actuator is a third hall effect sensor. This sensor signals 
the door open/closed status to the driver’s door switch block module and to the GM via the 
P-bus. 


The rotary latch plate position 
activates the door contact hall 


DRIVER'S DOOR 
LOCK ACTUATOR 


sensor. 

• When the door latch is closed, 
current flow through the sensor 
is <5 mA ( 0 ). 

• When the door is open, current 
flow through the sensor is >12 

mA (1). 

The passenger side front door and 
both rear door lock actuators only 
include this hall effect sensor (hall 
sensor 3). Hall sensors 1 & 2 are 
not required. 





ZKE - 17 





ACTUATOR MOTOR CONTROL 

There are two motors incorporated in each actuator that provide two separate functions: 

• Single lock/unlock function. This motor controls the mechanical lock mechanism 
when the central lock button is pressed to single lock the vehicle. The mechanism is 
locked at this point but can by opened from the interior by pulling an interior door handle 
twice or by pressing the central lock button again. When single lock function is 
activated, the fuel filler flap actuator is not locked. 

• Double lock/unlock function. This motor is activated only when the vehicle is locked 
from the outside at the driver’s door lock with a key or when the GM receives a lock 
request from the FZV system. In this case the double lock motor is activated 
simultaneously with the single lock motor. The function of the double lock motor is to 
mechanically offset an internal rod disabling it from unlocking the vehicle from the 
interior. This prevents the doors from being unlocked by any means except from an 
unlock request at the driver’s door, the FZV remote key or via central lock button. 

• Continuous locking/unlocking will initiate a timed arrest of the locking system. The GM counts 
each time the locks are actuated. After approximately 12 cycles, the timed arrest is active. 
The timed arrest is deactivated one actuator cycle for every 8 seconds until the counter is 
reset to 0. The timed arrest is overridden if a crash signal is received from the MRS III. 


ZKE - 18 



All door lock actuators and the fuel filler flap actuator are controlled directly by the GM via 
four internal load relays. The drivers door lock actuator has a separate circuit for the 
selective unlocking feature. 


If this feature is disabled by key memory encoding, the driver’s door lock actuator selective 
unlock circuit is activated simultaneously with the balance of the motors during unlock. 


CONTROL DURING DOUBLE LOCK: 

DOUBLE LOCK CONTROL 
-SWITCHED POWER- ' 


FUEL 

FILLER 

FLAP 


LEFT 

REAR 

DOOR 


GROUND 


SINGLE LOCK CONTROL 
- SWITCHED POWER - 



SELECTIVE SINGLE LOCK _ 
- CONTROL - SWITCHED POWER - 


RIGHT PASS. 
REAR DOOR 
DOOR 



CONTROL DURING SINGLE LOCK: 


LEFT 

REAR 

DOOR 


NOT ACTIVE 


GROUND 


SINGLE LOCK CONTROL 
- SWITCHED POWER - 


FUEL 

FILLER 

FLAP 



SELECTIVE SINGLE LOCK _ 
- CONTROL - SWITCHED POWER - 


RIGHT PASS. 
REAR DOOR 
DOOR 



DRIVER'S 

DOOR 



DRIVER'S 

DOOR 



CONTROL DURING SINGLE UNLOCK: 


DOUBLE LOCK CONTROL 


-GROUND- 


UNLOCK CONTROL 
- SWITCHED POWER - 


FUEL 

FILLER 

FLAP 


SINGLE UNLOCK CONTROL 
- SWITCHED GROUND - 


LEFT 

REAR 

DOOR 



M 


M 


RIGHT 

REAR 

DOOR 



PASS. 

DOOR 



DRIVER'S 

DOOR 



SELECTIVE SINGLE UNLOCK 
- SWITCHED GROUND - 


ZKE - 19 

































































TAILGATE CONTROL 


The tailgate can be opened from the following locations: 

• Exterior tailgate switch pad above the license plate 

• Interior remote tailgate button 

• FZV radio key 

The remote tailgate button is locked out when the GM 
detects a vehicle speed signal > 4 MPH via the K-bus. 
The switch has been incorporated into the SZM. 





TAILGATE 

UNLOCK 
SWITCH 
(above license 
plate) ■— 



GM III 


FZV 





LATCH FULLYCLOSED 
FEEDBACK 




Upper tailgate 
actuator 




LOWER 

TAILGATE 

LATCH 

ACTUATOR 

RELAY 



ZKE - 20 


L LOWER TAILGATE 
T LATCH ACTUATOR 





















































































TAILGATE LOCK ACTUATORS 


Each tailgate has a separate latching/actuator system. The upper tailgate actuator must first be 
activated open before the lower tailgate actuator can be operated (program logic). 

When closed, the tailgate actuator position switch provides a ground signal to the GM 
signifying a "closed tailgate". This switch also serves as the tailgate open signal to 
automatically switch the interior lights on. 

The lower tailgate actuator operates a lever which pulls two bowden cables to unlatch the 
outboard mounted latch mechanisms. The upper and lower latch mechanisms can also be 
manually unlatched for if electrical malfunction occurs (refer to complete vehicle section). 



LOWER TAILGATE COMPONENTS 

4 *. 


■ LATCH POSTS 
LATCH MECHANISMS 
- BOWDEN CABLES^ 


■ ■ 


'I 


■ 



ACTUATOR 
MOUNTING PLATE 


LOWER TAILGATE 
LATCH ACTUATOR 


UPPER TAILGATE 
LATCH POST 


LOWER TAILGATE 
ACTUATOR SWITCH 


ZKE - 21 



















CENTRAL LOCKING BUTTON 


The central lock button in the center console 
provides a momentary ground input signal to the 
GM. 

• This input initiates a single lock for each door 
and the trunk. 

• The fuel filler flap remains unlocked for 
refueling purposes. 

• If a door is manually opened while centrally 
locked, the remaining doors stay locked. 

The opened door can be re-locked when closed by manually locking or pushing the central 
button twice. This allows the locks of the remaining doors to be re-synchronized again. 

As an additional safety feature, the central lock button input also unlocks a double locked 
system. Pressing the button returns the system to central lock (single) position, allowing 
the doors to be opened when the interior door handles are opened twice. This feature was 
also added to other ZKE systems during the 1999 model year. 

CRASH SIGNALLING 

The Multiple Restraint System (MRS III) provides a switched signal to the GM in the event 
of an accident. The signal is an output function of the MRS control module and becomes 
active when MRS determines a crash has occurred. 

When active, the GM unlocks the door lock actuators, switches on the interior lights and 
signals the LCM III via the K bus to activate the hazard warning flashers. 

Once the crash signal is active, the GM will not respond to lock requests from the system 
until the ignition switch is cycled or a front door is opened. 



ZKE - 22 


REMOTE RF (KEYLESS) ENTRY 


The X5 keyless entry system’s operation is carried over from the E38/E39. However, the 
FZV key has undergone considerable redesign. 

• The remote key receiver is part of 
the antenna amplifier and is 
installed in the center of the top 
section of the tailgate. 


The receiver produces a digital 
signal based on the transmitter 
command and sends it to the GM 
for processing. 


The GM then carries out all remote 
lock system, window/sunroof 
convenience closing features and 
DWA arming/disarming functions. 

• The frequency at which the key transmits the radio signal to the antenna amplifier is 315 
MHz. 

• The system is also used to convey the key identification number being used to 
lock/unlock the vehicle. This is a requirement of the Key Memory feature covered further 
on in this manual. 



Antenna 

amplifier 



































































MODEL YEAR 2000 FZV KEY 


Visual Changes: 


• New appearance with blue and white BMW roundel. 

• New button arrangement (larger buttons) with sequential operation (enhanced operating 
convenience) 

• Rechargeable battery replaces replaceable batteries. Charged by EWS ring antenna. 

• The key housing is encapsulated and can not be opened. 

• The LED has been omitted. 

• Key will be used in E46, E38 and E39 vehicles. 

Features of the keyless entry system include: 


Up to 4 radio-control keys can be operated in conjunction with one vehicle. 

Locking/unlocking of doors, tailgate, 
fuel filler lid. 

Selective unlocking of driver’s door (as 
with key in lock) 

Arming/dis-arming of DWA alarm system 
(if equipped). 

Remote unlocking of the tailgate only. 

Comfort opening of windows and 
sunroof 

Interior lighting activation (search mode). 

Panic mode alarm activation.. 

Automatic correction for up to 1000 
erroneous activation signals. 

Low transmitter battery fault code 
storage in the GM. 

An EEPROM is used to store the key 
data. 


• Keys delivered with a four color label 
sheet containing four different colored 
labels for each of the four possible FZV 
keys. 

ZKE - 24 


MOMENTARILY PRESS: PRESS AND HOLD: 

• TAILGATE OPENS • PANIC MODE ALV\RM 


ARROW 


PRESS ONCE: 

• UNLOCK 
DRIVER'S DOOR 

• DWA DISARMED 
(if equipped) 

• INTERIOR LIGHTS 
ON 

PRESS TWICE: 

• TOTAL UNLOCKING 

HOLD: 

• CONVENIENCE 
OPENING 


ROUNDEL 

PRESS ONCE = 

• LOCKING, 

• DWA ARMING, 


• INTERIOR LIGHTS 
ON WHEN 
VEHICLE LOCKED 

PRESS TWICE WITHIN 
10 SECONDS = 

• DEACTIVATE UIS & 
TILT MONITORING 

TRUNK 





REMOTE KEY INITIALIZATION 


The initialization of the FZV keys is required to establish the Lock/Unlock signal 
synchronization with the GM. The initialization procedure provides the GM with a key 
identification number and a “rolling code” for each key. If the initialization is not performed, 
the GM will not respond to the key signals. 

Up to 4 remote keys can be initialized. They must be initialized at the same time. Key 
initialization is only possible with the vehicle unlocked. 

Procedure: 

1. Close all doors and have all keys available. 

2. Using key number 1, turn the ignition switch 
to KL R, then switch off within 5 seconds and 
remove the first key. 

3. Within 30 seconds of turning the ignition 
switch to “off” Press and hold the arrow 

button. 

4. While holding the arrow button, press and 
release {“tap”) the roundel button three 
times within 10 seconds. 

5. Release both buttons. The GM will 
immediately lock and unlock the doors 
signaling a successful initialization. 

6. If additional keys need to be initialized repeat 
steps 3 - 5 within 30 seconds. 

7. Switching the ignition to KL R completes the initialization. 

SERVICE NOTE: The key memory function of the GM responds to the key identification 
number of each key. If the keys are not initialized in the same order prior to initialization, the 
key memory function activated by the keys will not be assigned correctly. 

Always initialize the keys in the same order. 



ZKE - 25 





FZV KEY RECHARGEABLE BATTERY 


From KL R, the battery inside the key head is charged inductively by the EWS ring antenna 
via a coil antenna integrated in the key. The charging process is controlled by electronic 
circuitry integrated in the key. 

• The service life of a radio-control key used under normal conditions corresponds to the 
vehicle lifespan. 

• If the FZV keys are not used (ie: stored in a drawer), the battery will be discharged after 
approx. 1.5 years. 

• The time required to fully charge a discharged battery is approx. 30 hours. 

• The remote control can be operated about 15 times after a charging period of approx. 
30 minutes (driving time). 

The key data is stored in a transponder chip. The transponder chip is a wireless read and 
write EEPROM. It is powered via the ring coil at the steering lock. Power is applied 
electromagnetically when the key is in the ignition switch from KL R. 

The power supply is used both for data transfer as well as for charging the battery. This has 
been made possible by new development of the transponder chip. 

As with previous systems, every press of an FZV key also provides the battery charge 
condition. When the FZV electronics receives a low power condition message three 
successive times, the GM sets a fault indicating a low battery within a specific key. The 
LCM is also informed via the bus system and alerts the driver via an instrument cluster 
matrix message. 

If the battery is recharged (used operate car), the fault will be automatically deleted when 
five successive messages are received indicating a charged battery condition. 

The battery has no affect on the EWS III communication function! 


ZKE - 26 




DIS & 
MoDiC 


ZKE - 27 


































































































































Car Memory / Key Memory 


The Car/Key Memory feature provides the flexibility of allowing the owner to customize cer¬ 
tain functions of select vehicle systems and automatically identifies users of the vehicle by 
a key identification signal provided by the remote keyless entry system (FZV). 

Car & Key memory is marketed as a combined feature but is actually two separate func¬ 
tions of the select vehicle control systems. 

Car Memory: The owner is provided with a list of available system functions that can be 
customized to their liking. Prior to delivery, the DIS or MoDiC is used to encode the 
owner’s chosen selections into the appropriate control modules. 

These choices become a permanent function of the control module and can only be 
changed by re-encoding with the DIS or MoDiC at a BMW Center. 

This feature has been available for some time via the ZCS Conversion Feature but has never 
been fully utilized or officially presented to the vehicle owner as a feature of their vehicle. 


MoDiC 




D-BUS 


20 PIN 

DIAGNOSTIC 

CONNECTION 


ZKE - 28 


Units DisplayChange (°F/ °C) 



• DWA - Features 

• FZV - Features 


GM III 


• Automatic Seat 
Adjustment 

• Method Selection 


SEAT 

MODULE 


• Recirc 
Air Memory 


IHKA 



LCM III 

• Daytime Running 
Lights 

• Home Lights 





























































































































Key Memory: This feature provides the added convenience of identifying users of the vehi¬ 
cle whenever a lock or unlocked signal is generated via the individual FZV keys. A maxi¬ 
mum of four FZV keys can be used with the Key Memory feature. 

Each of the four keys generate a unique key identification signal (key number) that is trans¬ 
mitted simultaneously with the lock/unlock signals to the General Module. Key Memory 
does not respond to Lock/Unlock requests from the drivers door lock. 

Most of the key memory functions require the vehicle be configured using the “KEY MEM¬ 
ORY” function of the DIS or MoDiC. However, there are a few features that store settings 
automatically without configuration such as IHKA blower speed and temp setting. 



The key ID signal alerts the GM V to communicate with select control systems over the K 
Bus to store (when locked) or reset (when unlocked) certain driver adjustable settings. 

There are features that function as both a Car & Key Memory feature. 

Example; the Automatic Seat Adjustment feature is encoded as a Car Memory Function 
with the following possibilities: 

• when unlocking, 

• when opening a door after unlocking 

• or not active at all. 

If active, the seat positions are stored and reactivated by the Key Memory function for indi¬ 
vidual users of the car. 71 /c oo 



































































REQUIRED PRECONDITIONS: 


Change 


Print 


End 


Services 


BMW Coding/programming Selection 


Before configuring Car or Key Memory 
Functions, connect a battery charger to the 
vehicle. This will ensure adequate battery 
voltage during the Car/Key Memory 
configuration. 


1 CAR MEMORY 


2 KEY MEMORY 

3 ZCS CODING 

4 PROGRAMMING 

5 ADJUSTMENT EWS - DME 

6 ADJUSTMENT EWS - DDE 


Help 


If battery voltage drops below 11.8 volts, the 
procedure will terminate. 

Car Memory Configuration procedure: 

From the Coding/Programming Selection 
function of the DIS or MoDiC, Select "CAR 
MEMORY" and proceed by pressing the 
right arrow. 

The system will scan for control systems 
capable of configuration based on the ZCS 
in the Instrument Cluster. 

After a short wait the system will display a list 
of detected control systems capable of CAR 
MEMORY configuration. 

Using the owner's selection list, enter the 
systems selected for customization. 

Example: The owner chooses not to have 
an acoustic acknowledgment when the 
DWA is disarmed. 

• From the displayed list select "Anti Theft 
System" and press the continue arrow. 

• From the Anti Theft Sub menu, select 4. 
Acknowledge. 

The Acknowledge sub menu provides all 
possible options for the DWA 
Acknowledgment. 

• Select 2. Disarm Acoustically, and press 
the continue arrow. 


v 


◄ 









Document 

5?Sfedule 


<3 l> 










Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Coding/programming Selection 


1 ANTI-THEFT 
SYSTEM 

2 CENTRAL 
LOCKING 

3 WINDOW REGULATOR/ 
SLIDE/TILT 
SUNROOF 

4 LIGHTING 

8 HEATING/AIR 
CONDITIONING/ 
VENTILATION 

9 SEAT/MIRROR 

MEMORY 

10 DISPLAYS/LANGUAGE 


A 




Help 













Print 


Change 


End 


Services 



BMW Coding/programming Selection 


ANTI-THEFT 
SYSTEM 

1 Interior 
protection 

2 Tilt alarm sensor 

3 Arm/ 
disarm 

4 Acknowledge 


Help 



Quick test 




Note 

# 







◄ 



Document 


SSfedule 


<1 0 


System 


► 












Print 


Change 


End 


Services 



BMW Coding/programming Selection 


ANTI-THEFT 
SYSTEM 
Acknowledge 
1 Disarm 
Visually 


2 Disarm 

Acoustically 


3 Arm 
Visually 

4 Arm 

Acoustically 

5 Arm 
Visually, 
lids closed 


◄ 




l?Sfedule 


<1 > 



System 



ZKE - 30 


Document 



The next displayed screen is the "active/not 
active" selection. 

The blue "=" sign indicates what mode this 
particular function is set to at the present. 

• Select the "not active" function and press 
the continue arrow. 

The system will accept the selection and 
bring the CAR MEMORY main selection 
menu back in the display. 

If additional selections are required, enter 
into the systems displayed and repeat the 
steps from above. 

• When all of the required CAR MEMORY 
configuration selections are entered, scroll 
down to the bottom of the main car 
memory menu and select 99 SET 
VEHICLE. 

All of the selected configuration changes are 
now displayed. Check the displayed list 
against the Owner's selection list making 
sure all of the choices are entered. 

Print this list out and place in the vehicle 
history file for future reference. 

• Press the continue arrow to proceed with 
the configuration. The display will request 
that the ignition switch be "switched off 
and on again". Switch off for a minimum 
of 10 seconds, then switch back on. 

Press the "Yes" button to continue. 

A bar graph indicating configuration progress is displayed along with the current battery 
voltage. This portion of the configuration varies in duration based on the total number of 
configuration selections. Watch the battery voltage level during the configuration. Low 
battery condition will terminate or possibly incorrectly configure the vehicle. 




ZKE - 31 




The display will change indicating the 
“Vehicle setting completed”. Switch ignition 
off for 10 seconds and then back on. 

Verify the configuration change(s) by 
activating the new function. 

Pressing the Left arrow brings the Main 
Coding/Programming Menu back in the 
display. 



BMW Coding/programming Selection 



<] MfeA Document &f}e du | e <] |> 


ZKE - 32 




Key Memory Configuration procedure: 

From the Coding/Programming Selection function of the DIS or MoDiC, Select "KEY 
MEMORY" and proceed by pressing the right arrow. 

With the ignition switched on press the right arrow to allow the system to scan for control 
systems capable of KEY MEMORY configuration. 


After a short wait the system will display a 
key number selection list of the four possible 
keys. The display also indicates the 
identification number of the last key used 

• Using the owner's selection list, select the 
key for key memory assignment and 
press the continue arrow. 

The system will scan for key memory 
functions for the specific key. 



BMW Coding/programming Selection 



<3 iMBttWt Document &ff edu | e <] System [> 


Similar to the CAR MEMORY main menu, 
the KEY MEMORY main menu provides all 
of the possible configuration options. 

As an example, the owner requires the 
selective unlocking feature be deactivated. 

• Press 2. CENTRAL LOCKING and press 
the continue arrow. 


• From the displayed list select "10 
Selective central locking" and press the 
continue arrow. 




ZKE - 33 



Change 


Services 


The blue "=" sign indicates what mode this 
particular function is set to currently. 

• Select the "not active" function and press 
the continue arrow. 

The system will accept the selection and 
bring the KEY MEMORY main selection 
menu back in the display. 

If additional selections are required, enter 
into the systems displayed and repeat the 
steps from above. 

• When all of the required KEY MEMORY 
configuration selections are entered, 
select 99 SET VEHICLE. 


The next screen displays all of the selected 
configuration changes. 

Check the displayed list against the Owner's 
selection list making sure all of the choices 
are entered. Print this list out and place in 
the vehicle history file for future reference if 
necessary. 

• Press the continue arrow to proceed with 
the configuration. 

The next display will request that the ignition 
switch be "switched off and on again". Press 
the "Yes" button to continue. 


Print 


End 


BMW Coding/programming Selection 

CENTRAL 
LOCKING 

Selective central 
locking 
1 = active 


not active 



◄ 



- Y 

Document 

5?Sfedule 

7 

<! I> 









Help 



,-„ ,- 4 ,-„ ,-, 


Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Coding/programming Selection 


1 ANTI-THEFT 
SYSTEM 

2 CENTRAL 
LOCKING 

3 WINDOW REGULATOR/ 
SLIDE/TILT 
SUNROOF 

4 LIGHTING 

8 HEATING/AIR 
CONDITIONING/ 
VENTILATION 

9 SEAT/MIRROR 

MEMORY 

10 DISPLAYS/LANGUAGE 


◄ 




Document 


JfeHedule 


<1 ► 


System 



,- 










Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


Help 


BMW Coding/programming Selection 



A bar graph indicating configuration process 
is displayed along with the current battery 
voltage. 

The display will change indicating the 
"Vehicle setting completed". Turn the 
ignition switch back off for 10 seconds and 
then back on. Verify the configuration 
change(s) by activating the new function. 











Print 


Change 


End 


Services 



BMW Coding/programming Selection 


Vehicle setting 
Completed. 

The settings will 
be activated after 
switching the 
ignition off and on 
again. 

Therefore: 

Switch off ignition, 
wait 10 seconds, 
switch on ignition. 
Check settings! 









SHNI&M 


Document 


Scftedule 


<1 l> 



System 



ZKE - 34 



Also located at the bottom of both the CAR 
& KEY selection menus are the possible 
selections: 

• 97 FACTORY SETTING - This selection 
automatically resets the original factory 
default settings 

• 98 REJECT SELECTION - This selection 
resets the last selected entry to the 
previous setting. 


During the operation of the FACTORY SETTING selection, it is a normal function for the 
LCM III controlled lights to flash. 

Symbols: = The equal sign signifies the current mode of function 

> The arrow symbol signifies selected changes to be encoded when all 
selections are completed. This symbol can be seen when returning to a 
selection menu to check on selected modes of operation prior to “99 Set 
Vehicle”. 

* The asterisk indicates the factory default encoding function after encoding. 


Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Coding/programming Selection 


1 ANTI-THEFT 
SYSTEM 

2 CENTRAL 
LOCKING 

3 WINDOW REGULATOR/ 
SLIDE/TILT 
SUNROOF 

4 LIGHTING 

8 HEATING/AIR 
CONDITIONING/ 
VENTILATION 

9 SEAT/MIRROR 

MEMORY 

10 DISPLAYS/LANGUAGE 


Help 


L 




◄ 



Document 

Ifeffedule 


<3 E> 











Quick test 


Note 

# 


System 


► 


ZKE - 35 




CAR/KEY CONFIGURATION AND THE ZCS CODING CONVERSION FEATURE 

The ZCS Coding Conversion feature is still utilized for changing other system functions as 
in the past. For example: The Language Display Change for the instrument cluster display 
block is only available using the Coding Conversion feature. 


CAR/KEY MEMORY SERVICE CONSIDERATIONS 

Replacing Car or Key Memory Configured Control Modules: 

If a Car/Key Memory capable control module becomes defective and needs replacement, 
the specific customized data will be transferred over to the new replacement unit during the 
ZCS encoding process. 

If this is not possible due to extensive control module failure, the owner must be made 
aware of the situation and requested to provide the options they originally selected. For this 
reason, it is advantageous to print the selected features as mentioned in the CAR & KEY 
MEMORY configuration procedures. 

FZV Key Initialization Procedure: 

Also mentioned in the FZV section of this manual, If FZV keys need re-initializing, make sure 
they are initialized in the same order. Adhere to the colored label identification system for 
proper key initialization sequencing. 

Technician Awareness: 

Car Memory/Key Memory Configuration obviously changes the functionality of the systems. 
Before concluding a specific system is defective, review the Car/Key memory selection for 
the vehicle you are working on. There may be an owner selected function activated that is 
not a common selection, causing misunderstanding of the system's function. 

When working on a Car/Key Memory capable vehicle, avoid using the FZV keys. Use the 
driver’s door lock to lock and unlock the vehicle to maintain the owners memorized settings. 
If settings had to be modified as part of repair procedure, inform service advisor of situation 
to convey to vehicle owner. 


ZKE - 36 



POWER WINDOWS 


The power window operation on the E53 is similar to previous systems. Features of the 

system include: 

• Control of the front and rear door window motors is carried out directly by the GM. 

• One-touch operation in both directions on all four windows. 

• Cable type window regulator used for all windows. 

• Anti-trap detection is provided by the pressure sensitive finger guard . 

• Push/pull window switches 

• The rear window switches located in the rear doors can be deactivated by the pressing 
child lock out switch in the center console. 

• Convenience closing/opening of the windows from the driver's lock cylinder or 
convenience opening only from the FZV remote key (FZV operation can be owner 
customized with the Car Memory Function). 

• Window operation with the ignition switched off until a door is opened or 16 minutes has 
elapsed after the key is switched off. 

• Window load switching is through relays integral of the GM for rear windows and in the 
respective door switchblock modules for the front windows. The current draw is 
monitored for end limit position. The maximum run time for the window motors is limited 
to 8 seconds. This allows the motors to be switched off if the end limit load sensing fails. 


ZKE - 37 



DRIVER'S DOOR 


PASSENGER'S DOOR 


PM-FT/SB 


ANTI-TRAP 
CONTACT 




WINDOW 

MOTOR 



P-BUS 


-> 


< 


KL 30 


S8 


CO 

D 

GQ 

I 

a. 


KL 30 



PM-BT/SB 


LIGHTING 

A 





-> 


<- 


K-BUS 


GM III 


KL 30 


ANTI-TRAP 

CONTACT 




INTEGRATED 

POWER 

WINDOW 

SWITCH 


ANTI-TRAP 
CONTACT 




WINDOW 

MOTOR 




WINDOW 

MOTOR 



ANTI-TRAP 
CONTACT 



POWER 

WINDOW 

SWITCH 


'r®—" 

-> LIGHTING 

I T 

T J 

LIGHTING ^ 

- L -©Y 

l_^ 

-D-0 



-o c- 

_J 


POWER 

WINDOW 

SWITCH 


LEFT REAR 
DOOR 


KL 31 


RIGHT REAR Y 
DOOR -=r 


ZKE - 38 





























































































































































WINDOW ANTI-TRAP DETECTION 


The window anti-trap detection feature is only active in the one touch and convenience 
close modes of operation. If the window switch is pushed/pulled and held, the Anti-trap 
feature will not function. 


The rubber pressure guard located at the top 
edge of each door frame consists of two contact 
strips that close when subjected to pressure. 
This provides anti-trap detection and signal 
generation to the GM. 

When the contact strip closes, the window 
immediately (10ms) reverses direction as with 
previous anti-trap systems. The contact strip 
does not require that the anti-trap feature be 
initialized prior to operation. 

The pressure sensor finger guard has a 
resistance of 3.0 KOhm and it is monitored for 
open circuit. When pressed, the monitored 
resistance changes to <1 KOhm. Faults with the 
anti-trap system require that the window switch 
be held to close the window. 



EKS= ANTI-TRAP \_A 
CONTACT STRIP 


CONVENIENCE OPENING/CLOSING 

The GM and Front Door Switchblock Modules provide the convenience open/close feature 

providing control of the power windows (and sunroof) from outside the vehicle with the key 

in the driver’s door lock. The FZV provides the same function for the opening only. 

• The anti-trap feature is active during convenience closing from the driver’s door lock. 

• The convenience open feature provides outside activation of the windows and sunroof 
in the same manner. 

• If the GM receives a request to operate convenience close or open for more than 110 
seconds, the function is deactivated and a fault code is stored. 

• The Car Memory Feature can activate and deactivate the Convenience Open Feature 
from the FZV’s control. 


ZKE - 39 



SUNROOF 


The sunroof is mechanically similar to previous systems. All of the electronic controls and 
relays are contained in the sunroof module (SHD). The module is connected to the K-Bus 
for comfort closing/opening, unloader signalling during engine startup, diagnosis and fault 
memory purposes 



Mounted in the sunroof motor trim cover is the sunroof switch. Also similar to previous 

systems, the switch provides coded ground signals for system operation. 

The following switch signals are generated over three wires through coded combinations: 

• Rest position 

• Slide open request (press and hold switch - first 
detent of open position) 

• Automatic slide open request (press further to 
second detent and release) 

• Tilt open (press and hold) 

• Slide close request (press and hold switch - first 
detent of close direction) 

• Automatic slide close request (press further to 
second detent and release) 



ZKE - 40 















































SUNROOF MOTOR/MODULE (SHD) 


The combined motor module has a 13 pin 
connector for interfacing the switch, and 
vehicle harness (power ground and K bus.) 

The motor contains two hall effect sensors 
that monitor the motor shaft rotation 
providing sunroof panel position. 


The hall sensors also provide the end limit cut 
out function for the SHD once the system is 
initialized. The SHD counts the pulses and 
cuts the motor out prior to the detected end 
run of the sunroof panel. 

INITIALIZATION 

Initialization is required for the SHD to learn the end positions of the motor's travel. The hall 
sensors provide pulses for motor rotation, the SHD counts the pulses and determines 
where the panel is by memorizing the stored pulses. 

If the system is not initialized, the sunroof will only operate in the tilt up and slide close 
positions. Initialize as follows: 

• Press and hold the sunroof switch in either the tilt up or slide close positions for 15 
seconds. 

• The sunroof motor operate momentarily signifying initialization acceptance. 

The SHD memorizes the pulses from the hall sensors on the next activation of the motor 
by driving the panel to its end run positions. The SHD senses an amperage increase and 
determines the end run position. The counted number of pulses is then used as the basis 
for calculating the panel position. 

ANTI TRAP FEATURE 

The anti-trap feature of the sunroof uses a hall sensor to detect obstructions while the 
sunroof is closing (pulse frequency slowed down) in the automatic close function. The anti¬ 
trap feature is shut down prior to full closing (4mm from full closed) to allow the sunroof the 
seat into the seal. 

Additionally, the anti-trap feature is not functional when the switch is held in the manual 
close position. 



ZKE - 41 
















SHD SELF DIAGNOSIS 

The SHD monitors its operation and stores fault codes if a defect is determined: The SHD 
monitors the following conditions: 

• SHD motor relays: The relays are checked for sticking contacts (plausibility) and non 
functional contacts. 

• Hall effect position sensors: The SHD must detect a pulse frequency from the hall 
effect sensor(s) during operation. 

• Sunroof Switch: The SHD monitors the signal plausibility of the coded signaling from 
the sunroof switch. 

SUNROOF FAULT RESPONSE CHARACTERISTICS 

If a fault occurs with any of these functions, the SHD responds as follows: 

• Overrides the end run detection. 

• Switches the motor off if the relay contacts stick for more than 500 ms. 

• Switches the motor off if pulses are not received. 

EMERGENCY OPERATION OF SUNROOF 

If the sunroof motor does not respond to the switch signals, the hex key in the trunk lid tool 
kit is used to manually turn the motor shaft drive as on previous systems 


ZKE - 42 



INTERIOR LIGHTING 


The GM controls the interior lighting automatically with the status change of several moni¬ 
tored inputs. The lighting can also be manually controlled using the interior light switch. 

COMPONENTS 

DOOR CONTACTS: The door lock actuators contain a hall effect sensor for the purpose 
of monitoring door open/closed status (hall sensor 3 in the driver's door actuator). The hall 
effect sensor is located directly behind the rotary latch plate encased in the actuator. The 
sensor is activated by the rotary latch plate's position. A change in current flow informs the 
General module when a door is opened or closed. 

Front seat interior/map light unit: The overhead 
front seat interior/map light unit contains a single 
main interior light. The light is controlled by the GM 
automatically or by momentarily pressing interior 
light switch located on the light assembly. The 
switch provides a momentary ground signal that the 
GM recognizes as a request to either turn the light 
on (if off) or turn the light off (if on). 

If the switch is held for more than 3 seconds, the GM interprets the continuous ground sig¬ 
nal as a request to turn the interior light circuit off for the Workshop Mode as on previous 
systems. The workshop mode is stored in memory and will not come back on even if the 
GM is removed from it's power supply and reconnected. The switch must be pressed to 
turn the lights back on. 

There are two reading/map lights also located in the assembly. Each map light is mechan¬ 
ically controlled by depressing it's corresponding on/off switch. The power supply for the 
map lights is supplied by the GM through the Consumer Cut Off circuit. 

Rear seat interior light unit: 

In the center headliner is an additional interior/reading light unit. This unit contains an inte¬ 
rior light that is controlled with the front interior light and a mechanically switched reading 
light on the consumer cut off circuit. 

Front footwell lights: 

In each front footwell, there is also a courtesy light. These lights are only operated when 
the GM provides power to the interior lighting circuit. 



ZKE - 43 



OVERHEAD 

INTERIOR 

LIGHTS 


r 



FOOTWELL 
LIGHT i— 



P-BUS 

O 


GEARSHIFT INDICATOR 
MICRO PROCESSOR 


n* 

r 



GLOVEBOX LIGHT 







PM-BT/SB 


FOOTWELL 
1 LIGHT 


PASSENGER'S DOOR 

door actuator 
hall sensor 3 


DOOR 

PANEL 

COURTESY 

LIGHT 


REAR SEAT OVERHEAD 
INTERIOR LIGHTS 


< 


h 




door actuator 
hall sensor 3 



RIGHT 

REAR 

DOOR 









AUTOMATIC CONTROL FUNCTION 


The GM provides 12 volts (linear application providing soft on feature) to the interior light¬ 
ing circuit when the one of the following input signal statuses change: 

• Door contact hall sensor active (door opened) 

• An Unlock request from the driver's door key lock hall sensors are received. This only 
occurs if the ignition switch is off. 

• An Unlock request is from the FZV keyless entry system is received via the K bus. This 
only occurs if the ignition switch is off as well. 

• The ignition switch is switched off and the vehicle exterior lights (LCM III) have been on 
for a minimum of 2 minutes prior. This information is provided to the GM via the K bus. 

• Active crash signal from the MRS III control module. 

• Lock button of FZV key is pressed with the vehicle is already locked (interior search 
function). 

The GM gradually reduces the full 12 volt power supply (linear reduction providing soft off) 

until the lights are off when the following input signal statuses change: 

• Immediately after the ignition switch is turned to KL R with the driver's door hall sensor 
door contact closed. 

• When the vehicle is locked (single or double) with the door contacts closed. 

• When the vehicle door contacts are closed. The lights remain on for 20 seconds and 
then go to soft off. 

• After the interior search function is activated, the lights will automatically turn off (soft off) 
after 8 seconds. 

• After 16 minutes with a door contact active (open door) and the key off, the lights are 
switched off (consumer cutoff function). 

• The component activation function of the DIS also has the ability to switch the lights. 

The Interior lighting output circuit of the GM is approximately 3.5 amps with all lights on. 


ZKE - 45 



ANTI-THEFT (DWA) SYSTEM 

The GM utilizes the following components to provide the DWA function: 

• Door lock hall effect sensor contacts (door open/closed). 

• Tailgate lid switch contact (monitored for closed tailgate). 

• Hood switch (monitored for closed hood, located under the hood). 

• DWA status LED (part of rear view mirror). 


KL 30 


DRIVER'S DOOR 




KL 30 


oc 

O 

00 

z 

LU 

00 


TAILGAGE 

ACTUATOR 

POSITION 

SWITCH 


Tilt sensor located in the electrical 
carrier forward of the glove box (next 
to GM) 

UIS Interior compartment monitoring 
sensor (pre wiring in area of installa¬ 
tion in center headliner). 

DWA siren (left cowl area next to mas¬ 
ter cylinder). 



DWA 

LED 


KL 31 


ZKE - 46 












































































COMPONENTS 


DOOR CONTACTS 

As mentioned in the Central Locking Section, the door lock contact hall effect sensors pro¬ 
vide status of door open/closed. The GM will activate the siren if a door open signal 
becomes active when the DWA is armed. 

TAILGATE SWITCH CONTACTS 

The tailgate switch contact is located in the tailgate lock actuator assembly. When closed, 
the tailgate contact provides a ground signal to the GM signifying a "closed tailgate". The 
GM will activate the siren if the tailgate switch contact ground signal opens when the DWA 
is armed. 

HOOD CONTACT SWITCH 

Located on the right side engine com¬ 
partment, the hood contact switch pro¬ 
vides a ground signal to the GM signifying 
an open hood. 

The plunger of this switch can be pulled 
up past a detent causing the switch con¬ 
tact to open. This feature can be used to 
simulate a closed hood with the hood 
open when diagnosing the DWA system. 

DWA LED 

The LED is provided with constant battery voltage (KL 30) The GM provides a switched 
ground signal providing the various blinking signals used to coiwey DWA status to the vehi¬ 
cle operator (covered further on). 




ZKE - 47 





























TILT SENSOR 

Located in the electrical carrier forward of the glove 
box, the tilt sensor is an electronic sensing device with 
the sole purpose of monitoring the vehicle's parked 
angle when DWA is armed. 

The sensor requires three signal wires to perform its function: 

• KL 30 - Constant battery voltage 

• Signal "STDWA"; switched ground input signal provided by the GM indicating DWA 
armed/disarmed status. The tilt sensor is used as a splice location for the STDWA sig¬ 
nal to the Siren and FIS interior protection sensor. 

• Signal "NG"; switched ground output signal provided to the GM. The signal is used for 
two purposes, 

1. As a momentary acknowledgment that the tilt sensor received STDWA and is cur¬ 
rently monitoring the vehicle angle. 

2. If the tilt sensor detects a change in the vehicle's angle when DWA is armed, signal 
NG is switched to inform the GM to activate the siren. 

When the tilt sensor receives the STDWA signal from the GM it memorizes the vehicle's 
parked angle. The angle of the vehicle is monitored by the solid state electronics. Once 
armed, if the angle changes, the tilt sensor provides a switched ground signal to the GM to 
activate DWA. 



ZKE - 48 







INTERIOR PROTECTION (UIS) 


The UIS monitors the vehicle interior for motion through ultrasonic sound waves. The UIS 
is a combined transmitter and receiver. 


The X5 UIS sensor is incorporated into the 
rear seat interior light trim cover. It is a two 
piece unit with cable connection to the rear 
transmitter/receiver. 

The UIS and trim panel are clearly identified 
with arrows indicating forward mounting 
direction. 

Due to the design of the vehicles interior, 
the sensor is uni-directional and must be 
installed in the proper direction to ensure 
proper operation of the system (trim cover 
ensures directional installation). 

Every time the DWA system is armed (signal STDWA), the sensor adapts to what ever 
objects might be stationary in the interior. 

The sensor emits ultra sonic waves in a pro¬ 
grammed timed cycle. It receives echos of 
the emitted waves. 

The UIS amplifies the received sound wave 
signals and compares them with the trans¬ 
mitted waves. The UIS also checks the 
incoming echos for background hiss (wind 
noise through a partially open window) and 
adapts for this. 

• If the echos are consistently similar, no movement is detected, 

• If the echos are altered, (inconsistent), the UIS determines motion in the interior com¬ 
partment. 

If motion is detected, the UIS changes to a constant cycle and the echo is compared again. 
If the inconsistency is still present the UIS sends the activate siren signal (INRS) to the GM. 

As with the tilt sensor, the UIS is also switched OFF when the vehicle is locked two times 
within ten seconds. This allows the sensor to be switched OFF for transportation purpos¬ 
es. 




ZKE - 49 














































ALARM SIREN 


The siren is located in the vehicle cowl 
on the driver’s side of the vehicle. This 
location provides a secure position with 
loud acoustic output. 


The siren contains electronic circuitry 
for producing the warning tone when 
the alarm is triggered. The siren also 
contains a rechargeable battery that is 
used to power the siren when the alarm 
is triggered. 

The rechargeable battery will allow the siren to sound if it or the 
vehicle’s battery is dis-connected. The siren battery is recharged, 
from the vehicle’s battery when DWA is not in the armed state. 

The siren has four wires connecting it to the system; KL 30, KL 31, 
Signal STDWA (arm/disarm signal from GM), and Signal NG (acti¬ 
vate siren output signal to the GM) 



CONNECTOR 



The arm/disarm output signal from the GM (STDWA) is provided to the Tilt sensor, FIS sen¬ 
sor and the siren simultaneously. The arm/disarm signal is a switched ground that signals 
the components of DWA armed/disarmed status. 


The activate siren signal (NG) is high whether DWA is armed or disarmed. If a monitored 
input activates the alarm, the high signal to the siren is switched to a 50% duty cycle at 
the GM. The control circuitry in the siren activates the siren driver. If the DWA is armed 
and the battery is disconnected the siren recognizes the normally high “NG” signal as sud¬ 
denly going low, the siren is also activated. 



TILT SENSOR 


ZKE - 50 


ARM / DISARM SIGNAL 

























































DWA ARMING/DISARMING 


• The DWA is armed every time the vehicle is locked from the outside with the door lock 
cylinder or FZV key. 

• The LED in the rear view mirror flashes as an acknowledgment along with the exterior 
lights and a momentary chirp from the siren. 

• The GM monitors all required input signals for closed status (door closed, tailgate 
closed, etc.) The inputs must be in a closed status for a minimum of 3 seconds for the 
GM to include them as an activation component. If after 3 seconds any input signal not 
in the closed status is excluded (this is acknowledged by the DWA LED) preventing false 
alarm activation's. 

• If the DWA is armed a second time within 10 seconds, the tilt sensor and interior pro¬ 
tection sensor are also excluded as alarm activation components. This function is use¬ 
ful if the vehicle is transported on a train or flat bed truck to prevent false alarm activa¬ 
tion's. 

• While armed the tailgate can be opened with out the alarm being triggered as follows: 

- If opened with the tailgate remote button via the FZV, the GM prevents the alarm 
from activating. (This feature is customizable under the Car Memory function). 

- If opened with the key at the tailgate lock cylinder the tailgate key position switch 
signals the GM and in the same manner prevents the alarm from activating. 

In either case, when the tailgate is returned to the closed position, it is no longer con¬ 
sidered as an activation signal. 

Panic Mode Operation: When the tailgate button is pressed and held, the GM is signaled 
to activate the siren for the Panic Mode. The panic mode will function with either an armed 
or disarmed DWA system. 

EMERGENCY DISARMING 

Emergency disarming occurs automatically if a key is used to turn the ignition switch on and 
the EWS III accepts it. The EWS III signals the GM to unlock the doors and deactivate the 
DWA. 


ZKE - 51 



ALARM INDICATION 

When the alarm is triggered, the siren will sound for 30 seconds. At the same time the low 
beam headlights and four way flashers will flash for 5 minutes. The GM signals the the LCM 
III via the K bus — I bus to flash the lights. 

Following an alarm trigger, the system will reset and trigger again if further tampering is 
done to the vehicle. 

DWA LED STATUS 


DWA STATUS 

DWA LED CONDITION 

Disarmed 

OFF 

Armed 

Continual slow flash 

Armed with one or more monitored 
inputs not in closed position 
(ie: trunk not fully closed, etc) 

Rapid flash for 10 seconds, 
then continual slow flash. 

Alarm activated 

Rapid flash for 5 minutes, 
then continual slow flash. 

Rearmed in less then 10 seconds. 

ON for 1 second 

Disarmed after activated alarm 

Rapid flash for 10 seconds, 
then OFF. 


ZKE - 52 




DRIVER'S SEAT MEMORY FUNCTION 


As with previous systems, the seat memory feature of the SM stores three seat positions 
for recall. The positions are stored in a non-volatile memory preventing loss of positions if 
in case the SM or the battery is disconnected. 

The additional buttons on the SM (M) pro¬ 
vide activation of recording memory position 
and (1 -2-3) for storing or recalling a specific 
seat setting. 

Storing current seat position: 

• Seat in desired position, 

• Ignition switch in KL R, 

• Press the M button until it illuminates 

• Within 7 seconds press the 1,2 or 3 but¬ 
ton to store. 

The stored position can be recalled at any time by pressing the appropriate memory loca¬ 
tion button (1-2-3). 

MEMORY RECALL MODES OF OPERATION 

Depending on current SM input signals via K-Bus, the memory recall operates in two dis¬ 
tinctly different modes: 

• One-touch mode (TTB), 

• or press and hold mode of operation (DTB). 

If the following input signal status is current, the SM resets the seat position by a momen¬ 
tary “one touch" of the selected memory button. 

• Ignition switch off with the driver’s door open, or, 

• KL R on, door open or closed 

If the following input signal status is current, the SM resets the seat position by a continu¬ 
ous "press and hold" of the selected memory button. 

• Ignition switch off with the driver’s door closed 

• KL 15 on, door open or closed. 



ZKE - 53 




DRIVER'S SEAT MEMORY (CAR Memory Influence) 


The PM-SM can be encoded to recall a specific seat position for a vehicle user when the 
GM signals the SM to automatically recall stored positions separate of the 1 -2-3 button 
selections. 

This feature is encoded through the car memory function and activated by the key memo¬ 
ry function. The PM-SM will monitor the seat position and store it in another area of it's 
memory when the vehicle is locked with the remote keyless entry system. The GM sends 
a request to memorize the seat position and store it for FZV key user 1,2,3 or 4. 

If another user of the vehicle changes the seat position the PM-SM restores the memory 
position the next time the specific key is used to unlock the vehicle. 

This feature can be further modified to activate the position recall based on the owner's 
selected activation scenario, for example: The owner can choose to : 

• Disable this feature, 

• Initiate memory recall when the unlock signal is initially sent before a door is opened. 

• Initiate memory recall when the unlock signal is sent but only when the driver's door is 
opened. 

See Car Memory Key Memory for additional information. 

POWER SEAT DIAGNOSIS 

The PM-SM communicates with the DIS or MoDiC via the K bus - instrument cluster gate¬ 
way - to the P-bus. The PM-SM monitors the seat motors and circuits as well as it's inter¬ 
nal operation. Any detected faults are stored in the PM-SM fault memory and are called up 
when diagnosing the system with the Fault Symptom diagnostic plan. 

The PM-SM also provides status display to the DIS of its input and output control signals 
as well as component activation. 


ZKE -54 



MIRROR OPERATION 


The output stages and memory storage of mirror positions is handled by the respective 
door modules. The positioning of the mirrors is signaled from the driver’s door switch 
block/module. The signal passes over the P-Bus to the passenger’s door module. 

The memory/recall for the driver’s mirror comes directly into the door module from the 
memory switch. The operation for the passenger’s side mirror is carried out over the P-Bus 
from the driver’s door module to the passenger’s door module. 


The memory positions are stored in each respective module. The memory position is rec¬ 
ognized by the feedback potentiometers located on each mirror motor. 



DRIVER'S 

DOOR 

SWITCHBLOCK 

MODULE 

(PM-FT) 




o 


P-BUS 




PASS. 

DOOR 

SWITCH BLOCK 
MODULE 
(PM-BT) 


DRIVER'S 

DOOR 

MIRROR 



PASSENGER'S 

DOOR 

MIRROR 



The reverse gear tilt feature for the passenger’s mirror is signaled from the GM III, over the 
P-bus, when reverse is selected and the mirror switch is set for the driver’s side. 


Mirror heating is controlled by each respective door module. The GM III receives the out¬ 
side temperature from the IKE and passes it to the door modules. The “ON” time for mirror 
heating is adjusted based on the outside temperature. 

A pulsed heating cycle is used for the mirrors based on the outside temperature. 


Temperature 

<-10°C 

-10 to 0°C 

0 to 15°C 

15 to 25°C 

>25°C 

ON - duration 

100% 

75% 

50% 

25% 

5% 


ZKE -55 

















- REVERSE GEAR SIGNAL 

- OUTSIDE TEMPERATURE 



ZKE -56 




SEAT OPERATION 


Each motor for seat adjustment contains a micro-processor (called a Ripple Counter) that 
receives a digital signal from the seat control module for motor activation. The motors are 
connected to KL 30 and KL 31 and respond to the signals generated by the seat module 
when seat movement is requested. The seat adjustment switch provides ground input sig¬ 
nals to the module when seat movement is desired. The module processes these input sig¬ 
nals and sends output signals to the seat motor processors. The seat motor processors 
activate the motors and the seat moves to the desired point. 

The circuitry of the Ripple Counter detects the motor activation current. As the armature 
segments of the motor rotate passed the brushes, the current flow rises and falls produc¬ 
ing a ripple effect. The peaks of these ripples are counted and stored in the Ripple Counter 
module. The memory function of the seat module uses this ripple count instead of feed¬ 
back potentiometers to memorize and recall seat positions. 


SEAT 

MOTOR 


RIPPLE 

COUNTER 

MODULE 


kL 30 



SEAT MEMORY 
MODULE (PM-SM) 







KL 31 



RIPPLE COUNT RECOGNITION 

When the seat is installed and the battery is connected, the ripple counter uses the initial 
position of the motors as the “Zero Position”. Any movement from this point is counted as 
“+” or pulses as the motors move in either direction. The pulse position of the motors 
is stored in the seat module, in an EEPROM, before the ZKE goes into its “Sleep Mode”. 

This prevents the position recognition from being lost. If the battery is disconnected before 
the 16 minute sleep mode activation, the memory positions of the seat will be lost and 
reprogramming will be required. 


ZKE -57 



MEMORY 

SWITCH 


GM III 



FORWARD UP & DOWN SEAT BASE BACKREST HEADREST 

& BACK TILT ANGLE ANGLE UP & DOWN 


ZKE -58 




STEERING COLUMN OPERATION 

The adjustable steering column is similar to the E38 in components, mechan¬ 
ical linkages and electrical operation. The steering column adjusting switch is 
mounted on the left side of the steering column and provides for four directions 
of column movement. 

The motors for tilt and length also employ ripple counter modules for motor control and 
memory recall. The control electronics for the steering column are integrated into the seat 
module. The steering column switch inputs are processed by the seat module and the out¬ 
put signals are sent to the steering column ripple counter modules for motor activation. 




RIPPLE 

COUNTER 


STEERING 

COLUMN 

MOTOR 



ZKE -59 



STEERING COLUMN MOTOR DRIVES 


Forward/Back (Telescope) 

A flexible drive shaft operates a screw drive which causes a forward/back movement of the 
steering column. 



Up/Down 

A flexible drive shaft moves an off-center lever causing up/down steering movement. 



ZKE -60 



GENERAL FUNCTIONS OF ZKE III 


CONSUMER CUTOFF 


The interior lights are connected to the consumer cut out circuit. These consumers are con¬ 
nected to KL 30 and can remain on if one of the control switches are left on. This would 
prevent the ZKE from going into the sleep mode. However, the consumer cut off will switch 
Kl 30, to the interior lighting, off after 16 minutes. 



KL 30 



80 AMP 


l 


16 MINUTE PRE¬ 
SLEEPMODE 
OUTPUT VOLTAGE 




O 


CONSUMER CUTOFF/ 
OVERLOAD PROTECTION 
RELAY MODULE 


i 



MAP 

LIGHTS 

GLOVE BOX 
LIGHT 


TRUNK 

LIGHT 


SEAT 

MEMORY 

MODULE 



M 


2 STEERING 

COLUMN 

MOTORS 


TRANS RANGE SELECTOR INDICATOR MODULE 




M 


5 SEAT 
MOTORS 


REST FUNCTION SIGNAL (Rest function is cancelled 
when this signal goes low after 16 minutes) 




L 


I—- -I 

I-1 






OVERLOAD PROTECTION 


The seat and steering column motors are provided operating power through the consumer 
cutoff / overload protection relay module as on the E38. The consumer cutoff signal from 
the GM signals the relay to maintain operating power to the consumers. 

If an overload condition exists, the relay module detects the increase in amperage and 
opens the relay. The relay module is located in the electrical carrier forward of the glove 
box. 


ZKE -61 











































































SLEEP MODE 


To lower the constant battery draw when the vehicle is parked, The complete ZKE system 
will go into the “Sleep Mode” 16 minutes after the ignition has been switched off and no 
further ZKE function is active. 

Approximate X5 Battery draw: • Ignition switch off = approx 750 mA. 

• One minute after = approx. 560 mA. 

• After 16 minutes (sleep mode) = approx. 18 mA. 

All modules in the ZKE system will go into the sleep mode. The P-Bus remains active, how¬ 
ever no data transfer takes place until a wake-up request is received. The general module, 
door modules or keyless remote module can wake the system up and put the ZKE back 
on line. The K-Bus is not active in the sleep mode, however the GM III of Remote Entry 
Module can put the K-Bus back on-line with a wake-up request. 

SLEEP MODE CRITERIA: KL R, 15 OFF and no further function activated for 16 minutes. 
WAKE UP CRITERIA: KLR or 15 “ON” or a change in one of the signal states listed below. 


SIGNAL 

ACTIVITY 

ORIGINATING 

MODULE 

K-BUS 

High 

General Module 

Door jamb switches (possibility of 4) 

Low 

u 

Tailgate lock cylinder microswitch 

High 


Tailgate pushbutton microswitch 

Low 

u 

Interior Tailgate pushbutton microswitch 

Low 

(( 

Central locking button 

Low 

(t 

Hood microswitch 

Low 

u 

Tailgate microswitch 

Low 

(( 

Interior light switch 

Low 

(t 

UIS sensor 

Low 

(t 

Tilt Alarm sensor 

Low 

(( 

FBZV operational signal 

High 

FBZV Module 

Driver’s door lock microswitch - (lock) 

High 

PM-FT/SB 

“ “ “ “ - (unlock) 

High 


Passenger door lock microswitch - (lock) 

High 

PM-BT 

“ “ “ “ - (unlock) 

High 

u 






DIAGNOSIS/TROUBLESHOOTING 


The GM III contains an EEPROM fault memory. Faults that occur with any of the sub-sys¬ 
tems of the ZKE are stored in the GM III. Diagnosis and troubleshooting is carried out with 
the DIS tester. The diagnostic link is through the IKE or Instrument cluster over the K bus 
to the GM. 

Additional sub-fault memories are incorporated in all of the peripheral modules. The infor¬ 
mation stored in these location is used to pin point defective components. 


K-BUS 


(0 

D 

m 

i 

* 




©trownr"® ®@@ir 


[Mtedlmto 

PM-mr/ 






DIAGNOSIS BUS 







ZKE -63 

























































































































BASIC TROUBLESHOOTING 


• Always personally verify the customer complaint. 

• Always verify that the complaint is truly a system malfunction. 

• Perform a Quick Test to determine if the vehicle systems have logged fault codes. 

• Call up the faulted system or appropriate test schedule to verify the correct control 
module is installed in the car. 

• Follow the Diagnostic Information System (DIS) on screen instructions and perform all 
tests as specified. 

• Use the DIS and fault symptom diagnostic procedures as trained. 

• Follow the appropriate test module procedures for systems that malfunction but fail to 
set faults in memory. 

• System problems which elude diagnostic procedures must be brought to the attention 
of BMW of North America, Inc. 

• BMW Technical Assistance Hotline 1-800-472-7222 


ZKE -64 




