Table of Contents 
xDrive / DSC 

Subject Page 

Purpose of the System .4 

xDrive .4 

xDrive - System Components.5 

ATC 400 / ATC 500 Transfer Case.5 

Power Flow.6 

Servomotor with Motor Position Sensor.7 

Coding Resistor .7 

Transfer Case Electronic Control Unit .8 

Bus Overview .8 

IPO .9 

xDrive - Principle of Operation.10 

xDrive.10 

TCC .10 

Pre-control.11 

“Open” Transfer Case vs xDrive .12 

Traction Control / Driving Dynamics Control.13 

Tire Tolerance Logic.14 

xDrive / DSC - System Components.17 

Hydraulic Schematic.17 

DSC Module.18 

Yaw and Transversal Acceleration Sensors.18 

Wheel Speed Sensors.18 

xDrive / DSC System - Principle of Operation .19 

System Functions .19 

DSC: .19 

xDrive:.19 

ASC-X/ADB-X.20 

Limp Home Operation.20 

Warning Indicator Lamps.21 


Initial Print Date: 10/03 


Revision Date: 































Subject Page 

Workshop Hints.22 

Transfer Case Oil and Monitoring.22 

Diagnosis.22 

Programming (flashing).22 






xDrive/DSC 


Model: E83/E53 MU (Model Update) 

Production: E83 - Start of Production MY 2004 
E53 MU - 9/03 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the xDrive mechanical operation 

• Describe the xDrive power flow 

• Identify the coding resistor and understand its purpose 

• Diagnose the VGSG control of the multi-disc clutch 

• Perform an “on vehicle” test to verify xDrive function 

• Explain the Oil change procedure found in Service Functions 


3 

xDrive / DSC 














Purpose of the System 


xDrive 

The innovative xDrive four-wheel drive is a system that controls and regulates the distrib¬ 
ution of driving torque to the front and rear axles. The measured variables of DSC are 
used by xDrive but are also influenced by modified handling performance. 

The multi-disc clutch is the heart of the xDrive. By using the controlled multi-disc clutch, 
it is possible to resolve the conflict between traction and handling performance. 

This is achieved through the fact that torque distribution is not determined by a fixed gear 
ratio in the xDrive as was the case in the previous systems. Instead, the distribution of 
driving torque is dependent on the locking torque of the controlled multi-disc clutch in 
the transfer case and on the transferable torque to the front and rear axles. 



4 

xDrive / DSC 









xDrive - System Components 

ATC 400 / ATC 500 Transfer Case 

The ATC 400 is installed in the E83 and the ATC 500 in the E53 MU. They differ in that 
the ATC 500 is splined to the front propeller shaft and the ATC 400 uses a four bolt 
flange. In addition, there is one more disc in the multi-disc clutch of the ATC 500 and the 
distance between the input shaft and the output shaft to the front axle is 19 mm greater 
than in the ATC 400. 



1. Input from manual / automatic transmission 

2. Output to rear axle prop, shaft 

3. Output to front axle prop, shaft 

4. Servomotor 


5. Clutch discs 

6. Adjusting levers with ball ramp 

7. Chain 

8. Disc cam 


The flange illustration of the ATC transfer case is the same for automatic and manual 
transmissions. 


5 

xDrive / DSC 


TF03-3608 











Power Flow 

When the multi-disc clutch in the transfer case is disengaged, no driving torgue is trans¬ 
mitted to the front axle. All of the driving torgue is then distributed to the rear axle. This is 
because the input shaft (1) is splined providing a permanent connection to the rear axle 
propeller shaft output flange (2). The multi-disc clutch couples the rear axle propeller 
shaft output flange to the front propeller shaft output (3). 

The driving torgue on the front axle is increased or decreased by regulating the locking 
pressure of the multi-disc clutch, providing a stepless coupling of the front axle to the dri- 
vetrain. This depends on driving situations and road conditions. When the multi-disc 
clutch is fully engaged, the front and rear axles turn at the same speed. 

Driving torgue distribution (front/rear) is based on available traction at each axle. For 
example, when traction is identical on the front and rear axles and a driver accelerates 
from a stop in first gear at full throttle, the rear axle is capable of sustaining greater driving 
torgue as the vehicle weight shifts from the front to the rear. 

Another example is when the front axle is on a high traction surface and the rear axle is on 
ice. In this case, virtually 100% of the available driving torgue is transmitted to the front 
axle. Based on available traction, virtually no driving torgue can be supported by the rear 
axle . Obviously, when more driving torgue is transmitted to the front axle, driving torgue 
on the rear axle is proportionally reduced due to lack of traction. 



1. Input from transmission 2. Rear propeller shaft output 3. Front propeller shaft output 

6 

xDrive / DSC 





Adjusting Levers 

When the disc cam is rotated, it forces the adjusting levers 
apart. 

The ball ramps create a precision axial movement which 
compresses and increases pressure on the multi-disc clutch. 

This is completely variable up to a full lock. 


Servomotor with Motor Position Sensor 


Note: 

On a vehicle equipped with an automatic transmission, when driving onto brake 
analyzers, move the selector lever to the “N” position . On a vehicle equipped 
with a manual transmission, do not press the accelerator pedal once on the 
brake analyzer. This keeps the transfer case clutch open and the vehicle 
cannot be pulled off the analyzer. 



The servomotor with worm gear are powered 
to rotate the disc cam. 

The servomotor is a permanent magnet (1) DC 
motor which contains a Hall sensor (2) to 
detect the position and the adjusting speed of 
the motor shaft. 

This is proportional to the degree of multi-disc 
clutch engagement. 



Coding Resistor 

Because of mechanical tolerances in produc¬ 
tion, the characteristic curve of the multi-disc 
clutch locking torgue varies slightly. 

Once the actual locking torgue has been mea¬ 
sured on the clutch test bench, a resistor is 
attached to the servomotor; the resistor's value 
is a reference to the locking torgue characteris¬ 
tic. 

Each time the engine is started, the transfer 
case control unit measures the resistance 
value once and the optimum program map for 
the transfer case fitted is selected. 



1. Disc cam 3. Coding resistor 

2. Electric motor 4. Worm gear 


7 

xDrive / DSC 






Transfer Case Electronic Control Unit 

The transfer case control unit (VGSG) is installed in 
the E83 on the rear floor panel under the luggage 
compartment trim. 

In E53 MU, it is located underneath the rear bench 
seat on the left. 

I. 9-pin ELO connector (not used) 

II. 6-pin ELO connector 

III. 18-pin ELO connector 



Bus Overview 



The transfer case control unit (VGSG) is on the PT-CAN Bus. VGSG shares information 
with DSC for overall xDrive control and has diagnostic communication via the OBD con¬ 
nector . 

Notes: 


8 

xDrive / DSC 


Tfc03 3306 








































































































































Inputs 


Processing 


Outputs 



1. Transfer case control unit 

2. Transfer case clutch servomotor 

3. Instrument cluster 

4. DSC hydraulic modulator 

5. DSC control unit 

6. RDW button 

7. HDC button 


8. DSC button 

9. Brake fluid level 

10. Wheel speed sensor 

11. Steering angle sensor 

12. Yaw/transverse acceleration sensors 

13. EGS 

14. ECM(DME) 


xDrive / 


TF03-3685 













































xDrive - Principle of Operation 


xDrive 

The transfer case control unit (VGSG) regulates the locking pressure of the multi-disc 
clutch in the transfer case. The transfer case control unit receives information on the 
reguired clutch locking pressure from the DSC control unit. The processing, control and 
electronics reguired for this are integrated in the transfer case control unit. This informa¬ 
tion is converted and output as a corresponding rotary motion of the servomotor. 

In order to position the servomotor and compensate for wear, a reference run is carried 
out each time the ignition is switched off. The servomotor position is determined by a 
Hall sensor integrated in the servomotor. During the reference run, the clutch is engaged 
and disengaged completely (once). While the clutch is actuated, the current consump¬ 
tion is measured for the servomotor position. This allows the VGSG to determine the 
beginning and end of the clutch actuating procedure. 

A clutch and oil wear calculation is also processed and stored in the VGSG. It increases 
the locking pressure as necessary in order to reduce friction. 

In the event of DSC failure, the VGSG incorporates a fallback level (strategy) for activating 
the transfer case clutch in order to maintain the four-wheel drive function. 


TCC 

Regulation of the transfer case clutch (TCC) locking pressure allows stepless coupling of 
the front axle to the drivetrain. The driving torgue on the front axle can be increased or 
decreased depending on the driving situation and road conditions. Obviously, when 
more driving torgue is transmitted to the front axle, driving torgue on the rear axle is pro¬ 
portionally reduced due to lack of traction. 

The advantages of variable distribution of driving torgue to the front and rear axles are: 

• Optimum utilization of the cornering and longitudinal wheel forces on the front and 
rear axles. 

• DSC brake interventions only become necessary at a significantly later stage, an 
increase in comfort refinement. 

• Compared with an “open” differential transfer case and DSC, xDrive significantly 
improves driving torgue distribution when traction on the front and rear axles is 
notably different. 


The DSC control unit influences control of the transfer case clutch. Even when DSC is 
deactivated, TCC remains active for the purpose of maximum traction and driving 
dynamics. 

10 

xDrive / DSC 


Permanent four-wheel drive is only completely deactivated in three control situations: 

• During very tight cornering with low engine torgue to allow speed compensation 
between the front and rear axles (e.g. parking) 

• At speeds > 180 km/h 

• When the vehicle dramatically understeers 

The transfer case clutch control logic is described in three main modules: 

• Pre-control 

• Traction control / driving dynamics control 

• Tire tolerance logic 


Pre-control 

The pre-control logic (shared from DSC) reflects the driver's command and is calculated 
based on: 


• Accelerator pedal value 

• Engine torgue 

• Engine rpm 


• Vehicle speed 

• Gear 

• Steering angle 


In normal driving, the clutch is operated with minimum slip so that permanent four-wheel 
drive with a driving torgue distribution of 40% on the front axle and 60% on the rear axle 
is available. 

Even when the traction for the front and rear axles is dramatically different, the pre-control 
ensures that the system responds very guickly, as can be seen in graphic on the following 
page. 


Notes: 


11 

xDrive / DSC 



M = Driving torque M VA = Driving torque on front axle t = Time 


In the case of the open transfer case, the brake is applied after slip is detected on the rear 
axle. This takes approximately one half of a second in reaction time. 62% of the driving 
torque is supported on the two rear brake discs and only 38% of the driving torque can 
be transferred to the front axle. In other words, wheel slip must be sensed first before dri¬ 
ving torque is transferred through the transfer case by applying the rear wheel brakes. 

In contrast to an “open” transfer case (differential), the xDrive does not require brake inter¬ 
vention on the rear axle because no slip can occur (permanent through connection). The 
transfer case clutch is engaging the front axle as the vehicle is accelerating. This takes 
significantly less time (approx, one/tenth of a second). 

12 

xDrive / DSC 



















Traction Control / Driving Dynamics Control 

Traction control monitors the slip conditions on the front and rear axles. The wheel 
speeds, yaw rate and transversal acceleration serve as the input signals. 

The function of traction control/driving dynamics control is to achieve optimum traction 
and to keep the vehicle stable. 

As seen in the following graphic, in the event of an oversteer tendency, the transfer case 
clutch is completely engaged and the maximum supportable driving torgue on the front 
axle is transmitted. This helps to “puli’ the front of the vehicle until stability is achieved. 



In the event of an understeer tendency, the clutch can be fully disengaged if necessary. 
In this example, the front axle is separated from the drivetrain and the driving torgue can 
only be transmitted to the rear axle. This helps to “push” the rear of the vehicle until sta¬ 
bility is achieved. 


60% 



13 

xDrive / DSC 


Tire Tolerance Logic 

The tire tolerance logic detects different tread circumferences on the front and rear axles. 
This occurs when: 

• Mixed tires are used 

• Space saving spare tire is installed 

• Tires are used that have been worn down to different levels 


Normally, tire circumference deviations result in drivetrain torgue bias (unwanted varia¬ 
tions). 


The tire circumference can fluctuate up to 1 % or more as a result of mixed tires or wear. 
The tire tolerance logic decides depending on the driver's command and driving situation 
whether the slip is to occur in the transfer case clutch or at the contact area between tire 
and road. 

If the slip is permitted in the transfer case clutch, the locking pressure set by the pre-con¬ 
trol is reduced in order to keep the work loss low. In the driving dynamic control situation, 
the clutch is locked slightly more than normal, the four wheel drive is always guaranteed 
when reguired. 

For maximum xDrive performance, tires (and wheels) of the same diameter should be 
installed on the vehicle. 


Notes: 


14 

xDrive / DSC 


Workshop Exercise - xDrive Transfer Case 



With the Instructor’s assistance, perform the following: 

1. Disassemble xDrive transfer case. Familiarize yourself with the mechanical 
operation. _ 


2. What are the differences between the ATC 400 and the ATC 500? 


3. The multi-disc clutch (when engaged) locks what two components together? 


4. What is the purpose of the adjusting levers and the cam disc? 


5. Visually identify the coding resistor, why is it necessary? 


6. When the E83 is placed on a brake analyzer (or dyno), what procedure must be 
followed for: 

Manual Transmission - 

Automatic Transmission - 

7. The VGSG regulates the - 

and receives information on the required locking pressure from the _ 

8. When the multi-disc clutch is not engaged, the E83 will always be driven by _ 


Why? 


15 

xDrive / DSC 


























Workshop Exercise - xDrive on Vehicle 



With the Instructor’s assistance, perform the following: 

1. With the E83 placed securely on a vehicle lift and all 4 wheels off of the ground, 
start the engine and place the vehicle in a forward gear. 

Manual Transmission: release clutch pedal and observe which wheels are being 

driven _. Now press down on the accelerator pedal (slightly), 

what do you observe or feel? _ 


Automatic Transmission: release brake pedal and observe which wheels are 

being driven _. Now press down on the accelerator pedal 

(slightly), what do you observe or feel? _ 


Based on your observations, explain why this occurs: 


2. Apply the parking brake (completely). Start the engine and place the vehicle in a 
forward gear. 

Manual Transmission: release clutch pedal, what do you observe? _ 


Automatic Transmission: release brake pedal and press down on the accelerator 
pedal (slightly), what do you observe? _ 


Based on your observations, explain why this occurs: 


3. Is DSC braking application required to transfer drive torque from the rear output 
to the front output? _ 


4. DSC braking application takes place to provide: 


16 

xDrive / DSC 
































xDrive / DSC - System Components 


The xDrive / DSC system consists essentially of those components from the familiar 
DSC8. The controllable multi-disc clutch in the transfer case is a new feature. 


• DSC8 module 

• Transfer case electronic control unit (VGSG) 

• Yaw and transversal acceleration sensors 

• Wheel speed sensors 

• Pressure sensor 

• Steering angle sensor 


Brake fluid warning switch 
Brake light switch 
DSC button 

Transfer case motor position sensor 
Coding resistor 
Transfer case servomotor 
































































































































DSC Module 


The DSC module located in the engine compartment 
consists primarily of the following three components: 

• Surface mounted control unit 

• Valve block with integrated pressure sensor 

• Pump motor 


It is the same design as the DSC8 module which was 
introduced at BMW with the E60. 



Yaw and Transversal Acceleration Sensors 

The sensor (assembly) in the E83 and the E53 MU 
is located on the transmission tunnel at the rear. 

X Longitudinal vehicle axis 
Y Transversal vehicle axis 
Z Vertical vehicle axis 
ay Transversal acceleration 
ii Yaw 



Wheel Speed Sensors 

The active wheel speed sensors reguire a supply volt¬ 
age for operation and output a signal of non speed 
dependent constant amplitude. 


1. Sensor ring (ferromagnetic wheel bearing seal carrier) 

2. Sensor 1C with Hall elements 

3. Sensor housing 


The xDrive uses wheel speed sensors with an integrated evaluation circuit. The output 
signal is transmitted with the pulse width modulation (PWM). 

The rising signal edge is used to determine road speed; the pulse width contains addi¬ 
tional information on the direction of rotation, standstill detection, installation position 
detection and air gap reserve to the sensor ring. Direction of rotation detection is by 
the internal Hall sensor signals (like E65). 

18 

xDrive / DSC 












xDrive / DSC System - Principle of Operation 

As featured in earlier DSC modules, the DSC8 mounted control unit also features two 
microprocessors. The surface mounted control unit also incorporates two semiconductor 
relays: 

• One for the pump motor 

• One for the solenoid valves 


When a speed of 6 km/h (4mph) is exceeded, an electronic self-test is started which the 
pump motor and all the solenoid valves are briefly activated. When the brake light switch 
is activated simultaneously at that speed (for example: two footed drivers), the self-test is 
carried out at 15 km/h. Checking of the wheel speed signals is started at 2.75 km/h. 

In the xDrive, the DSC also assumes the function of calculating the locking pressure for 
the multi-disc clutch in the transfer case. The locking pressure is set based on the dri¬ 
ver's command and regulated as reguired depending on the driving situation. 

The locking pressure produces the distribution of driving torgue to the front and rear 
axles. The DSC sends the reguired locking pressure reguest to the VGSG via the PT- 
CAN Bus. 

In turn, the VGSG signals the locking pressure actually set depending on: 

• Transfer case fluid temperature (calculation based on locking pressures) 

• Electric motor loads 

• Multi-disc clutch loads 


System Functions 

The xDrive / DSC system comprises the following functions (same as E60 or E53 


except for *): 

DSC: 

• ABS Antilock Braking System 

• ASC-X Automatic Stability Control X * 

• DSC Dynamic Stability Control 

• EBV Electronic brake-force distribution 

• DBC Dynamic Brake Control 


• CBC Cornering Brake Control 

• MSR Engine drag-torgue control 

• HDC Hill Descent Control 

• ADB-X Automatic Differential Brake * 


xDrive: 

• TCC Transfer Case Control (previously covered) 

19 

xDrive / DSC 


ASC-X/ADB-X 

Unlike regular road vehicles, SAVs are also meant to demonstrate satisfactory handling 
characteristics and appropriate traction on unconventional roads. In order to provide opti¬ 
mum propulsion with sufficient cornering stability on both normal roads and other road 
surfaces, Automatic Stability Control X (ASC-X) contains a detection function to distin¬ 
guish between them. 

When off-road terrain is detected, wheel slip threshold is increased to provide sufficient 
traction force with the increased levels of traction loss. 

ASC-X is supplemented by the Automatic Differential Brake (ADB-X) function, which 
applies the brakes to the wheels per axle, for side to side torgue transfer. For example, 
when a wheel is spinning on one side (up to the slip setpoint), the brakes are applied to 
that wheel and the driving torgue is transferred through the axle differential to the wheel 
with the higher traction. This provides superb capabilities when there are diagonal trac¬ 
tion losses (ie. left front/right rear). 

ADB-X remains active when DSC is deactivated. Furthermore, ADB-X can develop full 
capability because the engine power is not reduced, even during extreme four wheel 
drive operation. Only that wheel which has a low traction receives the brake application. 

The brake disc can overheat with excessive ADB-X intervention with DSC deactivated. In 
this situation, the operation is discontinued at a disc temperature of approx. 700 °C and is 
resumed when this temperature drops below approx. 400 °C. This is a calculation per¬ 
formed by the DSC control unit based on brake application time, pressure, wheel speed, 
etc. 


Limp Home Operation 

In order to maintain the four wheel drive function for as long as possible even in the event 
of important sensor signal failures or failure of the DSC control unit, a limp home control is 
integrated in the transfer case control unit. This control operates in redundancy to the 
transfer case clutch control in the DSC control unit. The limp home control contains only 
two control functions, precontrol and traction-slip control. 

The wheel speed signals are very important to traction/slip control. Engine signals, 
steering angle and yaw are used predominantly for precontrol. If individual sensor signals 
fail, substitute values are calculated and the relevant functions operated with extended 
control thresholds. 

This strategy is continued until useful four wheel drive control is no longer possible. In 
this event, the driver is alerted by the DSC/xDrive lamp coming on in the instrument clus¬ 
ter and also by an acoustic warning signal (gong). 

Faulted wheel speed signals on the rear axle are calculated by driving or engine speed 
(remember, the rear wheels are always driven). If the front wheel speed signals fail, the 
values of the rear axle are adopted. Wheel speeds also substitute for a faulty steering 
angle signal. 

20 

xDrive / DSC 


Warning Indicator Lamps 

The warning indicator lamps 
for the xDrive / DSC are found 
in the instrument cluster as 
shown on the right. 


The warning indicator lamps 
and acoustic signals (gong) are 
assigned to the xDrive / DSC 
system states of malfunction 
described below. 



DSC deactivated 




DSC faulty (ABS only) 
or 

VGSG faulty 


with gong 



Complete DSC failure 
or 

Complete DSC failure 
and VGSG failure 



21 

xDrive / DSC 


TE03-33O8 









Workshop Hints 


CAUTION!!! 


On a vehicle equipped with an automatic transmission, when driving onto brake 
analyzers, move the selector lever to the “N” position . On a vehicle equipped 
with a manual transmission, do not press the accelerator pedal once on the 
brake analyzer. This keeps the transfer case clutch open and the vehicle cannot 
be pulled off the analyzer. 

Towing: Use only a flatbed carrier! 

Transfer Case Oil and Monitoring 

Please refer to BMW Operating Fluids for the required transfer case oil and specifications 
for the correct amount. 

Oil Monitoring is performed by the VTG control module to determine when a service 
(change) is due. The VTG calculates transfer case and clutch wear based on the amount 
of slip, engagement pressure (torque), speed and mileage. 

This calculation accounts for normal “dry” road driving, “adverse” road driving and 
“other” road extreme driving. Depending on individual vehicle use - driving styles and 
driving conditions, the transfer case oil service interval will vary. 

When a service is due, this will be indicated by a Fault Code and additional details are 
available using the DISplus/ GT1. Service functions provide directions on changing the 
transfer case oil and updating the VTG control module with the necessary reset and 
adaption procedure. This is extremely important for CBS. 


Diagnosis 

Diagnosis is available for fault repairs and service procedures using the DSIplus/GTI. 
When the tire tolerance logic is active, it can be read out in the fault memory. 


Programming (flashing) 

Both the transfer case control unit (VTG) and the DSC control unit are programmable and 
the new control unit(s) must be programmed when replaced. The wear values stored in 
the VTG control module (to be replaced) must be transferred to the replacement VTG. 


22 

xDrive / DSC 




Workshop Exercise - VTG Inputs/Signals 



1. Using the DISplus/GTI, perform an automatic vehicle determination and locate 
the transfer case (transmission) control. 

2. For the vehicle you are using, list the power supply sources and locations 

(power distribution, fuse box, etc.): _ 


3. What are the connector and pin numbers for the Coding (classification) 

Resistor? Connector: _ Pins: _ 

4. Disconnect the harness connector at the VTG and perform a resistance 

measurement of the Coding Resistor. What is the value? _ 

5. With the DISplus/GTI, access VTG - “Diagnosis Control unit functions”. Select 

Diagnosis requests, Control module - Battery voltage to transfer case and 
Coding status. What values are displayed? _ _ 


Additional Information: 

6. With the DISplus/GTI, access VTG - “Diagnosis Control unit functions”. Select 
Diagnosis requests, Transmission, Transmission integrator 1 and Transmission 
integrator 2. Select Display. 

These are kW hours of wear on the transfer case calculated by the VTG control 
module (based on wear factors, refer to page 22). 


Now select Clutch, Plate integrator 1, 2 and 3. Select Display. 

These are kW hours of wear on the multi-disc clutch calculated by the VTG con¬ 
trol module (based on wear factors, refer to page 22). These are deleted during 
a control module reset (oil service procedure). 


Notes: 


23 

xDrive / DSC 

















Workshop Exercise - VTG Outputs/Signals 


1. Using the DISplus/GTI, locate the wiring diagram for the transfer case control. 

2. What are the connector and pin numbers for the servomotor (actuator)? 

Connector: _ Pins: _ 

3. Disconnect the harness connector at the VTG and perform a resistance 

measurement of the servomotor “drive motor” (inside the actuator). What is the 
value ? _ 

4. Reconnect the harness, and measure the voltage applied to the drive motor: 

With key on (KL15) _ 

Engine started _ 

Raise vehicle on lift, place in a forward gear and accelerate slightly. _ 

Set up a scope pattern and repeat the step above, what do you observe? 


Record the duty cycle (%) while repeating the step above _ 

5. With the DISplus/GTI, access VTG - “Diagnosis Control unit functions”. Select 
Diagnosis requests, Servomotor, Current consumption, Angle of rotation actual 
value and Display. 

Start engine and record readings _ _ 

Place vehicle in a forward gear and accelerate slightly _ _ 

Now select Diagnosis requests, Clutch, Nominal clutch torque, Actual clutch 
torque and Display. 

Start engine and record readings _ _ 

Place vehicle in a forward gear and accelerate slightly _ 

6. With the Diagnostic head connected, ignition “on” (KL15), parking brake 
“released” and transmission in “neutral”, raise the vehicle on the lift. 

With the DISplus/GTI, access VTG - “Diagnosis Control unit functions”. Select 
Component activation, Servomotor and clutch. 

Turn one front wheel by hand (slowly) and have a colleague select “Activate” 
while continuing to turn the front wheel steadily. What did you observe? 


24 

xDrive / DSC 























Workshop Exercise - VTG Service/Repairs 



1. Using the DISplus/GTI, locate Sen/ice functions for the transfer case (transmis¬ 
sion control) VTG. 

2. What procedures appear in the Components column? _ 


3. Select the Oil change service path, what component is “adapted” during this 

procedure ? _ 

4. Select the Repair service path, what “selections” are available? 


5. When you select [3] Replace transfer case, does “Adaption” occur during this 

procedure ? _ 

6. When you select [4] Replace VTG control, what values are read out during this 

procedure ? _ 

What procedure must be performed with the values? 


7. When you select [5] Enter wear values in new VTG control, what does this pro¬ 
cedure prompt you to do? _ 

What is provided on screen for you to accomplish this? _ 

8. Return to the main component selection column and select Complete vehicle, 
Drive, Transmission control VTG, Transmission oil and Test plan. 

Does “Adaption” occur during this procedure? 

Is there an on screen indication about the condition of the transfer case oil? _ 

If yes, what is displayed? _ 


25 

xDrive / DSC 




























