Table of Contents 


Suspension Systems 

Subject Page 

Purpose of the System.3 

Basic Suspension Geometry.4 

Caster.4 

Camber.5 

Toe.6 

Steering Roll Radius.7 

Steering Axis Inclination.8 

Toe-out on Turns.9 

Geometric Axis.10 

Suspension Systems.11 

Single J oint Front Suspension.11 

Double Pivot Front Suspension.14 

Rear Suspension Systems.16 

Semi-Trailing Arm.17 

Semi-Trailing Arm with "Track Link".18 

Central "C" Link.19 

Multi-Link Suspensions.22 

Alignment Procedures .28 

Vehicle Inspection.29 

Ride Height Measurement.30 

Identification of Suspension.32 

Vehicle Loading.34 

Alignment Specifications.36 

Alignment Checklist.38 

Alignment Worksheets.39 

Review Questions.40 


Initial Print Date: 1/03 


Revision Date: 





























Model: All Production BMW Vehicles 
Production: All 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to 

Understand Basic Alignment Angles 

• Understand Suspension Geometry 

• Identify BMW Suspension Systems 

• Understand Basic Alignment Procedures 


2 




Purpose of the System 

The safety, stability, handling and performance of a vehicle depends on many factors. One 
of the most important aspects of these characteristics is the design of the suspension and 
steering systems. BMW vehicles are known for their superior handling and road perfor¬ 
mance. The design of the BMW suspension systems is a key factor in achieving these 
goals. 

Suspension geometry is defined as: "The angular relationship between the suspension, the 
steering linkage and the wheels - relative to the road surface." 

There are several alignment geometry angles which relate to the suspension components 
and steering linkages including: 

Caster 

Camber 

Toe-ln/Toe-Out 

Steering Roll Radius (steering offset) 

Steering Axis Inclination (SAI)and Included Angle (IA) 

Toe Out on Turns 
Thrust Line and Thrust Angle 
All of these angles influence: 

The ease with which the vehicle can be steered 
The steering stability (handling, tracking and safety) 

Tire wear 

The suspension geometry for any given vehicle is a result ofthe design engineers develop¬ 
ment of the vehicle and the design criteria for that particular vehicle. 


3 

Suspension Systems 



Basic Suspension Geometry 

Caster 

Caster is the forward or rearward tilt of the steering axis centerline, as viewed from the side 
of the vehicle, and is measured in degrees from a vertical. It is a directional control geom¬ 
etry angle that helps keep the vehicle moving straight ahead. 

If the steering axis is tilted rearward, it is called "Positive Caster". A forward tilt is called 
"Negative Caster". 



On BMW vehicles, Caster is always positive. Positive Caster increases stability at high 
speeds. Positive Caster also causes increased steering effort at low speeds. Systems 
such as Servotronic help minimize this negative effect. In addition to increased high 
speed stability, cornering is enhanced and steering wheel returnability is improved by pos¬ 
itive Caster. 

Caster is measured in degrees. On BM W vehicles, Caster is a non-adjustable angle. But 
Caster is influenced by damaged suspension components. When performing a wheel 
alignment, always check Caster to insure there is no hidden damage. 

Cross Caster 

Cross Caster is the difference in the Caster measurement from left to right. Excessive 
Cross Caster can cause the vehicle to pull to the side with the least positive caster. 


4 

Suspension Systems 



Camber 


Camber is the inward or outward tilt of the wheels when viewed from the front of the vehi¬ 
cle. The amount of tilt is measured in degrees from the vertical and is called the camber 
angle. 

If the wheel tilts out at the top, the camber angle is positive and if the wheel tilts in at the 
top it is negative. 



Excessive Positive Camber will cause abnormal wear on the outer edge of the tire. 

Excessive Negative Camber will cause abnormal wear on the inner edge of the tire. 

Camber is measured in Degrees and Minutes and is measured at the front and rear of the 
vehicle. Camber is adjustable on some BMW models. 

Cross Camber 

Cross Camber is the difference between camberangles from left to right. If Cross Camber 
is excessive, the vehicle will pull to the side with the most positive Camber. 


5 

Suspension Systems 





Toe in/Toe out 


Toe is the difference in length by which the wheels of each axle differ from each other, front 
to rear, in the straight ahead position. The rearwheels are also subject to toe measurement. 

Toe is measured at the center of the wheels from one wheel rim to the other. When the dis¬ 
tance is greater at the rear of the wheels, it is called toe-in. 



When the distance is greater at the front of the wheels, it is called toe-out. 

Rear wheel drive vehicles generally will have a small amount of toe-in at the front wheels 
This will allow the wheels to toe out when rolling to achieve a zero running toe. 

Toe is measured in Degrees when using BMW specifications. Front toe is adjustable on a 
BMW vehicles. Rear toe is only adjustable on some models. 



6 


Suspension Systems 



















Steering Roll Radius (Steering Offset) 

The steering offset is the distance between the point of contact of the projected line drawn 
through the steering axis to the road surface and the center point of the tire contact area 
(foot print). The roll radius is the distance between these two lines. 

A positive roll radius exists when the steering axis line is inside the center line of the 
tire. 

A negative roll radius exists when the steering axis line is outside of the tire center 
line. 



POSITIVE NEGATIVE 


When the Steering Roll Radius is excessively positive, stability during braking is reduced. 
When the Steering Roll Radius is excessively negative, the directional stability is reduced 
and there is reduced feedback to the driver through the steering wheel. BMW vehicles 
are designed with a slightly positive Steering Roll Radius. This gives the driver a better 
"road feel" without compromising braking stability. 

Steering Roll Radius is not adjustable, but can be influenced by improper tire and wheel 
combinations. Wheels with incorrect offsets can compromise handling characteristics. 
Scrub Radius is another term used to describe Steering Roll Radius. 


7 

Suspension Systems 













Steering Axis Inclination (SAI) 


Steering Axis Inclination is the inward tilt 
(angle) of the strut assembly with respect 
to a vertical line to the road surface. 

SAI results in self-correcting forces that 
cause the front wheels and steering 
wheel to return to a straight ahead posi¬ 
tion after cornering. 

SAI is not adjustable, but is affected by 
damaged suspension components. 
Most current alignment eguipment can 
measure SAI and can aid in the diagnosis 
of damaged parts. Bent strut or spindle 
assemblies are common causes of incor¬ 
rect SAI readings. 


Included Angle (IA) 

Included angle is the Camber angle and 
SAI combined. IA is also helpful when try¬ 
ing to diagnose bent suspension compo¬ 
nents. Knowing the IA and SAI is helpful 
when adjusting Camber. If the desired 
Camber angle cannot be achieved, then 
looking at SAI and IA could help deter¬ 
mine the cause. 



Suspension Systems 








Toe Out on Turns 


Also referred to as "Turning Angle", Toe out on turns results from the different angles (arcs) 
taken by the front wheels when driving through a corner. When turning a corner, the out¬ 
side wheel must travel a greater distance than the inside wheel. The additional toe angle 
is determined by the steering arm design. Deviations from the specified value could indi¬ 
cate possible bent steering linkage. A typical complaint that would be associated with this 
condition would be excessive tire squeal or "scrubbing" on turns. When looking for this 
specification in TIS, look for the "Track Differential Angle" specification. 



9 

Suspension Systems 











Geometric Axis 


The Geometric Axis (Centerline) is an imaginary line that is drawn between the midpoints of 
both front and rear wheels. The Axis is perpendicular to front and rear axles at 90 degrees. 
This is an imaginary angle that is not adjustable. 


Thrust Line/Thrust Angle 

The Thrust Line is represented by an imag¬ 
inary line that bisects the rear toe angle. 
This angle represents the overall "direc¬ 
tion" in which the rear wheels are pointing. 
The Thrust Angle is the difference between 
the Geometric Axis and the Thrust Line. 
The optimum Thrust Angle is Zero 
Degrees, any deviation from this will affect 
the position of the steering wheel. 

Positive Thrust Angle - is formed when 
the Thrust Line is to the right of the 
Geometric Axis (Centerline). When this sit¬ 
uation occurs, the steering wheel position 
will be off to the right as well. The rear of 
the vehicle will tend to move to the right 
which will cause the front of the vehicle to 
steer left, the driver will move the steering 
wheel to the right to compensate. 

Negative Thrust Angle - is formed when 
the Thrust Line is to the left of the 
Geometric Axis (Centerline). When this sit¬ 
uation occurs, the steering wheel position 
will be off to the left as well. The rearof the 
vehicle will tend to move to the left which 
will cause the front of the vehicle to steer 
right, the driver will move the steering 
wheel to the left to compensate. 

Alignment Procedures 

When performing a wheel alignment, make 
sure that the thrust angle is as close to 
zero as possible. Failure to do so can 
result in a steering wheel that is not cen¬ 
tered. 



10 

Suspension Systems 























Suspension Systems 

Front Axles 

Two basic design front axles are used on B M W vehicles including: 

Single-J oint Spring Strut Axle 
Double Pivot Spring Strut Axle 

Single J oint Spring Strut Axle 

The single-joint spring strut axle is used on E30, E36 (all incl Z3 and 318ti) and E85 mod¬ 
els. The axle beam is bolted to the body through four locating bushings. It supports the 
engine mounts, steering rack, anti-roll bar and lower control arm mount. 

The "C" shape lower control arm is additionally mounted through a rubber bushing to the 
body and serves as the lower pivot for the steering system. 


E36 Front Suspension 


Coil Spring and Strut Assemblies 


Rack and Pinion 
Steering Assembly 



Anti-Roll Bar 


Front Axle Carrier 


11 

Suspension Systems 













E46 Front Suspension 


The E46 front suspension is based on the E36 design. There have been some design 
changes to improve ride guality and handling characteristics. The following changes were 
incorporated into the E46 front suspension system: 

A new forged aluminum lower control arm is used (Except iX all-wheel drive). If 
offers the advantages of weight reduction and lower unsprung mass. 

Hydraulic bushings are used for the rear lower control arm support. 

Hollow strut piston rods are used to reduce weight. 

The steering knuckles are press fit into the strut tubes which reduce the tolerances 
of the front suspension geometry. 

The Caster has been increased to improve straight line stability. 

The track has been widened for improved cornering 
Aluminum brake dust shields are used for weight reduction. 

Altogether there is 5.72 lbs. less unsprung weight in the front suspension which enhances 
ride comfort and handling. 



E46 Front Suspension 


12 

Suspension Systems 



Adjustments 

The "Single j oint" front suspension has some adjustments available. 

Front toe is adjustable on all variants. Caster is NOT adjustable, but should always be 
checked during the wheel alignment to insure there is no damage. 

Camber is adjustable on the E46 and E85. There is a slot in the upper strut tower which 
will allow small Camber changes. A pin must be driven down in orderto allow the Camber 
changes. The upper strut plate can then be moved to make a slight Camber correction of 
up to .5 degrees. 

If the Camber adjustment cannot 
be achieved, check for suspen¬ 
sion damage. Make sure the 
vehicle is at the proper ride 
height. 

The instructions for making the 
Camber adjustment can be 
found in the Repair M anual in TIS 
under Group 32. 

Use Special tool # 323 140 to 
make the Camber adjustment. 

When using the Special tool: 

Drive out the pin in the upper 
strut mount. 

Loosen all 3 upper strut 
mounting bolts. 

Install tool and turn the 
adjusting nut to make camber 
corrections. 

Once desired value is 
reached, tighten upper strut 
mounting bolts to specifica¬ 
tion. 

Tightening Torque specs can be 
found in TIS. 



13 

Suspension Systems 



Double Pivot Spring Strut Axle 

The "Double Pivot Spring Strut Axle" is used on the following vehicles: 

All 5 Series including E34 and E39 

E53, X5 All Models 

All 7 Series including E32, E38 and E65/E66. 

E31 8 Series 

The axle beam of the double pivot is bolted to the sub-frame through three triangulated 
mounting bolts. The axle beam supports the steering box, engine mounting and lowercon- 
trol arms. The tubular cross member and compression struts complete the double pivot 
suspension frame work. 


E38 FRONT 
SUSPENSION 


SUSPENSION CARRIER 


mcpherson 

STRUT 

ASSEMBLY 



HUYDRAULIC 

RUBBER 

BUSHING 


LOWER FORWARD ARM 
(REAR NOT SHOWN) 


14 

Suspension Systems 














The double pivot refers to the lower 

mounting of the strut and spindle assem- LEFT FRONT WHEEL AS SEEN FROM TOP 
bly around which the wheel turns. 


The lower control arm and the compres¬ 
sion strut form the two lower pivot 
points. 

The lower pivot point is actually an imag¬ 
inary point formed by the extension of 
the two lower mounting arms. 


IMAGINARY 
AXIS INTERSECT 




15 

Suspension Systems 














































































Rear Suspension Systems 


BMW utilizes several different configurations forthe rearsuspension systems depending on 
the model and specific needs of the vehicle in terms of handling, ride and performance. 
Alignment angles are not adjustable on the early rearsuspension systems. The Central "C" 
Link rearsuspension and the Integral Link rearsuspension have adjustable Camber and 
Toe. The different rearsuspension systems used include: 

Semi-Tailing Arm - E30, E36/5 318ti and E36/7 Coupe and Roadsters 

Semi-Trailing Arm with Track Link - E32, E34, E28, E24 

Central "C" Link - E36, E46 and E85 

Integral Multi-Link - E38, E39, E31, E53, E65, E66 and E52. 



Example of E46 Rear Suspension 
Central “C" Link 


16 

Suspension Systems 



Semi-Trailing Arm 

The Semi-trailing arm rear suspension is used on the following vehicles: 

E30 All models including convertible, M3 and iX 

E36/7 Z3 Roadster and Coupe including M Roadster and Coupe 

E36/5 318ti (Compact) 

The semi-trailing arm is an independent suspension system. The axle geometry is such that 
all points on the hub carrier move in a circular path, on a single plane during bounce and 
rebound. As a result of this, the rearcamberand track will van/ with the up and down move¬ 
ment of the wheel. The are no adjustable angles on this suspension system. RearCamber 
is influenced by ride height. In the event of an incorrect rear toe situation, offset bushings 
can be installed on the trailing arms to make slight corrections. Refer to TIS Repair instruc¬ 
tions in Group 33. 



17 

Suspension Systems 








Semi-Trailing Arm with 'Track Link" 

The "Track Link" rear suspension is used on the following vehicles: 

E24 All models including M6 and L6 
E28 All models including M 5 
E32 All models 
E34 All models 

The Track Link is a modified semi-trailing arm rear suspension. It incorporates an addition¬ 
al link that is mounted between the trailing arm and the rear axle carrier beam. The track 
link is mounted through rubber bushings that allow it to flex during bounce and rebound. 
The track link reduces the pivot axis from 20 degrees to 13 degrees which reduces the 
amount of camber and track change during bounce and rebound. 

It provides better handling, reduces "squat" and "dive" tendencies and allows less camber 
change due to heavy loading. 

There are no rearsuspension adjustments, small corrections can be made with offset bush¬ 
ings. (see Repair Instructions in Group 33). 


COIL SPRING AND SHOCK ASSEMBLIES 


TRACK LINK LOCATION 



TRACK LINK LOCATION 


18 

Suspension Systems 






Central "C" Link Rear Suspension 

The Central "C” Link rear suspension is used on the following: 

E36 All Models except E36/7 and E36/5. 

E46 All Models 
E85 Z4 Roadster 

The Central Link rear suspension consists of a cast iron longitudinal are that is bolted to the 
body through a rubber bushing. The wheels are additionally supported by two transverse 
arms that are connected to the rear axle sub-frame. 

The design of this suspension allows for individual tuning of longitudinal and lateral forces 
acting on the vehicle. Longitudinal forces, such as starting and stopping are absorbed by 
the central arm. Lateral forces, such as cornering, are absorbed by the transverse links. 
The complete suspension exhibits little or no change in toe-in while driving. 



19 

Suspension Systems 







E46 Rear Suspension 


The Central "C" Link rear suspension 
minor modifications: 

Upper Transverse Control Arms 
(Lateral Links) are made from alu¬ 
minum. 

The Subframe (rear axle carrier) is 
of tubular steel construction. 

The differential is mounted to the 
subframe with a hydraulic mount. 


on the E46 is almost identical to the E36 with some 



Upper Transverse 
Control Arms 


E85 Rear Suspension 

The E85 rear suspension is taken from the E46 design with some minor changes for the 
roadster. The track width has been increased by 30 mm. A reinforcement plate has been 
added to increase rigidity. Due to underbody aerodynamics, a duct has been added to 
direct airflow to the differential. The differential cover has cooling fins which will help keep 
the differential within it's operating temperature range. 


E85 Rear Suspension 

1. Rear Subframe Section 

2. Left Upper Control Arm 

3. Left Trailing Arm 

4. Left Lower C ontrol Arm 

5. Reinforcement Plate 

6. Reinforcement support bracket 

7. Rear subframe mounting bushings 

8. Right trailing arm bushing 



20 

Suspension Systems 






Rear Suspension Adjustments (Central “C" Link) 

Rear Toe 

Toe is adjusted by moving the forward central arm bushing mount with a special tool. The 
tool part number varies between models. 


21 

Suspension Systems 


Rear Camber 


Rear Camber is adjusted by rotating an eccentric bolt located at the outer end of the rear 
lower lateral link. No Special tools are required to make the Camber adjustment. 


Tool #90 88 6 323 080 for E36 
Not Used for Z3 and 318ti 


Tool #90 88 6 323 030 for E46 and E85 


pi 


1 










Multi-Link Rear Suspensions 

M ulti-Link Rear suspension systems are used on the following vehicles: 

• E31 8 Series including 850i, 850Ci, 850CSi and 840Ci 

• E38 7 Series - All models 

• E39 5 Series - All models including M5 (Touring version is slightly modified) 

• E53 X5 3.0i, 4.4i and X5 4.6is 

• E52 Z8 

• E65 and E66 

The "integral" multi-link suspension was introduced on the E31 and variations of it are used 
on the 5 and 7 series vehicles. Slightly modified versions are also used in the X5 and E39 
Sportwagon with EHC. The multi-link suspensions incorporate what is called "elastokine¬ 
matics" that allow each wheel to move and flex individually without transmitting loads and 
forces through the sub-frame to the other wheel. 

These suspension systems incorporate anti-dive, anti-sguat geometry which serves to 
keep the vehicle level during hard acceleration and braking. 


E31 Multi-Link Rear Suspension 



22 

Suspension Systems 



Elasto-Kinematics 


Elasto-kinematics relates to the suspension system design type. The term "elasto" implies 
stretching, which in fact the system does. Under extreme load (acceleration, turning, brak¬ 
ing) the suspension changes its geometry to counteract inherent changes induced by the 
increased loads. 



co 


SWIVEL 
MOVEMENT 
OF THE 
PIVOTAL 
BRACKET 


FRONT PIVOT BUSHING 



DIRECTION OF 
FORWARD TRAVEL 



FIXED PIVOT OF THE 
LOWER PIVOTAL 
BRACKET 


The system changes are pre-determined and built into the system. The geometry changes 
provided by this system correct for unwanted changes that occur under load in non- elas¬ 
to- kinematic systems. 


23 

Suspension Systems 
















E38/E39 Multi-Link Suspension 


The E38 and E39s use a modified version of the E31 multi-link rearsuspension system. The 
system was modified to be more compact yet provide the same handling and ride charac¬ 
teristics as the E31 system. 

The trailing arm was eliminated and all suspension mount¬ 
ing is to the sub-frame of the vehicle. The E38/E39 Multi- 
Link Rear Suspension is made up of the following: 


Rear Link 



Leading Link 


Lower Arm 
(Wishbone) 


TOE EOCENTRlC 


INTEGRAL UNK 



Integral Link 


Wheel Hub 
Carrier 


CAMBER. ECCENTRIC 



24 

Suspension Systems 




Rear Suspension Adjustments 

Camber and toe angles are adjustable on the E38/39 rear suspension through two eccen¬ 
tric bushings. There are no special tools reguired to perform these adjustments. 



25 

Suspension Systems 






















E39 Sportwagon and X5 Rear Suspension 


With the introduction of the E39 Sportwagon and the E53 X5, the rear suspension system 
has been modified to accommodate the increased cargo capacity. The rear suspension is 
also modified to allow for the optional EHC system. The X5 and Sportwagon rear suspen¬ 
sions differ from the standard E38 and E39. The springs are now located on the perches 
that are part of the wheel carrier assembly. The E39 and E53 rear suspensions are also 
slightly different from one another, the E39 upper shock mounts are part of the subframe 
assembly. The E53 upper shock mounts are still located in the body. 

Both the E39 and E53 are available with optional EHC, this means thatthe rearsprings will 
either be coils springs or "air springs". 

The E39 rear suspension also uses special "hydro Mounts". This modification is necessary 
due to the fact that the upper shock mounts are on the subframe. The "hydro mounts" are 
used to isolate the subframe to suppress road noise and vibrations from being transmitted 
to the body. 


E39 Sportwagon Rear Suspension with EHC. 



UPPER SHOCK 
ABSORBER MOUNTS 


SHOCK 

ABSORBER 


AIR 

SPRING 


WHEEL 

CARRIER 


SUB FRAME 
HYDRO-MOUNTS (4X) 


26 

Suspension Systems 



E65/E66 Rear Suspension 

The rear axle on the E65/E66 is also the integral type. It is very similar to the E38/E39 rear 
suspension. The rearaxle carrier (subframe ) is made from tubularaluminum. The E65/E66 
is also available with optional systems such as: 

EDC-K Electronic Damping Control (Continuous) 

AR5 Active Roll Stabilization 

Air Suspension System 



1 Rear Cross M ember 

3 Differential Mounting (front) 


2 Differential Mounting (rear) 

4 Thrust Plate 


The RearToe and Rear Camber are adjusted by means of eccentric bolts. No special tools 
are needed to make these adjustments. 


27 

Suspension Systems 


Alignment Procedures 


The following procedure is an outline to follow based on BMW procedures. The actual 
alignment procedures will vary depending upon the alignment equipment being used. Refer 
to the alignment equipment manufacturers procedures for specific information. The steps 
listed below should be followed as closely as possible to perform a quality alignment. 

Vehicle Inspection - The vehicle inspection should include a road test before and 
after the alignment. Note any concerns during the pre-alignment road test and ver¬ 
ify that the concern has been rectified during the post-alignment road test. 

Install Specified Weight- Check Group 32 Technical Data in TIS to determine the 
"Normal Position/ Inspection Conditions". Install Specified weight in vehicle and 
compensate for fuel by adding extra weight if needed. 

Install Alignment Sensors - Install alignment sensors as per the alignment equip¬ 
ment manufacturers recommended procedures. 

Compensate Sensors - Depending upon the alignment sensors being used, com¬ 
pensation may not be necessary. Compensation may require the vehicle to be lift¬ 
ed from the alignment rack. If so, be sure to remove the pins from the front and rear 
slip plates. If the sensors do not need to be compensated, the next step can be 
ignored. 

Lower Vehicle and J ounce - M ake sure the pins are removed from the slip plates. 
Lower the vehicle back onto the alignment rack and jounce the vehicle. This will 
insure that the suspension has settled. 

Check Ride Height - Check ride height using metric tape measure. Ride height 
specifications can be found in Technical Data in TIS. Front ride height specs can be 
found under group 31 and rear can be found under group 33. Always check ride 
height after compensating the sensors. This will avoid having to check the ride 
height twice. 

Perform Alignment - There and various types of alignment equipment used in 
BMW workshops. Refer to the equipment manufacturers instructions for the next 
steps of the alignment. 

When performing an alignment of a vehicle equipped with airsuspension (EHC), disable the 
system by removing the fuse for the air supply system. This will insure that the ride height 
will stay consistent. 


28 

Suspension Systems 



Vehicle Inspection 


Before attempting to align any vehicle, it is important to inspect the vehicle completely to 
insure there are no damaged or loose suspension components. Regardless of the age or 
mileage of the vehicle, a complete inspection should be performed. The following items 
should be checked thoroughly: 

Tires and Wheels - Check tires for wear patterns that could indicate suspension 
problems. Make sure the tires are the correct size and type. Check for the correct 
inflation pressures. Look for wheel/rim damage which could indicate impact dam¬ 
age. 

Wheel bearings - Check to make sure there is no excessive wheel bearing play. 
This needs to be addressed for safety reasons, but loose wheel bearings will affect 
the quality of the alignment as well. 

Steering Linkage- Check the tie rods, center link, idler arm and pitman arm. On 
vehicles with rack and pinion steering, check for loose inner/outer tie rods etc. 

On vehicles with a center link, make sure the center link is level (see B M W TI5 Repair 
Instructions). Check flexible coupling between steering shaft and rack and pinion 
assembly (or steering box). 

Suspension Components - Check Struts/Shocks for leakage or damage. Check 
springs and perform ride height measurements. 

Subframe- Check the front and rear axle carriers. Look for bent/twisted sub 
frames. Check the crossmembers for evidence of shifting or displacement. Check 
the mounting bolts for "clean spots" which could indicate shifting or movement. 

Brakes - Check braking system by road testing the vehicle. A road test could help 
to identify brake related issues such as pulling or brake induced vibrations. 

Drivetrain - While road testing the vehicle, observe and vibrations and/or noises 
and try to isolate the cause. Noises and vibrations under acceleration (rather than 
coasting) may be an indication of drivetrain issues. 

Road Testing 

Whenever possible, a vehicle should be road tested before and after an alignment. If time 
allows, drive on various road surfaces and note the vehicle behavior. Check for brake pull 
when stopping. And most importantly, note the position of the steering wheel before and 
after the alignment. These are important steps to avoid comebacks and unnecessary 
return visits. 


29 

Suspension Systems 



Ride Height Measurement 

When performing alignments on BMW vehicle, the ride height must be set and checked 
before proceeding with any measurement or adjustments. Ride height is measured from 
the loweredge of the wheel rim to the loweredge of the wheel housing. Ride height spec¬ 
ifications are in millimeters. The specifications can be found in Technical Data. The front 
axle ride height is in Group 31 and the rear axle ride height is in Group 33. In order to obtain 
the correct specification, the vehicle and suspension type must be identified. 

Ride height specifications depend upon rim size (15", 16 ", 17 " etc.), engine size and the 
type of suspension. There are 4 different types of suspension packages: 

Series - Standard production vehicle 

Low Slung Sports Suspension - This is used on vehicle with Sports Package Option. 
Rough Road Package - For Eastern European Rough roads. Not used in US. 

M Sports Package - Used on Motorsport vehicles orthose with M Package Option. 


The example shown below is the ride height specifications for an E39 540i (Front Axle) 


Series 



15" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

579 

16" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

592 

17" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

607 

18" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

620 

Low Slung Sports Suspension 



15" Rim 

mm 

559 

16" Rim 

mm 

572 

17" Rim 

mm 

587 

18" Rim 

mm 

600 

Rough Road Package 



15" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

599 

16" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

612 

17" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

627 

18" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

640 

M Sports Package 



15" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

562 

16" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

575 

17" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

590 

18" Rim 

mm +/- 10 

603 


30 


Suspension Systems 

























































Ride Height 

When measuring ride height, measure from the lower edge of the wheel rim to the lower 
edge of the wheel opening. Use a metric tape measure with divisions of 1 mm. 



Z3 Ride Height Tool 


When measuring ride height on 
the E36/7 (Z3). Use special tool 
#313 010. Due to the design of 
the hood on the Z3, this tool is 
used to simulate the lower edge 
of the wheel opening. 



31 

Suspension Systems 







Identification of Suspension 

When performing an alignment, the suspension variant must be identified. This insures that 
the correct alignment specifications are used and the ride height is correct. There are 
numerous suspension variants, there is the standard "series" production suspension, the 
"low slung" sports suspension, "M Sport Package" and the "Poor Road Surface" package. 
The latter term is for Eastern Europe, this is not used in the US. 

There are various methods for determining the the suspension variant used. Refer to repair 
instructions in Group 32 for more information. The following is a summary of some com¬ 
mon models: 

E38 - The "Sports" suspension variant is identified by paint markings on the front 
springs or by a front sway bar diameter of greater than 21.5 mm. 

E65/E66- There is no additional identification needed to determine suspension 
variant (at this time). 

E39 - There is a symbol (or code) located on the front strut assembly. There is a 
chart in repair instructions to match to the symbol found. 

E36 - There is an auxiliary spring located on the front strut assembly. There is a 
measurement that needs to be made to determine suspension variant.. Refer to 
repair instructions for additional details. 

E46 - There is a symbol (or code) located on the front strut assembly. There is a 
chart in repair instructions to match to the symbol found. 

The following page shows the E39 suspension identification chart. Note the markings on 
the front strut housing below. 



32 

Suspension Systems 




Identifying 

Symbol 


Version 


Model 


Without 

Volume production 

Sedan 

Solid Circle 

Low slung sports 

Suspension 

4 and 6 cylinder 

Sedan 

Solid Triangle 

Low slung sports 

Suspension 

8 cylinder sedan 

Solid Square 

Poor road surface 
(Eastern Europe) 

Sedan 

M5 

Volume production 

M5 Sedan 

M5 

M sports package 

8 cylinder Sedan 

E39BAS.SP 

M sports package 

4 and 6 cylinder 

Sedan 

Circle 

Volume production 

Touring 

Triangle 

Low slung sports 

Suspension 

Touring 

Square 

Poor road surface 
(Eastern Europe) 

Touring 


Suspension Systems 





































Vehicle Loading 

In order to obtain the correct ride height, the vehicle must be loaded with the specified 
weight. The normal specified weight for most vehicles is as follows: 

68 kg. in each front passenger seat 

68 kg in the rear seat 

21 kg in the trunk 

Fuel tank full. 

Not all vehicle need to be weighed down. Usually E39 M 5 and E36/E46 M 3 are measured 
without any weight. Always check TI5 under Technical Data Group 32. The proper test 
conditions can be found under "Normal Position/Inspection Conditions". 

If the vehicle fuel tank is not full, compensate by adding weight in the trunk. Fuel is approx¬ 
imately 7 pounds (about 3.2 kg) per gallon. For example: If the vehicle has an 18 gallon tank 
and it is 1/2 full, add about 63 lbs. (about 28kg.) 

Alignment Sensor Mounting 

There are two types of alignment sensor mounting, this depends upon equipment used. 
The first type is the "Rim Clamp" Method which "clamps" on the edge of the wheel rim. 
This method of mounting requires that the sensor be "compensated" electronically to allow 
for wheel runout and mounting irregularities. The second type is the "Beissbarth" type 
clamp, this method allows the clamp to be indexed to the rotor hub through holes in the 
wheel rim. The clamp hold on to the tire tread with a spring loaded clamp. The 
"Beissbarth" clamping method does not have to be compensated due to the fact that the 
clamp is actually mounted to the rotor hub, theoretically this method eliminates the need for 
compensation. Always remember that the holes in the rim should be clean and free of 
excessive rust, this could cause irregular mounting and inaccurate alignment results. 



“Rim Clamp" Mounting 


Beissbarth Type Mounting 



34 

Suspension Systems 






Alignment Adjustment Summary 



Front 

Caster 

Front 

Camber 

Front 

Toe 

Rear 

Camber 

Rear Toe 

E30 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 
(Offset Bushing) 

E36 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

Yes (Eccentric) 

Yes 

Tool #323 080 

E36/7 Z3 
E36/5 318ti 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 
(Offset Bushing) 

E46 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

Tool #323 140 

Yes 

Yes (Eccentric) 

Yes 

Tool#323 030 

E34 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 
(Offset Bushing) 

E39 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

Yes (Eccentric) 

Yes (Eccentric) 

E53 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

Tool #323 145 

Yes 

Yes (Eccentric) 

Yes (Eccentric) 

E32 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 
(Offset Bushing) 

E38 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

Yes (Eccentric) 

Yes (Eccentric) 

E 65/E 66 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

Tool #323 145 

Yes 

Yes (Eccentric) 

Yes 

(Eccentric) 

E85 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

Tool #323 145 

Yes 

Yes (Eccentric) 

Yes 

Tool #323 030 

E31 

No Adjustment 

No Adjustment 

Yes 

Yes (Eccentric) 

Yes 

(Eccentric) 


35 

Suspension Systems 


















































































Alignment Specifications 

The alignment specifications can be found in Technical Data under Group 32. There is a 
slight difference in terminology between this information and the information found on most 
alignment equipment. The following text should be helpful in understanding the different 
terms used. The alignment specifications are shown on the opposing page: 

Front Toe - The Total Toe specification represents the left and right toe specs added 
together. Toe is measured in degrees and minutes. 

Front Camber - Camber is also measured in degrees and minutes. Camber is 
adjustable only a some vehicles. The maximum amount of Camber adjustment is 
approximately .5 +/- degrees. 

Track Differential Angle with 20° lock on inside wheel This angle is also 
known as "Toe Out on Turns". With the inside wheel turned to 20 degrees on the 
front turn plates, the difference in the toe angle should be as specified. 

Caster - Caster must be measured by sweeping the wheel through an arc of 10-20 
degrees. (M ost alignment equipment requires at least 20 degrees). Ride height is 
crucial to this specification. If the vehicle is too high or low in the rear, the Caster 
measurement will be affected. Caster is NOT a "live angle", the wheels must be re- 
sweeped to check the measurement again. Although Caster is NOT adjustable, it 
should always be checked to insure there is no "hidden damage". 

Front Wheel Displacement - More commonly known as "Setback", this is a mea¬ 
surement of the angle formed between the front axle to the Geometric Axis. The 
front axle centerline should be at 90 degrees to the Geometric Axis. A quick check 
of setback is to look to see if the wheel is centered in the wheel opening. Setback 
is a good diagnostic angle, if the Caster is off, the Setback measurement could indi¬ 
cate the cause. Look for bent suspension components or damaged suspension 
carrier/subframe. 

Maximum Wheel Lock - Also known as "Maximum Steering Angle". This is the 
maximum angle of the wheels when turned to the inward and outward lock position. 
When this measurement is out of specification, check to see if the steering rack or 
steering box is centered. This can cause a hazardous condition and premature tire 
wear. 

Rear Toe - j ust as with front toe, this is the combined measurement of the rear left 
and right toe. Rear Toe is also measured in Degrees and Minutes. 

Rear Camber - Rear Camber is always negative on B M W vehicles. Rear Camber 
adjustable on some models. 

Geometrical Axis Deviation - The Geometrical Axis Deviation is also known as the 
"Thrust Angle". The optimum angle is zero degrees. The Thrust Angle is the angle 
formed between the Geometric Centerline and the Thrust Line which is the imagi¬ 
nary line which bisects the reartoe angle. A Thrust Angle of Zero Degrees is Optimal. 

36 

Suspension Systems 



Depending upon the type of alignment equipment used, the specifications can be 
expressed a number of ways. Whenever possible, set the alignment equipment to read in 
degrees and minutes. Some alignment equipment has this option, this is more desirable 
than trying to convert from inches to degrees etc. 

The alignment angles are expressed in degrees and minutes. For example: 

6° 30' is expressed as 6 degrees, 30 minutes. 

There are 360 degrees in a circle and 60 minutes to each degree. The are also 60 seconds 
to each minute, but adjustments this fine are rarely used. 


32: DO Wheel alignment E39^ M5 


Observe tes) condition? 


Front axle-: 


TolflJtw 

(F ID' ±10' 

Cambflr (diito'enCe between lelti'right teftx. M5, M 

spcfls package max. 301 

-30'±30' 

Track differential anjte wdh lock on mide wheel 

-i* 43'1 

Caster i;diftererce hetween leltTght man. 3ft 1 ) 


With i IF wheel hek 

6= 27 ' = 

With ±2Sy wheel fade 

F 4 $ ± 3D 1 

From *noei displacement 

Chi Iff 

Maximum wheel lock 


ln£do wheel 


Outside wheE: 

AfsprOK, ' 32 

TurnEng circle 

approx, m 

Rear axle: 


Total lee 


Alignment check 

<y Iff llff 

Adjustment 

ff Iff i 0' 

Camber (diltorence between krftiVighl max, 151 


Alignment ChEKk 

-rso' = i£’ 

Adjustment 

±6' 

Oeoneln.’al axis fi-varon 

ff i 1ST 


37 

Suspension Systems 






Alignment Checklist 


Complete 


1. Pre-Alignment Road Test □ 

Notes:_ 

2. Perform Complete Vehicle Inspection □ 

Notes:_ 

3. Check Air Pressure and Set to Specification □ 

Notes:_ 

4. Install Specified Weight □ 

Notes: _ 

5. Install Alignment Sensors □ 

Notes:_ 

6. Compensate Sensors - If Needed □ 

Notes: _ 

7. Lower Vehicle and J ounce - If Needed □ 

Notes: _ 

8. Check Ride Height □ 

Notes: _ 

9. Perform Alignment □ 

Notes: _ 

10. Calibrate Steering Angle Sensor (DSC III) □ 

11. Post Alignment Road Test □ 


Notes: _ 

38 

Suspension Systems 



Alignment Worksheet 

Vehicle:_ Model Year:_ Chassis #:_ 

Front Suspension Type:_ 

Adjustments: _ 

Front Caster: Yes No Tool# Front Camber: Yes No Tool# 

Front Toe: Yes No Tool#_ 

Rear Suspension Type:_ 

RearCamber: Yes No Tool#_ Rear Toe: Yes No Tool#_ 

Suspension Variant: (Circle One) 

A. Series B. Low Slung Sports C. Rough Road D. M Sports 
Vehicle Loading (weight): 

Front Right:_ kg. Front Left:_ kg. 

Rear Seat:_kg. Trunk:_ kg. 

Ride Height Specification: Front_ Rear 

Ride Height Actual: Front_ Rear 

Tire Pressure Specification:_Tire Pressure Actual:_ 

Wheel Bearing Play:_ _ 

Alignment Equipment Type:_ 

Alignment Head Type:_ 

Notes:_ 



39 

Suspension Systems 



Review Questions 

1. What special tool is needed to adjust rearToe on an E46? 


2. What alignment angle represents the inward or outward tilt of the wheel at the top 7 
(When viewed from the front) 


3. Where can the front and rear ride height specifications be found 7 

4. The "Geometrical Axis Deviation" angle is also known as 

5. What angle is formed when combining Camber and 5Al? 

6. What vehicles use the "Single J oint" front suspension 7 

7. Ride height is measured from the to the 


8. When identifying the suspension variant of an E39, the technician finds a "Solid Triangle" 
on the front strut housing. What is the suspension variant 7 


9. Which BMW vehicles have adjustable Caster 7 

10. What is Special Tool 313 010 used for 7 


40 

Suspension Systems 



