Table of Contents 


E46 Traction Control Systems 

Subject Page 

Module Objectives.2 

Purpose of the System.3 

Traction and Stability Control Systems Apllication Chart.7 

DSC System l-P-0 Charts.8 

System Components.11 

Control Module/Hydraulic Unit.12 

Charge Pump.15 

Tandem Brake M aster Cylinder.16 

Brake Fluid Expansion Tank and Fluid Level Switch.16 

Wheel Speed Sensors (inductive).17 

Wheel Speed Sensors (Flail Effect).17 

Wheel Speed Sensors (Magneto-Resistive).19 

Steering Angle Sensor (LEW).22 

Rotation Rate Sensor.23 

Transverse (Lateral) Acceleration Sensor.24 

Integrated Rotation Rate/Lateral Acceleration Sensor.25 

Brake Pressure Sensor/ Brake Switch.26 

Brake Pressure Sensor (Bosch 5.7).27 

DSC Button.28 

Instrument Cluster Warning Indicators.29 

CAN bus interface.30 

Principle of Operation.31 

Diagnosis.42 

Review Questions.44 


1 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



























Model: E46 DSC III All versions including: 

Teves MK20 99-00 E46 323, 328i,is,iC 
Teves MK20 00- Present M3 

Teves MK 60 01 - Present 325, 330 i, is, 1C and E36/7 
Bosch DSC III 5.7 01- Present 330Xi, 325Xi 

Production: All E46 from 1999 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

Understand the Operation of DSC III Mk20 El 
• Locate DSC III Components 



2 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 






E46 Dynamic Stability Control 

Purpose Of System 

The DSC III system is being introduced as an option forthe E46 beginning with Model Year 
1999 production. Since the introduction of the E46, there have been some changes to the 
DSC III systems. Depending upon year and model, the following DSC system were used: 

• Teves MK 20 - All 99 and 00 323 and 328 (including is and 1C) and the M3. 

• Teves MK 60 - Used from 01 production until present, (not used on iX and M 3) 

• Bosch 5.7 - only used on the iX models (325Xi and 330Xi) 

These system are all similar in functional operation and basic components. The following 
training material is designed to help differentiate between the various systems by outlining 
components and functional operation. 

Teves DSC III MK 20 

The Teves M K 20 DSC system is based on the Teves M K 20 ASC system used on the 99 
E46. The system incorporates all of the features of the previous Teves slip control system 
and adds the lateral dynamic control of the DSC III system already installed on the 
E38/E39s. This system uses mostly the same components as the previous DSC systems. 

The Teves DSC system is designed to maintain the lateral locating forces for following: 

ABS braking control 
ASC +T traction control 

DSC - Dynamic Stability Control for oversteer and under steer conditions 


3 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



Teves DSC III MK 60 

DSC III M K60 is supplied by Continental Teves and supersedes the Teves DSC III M K20 El 
system. The M K60 includes all of the features of the previous M K20 El system and incor¬ 
porates two additional functions: 

DBC function 

Modified ADB function 

The most important changes from the MK20 El are: 

Reduction in size of the control unit/hydraulic Unit. 

Installation of the hydraulic unit close to the master cylinder. 

Elimination of a pre-charge pump. 

Magneto resistive wheel speed sensors. 

The Teves MK60 system is designed to maintain the vehicles stability during: 

AB5 braking regulation 
ASC+T traction control 
DSC for oversteer and understeer control 

Additional features are also programmed into the control module to enhance driver safety 
and comfort. These features are: 

CBC Corner Brake Control 

EBV Electronic Brake Proportioning 

MSR Engine Drag Torque Regulation 

ADB Automatic Differential Brake 

DBS Dynamic Brake System 


4 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



Bosch DSC III 5.7 


The Bosch DSC III 5.7 is used in the E46/16 in place of the DSC III M K 60 used on 2wd 
vehicles. The DSC system is the same as used in the E53. HDC is not a feature on 2001 
Xi models. 

Functions that are specific for the All-Wheel Drive system are: 

Modified ABS function. 

ASC+T (All-Wheel Drive version). 

Four wheel ADB function. 

The Bosch DSC III 5.7 system is designed to maintain the vehicle's stability 
during: 

ABS braking regulation 
ASC+T traction control 
DSC for oversteer and understeer control 

Additional features are also programmed into the control module to enhance driver safety 
and comfort. These features are: 

CBC Corner Brake Control 

EBV Electronic Brake Proportioning 

MSR Engine Drag Torque Reduction 

DBS Dynamic Brake System 


5 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



2002 Model Year Update 

The DSC system M k60 has been further developed with regard to certain functions. 

The yaw-rate sensor and the transversal-acceleration sensor will be one component and 
will be called the sensor cluster. The sensor cluster is installed in the same position as the 
yaw rate sensor. It is operated at 5 volts and has a separate CAN connection to the con¬ 
trol unit. 

The ADB function is further improved in DSC by Dynamic Traction Control (DTC). The dif¬ 
ferential effect is brought about here by active brake intervention and DSC monitoring. The 
yaw moment is taken into consideration which eliminates the danger of the carswerving as 
it corners. The DTC is activated by pressing the DSC button. The active DTC system is 
indicated by the DSC warning light in the instrument cluster. 

Starting September 1, 2001 DTC will be combined with overrun differential control (SDR). 
In the event of engine drag-torque control (M SR) while the car is cornering and oversteer¬ 
ing, SDR performs a brake intervention at the driving wheel furthest from the bend. The 
brake intervention at the rear axle does not require any countersteering by the driver, there¬ 
by increasing driving safety. 

In the event of a total ABS/ASC/DSC malfunction, this will be indicated not only by the 
established warning lamps but also by the acoustic transmitter in the instrument cluster 


6 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 




Traction and Stability Control Systems Application Chart 


Model 

Year 

E36 

E36/7 

Z3 

Roadster/ 

Coupe 

E46 

E39 

E38 

E53 

E52 

E65 

E66 

E85 

1998 

ASC+T 

ASC +T 

MK IV G 

N/A 

9/97 

ASC +T5 

S: 528i 

DSC III 5.3 

S: 540i 

N/A 528i 

9/97 

DSC III 
Bosch 5.3 

S: 740i/iL 

S: 750iL 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

1999 

ASC +T 
MK IV G 
328iC 
318ti 

ASC +T 

MK 20 El 
(Except M) 

ASC +T 

Mk IV G 
(M Versions) 

ASC 

Teves 

MK 20 El 

9/98 

ASC +T5 

S: 528i 

Bosch 

DSC III 5.7 

S: 540i 

O: 528i 

3/98 

Bosch 

DSC III 5.7 

S: 740i/iL 

S: 750iL 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

2000 

N/A 

from 4/99 
Teves 

MK 20 

DSC III 

DSC III 
Teves 

MK 20 El 
from 6/99 

6/99 

Bosch 

DSC III 5.7 
STD All 

3/99 

Bosch 

DSC III 5.7 
STD All 

DSC III 

Bosch 

5.7 

9/99 

DSC III 

Bosch 

5.7 

1/00 

N/A 

N/A 

2001 

N/A 

From 9/00 
Teves 

MK 60 

DSC III 

M Versions 
Teves 

MK 20 

DSC III 

DSC III 

Teves 

MK 60 
from 9/00 

M3 

Teves 

MK 20 

E46/16 

AWD 

Bosch 

DSC III 5.7 

DSC III 

Bosch 5.7 

DSC III 
Bosch 5.7 

DSC III 

Bosch 

5.7 

DSC III 

Bosch 

5.7 

N/A 

N/A 

2002 

N/A 


Same 

as 

2001 

DSC III 

Bosch 5.7 

N/A 

DSC III 

Bosch 

5.7 


■ 

N/A 

2003 

N/A 

N/A 

Same 

as 

2001 

DSC III 

Bosch 5.7 

N/A 

DSC III 

Bosch 

5.7 

DSC III 

Bosch 

5.7 

■ 

DSC III 

Teves 

MK60 


S = STANDARD EQUIPMENT 
0 = OPTIONAL EQUIPMENT 
STD All = Standard All Models 


7 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 








































































□sc iw? 


ECM 

MAJN 

RELAY 


jABS LAMP 


KWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 


PUMP 


WHEEL 


■W 


iNLEr i«i 


DSCIII 

HYDRAULIC 
UNI I 


FF^-LOAD (2r| 


FATF ScNSOfl 


PC^YERSLFPLY 


GROUhfl 


EM3QR TEST 


CH^PGL 


STEEHNG ANGLE 
S&EORWDH 
IKTTEGRALMCPO- 
FTOCESfiffl 


CHARGE PUMP 

control 


£■3 *4ML WtT^F 


nOTATTON '■ 
RA"^3ENSOn 


5JGNAL WLDOE 


LATERAL > ^ 

ACCELERATION sensor 


ELECTFCWC 
BRAKE LIGHT 
SWfTOl 


DIAGNOSES 


■_ 

Ij 


J 




' 


■ m 


P J , 

1 ^ 

*< 1 . 




■j. 

" 

i 

DSC SWITCH 

-—i 


■■ y 


■1 



Jffrv 

Fwhk BRAKE 

SWITCH 

_1 

r- 

V 



8 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 





































ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 




n n^ 


WHEEL 

ru~ui 


SPEED 


SENSORS 


BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE 
SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


ELECTRONIC 
BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 



i 


TO LSZ 



PARK BRAKE 
SWITCH 



BRAKE FLUID 
LEVEL 


DSC 
5.7 X 


ABS LAMP 



POWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 


PUMP 


I 


INLET (4X) 


OUTLET (4X) 


CHANGEOVER (2x) 


PRE-LOAD (2x) 


TfiSSSSJ— 

"UMlflflflJ - 


mmr 

wmr 1 


DSCIII 

HYDRAULIC 

UNIT 


POWER SUPPLY 

GROUND 


SENSOR TEST 


CHARGE PUMP 
CONTROL 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


STEERING ANGLE 
SENSOR WITH 
INTEGRAL MICRO¬ 
PROCESSOR 



RIGHT REAR 


LEFT REAR 


PROCESSED WHEEL SPEED 


BRAKE 


DSC LAMP 
GENERAL BRAKE 
WARNING LAMP 



10 


DIAGNOSIS 



9 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 

































































































































































KL 30 


DME 

MAIN 

RELAY 



/^S 



U— 

i— n 

- 1 

WHEEL 

i 

RJ 

i— n 

1 

SPEED 

i 

RJ 

1 

SENSORS 

_ i 


BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 




BRAKE 
PRESSURE 
SIGNAL X2 



SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 



SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


LATERAL 
ACCELERATION SENSOR 


BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 





TO LSZ 



PARK BRAKE 
SWITCH 


T 


SPLICE TO KOMBI 



m 

_ 

!, 

L 

V- 

BRAKE FLUID 


LEVEL SWITCH 


DSC 
MK 60 

47 PIN 


ABS LAMP 


KL 



POWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 




PUMP 

c 

■N 

\ 

§ 



3 U 



INLET (4X) 


OUTLET (4X) 


CHANGEOVER (2x) 


INTAKE (2x) 


'iisr 


Mir 

■ mmr 


MK60 

HYDRAULIC 

UNIT 


POWER SUPPLY 


GROUND 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


REFERENCE 
VOLTAGE 


BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 


POWER SUPPLY 


GROUND 



LATERAL 

ACCELERATION SENSOR 


STEERING 
ANGLE SENSOR 



PROCESSED WHEEL SPEED 


0 3 


DSC LAMP 
GENERAL BRAKE 
WARNING LAMP 


WHEEL SPEED SENSOR REFERENCE VOLTAGE X 4 

1 



10 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 


























































































































































System Components 

The E46 DSC III system consists of the following components: 

Integrated Control unit/Hydraulic unit with CAN Interface 

Charge pump (Not used on M K 60) 

Tandem Brake M aster Cylinder 

Four wheel speed sensors (Inductive, Hall Effect or M agneto-Resistive) 

Steering Angle Sensor 

Yaw Rate Sensor 

Lateral Acceleration Sensor 

Integrated Rotation Rate/Lateral Acceleration Sensor 

Brake Pressure Sensors (2 on Teves, 1 one Bosch) 

Brake Fluid Level Switch and Expansion Tank 
Brake Light Switch 

Hand Brake Switch 

DSC Button 

DSC Warning Indicator 

CAN Interface (DM E/AGS) 


11 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



Components 

Control Module/Hydraulic Unit 

The control module is installed in the engine compartment on the right side next to the strut 
tower. 


Either the control module or the hydraulic unit are replaceable as separate components. 


All processing functions for ABS/A5C or DSC regulating functions are carried out in the one 


control module. The module is linked to the 
CAN bus forcommunication with the DM E and 
AGS control modules. Additionally the CAN 
bus is used forcommunication with the steer¬ 
ing angle sensor and for illumination of the 
ABS and DSC indicator lamps in the instru¬ 
ment cluster. 

The hydraulic unit consists of the following: 
Four inlet solenoids 
Four outlet solenoids 
Two changeover solenoids 
Two charge solenoids 



Teves MK 20 

Control Module/Hydraulic Unit 


Control Unit/Hydraulic Unit (MK 60) 

The M K60 control unit/hydraulic unit is located 
in the engine compartment on the left side 
under the brake master cylinder. 

Both the control unit and the hydraulic unit are 
replaceable as separate components. 

The pre-charge pump used on previous 
systems is no longer required. Rapid pressure 
build up is possible because of the close prox¬ 
imity of the hydraulic unit to the master cylin¬ 
der and improvements in the design of the 
return pump. 

The control unit/hydraulic unit itself is 20% 
smaller and lighter than the previous M K20 El. 



Teves M K 60 

Control Module/Hydraulic Unit 


12 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 






All processing functions for ABS, ASC or DSC are performed by the combined control 
unit/hydraulic unit. The M K 60 control unit is also responsible for processing the wheel 
speed signals and providing them to other control units. 

The M K60 control unit for MY 2002 incorporates the RDW function into its scope of 
control, making a separate RDW control unit unnecessary The operating principle 
continues to be based on the analysis of wheel speed. 



Teves MK 60 

Control Module/Hydraulic Unit 


Control Unit/Hydraulic Unit (Bosch 5.7) 

The Bosch DSC III 5.7 control unit/hydraulic 
unit is located inside the engine compartment 
on the right hand side. 

Both the control unit and the hydraulic unit 
are replaceable as separate components. 

All processing functions for ABS, ASC and 
DSC are performed in the combined con¬ 
trol/hydraulic unit. The control unit is also 
responsible for processing the wheel speed 
signals and providing them to other control 
units. 



Bosch 5.7 

Control Module/Hydraulic Unit 


13 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



DSC III Hydraulic Unit (Typical) 



REAR AXLE BRAKE CIRCUITS 



FRONT AXLE BRAKE CIRCUITS 


INTAKE 
VALVE , 


CHANGEOVER 
VALVE 


IT* 


LOW PRESSURE 
ACCUMULATOR 


gw 


IT 

LEFT 

REAR ft 
BRAKE V 7 


€31 


INTAKE 


VALVE 


IT* 


PUMP 

mm 


OUTLET INLET 
VALVE VALVE 


LOW PRESSURE 
ACCUMULATOR 


INLET 

VALVE 


CHANGEOVER 
VALVE 



RIGHT 


M' 

\ LEFT 

m 

REAR 


( 

) FRONT 

• • 

BRAKE 


v y 

BRAKE 



RIGHT 

FRONT 

BRAKE 


The hydraulic unit consists of an aluminum block containing 12 solenoid valves, 2 pressure 
accumulators and the return pump. 

4 inlet solenoid valves (N/0) 2 changeover solenoid valves (N/0) 

4 outlet solenoid valves (N/C) 2 Intake solenoid valves (N/C) 

The solenoid valving ensures that normal braking is possible in the event of a defective 
control unit. 

In ABS regulation the pump returns fluid back to the master cylinder circuits. In ASC/D5C 
regulation with brake intervention, the pump is responsible for building up the brake 
pressure required for the front and rear hydraulic circuits. 

Note: N/0= Normally Open N/C = Normally C losed 


14 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 















Charge Pump (Teves MK 20) 

the charge pump is installed between the 
master cylinder and the brake fluid reservoir. 
During DSC controlled regulations that 
involve brake intervention, the charge pump 
ensures that the required volume of fluid is 
available for the hydraulic unit. 

When activated, the charge pump draws fluid 
from the reservoir and delivers it to the mas¬ 
ter cylinder at a pressure of 10 Bar. 

Pre-Charge Pump (Bosch 5.7) 

The pre-charge pump is located below the 
master cylinder in the left side of the engine 
compartment. 

During ASC or DSC regulation with brake 
intervention, the DSC control unit activates 
the pre-charge pump. The pump delivers 
brake fluid at a pressure of 10 to 15 Bar to 
the front axle circuit of the master cylinder. 
The pressurized fluid also acts on the rear 
brake circuit of the master cylinder as well. 

The Pre-charge pump ensures that an 
adequate amount of brake fluid is available at 
the hydraulic unit during brake regulation. 


Teves M K60 

The pre-charge pump used on previous systems is no longer required. Rapid pressure 
build up is possible because of the close proximity ofthe hydraulic unit to the master cylin¬ 
der and improvements in the design of the return pump. 




15 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 




Tandem Brake Master Cylinder 

The DSC III system uses a tandem brake mas¬ 
ter cylinder fitted with central valves as other 
DSC master cylinders. The central valves allow 
fluid to be drawn through the master cylinder 
during ASC and DSC regulation. The hydraulic 
circuit is split front/rear. 

An orifice for pre-charge pressure is fitted into 
the brake front axle circuit and is connected to 
the pre-charge pump via a steel braided flexible 
line. 



The inlet orifice is not used on the M K 60 system since the charge pump has been 
eliminated. 


Both brake pressure sensors are mounted on the master cylinder. 


Brake Fluid Expansion Tank and Brake Fluid Level Switch 


The brake fluid expansion 
tank has internal baffles 
that reduce foaming during 
return pump operation. 

The expansion tank 
includes a pick-up tube for 
clutch master cylinder fluid 
supply and a second lower 
one for the charge pump 
supply (not M K60). 

The brake fluid level switch 
is incorporated into the 
tank on Bosch 5.7 on is 
incorporated into the cap 
on Teves systems. 

The switch is a reed contact switch. If the brake fluid is at a sufficient level, the switch is 
closed and switched to ground. 

If the fluid level drops below a specified level , the reed contacts open and the DSC 
responds by switching off the ASC/DSC functions. 

Normal braking and ABS operation is unaffected. 



16 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 







Wheel Speed Sensors (Inductive) 

The E46 DSC lll(M k 20)system uses the wheel speed sensors from the ASC system. The 
whee speed sensors are the inductive type and generate an AC Analog Signal. 




Wheel Speed Sensors (Hall Effect) 

The E46/16 uses Hall-effect wheel speed sensors similarto other models with Bosch DSC 
III 5.7. The advantages of the Hall sensors overthe inductive sensors of the Teves M K 20EI 
are: 


Speed signal is available from 0.3km/h. 

Signal strength is not dependent on road speed. 

The signal supplied is a digital square wave. 

The pulse wheel for the front axle circuit is integrated into the wheel bearing inner seal, 
identical to that of E38, E39, E53, E52 models. 

The pulse wheel for the rear axle circuit is identical to 2wd E46 models. The pulse wheel 
is a plastic coated metal wheel attached to the rear stub axle outboard C.V. Both pulse 
wheels produce 48 pulses:! wheel revolution. 


The colorofthe sensorconnector is blue, just as the Magnetoresistive sensors ofthe Teves 
M K 60 used on 2wd vehicles. The front sensors of the 2wd and 4wd versions of E46 are 
physically different and will not fit in the wheel hub. 


17 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 

































The rear sensors can be confused with the Teves M K 60 sensors and will fit in the rear axle 
of the 4wd car however they are not compatible with the Bosch system. 

Principle of operation of the active wheel speed sensor 

The sensor housing contains the evaluation circuitry, a Hall-effect transmitter and a perma¬ 
nent magnet. The wheel speed sensor receives a stabilized 8V operating power supply 
from the control unit. 

Both front and rear sensors are two-wire. One wire is for the power supply, the other pro¬ 
vides a ground for the Hall element and also provides the input signal to the control mod¬ 
ule 

If a tooth of the pulse wheel is opposite the sensor, the signal to the DSC III is high: approx. 
1.9 to 3.9 V. When opposite of the gap, the signal to the DSC III is low at 0.35 to 1.3 V. 



18 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 


Wheel Speed Sensors (Magneto-Resistive) 

With the introduction of the Teves DSC III M K60, active wheel speed sensors that operate 
on the principle of magnetoresistive effect are used for the first time on B M W vehicles. 

The sensor element and evaluation module are two separate components within the 
sensor housing. 



1. Metal pulse wheel 6. 

2. Magnet 7. 

3. Sensor element 8. 

4. Evaluation module 9. 

5. Support for sensor element 10. 


Sensor wiring with weather boot 
Ground contact ring 
Fastening element 
Sensor housing 
Pick-up surface 


Principle of operation of the magnetoresistive sensor 

The active sensing of the magnetoresistive sensor is particularly suitable for advanced 
stability control applications in which sensing at zero or near zero speed is required. 


A permanent magnet in the sensor produces a magnetic field with the magnetic field stream 
at a right angle to the sensing element. 


The sensor element is a ferromagnetic alloy that changes its resistance based on the 
influence of magnetic fields. 


19 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 




As the high portion of the pulse wheel approaches the sensing element, a deflection of the 

magnetic field stream is created. This causes the resistance to change in the thin film 
ferromagnetic layer of the sensor element. 





/ 



1. Metal pulse wheel 

2. Magnet 

3. Sensor element 

4. Evaluation circuit 

5. Magnetic field 


The sensor element is affected by the direction of the magnetic field, not the field strength. 
The field strength is not important as long as it is above a certain level. This allows the 
sensor to tolerate variations in the field strength caused by age, temperature or 
mechanical tolerances. 


The resistance change in the sensor element affects the voltage that is supplied by the 
evaluation circuit. The small amount of voltage provided to the sensorelement is monitored 
and the voltage changes (1 to lOOmV) are converted into current pulses by the evaluation 
module. 


Signal High-14mA 
Signal Low-7mA 



I 

The sensor evaluation circuit is supplied 12V by the M K60 control unit. Output voltage from 
the sensor is approximately 10V. The control unit counts the high and low current pulses 
to determine the wheel speed signal. 

Front sensors are three wire because they have a separate ground wire. 

Rear sensors are two wire and use the sensor case as a ground point. 

20 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 




Different sensors are used on the left and right side 
front axle of the vehicle. The difference comes in 
the length of the harness. 

The connectors are blue to distinguish them apart 
from the grey connectors used for sensors on the 
M K20 El. 

The DSC III M K60 uses the same metal pulse 
wheels used with the M K20 inductive sensors. 


Front Axle E46/Z3 




There are two types of sensors used in the rear axle of the E46: 

The short sensor is used on the 325i (any transmission) and 330i automatic. 
The long sensor is used on the 330i manual transmission version. 

The Z3 uses the same sensors for the rear axle, left or right. 


21 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 




Steering Angle Sensor (LEW) 

The Steering Angle Sensor is mounted towards the lower end of the steering column, 
above the flexible coupling. The LEW consists of a potentiometer and a built in 
microprocessor. The potentiometer has two pickups offset at 90° to one another. The raw 
potentiometersignal is processed and converted into a digital signal that is transmitted over 
the CAN bus to the DSC control unit. 



The sensor requires initialization in-orderto create a zero point default. Once initialized, the 
LEW sends an ID number to the DSC control unit. The ID provides confirmation that the 
LEW is properly initialized. 

The total steering wheel angle is determined by combining the CAN telegram signal, the 
stored zero point default and the actual number of turns to the wheel. In order to prevent 
the LEW from loosing count, KL 30 is provided to the sensor and it continues to record 
even after the ignition has been switched off. 


The DSC calculates the drivers desired rate of turn from the steering angle signa 


POTENTIOMETER 

HOUSING 



\ 


CAN BUS MICROPROCESSOR 


Pin 1. KL 30 
Pin 2. KL 87 
Pin 3. CAN high 
Pin 4. CAN low 
Pin 5. KL 31 
Pin 6. TXD 


Note: Refer to the Workshop Hints for instructions on coding and initializing the sensor. 

22 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



Rotation Rate Sensor 


The Rotation Rate Sensor is mounted on a metal bracket under the drivers seat. The 
sensor provides information to the DSC Control Unit concerning the vehicles speed around 
its main axis (yaw). 


The sensor has a three pin connector with the following connections: 


5V reference 


Signal 

Ground 

The sensor receives a reference voltage of 5V from the M K60 control unit and provides a 
signal output of approximately 0.25 to 4.65V depending on the amount and direction of 
yaw. If the sensor is defective a constant voltage will be sent to the M K60. 

The sensor element is a micro-mechanical double quartz tuning fork. A frequency of 11 
Hertz is applied to one side of the fork and as the vehicle turns on it’s axis, vibrations are 
induced on the other end. 

The sensor analyzes the signal produced by the fork and produces an analog voltage 
signal that is proportional to the amount of yaw. 

The rotation (yaw) rate is compared to the signal from the Steering Angle Sensor and the 
Transverse Acceleration Sensor. If physical limits are beginning to be exceeded, the M K60 
DSC will begin regulation by engine and brake intervention to attempt to stabilize the 
vehicle. This is referred to as a GMR regulation. 


DSC 
Control Unit 



Rotation Rate 
Sensor 


The M K60 DSC III for M .Y. 2002 incorporates a combined Rotation rate and Transverse 
Acceleration Sensor. The Sensor is connected to the M K60 control unit by the CAN bus. 
The Z3 version will retain separate sensors until the E36/7 is replaced by the E46/6. 


23 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 




Transverse (Lateral) Acceleration Sensor 

The Transverse Acceleration Sensor is mount¬ 
ed in the left "A" pillar behind the driver's foot 
rest. The sensor provides the DSC control unit 
with a signal that corresponds to the degree of 
transverse acceleration (G forces) acting on the 
vehicle. 

The sensor is a capacitive sensor with two 
plates. One plate is rigidly mounted, the other 
plate is mounted on a spring. Under the effect 
of transverse forces acting on the sensor the 
distance between the plates changes. 

This change of distance between the plates affects the capacitance of the sensor. The 
evaluation circuitry converts the signal into an analog voltage that is transmitted to the 
control unit. 

The output signal of the sensor is between the range of 0.5 to 4.5 Volts. This corresponds 
to -1.5 to 3.5g respectively. When the vehicle is stationary the output is 1.8V. 

The transverse acceleration signal is used in the DSC III control unit along with the rotation 
rate and steering angle signal to determine if DSC regulation is required to maintain the 
vehicles stability. 

Note: Refer to Workshop Hints for instructions on initializing sensor. 




24 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 








Integrated Rotation Rate and Transverse Acceleration Sensor 


The E46/16 uses the combined rotation rate 
/transverse acceleration sensor used in all 
Bosch DSC III 5.7 systems. The sensor is 
located under the drivers seat in front of the 
left seat rail and is attached to a plate with a 
rubber mounting to isolate it from vibrations. 

For rotational speed, the sensor produces a 
reference signal of 2.5 volts and a voltage 
input signal from 0.7 to 4.3 volts. This signal 
represents the rotational movement (yaw) of 
the vehicle from the neutral straight ahead 
position. 



The sensor also integrates the transverse acceleration signal (side-ways acceleration). The 
signal range is 0.5V increasing to 4.5V as side forces (g-force) increase. This signal is 
combined with the rotation signal to determine when to start DSC regulation. 



RATE SENSOR/ 
ACCELERATION SENSOR 




12 V 


IjHSHI 

H 

yaw 



H 


0.7v - 4.3v 

"| -50 +50 





Note: Adjustment of sensors is conducted separately in Service Functions of the Diagnosis 
Program even though both sensors are contained in one housing. 


25 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 




















Brake Pressure Sensors (Teves MK 20 and MK 60) 


Two brake pressure sensors are 
mounted on the master cylinder 
below the outlet ports for the 
front and rear brake circuits. The 
sensors are provided a 5V refer¬ 
ence voltage by the M K 60 con¬ 
trol unit. 

The sensor provides the control 
unit with an analog signal propor¬ 
tional to brake pressure. 
Voltage increases with increasing 
brake pressure. 



Plausibility with BLS 

The signal input from the brake light switch is compared with the pressure sensor values. 
The pressure sensors must not detect more that 5 bar when the BLS is not actuated. 
Both signals are used to form a redundant BLS input which is constantly monitored. 


Note: Refer to the Workshop Hints for instructions on initializing the brake pressure sensors. 

Brake Light Switch (BLS) 

The brake switch is an input to the M K 60 to inform it that the brakes are being applied. If 
the signal is received during an ASC regulation then brake regulation is interrupted. 



26 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 





Brake Pressure Sensor (Bosch 5.7) 

The brake pressure sensor is mounted on the 
DSC hydraulic unit in the front axle circuit. The 
sensor is provided with a 5V reference voltage 
by the DSC control unit. 

The sensor provides the control unit with an 
analog signal proportional to brake pressure. 

Voltage increases with increasing brake 
pressure. 

Plausibility with BLS 

The signal input from the brake light switch is compared with the pressure sensor value. 
The pressure sensor must not detect more that 5 bar when the BLS is not actuated. 

Both signals are used to form a redundant BLS input which is monitored during all phases 

Handbrake Switch 

The Hand Brake Switch is a ground input to the DSC module. This DSC module will dis¬ 
continue MSR regulation when the signal is present. 




27 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 







































DSC Button 

The DSC button on the Teves M K 20 system oper¬ 
ates just as on previous systems. The DSC system 
is active when the ignition switch is turned on, the 
DSC system is de-activated when the button is 
pressed. The DSC warning light will be illuminated 
when the system is off. The activate the system, 
press the DSC button again to restore operation. 

DSC Button (Teves MK60) 

The DSC button is located on the SZM, however the SZM provides no processing, it is 
simply a housing for the button which is hardwired to the M K60 control unit. 

The DSC Button features two functions that can be set by varying the time the button is 
held down for: 



Button activation 

Function 

Display 

Short press 
<2.5s 

Only the yaw control of the DSC is deactivated. 
The ADB and DBC functions remain active. 

DSC light illuminated 


A higher slip ratio is allowed up to 42 mph for the 
purpose of improving traction in slippery 
conditions. ASC uses different thresholds. 


Long press 
>2.5s 

All ASC, ADB, DSC, GMR (yaw control) and DBC 
control functions are deactivated. 

DSC light and general 
brake warning light 
(yellow ABL) illuminated. 


Used for service and use on dynamometers. 



Pressing the button again returns the system to normal status. It is not possible to go 
directly from one function to the next without first returning to normal status. 

DSC Button (Bosch 5.7 on E46 AWD) 

The function of the button is different than for 2wd vehicles. Brake intervention 
remains active for the ADB function after pressing the button to turn off the DSC. 
Only ASC engine intervention and DSC yaw intervention are deactivated. 

The DSC warning lamp will be illuminated to remind the driver that these functions have 
been disabled. Pressing the button again returns the system to normal status. 


28 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 











Instrument Cluster Warning Indicators 



Three warning indicator lamps are arranged in the instrument cluster: 

DSC lamp: Indicates fault in DSC or system disabled by the switch 
ABS lamp: Indicates a fault in the ABS system. 

ABL"BRAKE" lamp: 


This lamp is a general brake warning and illuminates two different colors 


Red indicates low brake fluid or hand brake engaged. 


Yellow indicates DSC/ABS fault or system disabled by the switch 


The DSC and yellow ABL lamp are controlled by the DSC III control unit via the CAN bus. 
The ABS lamp is controlled directly by the DSC III control unit via hardwire. 


29 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 







CAN Interface 

The M K60 is connected to the CAN bus for communication with the AGS, DME control 
module, Steering Angle Sensor and the Instrument Cluster. 

The CAN bus allows all of the connected control modules to send and receive information 
and commands. 

Communication with the M K60 includes: 

DME - The DME sends current engine torque. M K 60 commands the DM E to reduce 
(ASC/DSC) or raise (M SR) engine torque. 

AGS - The M K60 commands the AGS to suppress shifts during regulation. 

LEW - The M K60 receives steering angle information. 

KOMBI - The M K60 commands the instrument cluster to activate or deactivate the 
warning lamps. 

All four wheels speed signals are sent over the CAN bus for use by other modules. 


INSTRUMENT 



CLUSTER 


MK 60 


SPLICE CONNECTIONS 
FOR TWISTED PAIR CAN 


30 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 























Principle of Operation 

The scope of control for the DSC III is comprised of three systems: 

ABS 

ASC+T 

DSC 


Based on signals coming from the various sensors the DSC III will determine which system 
is best suited to maintain control of the vehicle. 


In addition to the three basic systems, there are several sub-functions which are activated 
during very specific circumstances. The sub-functions are: 


CBC 
EBV 
M SR 
ADB 
DBC 
MBC 


CBC 

EBV 


ADB 

MSR 


MBC — DSC— DBC 



The ABS system can prevent wheel lock when braking by comparing the four active wheel 
speed sensors to the average vehicle speed. If a wheel is locking during braking or has 
dropped below a speed threshold programmed in the control unit ABS, braking will begin. 
ABS braking is possible when vehicle speeds are above 12 km/h (7mph). 

The function of ABS for All-Wheel Drive use has an additional variation. During braking on 
loose surfaces the wedge effect is helpful. Gravel ordirt will build up in front ofthe tire when 
the wheel is locked, creating an increased braking effect. The system allows the locking of 
one or both front wheels up to approx. 20km/h (12mph). This "poor road surface logic” 
does not affect steerability. As soon as the control unit detects steering wheel change, the 
ABS system regulates normally again. 


31 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 







ABS regulation has three phases: 

Pressure Build 
Pressure Hold 
Pressure Release 


Pressure Build already occurs during normal braking, so when ABS first intervenes it will 
start holding pressure by energizing the Inlet Valve. For example, if the right rear wheel is 
locking up, both Inlet Valves will be energized, regulating both wheels together. This logic 
is known as Select Low. Front wheels can be regulated individually as needed to prevent 
lockup. 

Energizing the Inlet Valve closes the brake fluid passage to the calipers and traps the fluid 
at the current pressure, thus not allowing the brake pressure to rise any further. 

If the wheel speed does not increase, the Pressure Release phase begins. 

Pressure Release occurs when the control unit energizes the Outlet Valve while continuing 



to hold the Inlet Valve closed. The trapped brake fluid is released out of the calipers reduc¬ 
ing braking pressure. 


At the same time the pump is switched on which draws in the released brake fluid and 
pumps it back into the pressure build-up circuit restoring the volume of brake fluid again in 
front of the Inlet valve. 

Depending on conditions the ABS system may cycle between these three phases from 3 
to 12 times a second to prevent wheel lock. 


32 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 





ABS Sub-functions 
Corner Brake Control (CBC) 

CBC can occur if the vehicle is cornering and ABS regulation is not taking place. 

If the control unit detects transverse acceleration in excess of 0.6g and the brakes are 
applied, CBC prevents a build up in brake pressure to the inside rear wheel. This prevents 
the vehicle from entering into an unstable situation that can lead to Oversteer. 

The DSC III accomplishes this by closing the Inlet Valve, thus not allowing brake pressure 
to increase at the brake caliper. 

The difference in braking force between the two rear wheels creates a yaw force that 
opposes the oversteer and allows the vehicle to handle neutrally. 






















Electronic Brake Force Distribution (EBV) 

EBV will adjust brake pressure to the rear axle based on the rate of slow-down of the rear 
wheels, ensuring even brake force between the front and rear of the vehicle. 

The control unit monitors the wheel speed when the brakes are applied and compares the 
deceleration rate of the front and rear axle to determine required regulation. 

If the vehicle is moderately to fully loaded, the rear axle will take longer to slow down, rear 
wheel brakes then can be applied at a higher pressure. 

If the vehicle is lightly loaded, a similar brake pressure would be too great and result in an 
unstable situation. 

If EBV control intervention is required, the control unit cycles the intake valve on the rear 
brake calipers to prevent further build-up. 

Benefits of EBV are 

Enhanced braking due to an even distribution of brake force. 

Rear wheel brake size can be increased. 

Front and rear brakes wear at a similar rate. 


34 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



Automatic Stability Control (ASC+T) 

A5C prevents unintentional wheel slip of the drive wheels in every situation. 


The DSC III control unit determines if the vehicle is loosing traction due to excessive longi¬ 
tudinal wheel slip based on input from the wheel speed sensors. An ASC regulating 
sequence is initiated if the wheel slip exceeds the control units stored allowable values. 


The DSC III can control longitudinal wheel slip by two means: 


Automatic stability Control ASC. Engine Intervention 


Automatic Differential Brake ADB. Brake intervention 


ASC Engine Intervention 

Engine torque may be reduced by: 

Reducing the throttle opening angle 
Retarding the ignition 

Canceling individual cylinders by fuel injection cutout. 

The DSC III control unit determines the amount of torque reduction that is 
necessary and sends the request for regulation to the DM E via the CAN bus 


ADB Brake Intervention 

The ADB is an automatic differential lock that improves traction. The slipping wheel is 
braked by pressure built up in the hydraulic unit. The drive torque can be transferred to the 
wheel with the greater traction, which can transmit drive power to the road. This function 
acts much like a limited slip differential. 

Brake intervention is applied to the individual wheel which is loosing traction by 
regulating the brake calipers in three phases: 

Pressure Build 

Pressure Hold 

Pressure Release 


35 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



When brake intervention is necessary, the axle not being regulated must be isolated from 
the Pressure Build sequence in the hydraulic unit. This is accomplished by closing both 
Inlet Solenoid Valves for that axle. 

Here is an example of an ADB brake intervention at the left rear wheel: 

The Changeover Valve forthe rearbrake circuit, the right rearand both front Inlet Valves 
are energized and closed. 

The rear brake circuit Intake Valve is energized and opened. 

The Return/Pressure pump is activated and draws brake fluid through the open Intake 
Valve from the Master Cylinder (via the Central Valve) and delivers the pressurized fluid to 
the open Inlet Valve braking the left rear wheel. 

Pressure Hold and Pressure Release are done by cycling the Inlet and Outlet Valves 
similar to the ABS sequence described previously. 

The drive torque can be distributed to the wheels with high friction coefficients (traction). 

Transversal differential-lock function. 



COEFFICIENT OF FRICTION 


36 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 





Longitudinal differential-lock function 

By performing brake intervention at 
the axle with a low friction coeffi¬ 
cient, drive torque can be transmit¬ 
ted to the front wheels. 



COEFFICIENT Of FRICTION 


Longitudinal and transversal 
differential-lock function 

By performing brake intervention 
at the diagonally opposing wheels 
with a low friction coefficient, drive 
torque can be transmitted to the 
two wheels with more traction. 



HIGH 


COEFFICIENT OF FRICTION 


37 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 











ASC Sub-function 


Engine Drag Torque Reduction (MSR) 

If the vehicle is driven in low gear when coasting down hill, or if there is a sudden shift to a 
lower gear, the wheels may be slowed down by the engine braking effect to rapidly. This 
could result in an unstable situation. 

If the front wheels are turning faster than the rear wheels the DSC III control unit signals the 
DM E via the CAN bus to raise the engine torque. DM E cancels fuel cut-off and allows the 
engine speed to increase, this allows the drive wheels to accelerate to match the speed of 
the non-driven wheels. 


MSR regulation is cancelled if the brake pedal or hand brake is applied. 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 


With the introduction of DSC systems, lateral dynamics were taken into account for the first 
time. The DSC III system will initiate a DSC regulation sequence if the control unit detects 
a difference between the drivers desired turning angle and the actual rotation angle of the 
vehicle. The control unit determines vehicle stability based on: 


Steering wheel angle 
Wheel speed 

Transverse acceleration forces 


Rotation angle and speed (yaw) 

Once the control unit determines that the vehicle is in an unstable situation, it also 
identifies whether it is oversteering or understeering. This distinction is important because 
it determines which control strategy should be used to help stabilize the vehicle. 

DSC regulation consist of: 

Engine intervention 

Engine and brake intervention (any wheel) 

Brake intervention 


38 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



Understeer 


Understeer occurs when the driver wishes to turn a corner, but despite the front wheels 
being turned in the direction of the curve, the vehicle continues its forward track. This 
occurs when the front wheels no longer have sufficient lateral locating force (traction). 


The DSC III can identify the situation and initiate a corrective action based on engine torque 
reduction followed by a controlled brake intervention sequence if needed. 

Engine torque reduction is carried out by the DM E from a request by the DSC via the CAN 
bus. The DM E sends the torque reduction confirmation back to the DSC. 

Brake intervention is carried out by the DSC III hydraulic unit if the driver is not actively 
braking. An example of a brake intervention at the inside rear wheel is as follows: 

All Inlet Valves are closed except for the right rear inlet. 

Intake Valve for rear circuit is opened. 

Both Changeover Valves are closed. 

Return pump operated. 


3. VEHICLE 
COMES OUT 
OF TURN 
SUCCES- 
FULLY 



UNDERSTEER CORRECTION 

WITH DSC III 1 . VEHICLE APPROACHES TURN: 

- Driver steers into turn 

- Brakes are applied 



WITHOUT 
DSC III 


- regulated brake slows 
wheel down (and helps to 
reduce vehicle speed). Wheel on 
outside of curve speeds up due to power transfer thru differential. 
Vehicle pivots in favor of curve. Combined, this forces the vehicle into the turn. 

39 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



J ust as an ASC regulation, DSC brake intervention carries out 
Pressure Build 
Pressure Hold 
Pressure release 


LOW BRAKE 
FLUID SIGNAL 



40 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 
























































Oversteer 


Oversteer occurs when the driver wishes to turn a corner and the tail of the vehicle slides 
outward, leading the turn. This is caused by the rear tires loosing traction and not being 
able to hold against the centrifugal force acting upon the vehicle. 

The DSC III can identify the situation and initiate a corrective action based on engine torque 
reduction followed by a controlled brake intervention sequence if needed. 

Engine torque reduction is carried out by the DM E from a request by the DSC via the CAN 
bus. The DM E sends the torque reduction confirmation back to the DSC. 


3. VEHICLE COMES 
OUT OF TURN 
SUCCESFULLY 


WITH DSC III 


OVERSTEER CORRECTION 


1. VEHICLE APPROACES TURN AT HIGH RATE OF SPEED: 
- Driver steers into turn and applies brakes to slow down. 



2D. The torque reduction and rear brake regulation 
should stabilize the vehicle at this point. If not 
the left front wheel has a high degree of lateral 
locating force and is momentarily regulated. 

This action deliberately causes the wheel to shed 
a calculated degree of it's locating force. This 
counteracts oversteer yaw at this wheel and also 
aids in slowing the vehicle down to correct it. 


2B. Driver tries to compensate by oversteering which 
diminishes lateral locating force even further. 
Simultaneously, rear of car starts to slide out. 

2C. DSC III determines an OVERSTEER condition. 
Engine torque is reduced via CAN Bus signalling. 
Outside rear wheel is momentarily regulated to 
counteract severe yaw angle (also helps to reduce 
drive torque further.) 


41 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



DSC Sub-functions 
Dynamic Brake System (DBS) 

DBS is designed to assist the driver in emergency braking situations by automatically 
increasing pressure to the vehicles brake system. This allows the vehicle to stop in the 
shortest distance possible. DBS was first available in 1999 Bosch DSC III 5.7 systems. 

The DBS system contains two functions: Dynamic Brake Control and Maximum Brake 
Control. DBS functions are programmed into the DSC III control unit and require no addi¬ 
tional hardware over conventional DSC. 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

The DBC function is designed to provide an increase in braking pressure up to the ABS 
threshold during rapid (emergency) braking situations. The DSC III control unit monitors the 
inputs from the brake light switch and the brake pressure sensor. The triggering criteria for 
activation of DBC is, how rapidly is the brake pressure increasing with an application of the 
brake pedal. The triggering conditions are: 

Brake light switch on. 

Brake pressure in the master cylinder above threshold. 

Brake pressure build-up speed above threshold. 

Vehicle road speed above 3mph (5km/h). 

Pressure sensor self test completed and sensor not faulted. 

Vehicle traveling forward. 

Not all of the wheels in ABS regulation range. 

If the threshold for DBC triggering is achieved, the DSC III control unit will activate a 
pressure build-up intervention by activating the pre-charge and return pump. The pressure 
at all wheels is increased up to the ABS regulation point. This ensures that the maximum 
brake force is applied to the vehicle. 

During DBC the rear axle is controlled with Select-Low logic and the front wheels are 
regulated individually. DBC will continue until: 

The driver releases the brake pedal. 

Brake pressure falls below threshold. 

Vehicle road speed below 3mph. 

DBC will also be switched off if a fault occurs in with any of the necessary input sensors. 
A fault in DBC will illuminate the "BRAKE” (ABL) lamp yellow to warn the driver, depending 
on the failure the DSC lamp may be illuminated as well. 

42 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



Maximum Brake Control (MBC) 

The M BC function is designed to support driver initiated braking by building up pressure in 
the rear brake circuit when the front wheels are already in AB5 regulation. 

The additional braking pressure is designed to bring the rear wheels up to the ABS 
regulation point shortening the stopping distance. The M BC function is triggered when the 
brakes are applied more slowly than the threshold needed for a DBC regulation. The trig¬ 
gering conditions are: 

Both front wheels in ABS regulation. 

Vehicle road speed above 3mph (5km/h). 

DBC and pressure sensor initialization test successful. 

Vehicle traveling forward. 

Rear wheels not in ABS regulation. 

If the threshold for M BC triggering is achieved, the DSC III control unit will activate a 
pressure build-up intervention by activating the return pump. The pressure at the rear 
wheels is increased up to the ABS regulation point. This ensures that the maximum brake 
force is applied to the vehicle. 

The M BC function will be switched off if: 

Front wheels drop out of ABS regulation. 

The driver releases the brake pedal. 

Brake pressure falls below threshold. 

Vehicle road speed below 3mph. 

MBC will also be switched off if a fault occurs in with any of the necessary input sensors. 
A fault in M BC will illuminate the "BRAKE” (ABL) lamp yellow to warn the driver, depending 
on the failure the DSC lamp may be illuminated as well. 


43 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



Diagnosis 

The following diagnostic functions are available using the DISplus or GT-1. 


Control Unit Functions: 

Expert mode diagnosis available 
at any time during troubleshoot¬ 
ing. To enter: press the Control 
Unit Functions button at the 
right lower corner of the screen. 

The contents are: 

• Identification 

• Delete Fault Memory 

• Read Fault Memory 

• Component Activation 

• Status queries (requests) 


/ 





Service Functions: 

Provides access to specialized test modules 
used as post repair procedures. To enter: 
Function Selection 
Service Functions 
Chassis 

Dynamic Stability Control 
The contents are: 

Connection Speed Sensor: A test to 
verify the proper wiring to the wheel 
speed sensors 

Connection Brake Lines: A test to 
verify the proper brake pipe connections 
to the hydraulic unit. 

Adjustment Functions: Test modules 
to initialize certain components after 
repair work is performed 
Steering Angle Sensor 
Fateral Acceleration Sensor 
Pressure Sensors 


Note: E46 AWD 



The all-wheel drive models of the E46 series 
do not have their own model identification 
and all-wheel drive specific equipment (i.e. 
DSC III 5.7) is not detected automatically. 
All-wheel drive identification is performed by 
manually selecting it from a pop-up dialog 
box when a document or test module is 
called up which has a variation for all-wheel 
drive. 


Test Modules: Faults with the M K60 system can be diagnosed using fault or symptom driven test 
modules. To begin diagnosis: 

• Perform the Quick Test. 

• Select Vehicle Symptom from the Symptom Selection page. 

• Select Test Module from Test Plan page. 

• Press the Test Schedule Button. 

Test Modules are configured in the E46 diagnosis concept. 


44 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 













Coding 

Coding must be performed after replace¬ 
ment of the DSC III control module or the 
steering angle sensor. ZCS coding is found 
in the Coding and Programming selection 
from the start screen or when pressing the 
Change button. Follow on-screen instruc¬ 
tions for initialization of components after 
completing the coding process. 

Adjustment Functions 

Adjustment (initialization) is required when: 
Replacing the DSC III Control Unit. 


Replacing/Re-coding the Steering Angle Sensor. 
Replacing one or both Brake Pressure Sensors. 
Replacing Lateral Acceleration Sensor. 





1 CAR MEMORY 

2 KEYMEMORY 

3 ZCS CODING 

4 PROGRAMMING 

5 ALIGNMENT EWS-DME 

6 ALIGNMENT EWS-DDE 



Steering Angle Sensor 


The steering angle sensor requires an offset adjustment afterthe sensor has been replaced, 
coded or after repairs to the steering or suspension system. The offset adjustment informs 
the steering angle sensor processor of the straight ahead position of the front wheels. 


The adjustment is performed by completing the Test Module found in Service Functions. 
Once the adjustment is complete the sensor sends an identification number over the CAN 
bus to the DSC control unit. The ID provides confirmation that the steering angle sensor is 
coded and has successfully completed the adjustment procedure. 

Special Tools 


Special Tools available for the DSC III system consist of: 


47 Pin V-Cable 34 5 250 (MK 60) 
42 Pin V-Cable 34 5 240 

60 Pin Break-Out-Box 



45 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 








































review Questions 

1. How does the M K20 El ASC system communicate with DM E to reduce engine power 
during an intervention 7 


2. Which component in the DSC III M K20 system is used to build-up pressure in the front 
axle circuit during DSC intervention 7 


3. What type of sensors are used in the M K20 ASC and DSC systems 7 


4. What is the difference in ABS control logic for the E46/16 in comparison to the 2wd 
models 7 


5. What service procedures are required when replacing a steering angle sensor 7 


5. What is the effect to the Bosch DSC III when the system is disabled by the DSC 
button 7 What about the button operation in the Teves M K60 7 


6. Describe the operation of the "Automatic Differential Lock" function. 


46 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



Review Questions 

7. Why is a pre-charge pump not required in the M K60 system 7 


8. What is the purpose of the two sensors on the M K20 and M K60 DSC III master 
cylinder and what is their relationship with the BLS (Brake light switch) 7 


9. What is the difference of the signal produced by the magneto-resistive and a Hall-effect 
wheel sensor 7 


10. List the various sensors used to detect oversteer/understeer in the DSC III systems. 


11. What is the purpose of the DBS sub-function 7 


47 

E46 Dynamic Stability Control Systems 



