Table of Contents 


X5 Dynamic Stability Control 

Subject Page 

Purpose of the System.3 

Components.5 

Integrated Control unit/Hydraulic unit with CAN Interface.6 

Brake Pressure Sensor.6 

Brake Light Switch.6 

Charge pump.7 

Hand Brake Switch.7 

Integrated Rotation Rate/Lateral Acceleration Sensor.8 

DSC Button.9 

HDC Switch (Hill Descent Control).9 

Four wheel speed sensors (Active Hall Effect).9 

Steering Angle Sensor.10 

Brake Fluid Level Switch.11 

DSC Warning Indicator.12 

CAN Interface (DM E/AGS).13 

Principle of Operation.14 

X5 DSC New Functions.27 

Diagnosis.31 

Review Questions.33 


Initial Print Date: 1/03 


Revision Date 






















Model: E53 X5 3.0i, 4.4i and 4.6is 
Production: All from Model Introduction 

Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to 
Understand X5 DSC operation 
Identify X5 DSC Components 
Understand HDC Operation 


2 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 




Purpose of System 

DSC for the X5 

The X5 is equipped with DSC III for its stability control system. The components are the 
same as the DSC III system (version 5.7) currently installed in the E38/E39 vehicles. 
However the software and programming are changed to allow for new functions associat¬ 
ed with all wheel drive and off-road use. 

New/changed functions ofthe DSC III include: 

New Hill Decent Control (HDC) function 

New Differential Brake Control (ABD) function 

Changed traction control function 

Changed ABS function 

The DSC system for the X5 provides all ofthe functions and features ofthe DSC III system 
currently in the E38/E39 vehicles, these functions/features include: 

M aintaining traction under all driving conditions 

Maintaining the directional Control (Longitudinal Stability) 

Providing Lateral Stability (Correction for oversteer/understeer) 

Providing Corner Braking Control (CBC) 

Providing Dynamic Braking System features of - Dynamic Braking Control and 
Maximum Braking Control (DBC and MBC) 

Providing Electronic Brake Proportioning (EBV) 


3 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 




KL 30 
KL 15 


Ki- ■-Q.-1 

■,r'- 

■ * . 

DSC 

\ - .■ 


■.Ay-v. 


DSC SWITCH 



HDC SWITCH 





•—U 

1- 1 

WHEEL 


1 1 

1 ' 

SPEED 


=□ 


1 1 

SENSORS 



i mm 


BRAKE 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 
SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE 


ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


ELECTRONIC 
BRAKE LIGHT 
SWITCH 



i 


TO LCM 



PARK BRAKE 
SWITCH 


DSC 



POWER SUPPLY 


POWER SUPPLY 


PUMP 


INLET (4X) 


OUTLET (4X) 


CHANGEOVER (2x) 


PRE-LOAD (2x) 


mm — 

"iflMdr 


liT 


DSCIII 

HYDRAULIC 

UNIT 


POWER SUPPLY 
GROUND 
SENSOR TEST 



ROTATION 
RATE SENSOR 


CHARGE PUMP 
CONTROL 



STEERING ANGLE 
SENSOR WITH 
INTEGRAL MICRO¬ 
PROCESSOR 


CAN 






EMLllis 

i uuu 


WHEEL SPEED X4 


EDO 

IKE&DME 
DIAGNOSIS 



4 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 

















































































































































































Components 

The components of the X5 DSC III system are similar to the E39 with Bosch DSC III 5.7. 
The location of some components is slightly different than the E39. The components are 
as follows: 

Integrated Control unit/Hydraulic unit with CAN Interface 
Charge pump 

Tandem Brake M aster Cylinder 

Four wheel speed sensors (Active Hall Effect) 

Steering Angle Sensor 

Integrated Rotation Rate/Lateral Acceleration Sensor 

Brake Pressure Sensor 

Brake Fluid Level Switch 
Brake Light Switch 

Hand Brake Switch 

DSC Button 

DSC Warning Indicator 

CAN Interface (DME/AGS) 

HDC Switch (Hill Descent Control) 


5 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



Components 

Control Module/Hydraulic Unit 


The control module is integrated into the 
hydraulic unit as one compact unit. This 
reduces the size and wiring required for 
DSC operation. Additionally the motor 
relay and valve relay have been replaced 
by solid state final stages in the control 
module. The hydraulic unit continues to 


use: 


Two pre-charge solenoid valves 
Two changeover solenoid valves 
Four intake solenoid valves 
Four outlet solenoid valves 
One return pump 


Brake Pressure Sensor 


A brake pressure sensor is installed in the 
hydraulic unit to determine the degree of pres¬ 
sure build-up for Dynamic Brake Control. It is 
installed in the front axle brake circuit. 

The sensor receives its power supply from the 
DSC control module and produces a linear 
voltage input signal ranging from 0.5 to 4.5 
volts depending on how hard the brakes are 


applied. 

Brake Light Switch (BLS) 


The brake switch is an input to the DSC 
Module to inform it that the brakes are 


being applied. If the signal is received dur¬ 
ing an ASC regulation then brake regulation 


is interrupted. 



6 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 





Pre-Charge Pump (Bosch 5.7) 

The pre-charge pump is located below the 
master cylinder in the left side of the engine 
compartment. 

During A5C or DSC regulation with brake inter¬ 
vention, the DSC control unit activates the pre¬ 
charge pump. The pump delivers brake fluid at 
a pressure of 10 to 15 Bar to the front axle cir¬ 
cuit of the master cylinder. The pressurized 
fluid also acts on the rear brake circuit of the 
master cylinder as well. 

The Pre-charge pump ensures that an ade- 
guate amount of brake fluid is available at the 
hydraulic unit during brake regulation. 

Handbrake Switch 

The Hand Brake Switch is a ground input to the DSC module. This DSC module will dis¬ 
continue MSR regulation when the signal is present. 



DSC 

Module 






7 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 





































Rotation Rate/Transverse Acceleration Sensor 

Located under the center console behind the MRS III control module, the rotation rate and 
transverse acceleration sensor provides two inputs to the DSC control module. The sensor 
is isolated from body/chassis vibrations through its rubber mounting. 

For rotational speed, the sensor produces a reference signal of 2.5 volts and a linear volt¬ 
age signal from 0.7 to 4.3 volts. This linear voltage input signal is used by the DSC control 
module as the degree of rotational rate (yaw). 

The sensor also produces a linear voltage signal for the lateral acceleration (G-force) that 
ranges from 0.5 to 4.5 volts. The DSC control module uses this input to determine the side 
forces acting on the vehicle for DSC regulation. 



RATE SENSOR/ 
ACCELERATION SENSOR 







8 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 





















































DSC Switch 


The system is active whenever the ignition is 
switched on. When pressed, the switch provides 
a momentary 12 volt signal to the DSC III control 
module to switch the system off (DSC indicator in 
cluster illuminated.) When pressed again, the sys¬ 
tem switches back on (DSC Indicator in cluster 
goes off.) 


DSC 


HDC Switch 

The hill decent control function is activated by 
pressing the HDC switch located in the centercon- 
sole. The LED will come on steady when the func¬ 
tion is in standby and flash when HDC is regulating 

Wheel Speed Sensors 

2 wire Hall Effect Sensor - "Square wave generator". 



Stabilized 8 volt power supply to hall element on one wire, ground path for sensor 
through second wire back to control module. Signal is generated by the pulse wheel 
affecting voltage flow through hall element creating a low of .75 and a high of 2.5 volts. 


48 pulse incremental wheel incorporated in wheel bear¬ 
ing cover for contaminant protection. 48 pulses = one 
complete wheel revolution. 

Sensors identical to DSC II and ASC V systems. 

Sensors provide immediate vehicle speed recognition. 




9 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 













































Steering Angle Sensor (LEW) 


The sensor is equipped with a processor 
and is directly linked to the CAN bus to com¬ 
municate with the DSC III module. 


The Steering angle sensor is mounted at the 
bottom of the steering spindle (in front of the 
flex coupling). 



CAN BUS MICROPROCESSOR 


The sensor still utilizes two potentiometers to determine the steering angle and the rate of 
steering. These are the raw signals the CAN Bus microprocessor utilizes to create the steer- 



The sensor requires calibration after repairs to the steering or suspension system (found in 
DIS Service Functions). Once the calibration is completed the sensor now also sends an 
identification number over the CAN bus to the DSC III module. The ID provides confirma¬ 
tion in the DSC module that the steering angle sensor is properly calibrated. 

If the ID differs due to component swapping it will not be possible to enter the DSC system 
for diagnosis. The DIS will request that the steering angle sensor be recalibrated using the 
service functions. Once complete a new ID number is generated and the DSC III control 
module and Steering angle sensor are properly mated. 

The DSC III logic checks the plausibility of the steering angle sensor against the other DSC 
III inputs (front wheel speeds, rotation and lateral acceleration sensors). If battery voltage 
is interrupted, the current steering wheel rotation is recalculated by the DSC module eval¬ 
uating the front wheel speeds. 

Replacement steering angle sensors must be ZCS coded when installed in the vehicle prior 
to the calibration procedure. 


10 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 









Brake Fluid Level Warning Switch 




IT 



A new fluid level switch is incorporated into the reservoir cap. 
With sufficient fluid level the reed contact is closed. 

When level drops below allowable limits, switch opens. 



Since the normal position is closed, this circuit is monitored 
for shorts to + and ground. 


TheLCM constantly monitors the input. If the ground signal is momentary, the LCM sig¬ 
nals the Instrument cluster of the condition. The instrument cluster then informs the DSC 
III control module over the CAN bus. If the signal is received just prior to the activation of 
the charge pump, the charge pump activation is delayed. 


If the signal is present for more then 25 seconds, the LCM issues two I BUS message for 
the Instrument Cluster: 


1. Post "Brake Fluid Level" in the Matrix display 

2. Notify the DSC III via CAN that the Fluid level has been low for more than 25 seconds. 

The DSC III control module immediately switches DSC III functions off and continuously illu¬ 
minates the DSC indicator in the cluster. 


11 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 




































































Instrument Cluster Warning Indicators 



BRAKE ABS 


1/min 

xlOOO 


UNLEA i GASOLINE ONLY] 


SERVICE 

ENGINE 

SOON 


Three warning indicator lamps are arranged in the instrument cluster: 

DSC lamp: Indicates fault in DSC or system disabled by the switch 
ABS lamp: Indicates a fault in the ABS system. 

ABL"BRAKE" lamp: 


This lamp is a general brake warning and illuminates two different colors 


Red indicates low brake fluid or hand brake engaged. 


Yellow indicates DSC/ABS fault or system disabled by the switch 


The DSC and yellow ABL lamp are controlled by the DSC III control unit via the CAN bus. 
The ABS lamp is controlled directly by the DSC III control unit via hardwire. 


12 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 




















CAN Interface 

The M K60 is connected to the CAN bus for communication with the AGS, DME control 
module, Steering Angle Sensor and the Instrument Cluster. 

The CAN bus allows all of the connected control modules to send and receive information 
and commands. 

Communication with the M K60 includes: 

DME - The DME sends current engine torque. M K 60 commands the DM E to reduce 
(ASC/DSC) or raise (M SR) engine torque. 

AGS - The M K60 commands the AGS to suppress shifts during regulation. 

LEW - The M K60 receives steering angle information. 

KOMBI - The M K60 commands the instrument cluster to activate or deactivate the 
warning lamps. 

All four wheels speed signals are sent over the CAN bus for use by other modules. 


INSTRUMENT 




13 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 




















Principle of Operation 

The scope of control for the DSC III is comprised of three systems: 

ABS 

ASC+T 

DSC 


Based on signals coming from the various sensors the DSC III will determine which system 
is best suited to maintain control of the vehicle. 


In addition to the three basic systems, there are several sub-functions which are activated 
during very specific circumstances. The sub-functions are: 


CBC 
EBV 
M SR 
ADB 
DBC 
MBC 



MBC- DSC- DBC 


The ABS system can prevent wheel lock when braking by comparing the four active wheel 
speed sensors to the average vehicle speed. If a wheel is locking during braking or has 
dropped below a speed threshold programmed in the control unit ABS, braking will begin. 
ABS braking is possible when vehicle speeds are above 12 km/h (7mph). 

The function of ABS for All-Wheel Drive use has an additional variation. During braking on 
loose surfaces the wedge effect is helpful. Gravel ordirt will build up in front ofthe tire when 
the wheel is locked, creating an increased braking effect. The system allows the locking of 
one or both front wheels up to approx. 20km/h (12mph). This "poor road surface logic” 
does not affect steerability. As soon as the control unit detects steering wheel change, the 
ABS system regulates normally again. 


14 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 







ABS regulation has three phases: 

Pressure Build 
Pressure Hold 
Pressure Release 


Pressure Build already occurs during normal braking, so when ABS first intervenes it will 
start holding pressure by energizing the Inlet Valve. For example, if the right rear wheel is 
locking up, both Inlet Valves will be energized, regulating both wheels together. This logic 
is known as Select Low. Front wheels can be regulated individually as needed to prevent 
lockup. 

Energizing the Inlet Valve closes the brake fluid passage to the calipers and traps the fluid 
at the current pressure, thus not allowing the brake pressure to rise any further. 

If the wheel speed does not increase, the Pressure Release phase begins. 

Pressure Release occurs when the control unit energizes the Outlet Valve while continuing 



to hold the Inlet Valve closed. The trapped brake fluid is released out of the calipers reduc¬ 
ing braking pressure. 

At the same time the pump is switched on which draws in the released brake fluid and 
pumps it back into the pressure build-up circuit restoring the volume of brake fluid again in 
front of the Inlet valve. 

Depending on conditions the ABS system may cycle between these three phases from 3 
to 12 times a second to prevent wheel lock. 


15 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 






ABS Sub-functions 


Corner Brake Control (CBC) 

CBC can occur if the vehicle is cornering and ABS regulation is not taking place. 

If the control unit detects transverse acceleration in excess of 0.6g and the brakes are 
applied, CBC prevents a build up in brake pressure to the inside rear wheel. This prevents 
the vehicle from entering into an unstable situation that can lead to Oversteer. 

The DSC III accomplishes this by closing the Inlet Valve, thus not allowing brake pressure 
to increase at the brake caliper. 

The difference in braking force between the two rear wheels creates a yaw force that 
opposes the oversteer and allows the vehicle to handle neutrally. 



16 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 





















Electronic Brake Force Distribution (EBV) 

EBV will adjust brake pressure to the rear axle based on the rate of slow-down of the rear 
wheels, ensuring even brake force between the front and rear of the vehicle. 

The control unit monitors the wheel speed when the brakes are applied and compares the 
deceleration rate of the front and rear axle to determine required regulation. 

If the vehicle is moderately to fully loaded, the rear axle will take longer to slow down, rear 
wheel brakes then can be applied at a higher pressure. 

If the vehicle is lightly loaded, a similar brake pressure would be too great and result in an 
unstable situation. 

If EBV control intervention is required, the control unit cycles the intake valve on the rear 
brake calipers to prevent further build-up. 

Benefits of EBV are 

Enhanced braking due to an even distribution of brake force. 

Rear wheel brake size can be increased. 

Front and rear brakes wear at a similar rate. 


17 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



Automatic Stability Control (ASC+T) 

A5C prevents unintentional wheel slip of the drive wheels in every situation. 


The DSC III control unit determines if the vehicle is loosing traction due to excessive longi¬ 
tudinal wheel slip based on input from the wheel speed sensors. An ASC regulating 
sequence is initiated if the wheel slip exceeds the control units stored allowable values. 


The DSC III can control longitudinal wheel slip by two means: 


Automatic stability Control ASC. Engine Intervention 


Automatic Differential Brake ADB. Brake intervention 


ASC Engine Intervention 

Engine torque may be reduced by: 

Reducing the throttle opening angle 
Retarding the ignition 

Canceling individual cylinders by fuel injection cutout. 

The DSC III control unit determines the amount of torque reduction that is 
necessary and sends the request for regulation to the DM E via the CAN bus 


ADB Brake Intervention 

The ADB is an automatic differential lock that improves traction. The slipping wheel is 
braked by pressure built up in the hydraulic unit. The drive torque can be transferred to the 
wheel with the greater traction, which can transmit drive power to the road. This function 
acts much like a limited slip differential. 

Brake intervention is applied to the individual wheel which is loosing traction by 
regulating the brake calipers in three phases: 

Pressure Build 

Pressure Hold 

Pressure Release 


18 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



When brake intervention is necessary, the axle not being regulated must be isolated from 
the Pressure Build sequence in the hydraulic unit. This is accomplished by closing both 
Inlet Solenoid Valves for that axle. 

Here is an example of an ADB brake intervention at the left rear wheel: 

The Changeover Valve forthe rearbrake circuit, the right rearand both front Inlet Valves 
are energized and closed. 

The rear brake circuit Intake Valve is energized and opened. 

The Return/Pressure pump is activated and draws brake fluid through the open Intake 
Valve from the Master Cylinder (via the Central Valve) and delivers the pressurized fluid to 
the open Inlet Valve braking the left rear wheel. 

Pressure Hold and Pressure Release are done by cycling the Inlet and Outlet Valves 
similar to the ABS sequence described previously. 

The drive torque can be distributed to the wheels with high friction coefficients (traction). 

Transversal differential-lock function. 



COEFFICIENT OF FRICTION 


19 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 





Longitudinal differential-lock function 

By performing brake intervention at 
the axle with a low friction coeffi¬ 
cient, drive torque can be transmit¬ 
ted to the front wheels. 


Longitudinal and transversal 
differential-lock function 

By performing brake intervention 
at the diagonally opposing wheels 
with a low friction coefficient, drive 
torque can be transmitted to the 
two wheels with more traction. 



COEFFICIENT OF FRICTION 



HIGH I JdA li HIGH 




COEFFICIENT OF FRICTION 


20 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 






















ASC Sub-function 


Engine Drag Torque Reduction (MSR) 

If the vehicle is driven in low gear when coasting down hill, or if there is a sudden shift to a 
lower gear, the wheels may be slowed down by the engine braking effect to rapidly. This 
could result in an unstable situation. 

If the front wheels are turning faster than the rear wheels the DSC III control unit signals the 
DM E via the CAN bus to raise the engine torque. DM E cancels fuel cut-off and allows the 
engine speed to increase, this allows the drive wheels to accelerate to match the speed of 
the non-driven wheels. 


MSR regulation is cancelled if the brake pedal or hand brake is applied. 


Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 


With the introduction of DSC systems, lateral dynamics were taken into account for the first 
time. The DSC III system will initiate a DSC regulation sequence if the control unit detects 
a difference between the drivers desired turning angle and the actual rotation angle of the 
vehicle. The control unit determines vehicle stability based on: 


Steering wheel angle 
Wheel speed 

Transverse acceleration forces 


Rotation angle and speed (yaw) 

Once the control unit determines that the vehicle is in an unstable situation, it also 
identifies whether it is oversteering or understeering. This distinction is important because 
it determines which control strategy should be used to help stabilize the vehicle. 

DSC regulation consist of: 

Engine intervention 

Engine and brake intervention (any wheel) 

Brake intervention 


21 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



Understeer 

Understeer occurs when the driver wishes to turn a corner, but despite the front wheels 
being turned in the direction of the curve, the vehicle continues its forward track. This 
occurs when the front wheels no longer have sufficient lateral locating force (traction). 


The DSC III can identify the situation and initiate a corrective action based on engine torque 
reduction followed by a controlled brake intervention sequence if needed. 

Engine torque reduction is carried out by the DM E from a request by the DSC via the CAN 
bus. The DM E sends the torque reduction confirmation back to the DSC. 

Brake intervention is carried out by the DSC III hydraulic unit if the driver is not actively 
braking. An example of a brake intervention at the inside rear wheel is as follows: 

All Inlet Valves are closed except for the right rear inlet. 

Intake Valve for rear circuit is opened. 

Both Changeover Valves are closed. 

Return pump operated. 


3 vehicle UNDERSTEER CORRECTION 

COMESOUT 


OF TURN 
SUCCES- 
FULLY 


WITH DSC III 


1. VEHICLE APPROACHES TURN: 

- Driver steers into turn 

- Brakes are applied 



WITHOUT 
DSC III 


- regulated brake slows 
wheel down (and helps to 
reduce vehicle speed). Wheel on 
outside of curve speeds up due to power transfer thru differential. 
Vehicle pivots in favor of curve. Combined, this forces the vehicle into the turn. 


22 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 


J ust as an ASC regulation, DSC brake intervention carries out: 
Pressure Build 
Pressure Hold 
Pressure release 


LOW BRAKE 
FLUID SIGNAL 



23 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 































































Oversteer 


Oversteer occurs when the driver wishes to turn a corner and the tail of the vehicle slides 
outward, leading the turn. This is caused by the rear tires loosing traction and not being 
able to hold against the centrifugal force acting upon the vehicle. 

The DSC III can identify the situation and initiate a corrective action based on engine torque 
reduction followed by a controlled brake intervention sequence if needed. 

Engine torque reduction is carried out by the DM E from a request by the DSC via the CAN 
bus. The DM E sends the torque reduction confirmation back to the DSC. 


3. VEHICLE COMES 
OUT OF TURN 
SUCCESFULLY 

WITH DSC III 


OVERSTEER CORRECTION 


1. VEHICLE APPROACES TURN AT HIGH RATE OF SPEED: 
- Driversteers into turn and applies brakes to slow down. 



2D. The torque reduction and rear brake regulation 
should stabilize the vehicle at this point. If not 
the left front wheel has a high degree of lateral 
locating force and is momentarily regulated. 

This action deliberately causes the wheel to shed 
a calculated degree of it's locating force. This 
counteracts oversteer yaw at this wheel and also 
aids in slowing the vehicle down to correct it. 


2B. Driver tries to compensate by oversteering which 
diminishes lateral locating force even further. 
Simultaneously, rear of car starts to slide out. 

2C. DSC III determines an OVERSTEER condition. 
Engine torque is reduced via CAN Bus signalling. 
Outside rear wheel is momentarily regulated to 
counteract severe yaw angle (also helps to reduce 
drive torque further.) 


24 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



DSC Sub-functions 
Dynamic Brake System (DBS) 

DBS is designed to assist the driver in emergency braking situations by automatically 
increasing pressure to the vehicles brake system. This allows the vehicle to stop in the 
shortest distance possible. DBS was first available in 1999 Bosch DSC III 5.7 systems. 

The DBS system contains two functions: Dynamic Brake Control and Maximum Brake 
Control. DBS functions are programmed into the DSC III control unit and require no addi¬ 
tional hardware over conventional DSC. 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

The DBC function is designed to provide an increase in braking pressure up to the ABS 
threshold during rapid (emergency) braking situations. The DSC III control unit monitors the 
inputs from the brake light switch and the brake pressure sensor. The triggering criteria for 
activation of DBC is, how rapidly is the brake pressure increasing with an application of the 
brake pedal. The triggering conditions are: 

Brake light switch on. 

Brake pressure in the master cylinder above threshold. 

Brake pressure build-up speed above threshold. 

Vehicle road speed above 3mph (5km/h). 

Pressure sensor self test completed and sensor not faulted. 

Vehicle traveling forward. 

Not all of the wheels in ABS regulation range. 

If the threshold for DBC triggering is achieved, the DSC III control unit will activate a 
pressure build-up intervention by activating the pre-charge and return pump. The pressure 
at all wheels is increased up to the ABS regulation point. This ensures that the maximum 
brake force is applied to the vehicle. 

During DBC the rear axle is controlled with Select-Low logic and the front wheels are 
regulated individually. DBC will continue until: 

The driver releases the brake pedal. 

Brake pressure falls below threshold. 

Vehicle road speed below 3mph. 

DBC will also be switched off if a fault occurs in with any of the necessary input sensors. 
A fault in DBC will illuminate the "BRAKE” (ABL) lamp yellow to warn the driver, depending 
on the failure the DSC lamp may be illuminated as well. 


25 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



Maximum Brake Control (MBC) 

The M BC function is designed to support driver initiated braking by building up pressure in 
the rear brake circuit when the front wheels are already in AB5 regulation. 

The additional braking pressure is designed to bring the rear wheels up to the ABS 
regulation point shortening the stopping distance. The M BC function is triggered when the 
brakes are applied more slowly than the threshold needed for a DBC regulation. The trig¬ 
gering conditions are: 

Both front wheels in ABS regulation. 

Vehicle road speed above 3mph (5km/h). 

DBC and pressure sensor initialization test successful. 

Vehicle traveling forward. 

Rear wheels not in ABS regulation. 

If the threshold for M BC triggering is achieved, the DSC III control unit will activate a 
pressure build-up intervention by activating the return pump. The pressure at the rear 
wheels is increased up to the ABS regulation point. This ensures that the maximum brake 
force is applied to the vehicle. 

The M BC function will be switched off if: 

Front wheels drop out of ABS regulation. 

The driver releases the brake pedal. 

Brake pressure falls below threshold. 

Vehicle road speed below 3mph. 

MBC will also be switched off if a fault occurs in with any of the necessary input sensors. 
A fault in M BC will illuminate the "BRAKE” (ABL) lamp yellow to warn the driver, depending 
on the failure the DSC lamp may be illuminated as well. 


26 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



X5 DSC New Functions 

Hill Descent Control 


Hill Decent Control (HDC) is designed for off road use to automatically slow the vehicle and 
maintain a steady speed on steep gradients. This function allows the driver to focus on 
steering and controlling the vehicle without having to use the brakes to slow the vehicle. 


HDC is activated manually through the push button switch located in the center switch 
panel located in the console. When activated, the vehicle’s speed is held to approximately 
5 M PH by the DSC system pulsing the brakes to maintain the speed. 


The following conditions must be met before the HDC will activate: 


Push button pressed - LED "ON” 
Vehicle speed: <25 MPH 
Accelerator pedal pressed <15% 
Downhill driving recognized 


Downhill is recognized from the vehicle's speed and engine load from the engine control 
module. The accelerator pedal and engine load signals are passed overthe CAN bus to the 
DSC control module. 


The HDC switch can be pressed at speeds < 37M PH and the LED will come on to indicate 
standby mode. However the system will not activate until the vehicle's speed is below 25. 

The driver can accelerate with HDC active up to approximately 20% engine load. The HDC 
will stop regulating as long as the driver is requesting a speed increase. If the vehicle's 
speed is > 37 M PH, the HDC function is automatically switched OFF. 



27 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 






Automatic Differential Braking 


On dry pavement with no wheel slip, the vehicle’s driving torque is split 68% rear and 32% 
front through the planetary gear differential transfer case. 


If one ormore wheels spin orslip, the DSC will activate a regulation process and the brakes 
on the effected wheel(s) will be pulsed. The driving torque will be distributed through the dif¬ 
ferential to the remaining wheels with a good coefficient of friction 


The driving torque will be applied through the differential as follows: 


Three wheels - with one wheel spinning. 

On two diagonal wheels with two wheels spinning on different axles. 
One axle only with two wheels spinning on the same axle. 


Once the spin or slip is under control, the drive torque will again be applied to all wheels. 



28 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 




























































29 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 











































































































Traction Control 


The traction control feature of the DSC III on the X5 cannot be switched OFF with the DSC 
switch. Pressing the button will only switch off the dynamic stability control function of the 
DSC. 

The traction control feature is needed at all times to provide anti-spin control especially 
when driving the vehicle off road. The DSC warning lamp in the instrument cluster will still 
come on when the system is switched off manually or there is a fault in the system. 

Off road traction control or HDC regulation places an additional load on the brakes. To pre¬ 
vent overheating of the brakes and rotors, the temperature of the rotors is calculated over 
time from the road speed and amount of brake application. If the temperature of one or 

more rotors goes above 600° C, the traction control or HDC function forthat wheel will be 

cancelled temporarily. Once the temperature of the rotor goes below 500° C, the traction 
application will be re-activated. 


The normal braking function (including ABS) is always active at any temperatures. 


Off-Road ABS Control Module Programming 

The programming forABS regulation have changed to allow a higherthreshold forABS reg¬ 
ulation when driving off-road in loose gravel or dirt. A locked wheel is more effective in slow¬ 
ing or stopping the vehicle because of the wedge that is built up in front of the tire. 


The programming in the DSC control module allows one or both front wheel(s) to lock up 
to a speed of 12 M PH as long as the vehicle is traveling straight ahead. If the DSC control 
module receives a signal from the steering angle sensor indicating a turn, ABS regulation 
will activate to prevent the lock and allow the vehicle to be steered. 


30 

Braking Systems 



Diagnosis 

The following diagnostic functions are available using the DISplus or GT-1 


Control Unit Functions: 

Expert mode diagnosis available 
at any time during troubleshoot¬ 
ing. To enter: press the Control 
Unit Functions button at the 
right lower corner of the screen. 

The contents are: 

• Identification 

• Delete Fault Memory 

• Read Fault Memory 

• Component Activation 

• Status queries (requests) 



Service Functions: 

Provides access to specialized test modules 
used as post repair procedures. To enter: 
Function Selection 
Service Functions 
Chassis 

Dynamic Stability Control 
The contents are: 

Connection Speed Sensor: A test to 
verify the proper wiring to the wheel 
speed sensors 

Connection Brake Lines: A test to 
verify the proper brake pipe connections 
to the hydraulic unit. 

Adjustment Functions: Test modules 
to initialize certain components after 
repair work is performed 
Steering Angle Sensor 
Lateral Acceleration Sensor 
Pressure Sensors 


Test Modules: Faults with the M K60 system can be diagnosed using fault or symptom driven test 
modules. To begin diagnosis: 

• Perform the Quick Test. 

• Select Vehicle Symptom from the Symptom Selection page. 

• Select Test Module from Test Plan page. 

• Press the Test Schedule Button. 

Test Modules are configured in the E46 diagnosis concept. 


31 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 










Coding 


Coding must be performed after replacement 
of the DSC III control module or the steering 
angle sensor. ZCS coding is found in the 
Coding and Programming selection from the 
start screen or when pressing the Change 
button. Follow on-screen instructions for 
initialization of components after completing 
the coding process. 


Adjustment Functions 



Adjustment (initialization) of certain components is required when: 


Replacing the DSC III Control Unit. 


Replacing/Re-coding the Steering Angle Sensor. 
Replacing Rotation/Lateral Acceleration Sensor. 


Steering Angle Sensor 

The steering angle sensor requires an offset adjustment afterthe sensor has been replaced, 
coded or after repairs to the steering or suspension system. The offset adjustment informs 
the steering angle sensor processor of the straight ahead position of the front wheels. 

The adjustment is performed by completing the Test Module found in Service Functions. 
Once the adjustment is complete, the sensorsends an identification numberoverthe CAN 
bus to the DSC control unit. The ID provides confirmation that the steering angle sensor is 
coded and has successfully completed the adjustment procedure. 

Special Tools 


Special Tools available for the Bosch DSC III 5.7 consist of: 


42 Pin V-Cable 34 5 240 



W34 5 240 


60 Pin Break-Out-Box 



32 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 


















































review Questions 

1. Desribe the operation of the DSC button on the X5 DSC III system 7 


2. Describe the activation criteria for HDC: 


3. What type of wheel speed sensors are used in the X5 DSC III system 7 


4. What is the difference in ABS control logic for the X5 DSC III in comparison to the 2wd 
models 7 


5. What service procedures are required when replacing a steering angle sensor 7 


6. Describe the operation of the "Automatic Differential Lock" function. 


33 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



Review Questions 

7. List the various sensors used to detect oversteer/understeer in the DSC III systems. 


8. What is the purpose of the DBS sub-function 7 


9. What is the handbrake input signal used for 7 


10. What is the criteria for M BC activation 7 


11. Briefly explain Corner Braking Control (CBC): 


34 

X5 Dynamic Stability Control 



