Table of Contents 


Level Control Systems 


Subject Page 

Hydraulic Level Control System. 

Air Suspension Systems (EHC). 


Initial Print Date:3/02 


Revision Date: 





Model: Level Control Systems 

Production: E32 750iL 88-94 (Hydro-Pneumatic) 
E32 740iL 93-94 
E38 750iL 95-01 
E38 740iL 95-01 
E 34 Touring 525iT, 530iT 
E39 Touring 528iT, 540iT, 525iT (EHC I) 
E53 X53.0i, X5 4.4i and X5 4.6is (EHC I) 
E53 X5 3.0i, X5 4.4i (EHCII) 

E66 745Li, 760Li from 03 EHC 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you should be able to 
Identify BMW Level Control Systems 


2 

Level Control Systems 




Level Control Systems 

Purpose of the System 

The primary function of Level Control Systems is to maintain the height of the vehicle as 
closely as possible to a predetermined level under all load conditions. 

This constant level allows the suspension system to maintain the alignment geometry. 
Camber and Toe in are minimally affected when the ride height is consistent. In addition, 
the headlight range stays consistent throughout the various operating conditions. 

The Level Control System is designed to operate in the event of static changes such as 
when passengers are entering or exiting the vehicle or quasi-static such as s when the fuel 
tank is emptying while driving. 

The Level Control System come in various configurations such as hydraulic (hydropneu- 
matic) or pneumatic only systems. 

Hydropneumatic systems use high pressure hydraulic fluid which is dampened by a gas 
cushion from a nitrogen charged accumulator. These system use and electro-hydraulic 
pump or an engine driven piston pump. These systems are installed as follows: 

Hydropneumatic Level Control System with electro-hydraulic pump This 
type of system is used on the early 5 Series vehicles (E12 and E28), the 6 Series 
(E24) and the early 7 Series (E23). This system uses an electric motor, pump and 
an expansion tank which is connected by hydraulic lines to the rear spring struts. 
The rear spring struts are also connected to a pair of pressure accumulators which 
are "Nitrogen Charged". There is a control switch which mounted on the rear axle 
which monitors the position of the stabilizer bar. Changes in ride height are detect¬ 
ed and the system is regulated to maintain the correct level. During prolonged dyna¬ 
mic movements during acceleration and braking, the level control system is disabled 
by an acceleration sensor (mercury switch) and brake light input to the hydraulic 
control unit. 

Hydropneumatic Level Control System with engine driven piston pump This 
system can be found on the 7 Series (E32 and E38) and the 5 Series Touring (E34). 
This configuration is similar in operation to the previous system with a few changes. 
There hydraulic pressure now comes from an engine driven piston pump. This 
pump is mounted in tandem with the power steering (radial type) pump. The pres¬ 
surized fluid is sent to a control valve which distributes the fluid to the rear spring 
struts and pressure accumulators. The control valve is attached to the rear sway 
bar by a lever, changes in ride height will move the lever which will influence fluid flow 
to the spring struts. 

The next generation of BMW Level Control Systems evolved into pneumatic only systems 
which are referred to as EHC. EHC will be discussed later in this module. 


3 

Level Control Systems 



Hydropneumatic Rear Leveling System 

This module pertains to the hydropneumatic rear suspension system with the engine dri¬ 
ven piston pump. The earlier system using the electro-hydraulic pump will not be dis¬ 
cussed. 

The self-leveling suspension system is designed to maintain vehicle ride height under 
loaded conditions. 

The system is fully hydraulic, utilizing a tandem oil pump to supply pressure to both the 
suspension system and power steering system. 

The system is installed on: 

E32 - 735 iL, 740iL and 750iL 

E34 - Touring 525i and 530i 

E38 - 740 iL and 750iL 



4 

Level Control Systems 
















System Components 

The system consists of the following components: 

Tandem Hydraulic Pump 
Oil Reservoir 
Pressure Reservoir (2) 

Control Valve with Regulating Linkage 
Camber Warning Switch (E32 and E34) 

Rear Shock with LAD M odule 

Expansion Hose, Pressure Lines and Distribution block 



Expansion 


Component Layout E32 


Pressure rciKjRni^i 

Hear 

Camber warning 




□ islnbul:: r 


Rear sPcck 


Sl r nbili7Prr bnr 

Pressure linos 


LAD Module 
Pressure reservoir 


I reservmi 


Regulating linkage 


5 

Level Control Systems 



Tandem Pump 

The tandem pump consists of a vane pump for power steering and a radial pump for self¬ 
leveling suspension. Both pumps are driven by the same shaft and have separate oil feeds 
for each system. 

The radial pump has the capacity to pump 102 liters of oil per minute. The maximum pres¬ 
sure is limited to 1900 Psi (130bar) by the pressure regulator located on the control valve. 



SELF LEVELING 


POWER STEERING 


t 


t 

FLUID 

RESERVOIR 


6 

Level Control Systems 



Oil Reservoir 

The single reservoir stores fluid for both the self-leveling and power steering systems. 
Incorporated in the reservoir, is a reed type level warning switch. If the fluid level drops and 
the contact closes, a signal is sent to the check control module and a warning will be dis¬ 
played in the instrument cluster matrix display. 

The hydraulic fluid required for the self-leveling suspension system varies between models 
and installed equipment. The following fluid is used: 

Pentosin CHF 7.1 

Pentosin CHF 115 


Power Steering Fluid (BMW! 


This type of fluid is used because of its 
low viscosity and low noise characteris¬ 
tics. It cannot be mixed with other fluid 
types. 

The self-leveling system fluid type is 
always marked on the top of the hydraulic 
reservoir. Always use the correct fluid 
never mix with another fluid. 

When filling the system, be aware of the 
status of the level control system. If the 
vehicle is loaded, the level will appear to 
be low. Do not fill the system unless it is 
in the resting state. Otherwise, an over¬ 
flow situation could result. 


Scro-w 



Rn-turn line 


RILE! 


Ffisa llns 


ESsctiical connector 


7 

Level Control Systems 



pressure reservoirs (A) on each strut incorporate a memPrane and are nitrogen 
hey are designed to absorb the oil which is expelled from the struts during do 
ovement, the gas in the reservoirs is compressed and pushes the oil back into 
uring upward movement. 









Control Valve 


The rotary control valve located on the rear suspension has three positions: 

Raise 

Level 

Lower 

The control lever is attached to the rear stabilizer bar to sense vehicle loading. When the 
vehicle is loaded (passengeror luggage)the suspension drops and the stabilizerbartwists. 
The control lever is moved in the "raise" direction. 


With the engine running, oil flows from the pump to the bottom of the rear struts. The body 
of the car is lifted and the control lever returns to the level position. 


In the level position, the oil 
bypasses the valve and 
returns to the reservoir 
through the return line. 

A minimum pressure of 
440 Psi (30bar) is main¬ 
tained at all times. If ser¬ 
vice is reguired, a bleed off 
valve is installed on the 
control valve to drain the 
systems pressure. 



9 

Level Control Systems 




•11 




LAD Module 



The load dependent module is a control valve 
that regulates the flow of oil between the strut 
and the pressure reservoir. 

The control piston in the (LAD) moves in rela¬ 
tion to the pressure applied from the pump. 
This movement will regulate the tension on the 
inner spring of the module. With only a low 
pressure applied, a small amount of tension 
will be applied to the spring. Little flow resis¬ 
tance will be developed between the strut and 
pressure reservoir. The damping force is soft. 


With a high pressure applied to the control piston, 
the flow resistance is high and the damping force 
will be stiff. 




11 

Level Control Systems 











































Camber Warning Switch (E32 AND E34 Touring) 


The self-leveling suspension systems used in the E32 and the E34 Touring are eguipped 
with a camber warning switch. The switch is mounted on the right rear axle support and 
connected through a rod to the semi-trailing arm. 


The function of the switch is to warn the driver of an 
overload condition or an unsafe driving situation. 

If the switch detects a rear wheel camber of-3.5 deg. 
A signal is sent to the check control module and dis¬ 
played on the dash. 

A time delay of 8 minutes is incorporated to prevent 
the warning from being displayed while driving 
through turns. 

The E38 does not use the camber warning switch 
due to the design of the rear suspension. 



12 

Level Control Systems 







Air Suspension Systems (EHC) 

Purpose of the System 

Air Suspension systems were first introduced on the 1999 E39 Sportwagon. Since then 
the E53 (X5) and E65/E66 (7Series) models were available with this new system. EHC are 
available is two configurations, the Single Axle Air Suspension System and the Dual Axle 
Air Suspension System. The Dual Axle (EHC II) system is only available on E53 X5 models 
from the 2002 model year. 

EHC systems can be found on the following vehicles: 

E39 Sportwagon 528i, 525i and 540i from the 1999 Model Year (Single Axle) 

E53 X5 3.Oi and 4.4i from the 2000 Model Year (Single Axle) 

E53 X5 4.6iS from 2002 (Single Axle) 

E53 X5 3.Oi and 4.4i from 2002 (Dual Axle EHC II) 

E65/E66 from 2003 Model Year (Single Axle) 

There are some functional changes with these systems. On EHC, the entire axle load is 
borne by the air suspension. The underlying control philosophy of EHC is "Control only 
when absolutely necessary". This means that brief changes in the ride height are not com¬ 
pensated (such as potholes). This avoids any unnecessary control operations. 

The advantages of air suspension are as follows: 

Control is independent of the vehicle engine 

Single-wheel control is possible 
Lateral locking is affected 

A distinction is made between load and drive states 
An inclined load is identified and corrected 
However, an inclination is not compensated 
Self diagnosis can be performed 
Diagnosis with DISplus orGT-1 is possible 

An automatic interruption of control takes place in case of cornering and wheel 
changes. 


13 

Level Control Systems 



EHC System Overview 



ENCAPSULATED 
AIR SUPPLY 
SYSTEM 


SEPARATE (L/R) 
AIR SUPPLY 
CIRCUITS 


AIR SPRINGS WITH 
1 LITER AIR 
RESERVOIRS 


EHC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 


REAR AXLE LEVEL 
SENSORS (HALL EFFECT) 


EHC I Single Axle Air Suspension E39/E53 



3 2 


4. Pressure Accumulator/ 
Valve Unit 

5. Front Axle Air Bellows 

6. Control Unit 


EHC II Dual Axle Air Suspension E53 


14 

Level Control Systems 









Single Axle EHC I System Components (E39/E53) 

The EHC system consists of the following components: 

EHC Control Module 

Air Springs (2) with Air Reservoirs 
Rear Axle Level Sensors 
Encapsulated Air Supply (LVA) 

Warning Indicator 

Control Module 

The Control Module is mounted in the module carrier box in the luggage compartment on 
the right side. It contains the processing electronics and final stages for operation of the 
EHC system. 

The control module receives the following inputs for its processing functions: 



15 

Level Control Systems 




The control module incorporates two filters (slow/rapid) for processing the input signals 
from the ride height sensors. Depending on the operating mode, either the slow or rapid fil¬ 
ter is used to check the need fora regulating sequence. 


The slow filter is used during the normal operation mode to prevent normal suspension trav¬ 
el from causing the system to make adjustments. 


The rapid filter is used during the pre-run and tailgate (LID) modes to ensure that the sus¬ 
pension is adjusted quickly while the vehicle is being loaded orchecked priorto operation. 


L LEVEL 
SENSOR 


R LEVEL 
SENSOR 


KL 30 KL31 


22 



GM III 


i- 

D 

o 

I- 

« 10 



SLOW FILTER 


RAPID FILTER 


MODE OF OPERATION 


- NORMAL x 
MODE 


SUPPRESSED 


PRE/POST 
RUN MODE f 

IMMEDIATE- 

- LID MODE LI 


SUPPRESSED 
OR IMMEDITATE 
OUTPUT 
CONTROL 


1 f 


16 

Level Control Systems 


EHC CM 










































Air Springs 

The air spring is made from a flexible rubber material. It 
forms an air tight cavity which provides the calculated 
spring rate reguired for the sport wagon. 

As the spring compresses downward the bottom edge 
of the rubber material rolls along the vertical surface of 
the base mount cylinder. 

Air is added or removed from the air spring through its 
top port. The top port of each spring is connected to a 
reservoir and the air supply pipes. The reservoirs are 
required to hold additional airdue to the compact design 
of the springs. 

Rear Axle Level Sensors 



ir 


Hall effect sensors are mounted on the left 
and right sides of the rear suspension for 
ride height detection. They are pivoted by a 
coupling rod through the rear axle swing 
arms. 

The hall sensors produce a varying voltage 
input to the control module as the suspen¬ 
sion height changes. 

If the vehicle is equipped with Xenon head¬ 
lights the right side sensor contains an 
additional sensor for the automatic head¬ 
light level adjustment system. 

Warning Displays 

If the system is faulted and off-line or set in the transport mode, the following is displayed 
Basic Cluster: A warning lamp indicator is illuminated used on the basic cluster. 

High Cluster: A message is posted in the high cluster matrix display. 






























Air Supply System (LVA) 

The air supply system is identified as the LVA in the diagnosis program and in the repair 
manual. It is mounted in the spare tire well compartment. The components are housed in 
a sound deadening carrier, through rubber bushings, to prevent operating noises from 
being transmitted through the vehicle's interior. 


With the exception of the compressor relay, individual replacement parts for the air supply 
system are not available. If diagnosis determines a defect in any of the other air system 
components, complete replacement is necessary. 


The air supply system consists of the following components 



Compressor assembly with; 

- Piston compressor 

- Electric motor 

- Air dryer (desiccator) 

- Pressure relief solenoid valve 

- Pressure maintenance valve 

- Check valves 

Compressor Relay (Replaceable) 

Solenoid Valve Block (2 - two way 
valves) 

Lines - including distributor 



18 

Level Control Systems 



Air Supply System (LVA) Operation 

The single stage piston compressor produces a maximum pressure of 13.5 Bar. The com¬ 
pressor is maintenance free - provided it is used in a dust free environment. This includes 
the compressor's intake air filter. 

The compressor is driven by a DC motorthat is controlled by the compressor relay through 
the control module. 

When the compressor is activated, the pressure builds up to a working pressure of 11.4 
Bar (+0.8/-1.5 Bar). This is controlled through the pressure maintenance valve. The air 
under pressure is fed through the dryer and check valve to the solenoid valve block forthe 
air springs. 

There is one solenoid valve in the valve block for each air strut. This allows the system to 
compensate for uneven loads in the vehicle and maintain the vehicles ride height at all 
times. 

Pressure is drained through the left or right solenoid valve (energized open) the pressure 
relief solenoid valve, restrictor, check valve and dryer back to the inlet side of the compres¬ 
sor pump. 


LVA Location X5 



19 

Level Control Systems 






20 

Level Control Systems 
































































































EHC System Operation 

A fully functional EHC system is controlled by one of three different modes of operation. 
The operation mode is selected by the control module based on current conditions provid¬ 
ed by the monitored input signals. The main modes of operation are: 

• Pre-Run/Post-Run Mode 

• Normal Mode 

• Tailgate Mode 

Two special operating modes are also included in the control module programming. 

• New/replacement mode (pre ZCS encoded). This mode provides basic operation. 

• Transport Mode - Transport mode is set at the factory and raises the vehicle 30mm to 
prevent vehicle damage during transportation. It must be deactivated with the DIS/ 
M 0 D 1 C prior to customer delivery. 

Pre-Run / Post-Run Mode 

The Pre-Run mode is activated when the vehicle is parked and the control module is in the 
sleep mode. Opening a doororthe tailgate initiates a system wake up and the control mod¬ 
ule comes on-line. 

The control module performs a self-check of the control electronics and sensors. If no fault 
is found, the system will check the ride height and institute a rapid regulation if the height 
varies by more than 40mm. 


KL 30 KL31 


22 



•Control module 
in sleep mode 
•Tailgate or Door 
opened 
•KL 15 - OFF 
Engine - Off 


L LEVEL 
SENSOR 


R LEVEL 
SENSOR 



MODE OF OPERATION 
- PRE/POST RUN MODE 


1. K-Bus signaling provides 
control module wake up and 
vehicle data status. Control 
module checks fault memory. 


2. EHC control module 
determines the vehicle 
height and compares it 
with stored values. 


3. Control module will rapidly raise the vehicle if the monitored vehicle height is lower 
than the stored value by more than 40mm. If the monitored level is not correct but 
less than 40mm the control module will adjust the vehicle level once the engine is 
running to prevent unnecessary battery loads. 


m 

x 

o 

o 


21 

Level Control Systems 

























Normal Mode Operation 


Once the rear lid is closed, KL 15 switched ON and the engine started, the system switch¬ 
es into the normal operation mode. In the normal mode, the control module will constantly 
monitor the input signals from the ride height sensors and will activate a correction if the 
ride height deviates by at least 10mm. 



MODE OF OPERATION 
- NORMAL MODE 


1. K-Bus signaling provides 
changed vehicle data status 


L LEVEL R LEVEL 
SENSOR SENSOR 





2. EHC control module 


continually monitors 
the vehicle height 
through the slow filter. 


3. Control module will raise or lower the vehicle height if it deviates more than 10mm 
for a long duration of time. The constant rapid signal changes caused by uneven road 
surfaces are filtered out. 


m 

x 

o 

o 


Tailgate Operating Mode 

The tailgate operating mode is activated if the gate is opened with KL - 15 On and the 
engine running. The difference between this mode and the normal operating mode is the 
response time is rapid instead of slow . 



KL 30 


•Tailgate OPENED 
•KL 15 - ON 
•Engine - ON 
•Roadspeed = 0 



MODE OF OPERATION 


-TAILGATE MODE 


1. K-Bus signaling provides 
changed vehicle data status. 


2. EHC control module 
switches from the slow 
filter to the rapid filter for 
vehicle height monitoring 


3. Control module will rapidly raise or lower the vehicle height if it deviates more than 
10mm. The rapid signal change from loading or unloading the cargo area causes the 
control module to rapidly respond to the change in vehicle height. 


m 

x 

o 

o 

2 


22 

Level Control Systems 

















































Special Operating Modes 

Assembly Line Mode (New control module) 

The assembly line mode refers to control module manufacturing. New control modules 
are stored in a deactivated state. The control programming is not active and must first 
be ZCS encoded. 

After installing a replacement control module, it must be coded using the DIS or MoDiC. 
The instrument cluster fault display will remain illuminated until the control module is 
coded. 

Transport Mode 

The vehicle rolls off the factory assembly line with the EHC control module in the trans¬ 
port mode. The transport mode inflates the air springs to a higher position (approx. 
30mm higher) than the normal mode in order to avoid damage during transit. 

The system will not respond to any inputs that would alterthe height of the vehicle. The 
fault indicator (base cluster) is illuminated or instrument cluster matrix display (high clus¬ 
ter) provides the message "Leveling System" to draw attention to the transport mode 
setting. 

The Service Functions section of the diagnosis program is used to activate/deactivate 
the transport mode. Once the transport mode is deactivated, check the vehicle Ride 
Height Offset making sure the vehicle rear axle height is to specification. 


Control Interrupts 

Cornering 

To prevent unnecessary suspension adjustments while driving through corners, a "control 
interrupt" is built into the system. Above 30MPH the control module monitors the left/right 
ride height sensors for a difference of 30mm. Exceeding this difference will put the system 
into a control interrupt and no adjustment will take place. The control interrupt last for a 
duration of 5 minutes. 

Vehicle Lifting 

The ride height control is interrupted when the vehicle is raised on a lift or with a jack. The 
system monitors the ride height sensor inputs and when the height limit of 90 mm is 
exceeded, the control is switched OFF until the vehicle is lowered again. 


23 

Level Control Systems 



EHC Service Information 


Diagnosis/Coding 

The EHC control module is connected to the diagnostic link. The EHC control module 
activates the fault display in the instrument clusterto alert the operatorof the off-line sta¬ 
tus of the system. The EHC control module stores up to three electrical/electronic 
faults. 

Diagnosis/troubleshooting of EHC is carried out using the fault symptom troubleshoot¬ 
ing program of the M 0 D 1 C orDIS. The EHC system has an extensive diagnosis program. 

Replacement control modules are shipped in the factory mode. The control modules 
must be ZCS encoded using the DIS or MoDiC to activate the operating parameters. 


BMW Diagnosis FAULT SYMPTOMS 


Fault display in instrument cluster 
§3 Leakage in system 
I! Car positioned too high/too low on 
one/both side(s) 

Hi Compressor running noise too loud 
[H Compressor does not start up, 

compressor runs continually or too often 

|i?H None of the fault symptoms indicated 
is applicable. 

Do you want to continue troubleshooting? 

21 Yes 
I No 


_ 




GO HOE 



BMW Diagnosis TEST MODULES 


[ Control unit 

[ Voltage and earth supply of control 

| Height sensor, left 
| Hire, height sensor, left 
I Height sensor, right 
| Hire, height sensor, right 
[ Wire, consumer-cutout signal 
| K bus 

I) Air-supply system (LVA) 

| Voltage and earth supply of 
air-supply system (LVA) 

| Hire, drain valve 
| Hire, compressor relay 
| Wire, valve, left 
1| Hire, valve, right 
| Compressor relay 
i! Pneumatic springs, air pipework, 
screw connections 


A 


Rjllsaa l1ll D,c " m,ni i1l|aLnlll< Hi 


□ 




24 

Level Control Systems 

































































































































































DISplus/GT-1 Service Functions Program 

The Service Functions program of the DIS/M 0 D 1 C provides the Transport Mode activa- 
tion/deactivation and Ride Height Offset functions (see next page). 

Once the transport mode has been released, or if the system requires left to right side 
height adjustment, the ride height "OFFSET" must be carried out to ensure that the vehi¬ 
cles suspension has a base ride height level starting point. 

The "HEIGHT OFFSET" is adjusted using the DIS or M 0 D 1 C. The procedure is as follows: 

Place the vehicle on a level surface unloaded. 

Access the Height Offset program in the service function menu. 

Measure the base ride height from the lower edge ofthe wheel housing to the centerof 
the wheel hub. 

Check measured height against the specifications listed 

Use the DIS/M oDiC to correct the ride height if the value differs from the listed specifi¬ 
cation. 


jj | | Services |"| 


BMW Diagnosis HEIGHT OFFSET 




BMW Diagnosis HEIGHT OFFSET 


Additional information: 

Car must be in the normal position, 
i.e. in a compensated state. 

Car must be standing on a level surface. 

Instruction: 

One-sided loading and parking 
on uneven surfaces must be avoided: 

If necessary, wait until vehicle has 
corrected itself. 

Measure distance from lower edge of wheel 
house to wheel centre with tape measure. 


Specified ride le 
E39 saloon 
E39 touring 
E39 touring with 


360 mm +/- 3mm 
360 mm +/- 3mm 


0 [ 




A 


Ivj 


15= I 

FI 



25 

Level Control Systems 





































































































































































TIS Repair Manual Information 

The repair manual contains the following EHC specific sub-group repair information: 

00 General (general information, overview routing of pipes, tubes and components) 

12 Control and suspension system, rear (DIS referral, specific R&R procedures, etc.) 

13 Connecting Lines (specific R&R procedures) 

14 Electrical components (specific R&R procedures) 

22 Pump assembly (LVA) with container (LVA R&R procedure) 

90 Troubleshooting (system troubleshooting charts) 

The troubleshooting charts provided an additional reference when used in conjunction with 
the DIS program. 

The following screen samples are from the TIS repair manual section. 




26 

Level Control Systems 







Two Axle Air Suspension (E53 EHC II) 

Purpose of the System 

The two axle air suspension system (EHC2) offers advantages overthe single-axle air sus¬ 
pension with respect to ride comfort and off-road capability. 

Lowering the entire body makes it easier to enter, exit, load and unload the vehicle. 

The vehicle's off-road capability was improved by providing the possibility for increasing the 
ground clearance of the body. 

The drivercan now choose between three different ride levels which can be set with a rock¬ 
er switch, as reguired. Automatic ride-height control for payload compensation and 
automatic inclination compensation continue to be fitted. 

Deficits of the old system 

The automatic payload compensation facility for the single-axle air suspension did not per¬ 
mit driver control. The driver could not actively control the system to make it easier to enter 
and exit or load the vehicle. 

Ride level was compensated via the rear axle only. 

Advantages of the new system 

The new system allows the ride-height control system to be controlled actively by the dri¬ 
ver. 

The twin axle air suspension allows both axles to be lowered evenly and in parallel. 

As a result, it is easier for the occupants to enter, exit, load and unload the vehicle. 

On the E39, the load of the complete rearaxle was born forthe first time by airsuspension 
in combination with the optional ride height control system. The system was controlled 
automatically under all operation conditions, and there was no possibility for driver inter¬ 
vention on the X5, the rearaxle previously had single axle airsuspension only. The air sup¬ 
ply unit and the control unit were adopted from the E39. The air springs were adapted to 
the X5. 

There is a standard version and a sports version. 

The ride-height control system (EHC) was supplied as standard in combination with the 
M62 engine and is available as an optional extra in combination with the M54 engine. 

EHC2 is optional on both the M62 and M54 versions of the X5 and not available on the 
4.6is X5. 


27 

Level Control Systems 



System components 

The X5 Two Axle Air Suspension System (EHC2) utilizes the air supply unit from EHC 
mounted in the luggage compartment, with the following components added or modified: 

Air Supply Unit (with redesigned compressor and drier) 

Pressure Accumulator 

Valve Unit 

Ride Height Sensor 

Air Suspension Strut 

Control Unit 


Switch Assembly 



Pneumatic System of EHC2 


1. Air Supply Unit 

2. Rear Axle Air Bellows 

3. Ride Height Sensors 

4. Pressure Accumulator/ 
Valve Unit 

5. Front Axle Air Bellows 

6. Control Unit 


Air Supply Unit 

As on vehicles with single axle air suspension, the air supply unit is located in the luggage 
compartment under the spare wheel. As with the single axle air suspension, the auxiliary 
tanks for the rear air spring bellows are located in the luggage compartment. 

The air supply unit is configured similarly to the single axle air supply unit forthe ride-height 
control system of the E39, which is currently in production. 

The functions are implemented by activating a compressor and various valves in the air 
supply unit and on the air accumulator valve unit. 

The maximum pressure of the air supply unit is 21 bar. 


28 

Level Control Systems 



1. Pneumatic Drain Valve 

2. Electric Pilot Control Valve 

3. High Pressure Vent Valve 

4. Air Drier 

5. Compressor 

6. Sintered filter 

7. To Pressure Accumulator/Valve Unit NW Size of 

opening/tubing in mm. 


ti 5 4 7 

Air Supply Unit 

Pneumatic Drain Valve 

The Pneumatic Drain Valve is activated pneumatically by pressure from the control valve. 
This causes the drain valve to open allowing the pressure supply line to vent to atmosphere. 
This design allows for large air volumes to be discharged quickly and eliminates the need 
for a solenoid valve with high current consumption. 

The 21 bar pressure limiting valve is integrated in the drain valve. 

Electric Pressure Relief Valve 

The electrically activated pressure relief valve controls normal system pressure. The con¬ 
trol valve performs this function in conjunction with the drain valve. 

High Pressure Vent Valve 

The High Pressure Vent Valve serves as a comfort valve and is used to release system pres¬ 
sure after the accumulator has closed and the compressor is still running. When the high 
pressure vent valve has opened the compressor can be stopped quietly. 

Air Drier 

In the air drier, the air which is drawn in passes over a water absorptive filter material in the 
form of filter nodules which extract moisture from the air. As long as the air contains more 
moisture than the filter material, the individual nodules absorb and accumulate the mois¬ 
ture. When the air flows back, it is drier than the filter material, with the result that the air is 
re-humidified and the moisture is discharged into the open air. The maximum 
water storage capacity of the filter is 30 g. 

29 

Level Control Systems 





Compressor with Drier 


Top: Air Drying 

Bottom: Dissipation of water to air 


Compressor 

Compressor operation is the same as in EHC with the following technical improvements: 

Addition of a temperature sensor (Located on the compressor cylinder head) 
Temperature sensor switches off the compressor at temperatures above 110°C. 

Extended compressor ON time (180 seconds) 

Redesigned air drier to compensate for additional air volume. 

Pressure Accumulator 

The twin axle air suspension system now features a pressure accumulator which forms an 
air accumulator valve unit in combination with the valve. The air accumulator valve unit is 
located beneath the vehicle floorpan in the right-hand sill area. 

Pressure Accumulator Unit which 
includes: 

Pressure Accumulator 
Pressure Sensor 
Valve Unit 


Front 



30 


Level Control Systems 






The pressure accumulator decreases the load on the compressor and significantly reduces 
the time required for large changes in ride height. 

The EHC 2 control module monitors system pressure via a pressure sensor mounted on 
the accumulator. Normal system pressure is 15.7 +/- 0.7 bar. Minimum system pressure 
is 9 bar. 

The pressure accumulator's charge is sufficient to fill the four suspension struts once from 
the Access position to the normal position and compensate for vehicle load up to maximum 
gross weight. 


i 



Accumulator/Valve Unit 

1. Air Lines 
Yellow-Black Front 
Red-Blue Rear 

2. Pressure Accumulator 

3. Connecting Cable 

4. Pressure Sensor 

5. Valve Unit 


1 3 1 



Valve Unit 

1. Connections for Air Lines 

2. Pressure Accumulator valve 


Valve Unit 


In the valve unit, four bellows valves and the pressure accumulator valve are activated. 

The bellows valves and the pressure accumulator valve are solenoid valves which are 
closed under spring pressure when de-energized. 



Pneumatic Layout of Control Valve 

1. Pressure Accumulator 

2. Accumulator Pressure Sensor 

3. Pressure Accumulator Valve 

4. Bellows Valves 

5. From the Air Supply Unit 

NW Size of opening/tubing size in mm. 



31 

Level Control Systems 




Ride Height Sensor 

The control unit obtains information about the ride height of the vehicle via a ride height sen¬ 
sor attached to each of the four wheels. 


60° Rear Axle 


35° Front Axle 


35° Front Axle 


60° Rear Axle 



Ride Height Sensor 


The ride height sensor is an angle Hall sensor which is activated by a ring magnet. The ring 
magnet is polarized vertically from north to south. 

The magnetic field line of the ring magnets intersect a Hall cell. The Hall cell is arranged in 
such a way that only the horizontal components of the field lines are evaluated. This results 
in different field line strengths at different positions of the ring magnet. The Hall cell mea¬ 
sures the field strength of the magnetic flux and converts it into an analog signal with a volt¬ 
age level between 0.5 and 4.5 V. 


1 



(Tir /| 

\JL/ 


Sensor Principle of 

Operation 

1. Ring Magnet 

2. Hall Cell 

3. Longitudinal magnetic 
field lines, low voltage 
0.5V 

4. Transverse magnetic 
field lines, high voltage 
4.5V 


32 


Level Control Systems 



Air Suspension Strut 
Rear 


M inor modifications were made to the rearaxle airsprings. The airsprings and the dampers 
are configured separately at the rear axle. 

Front 


The air suspension replaces the steel suspension at the front axle, i.e. the spring bellows is 
attached to the damper. The front air suspension strut and the impact absorber form a 
complete unit. 




lJLj 

a_ SL 


1 
n t 

Hi 


Air Suspension Strut 

1. Auxiliary Spring 

2. Air Bellows 

3. Damper 


Control Unit 


The EHC2 Control Unit is located behind the glovebox adjacent to the General Module 
The connector is a black 54 pin connector. 

Inputs received directly into the control unit are: 


Up and Down requests from the switch assy. 
CAN Bus Inputs 
Pressure Sensor 


Outputs include: 


Ride Height Level Sensor (X4) 
General Module (Load cutout signal) 
K Bus Inputs 

Compressor Temperature 


Air Unit Control (Activation) 
LED's for Switch Unit 
Pressure Accumulator 


Front and Rear Axle Valves 
Compressor Relay 


33 

Level Control Systems 



Switch Assembly 



The dash mounted switch assembly supplies a momentary switched ground to the EHC2 
Control Unit requesting a ride height change in the up ordown direction. Three LED's pro¬ 
vide current ride level selected and target ride level if a request for change has been made. 
The LED for the current ride height will always be illuminated. The LED for the target ride 
level will flash until the new ride level is reached. 

Notes: 


34 

Level Control Systems 





Principle of Operation 

Ride Height Control Operations 

In addition to the automatic ride-height control system for payload compensation, the dri¬ 
ver can set three different vehicle ride heights. 

Off-road (+25 mm), high ground clearance to a max. speed of 50 km/h 

Standard (0 mm), normal ride level 

Access (-35 mm), forentryand exit, loading and unloading to a max. speed of 35 km/h 
or can be activated in Standard mode at road speeds < 25 km/h 

The various heights are selected by scroll rocker. Light emitting diodes indicate the present 
ride height setting. 

Ride height can be adjusted from terminal 15 and with the doors closed. The hood and tail¬ 
gate may be open. 

The system also controls inclination automatically, like the single axle air suspension. 

All control operations are executed without stopping at intermediate levels. The vehicle is 
configured pneumatically in such a way that the front and rear axles can be lowered in par¬ 
allel in any load situation. Depending on the load situation, either the front axle or the rear 
axle is slightly quicker. On account of the different control speeds, a difference in height 
between the two axles is possible during all control operations. If a max. permissible thresh¬ 
old is exceeded, the quicker axle is stopped briefly. 

The various levels can be preselected while travelling. Changeover between ride levels is 
effected at the speed threshold values defined in the control unit. The control unit monitors 
the change-over. 

As soon as the driver sets a new target ride level by pressing a button or when a change¬ 
over is initiated automatically by a specific driving condition, the LED for the current ride 
level remains lit and the LED for the target ride level begins to flash. 

When the new level is reached, the LED forthe previous level goes out and the LED forthe 
new level reached stays lit permanently. 


35 

Level Control Systems 



Down button 
or 

>50km/h 


Up button 
and 

<50km/h 


Down Button and 

<80km/h 

and 

Accumulator pressure 

threshold 

and/or 

compressor temperature 
<thres ho Id 


f Access 
Vl Preselection 



Off-Road 
(+25 mm) 


Standard 
(0 mm) 


Access 
(-35 mm) 


<25km/h 



The various levels can be preselected while travelling. Changeover between ride levels is 
effected at the speed threshold values defined in the control unit. The control unit monitors 
the change-over. 

As soon as the driver sets a new target ride level by pressing a button or when a change¬ 
over is initiated automatically by a specific driving condition, the LED for the current ride 
level remains lit and the LED for the target ride level begins to flash. 

When the new level is reached, the LED forthe previous level goes out and the LED forthe 
new level reached stays lit permanently. 

If a ride level selection is not allowed, the LED indicating the momentary ride level of the 
vehicle flashes for 3 seconds. 

A special case is preselection of Access levels while travelling. The Access LED flashes and 
the LED forthe original ride level is lit permanently. However, this does not mean that a con¬ 
trol operation has already begun. The control operation does not actually begin until the 
speed threshold which the Access level allows is reached or undershot. 


36 

Level Control Systems 



In addition to the LED indicator, the following text messages can 
be displayed in the instrument cluster: 

TRAILER MODE 

A coupled trailer is identified via the trailer connector. To avoid damaging the trailer and 
the vehicle, changes of vehicle level are generally avoided. The standard level is "frozen." 
If the trailer is coupled at a level other than the Standard level, the vehicle ride level is 
not changed to Standard unless a button is pressed or the speed threshold for auto¬ 
matic change-over is reached. The standard level is then "frozen" until the trailer con¬ 
nector is disconnected. 

RIDE HEIGHT CONTROL INACTIVE 

Faults in the system and on the control unit which are only identified by the instrument 
cluster, e.g. control unit disconnected 

RIDE HEIGHT CONTROL INACTIVE + MAX. 60 km/h 

For safety-critical faults (vehicle is too high or at inclination) 

Control Modes 
Sleep mode 

If the vehicle is parked, it enters Sleep mode after 16 minutes. No further control opera¬ 
tions are executed. A "watch dog" wakes up the control unit for a few minutes every 6 
hours (wakeup mode) in orderto compensate for possible inclination of the vehicle. (Vehicle 
height may only be corrected once as air supply unit only operates with engine running.) 

Wake-up 

In wake-up mode, the control unit is woken up for a set period of time in order to com¬ 
pensate for possible inclination of the vehicle. Inclination of the vehicle can be caused by 
large temperature differences or by minor leaks. Adjustments to the front and rear axles 
ensure that the vehicle is visually level. To minimize power consumption, the vehicle is low¬ 
ered only. The nominal level of the lowest wheel serves as the nominal level for all other 
wheels. The lowest nominal level to which the vehicle is lowered is the Access level (-35 
mm). 

Exception: if the vehicle is parked at Access level, the vehicle is lowered to max. -50 mm 
in wake-up mode. If the vehicle is parked fora prolonged period of time and there is a leak 
in the system, further loss of pressure does not produce a change of ride level since the 
weight of the body is born by the auxiliary suspension and the residual tire pressure. 

Advance /Overrun 

When the vehicle is woken out of sleep mode by the load-cutout signal (VA), it normally 
enters advance / overrun mode. Since the engine is not (no longer) running in this mode, 
however, there are restrictions on the control operations that can be performed in orderto 
conserve the battery. Ride level compensation is restricted to tolerance ranges of 20 mm 
and 25 mm in the up and down directions respectively. This serves to reduce the frequen¬ 
cy of control operations. 


37 

Level Control Systems 



All control operations in advance / overrun mode are executed as long as pressure is avail¬ 
able in the accumulator. When the accumulator is empty and the engine is turned off, con¬ 
trol operations are directly driven by the compressor. User-activated changes of ride level 
and filling of the accumulator are not possible. 

Terminal 15 

As soon as the ignition is turned on (terminal 15), the user is allowed to lower the ride level 
as required. 

However, it is still not possible to raise the ride level or fill the accumulator. 

Ride level is compensated outside a narrow tolerance range of 10 mm upwards and 10 mm 
downwards. 

Engine "on" 

Ride level compensation, raising and lowering the vehicle's ride height as well as filling the 
accumulator are permitted when the engine is running. The compressor also starts up dur¬ 
ing every control operation. 

Ride level is still compensated outside the narrow tolerance range of ±10 mm. 

As long as the vehicle is stationary, high speed filtered ride level signals are used to detect 
a change of load. This allows the system to react immediately to changes in ride level. 

As soon as the vehicle is travelling, it changes over to low speed filtered ride-level signals. 
The system no longer reacts to bump movements caused by road surface unevenness. A 
mean value is formed over a prolonged period of time, i.e. payload is only altered by the 
progressive emptying of the fuel tank. 

The high speed filter is not used until the vehicle is stationary again and a lid is opened. If 
no lid is opened, the vehicle logically cannot be loaded or unloaded. 



Power Down 


VA = Load Cutout Signal 

Sleep =Temporary Power Down of Control Unit 
Wake-up =Activating the Control Unit 

Watch Dog = Monitoring 






Sleep 


f 

Wake-Up 




J 

V 




y Watch Dog 




VA up 

i 

VA Down 



Engine Off 


r 


Advance/ 

Overrun 


. > 


Terminal 15 "OFF" , ^ 


Ignition “ON” 


v. 


Engine Running 

I 

v- 


Terminal 15 "ON" 


Engine On 


38 

Level Control Systems 




Workshop Hints 

If a threshold level is exceeded on all 4 wheels when the vehicle is stationary, the control 
unit assumes that the vehicle has been raised on a workshop platform. 

There are three possible reset conditions for workshop platform recognition: 

The original level values are undershot at all four wheels, 

A selection is made by button, 

A speed of >40 km/h is recognized for 3 s. 

Vehicle jack 

If the lowering speed at a wheel is too low during the lowering operation, the system 
assumes that the wheel is jacked up. However, the downward velocity must be less than 
a certain preprogrammed speed threshold. If the system detects a jacked wheel, it stores 
the height of this wheel. 

Carjack recognition is reset when the stored ride height is again undershot. When a trav¬ 
elling speed of 40 km/h is maintained forat least 3 s, another control attempt is performed. 
The carjack recognition can also be reset by button selection. 

Please note that the system also controls ride height in diagnostic mode. For this reason, 
Belt M ode must be activated before carrying out work on the system or before setting the 
vehicle ride height. 

Belt Mode: 

Heights are fixed and are not compensated. If Belt Mode is set, the function LED is off. The 
text message "ride-height control system inactive" appears in the instrument cluster. 

Transport Mode: 

The Transport Mode setting is for transportation purposes. When the ignition is turned on, 
the message "ride-height control system inactive" appears. Heights are increased or 
decreased depending on ignition key status, e.g. ride height is reduced when the vehicle is 
lashed to a ship ortrain and raised when the "Engine on" signal is generated and when the 
vehicle is transported on a transporter truck. 

The correct ride height is set to ± 5 mm via "Activate components." The left and right ride 
levels are set separately at the rear axle. The ride levels are then set at the front axle. The 
left and right air springs are adjusted jointly for this purpose. 

Following this, the new ride height for the front and rear axles is stored via the "Offset func¬ 
tion." 

Before replacing components, the system must be depressurized 1 This is done in the diag¬ 
nostics via "control unit functions," "Component activation," "Pres sure-relieve front axle/rear 
axle." Repeat the activation procedure 6 times. 


39 

Level Control Systems 



If the fabric of the bellows is visible, then the bellows must be replaced. 

Upon completion of repair work, the air suspension system of the vehicle raised on the 
workshop platform must be refilled with air via the diagnostics. The activation procedures 
must also be repeated 6 times. This prevents the bellows from being folded incorrectly. 
The vehicle must with be set down on its wheels when the suspension struts are depres¬ 
surized 1 

Important Workshop Hint 

Similarly, a defective vehicle with leaky pneumatic system must not be raised on the work¬ 
shop platform. If depressurized, the bellows would contract under suction forming incorrect 
folds. These folds could result in malfunctions later on. 

Areas on the air bellows which can possibly become leaky are the 0-ring at the piston rod 
and the seal carrier on the roll piston. 

The connectors attached to all cables are identical to the connections on the single-axle air 
suspension. 6 mm cable is used. The tightening torgue is 3+1 Nm throughout the system. 
Special care must be taken when handling breakage-prone plastic parts of air suspension 
elements. 

Upon completion of repair work, Belt mode must be deactivated via the diagnostics. The 
function LED on the button comes on. No text message appears in the instrument cluster. 
The system is 0 K and ready for operation. 


40 

Level Control Systems 



Single Axle Air Suspension (E65/E66) 

Purpose of the System 



The single axle air suspension system used on the the E65/E66 is a further enhancement 
of the previous single axle air suspension system used on the the E39 and X5. The com¬ 
ponents used are similarto the Single Axle EHC System on the E53. The E65/E66 Air sus¬ 
pension consists of the following components: 


Two Air Springs 


Two Ride Height Sensors 


CC Display/Telltale Icon 


Level Control Systems 

















































Components (E65/E66) 


Air Supply Unit (LVA) 

The air supply unit is located in the spare tire recess and consists of the following compo¬ 
nents: 


Protective cover with internal acoustic 
insulation 

Lid 

Rubber-mounted component carrier 
Compressor Unit 
Compressor Relay 
Solenoid Valve Block 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rubber M ount 

6 

Air Drier 

2 

Component Carrier 

7 

Compressor 

3 

Compressor Relay 

8 

Solenoid Valve, Right 

4 

Electric Motor 

9 

Solenoid Valve, Left 

5 

Air Cleaner 




43 

Level Control Systems 





Control Unit 


The EHC control module is located in the right rear luggage compartment area in the mod¬ 
ule carrier next to the battery. On the E65/E66, the control module is connected to the K- 
CAN 5. The EHC control module receives the following information: 


Vehicle Ride Height 

Load Cutout Signal 

Terminal 15 ON/OFF 

Vehicle Speed 

Lateral Acceleration 

"Engine Running" Signal 

Flap Status (Doors/Trunk) 

The Control unit decides on a case by 
case basis whether a control opera¬ 
tion is required in order to compen¬ 
sate changes in load. It prevents 
intervention in the case of other caus¬ 
es. This makes it possible to adapt 
the frequency, specified height, toler¬ 
ance thresholds and batten/ load opti¬ 
mally by means of the control opera¬ 
tion to the relevant situation. 

In addition to handling the self levelling 
suspension, the control module moni¬ 
tors the system components as well 
as storing a displaying faults. The 
control module has full diagnostic 
capability. 

The EHC module is a 26 pin module 
with an ELO type connector. The 
module is connected to the K CAN 5. 
The majority of the input messages 
are from the K CAN S Bus. 





44 

Level Control Systems 









Air Springs 

An identifying feature of the E65/E66 air spring is the internally guided air bellows. Internally 
guided means that the bellows is guided in an aluminum casing. The bellows is support¬ 
ed on this casing. This prevents the compression forces from weighing heavily on the bel¬ 
lows. 


This process allows the bellows to be manufactured from a thin, flexible diaphragm which 
can react to minimal shocks and in this way provide a more comfortable suspension. 


The bottom end of the air spring strut is enclosed 
in a bellows in order to protect the diaphragm 
againstthe mechanical effects of fouling (sand, dirt 
etc.). The lower end of the bellows incorporates 
small holes for pressure compensation in the 
space between the roll piston and bellows. The 
action of the bellows rolling in this space produces 
pressure differences. 


The bellows together with the roll piston contains 
a volume of air that is sufficient for optimum sus¬ 
pension. 

A residual pressure holding valve on the air spring 
strut prevents it from being depressurized. The air 
spring strut remains under pressure in the event of 
a loss of pressure in the system. The residual 
pressure is 3.25 +/- 0.75 bar. This ensures that 
the bellows is not damaged when the car is still 
being moved. 



The diaphragm is composed of only one fabric layer embedded in rubber. The fibers with¬ 
in the fabric run longitudinally along the spring strut. The bellows is therefore known as an 
axial air bellows. 




The residual pressure holding valve is secured with 
Loctite and must NOT be removed. 

The air spring strut is initially filled at the manufac- 
turerto 10 bar. This pressure is reduced to 3.5 bar 
when the spring strut is to be stored. Under this 
pressure, the strut is extended to maximum 
length. 

The connection of the air spring struts to the air 
supply unit (distributor block) is located on the left 
of the luggage compartment under the flap on 
which the wheel nut wrench is mounted. 



45 

Level Control Systems 





Ride Height Sensor 

There are two ride height sensors, one for each rear wheel. The ride height sensor is actu¬ 
ated by a coupling rod and sends a signal to the EHC control unit. 

The sensor is a hall sensor which sends a DC Analog output voltage to the EHC module. 
The voltage range is approximately .5 to 4.5 volts. The voltage increases with increasing 
vehicle height and the nominal voltage at normal ride height is approximately 2.5 volts. The 
right side rear sensor is a double sensor, the additional sensor is an input to the headlight 
leveling systemand has it's own power supply, ground and signal wires. 



Check Control Messages 


Control 

Unit 

Cause 

Variable 

Telltale Icon 

Check Control 
Message 

Information in Control Display 

EHC 

Alive failure or 
loss of function¬ 
ality; transport 
or belt mode set 


< 6 ^ 


Level Control 
System failure 

"Level Control system failure" 
Ground clearance and driving 
comfort reduced. Avoid high 
speed cornering. Have 

checked by BMW Service as 
soon as possible. 

EHC 

Level Control 
System sensor 
failure. 




Level Control 
System Fault 

"Level Control System fault" 
Possible reduction in driving 
comfort. Have problem 

checked by BM W Service. 


46 

Level Control Systems 






















Control Mode Flow Chart 


The following chart demonstrates the control sequences of the E65/E66 with single axle 
rear air suspension. 



/ \ 



Drive 


V_ 

♦ 

Curve 

_ 


'N 

J 


47 

Level Control Systems 


Principle of Operation 

Control Mode Overview 



E39/E53 EHC 1 
(Single Axle) 

E 65/E 66 
(single Axle) 

E53 EHC II 
(Dual Axle) 

Sleep 

X 

X 

X 

Wake-up 



X 

Post 


X 


Pre 

X 

X 

X 

Terminal 15 On 



X 

Normal 

X 

X 

X 

Drive 

X 

X 

X 

Kerb 

X 

X 

X 

Curve 

X 

X 

X 

Lift 

X 

X 

X 

Twist 



X 

Trailer 



X 

Off-Road 



X 

Access 



X 


Control Modes 

Ongoing control operations are not affected by transitions from one mode to another. 
However, in the case of load cutout OFF, control operations are always concluded in order 
to safeguard system deactivation. The control unit then sets the Sleep Mode. 

Sleep 

The vehicle is in Sleep mode at the latest when it has been parked for longer than 16 min¬ 
utes with a door, hood or rear lid/hatch being operated or the terminal status changing. 
This is the initial state of the control system. No control operation is being performed in 
Sleep mode. 

The control system goes into Pre-mode when a wake-up signal is received by the control 
unit. 


48 

Level Control Systems 





















Post Mode 


The Post-mode is adopted in order to compensate any inclination or to adjust the ride 
height after driving and between the Pre-mode and Sleep mode. 

The Post-mode is limited in time to 1 minute. The Post-mode is only executed if the engine 
has been running before the system switches into this mode. If the engine has not been 
previously running, the system switches directly from Pre-mode into Sleep mode. 

The control operation is performed in a narrow tolerance band of+/- 6mm and is terminat¬ 
ed at +/- 4mm. The fast signal filter is used. 

In the event of an inclination (Kerb M ode), the control operation takes place forthe nominal 
heights applicable in this situation. 

Pre-Mode 

The P re-mode is activated by the "Load Cutoff" signal (e.g. by opening the door or unlock¬ 
ing with the remote control). The Pre-mode then stays set for 16 minutes and is restarted 
with a change in status. 

The ride height of the vehicle is monitored and evaluated with a wide tolerance band. 

In Pre-mode, the vehicle is only controlled un to the nominal height if the level is significantly 
below the nominal height. The control tolerance band is -40mm from the mean value for 
the single axle air suspension and -20mm for the dual axle system. This control tolerance 
ensures that the vehicle is only controlled up in the case of large loads in order to increase 
the ground clearance prior to departure. Small loads give rise to small compression travel 
and this is compensated only when the engine is started. This control setting helps reduce 
the battery load. 

With the single axle air suspension, the vehicle is controlled down when the mean value 
derived from both ride height signals is > 0mm and one side is in excess of +10mm. With 
twin axle air suspension, the vehicle is controlled down when one side is >15mm. 

In this mode, only the mean value of the two height signals is considered when deciding 
whether there is an need for control operation. 

The control operation is executed as long as pressure is available in the accumulator. When 
the accumulator is empty and the engine is turned off, the control operation is driven direct¬ 
ly by the compressor. User-activated changes of ride level and filling of the accumulator are 
not possible. 

Control operations which were started in other modes are continued with the inner toler¬ 
ance bands applicable to these modes. 

There is no inclination identification in Pre-mode. 


49 

Level Control Systems 



Normal 


The normal mode is the starting point forthe vehicle's normal operating state. It is obtained 
by way of the engine running signal. 

Ride level compensation, changing the vehicle's ride height and filling the accumulator are 
possible. The compressor starts up as required. 

A narrower tolerance band than that in Pre-mode cab be used because the battery capac¬ 
ity does not have to be protected. The fast filter is used with a narrow tolerance band of 
+/- 10mm. In this way ride level compensation takes place outside a narrow band of 10+/- 
10mm. The faster filter allows the system to respond immediately to changes in ride level. 
Evaluation and control are performed separately for each wheel. 

When a speed signal is recognized, the control unit switches into Drive mode. When the 
vehicle is stopped, the control unit remains in Drive mode. The system switches back into 
Normal mode when a door or the boot (trunk) lid is also opened. If none of the doors or 
the boot lid is opened, the vehicle cannot be loaded or unloaded. 

This prevents a control operation happening when the vehicle (for example) is stopped at 
traffic lights and the ride height is above the mean axle due to the pitching motion on the 
rear axle. 

Drive 

The Drive mode is activated for E39/E53 single axle air suspension when a speed signal of 
>4km/h is recognized. The Drive mode is recognized from >lkm/h forthe E65/E66 single 
axle air suspension and forthe E53 twin-axle air suspension system. 

Low pass filters are used. In this way, only changes in ride height over a prolonged period 
of time (1000 seconds)are corrected. These are merely the changes in ride height, caused 
by vehicle compression and a reduction in vehicle mass due to fuel consumption. The high 
pass (fast) filter is used during the control operation. The slow filters are recognized at the 
end of the control operation. The slow filters are re-initialized at the end of the control oper¬ 
ation. The markedly dynamic height signals caused by uneven road surfaces are filtered 
out. 


50 

Level Control Systems 



Kerb (Curb) Mode 


The Kerb mode prevents the inclination caused by the vehicle mounting an obstacle with 
ine wheel from being compensated. Compensation would cause a renewed inclination of 
the vehicle and result in a renewed control operation after the vehicle comes off the obsta¬ 
cle. 

The Kerb Mode is activated when the height difference between the left and right sides of 
the vehicle is > 32mm for the E65/E66 with single axle air suspension and >24mm for the 
E39/E53 with single axle air suspension and lasts longer than 0.9s. Twisting (also over both 
axles) > 45mm must occur for the E53 with twin axle air suspension. 

There must be no speed signal present. The system switches from single wheel control to 
axle control. 

The Kerb mode is quit when the difference between the left and right sides of the vehicle is 
< 28mm for the single axle air suspension and lasts longer than 0.9s when the speed is 
greater than > lkm/h. 

If the system switches from Kerb mode to Sleep mode, this status is stored in the 
EEPROM. 

If the vehicle is loaded or unloaded in Kerb mode, the mean value of the axle is calculated 
by the control unit. The value is calculated in the control unit from the changes in ride level 
of the spring travel on the left and right sides. 

A change in ride level is initiated if the mean value of compression or rebound at the axle is 
outside the tolerance band of +/- 10mm. The left and right sides of the vehicle are raised 
or lowered in parallel. The height difference between the two sides is maintained. 

Curve 

Since rolling motions have a direct impact on the measured ride level, an unwanted control 
operation would be initiated during longer instances of cornering with an appropriate roll 
angle in spite of the slow filtering of the Drive mode. The control operations during corner¬ 
ing would cause displacement of the air volume from the outerside to the innerside ofthe 
curve. Once the curve is completed, this would produce an inclination which would result 
in a further control operation. The Curve mode prevents this control operation whereby 
when cornering is recognized slow filtering is stopped and a potential control operation that 
has started is terminated. 

The Curve mode is activated for the E65/E66 single axle EHC and for the E53 twin axle 
suspension for a lateral acceleration of > 2m/s 2 and deactivated at < 1.5 m/s 2 

The lateral acceleration is recorded by the rotation rate sensor. 


51 

Level Control Systems 



Lift 


The Lift mode is used to prevent control operations when a wheel is changed or during 
work on the vehicle while it is on a lifting platform. 

This mode is recognized when the permitted rebound travel at one or more wheels is 
exceeded. For the E65/E66 the limit is > 55mm. 

A "jack" situation is also recognized when the ride level is stored and the lowering speed 
drops below the value of 2 mm/s for 3 seconds. 

If the vehicle has been raised slightly and the permitted rebound travel has not yet been 
achieved, the control operation attempts to readjustthe ride height. If the vehicle is not low¬ 
ered, a carjack situation is recognized after a specific period of time and this ride height is 
stored. 

A reset is performed if the vehicle is again 10 mm below this stored ride height. 

Transport 

The Transport mode is set and cleared by means of a diagnosis activation. It serves to 
increase the ground clearance in order to ensure a safe transportation of vehicles on trans¬ 
porter trucks. The nominal height of the vehicle is raised in this mode by 30 mm. 

When the Transport mode is activated, the air suspension symbol is indicated in the vari¬ 
able telltale in the instrument cluster and a text message is output in the Check Control 
Display. 

Control operations do not take place in this mode because the vehicle mass does not 
change during transportation. 

Belt 

The Belt mode is set for mounting on the belt in order to avoid control operations. 

When the Belt mode is activated, the air suspension symbol is indicated in the variable tell¬ 
tale in the instrument cluster and a text message is output in the Check Control display. 

The Belt mode is cleared by means of a diagnostic activation only. The Belt mode can no 
longer be set. 

New control units are supplied with the Belt mode set. 

Control operations are not performed, the safety concept only operates with limited effect. 
The Belt M ode is also known as "Band M ode" or "Assembly Line M ode". 

52 

Level Control Systems 



Operating Principle 

Initialization/Reset Performance 

When the control unit is powered up after a reset (such as an undervoltage < 4.5 V or by a 
load cutoff), different tests and initializations are performed. This system is only enabled 
after the tests have been successfully completed and starts to execute the control pro¬ 
grams on a cyclical basis. 

Occurring faults are stored and displayed. 

Control Sequence 

In an ongoing control operation, the high pass filter (fast filter) is always used to prevent the 
controlled height from overshooting the nominal value. If a low pass filter (slow filter) were 
used to calculate the ride height, brief changes of ride height would be consumed. The 
low-pass filter is used while the vehicle is driven. This type of filtering filters out vibrations 
which are excited by the road surface. 

The high pass filter is used to respond guickly to ride level deviations from setpoint. These 
take place while the vehicle is stationary in the event of large load changes. 

Both sides of the vehicle are controlled individually, i.e. even the setpoint/actual value com¬ 
parison for both sides is carried out individually. Exception: check for undershooting of the 
minimum height in Pre-mode and Kerf mode: consideration of the left and right mean val¬ 
ues in each case. 

The following stipulations are applicable here: 

Raising before lowering 

Activation of all valves with control in the same direction 
Individual wheel deactivation 

To ensure safe closing of the non-return valve in the air drier, the drain valve is actuated 
briefly for 200ms after the control operation has ended. 

The permissible ON period of the components is monitored while control up operation are 
executed. 


53 

Level Control Systems 



Safety Concept 

The safety concept is intended to inhibit any system malfunction, particularly unintentional 
control operations, through monitoring of signals and function relevant parameters. If faults 
are detected, the system is switched over or shut down depending on the affected com¬ 
ponent. The driver is informed of existing faults via the display. Detected faults are stored 
for diagnostic purposes. 

In orderto ensure high system availability, existing faults, as faras possible, are cleared with 
terminal 15 ON. This is done by resetting the fault counter to zero. However, the fault 
memory content in the EEPROM is retained and can be read out for diagnostic purposes. 
The system is then operational again. The fast troubleshooting helps to detect existing 
faults before control operation can take place. 

Only lowering is permitted if: 

The permissible supply voltage of 9 volts is undershot 

The permissible compressor running time of 480 seconds is exceeded. 

A reset takes place if the voltage is in the OK range of 9 to 16 volts or after the compres¬ 
sor pause time of 100 seconds has elapsed. 

Only raising is permitted if: 

The permissible control down period of 40 seconds is exceeded 

The reset takes place the next time the vehicle is driven or after the next control up 
operation. 

No control operation takes place if: 

The permissible supply voltage of 16 volts is exceeded 
The reset takes place as soon as the voltage is in the OK range. 


54 

Level Control Systems 



Workshop Hints 

Ride Height Measurement 

When checking vehicle ride height with EHC, measure from the lower edge of the wheel 
opening to the center of the wheel hub. 



Fra. 23 Ride height measurement |h| 


Diagnosis 

Diagnostic items can be found in the "Control Unit Functions" path when using the DISplus 
orGT-1. The functions available are Id entifcatio n (ID page), Read/Clear Fault Memory, Read 
Test Codes, Diagnosis Requests and Component Activation. 

Service Functions 

In the Diagnosis Program, there are numerous Service Functions that can be performed for 
the E65/E66 EHC system. By entering into the "Function Selection" program and follow¬ 
ing the "Chassis - Pneumatic Suspension" path all of the Service Functions are listed. The 
Service functions include Ride-Level Offset, Transport Mode and Band Mode. 


55 

Level Control Systems 





Review Questions 

1. The EHC control module on the E65/E66 is connected to the Bus 

2. List the operating modes that are specific to the E65/E66 Air Suspension System: 


3. Why is the accumulator needed on the dual axle EHC system 7 


4. List the components specific to the Dual Axle EHC system 


5. Which 2 Buses system are connected to the EHC control module on the Dual Axle EHC 
system 7 


6. What components are replaceable on the LVA 7 


7. What are the 3 possible ride height setting on the Dual Axle EHC system 7 


8. What type of sensor is used for ride height measurement 7 


56 

Level Control Systems 



9. How much pressure is in the rear air strut on the E66 when it is stored 7 

10. List the correct color for the air hoses on the EHC I system: 

Left Right 

11. The "Band Mode" is also known as 
and 

12. What operating modes are specific to the Dual Axle EHC system 7 


13. What is the maximum system pressure on the EHC I system (E39/E53) 7 


14. What is unigue about the rear air struts on the E66 7 


15. What is the maximum air pressure of the air supply unit on the E53 with Dual Axle Air 
Suspension 7 


57 

Level Control Systems 



