Table of Contents 


Tire Pressure Warning Systems 

Subject Page 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components.5 

DSC III Module.5 

RDW Module.5 

Pushbutton Switch.6 

Check Control Display.7 

Principle of Operation.8 

Initialization.9 

E85 Initialization.10 

Diagnosis.11 

Run Flat Tire Technology.12 

RDC Tire Pressure Control (E65/E66).14 

Components.15 

RDC Control Unit .15 

Receiving Antennae.15 

Wheel Transmitter Modules.16 

Principle Of Operation.17 

Initialization.17 

Tire Pressure Monitoring.18 

Tire Pressure Warning.19 

Review Questions.20 


Initial Print Date: 1/03 


Revision Date: 
























Model: 

Production: Start of Production MY 


Objectives: 

After completion of this module you should be able to: 
Identify Components in Tire Pressure Warning Systems 
Diagnose Tire Pressure Warning Systems 
Initialize Tire Pressure Warning Systems 


2 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 




Tire Pressure Warning Systems 
Purpose of the System 

The Tire Pressure Warning System (RDW) is being introduced forthe US market on the new 
E39 M5. RDW is the German acronym for Reifen Druck Warnen" and it follows the tire 
pressure control system (RDC) that has been in use in other markets for several years. The 
RDW and RDC systems will eventually be linked to the run flat tires as a means of warn¬ 
ing the driver of pressure losses in the tires. 

Experience has shown that the majority of owners are unaware that the owner's manual 
recommends that the inflation pressure be checked at 14 day intervals. The RDW system 
will aid in this by warning the driver of pressure losses in one or more of the tires. 

Consequences of incorrect inflation pressures result in: 

Increased tire wear 

Reduced service life of the tires 

Impaired vehicle handling 

Increased risk of punctures due to worn tread 

Regardless of the terminology used, the Tire Pressure warning system is designed to warn 
the driver of pressure losses in one or more of the tires through the "Check Control" display 
(or Warning Light) 

The system measures the wheel speeds of all four tires and compares the speed of the 
diagonal wheels forthe average speed. A rolling circumference value is calculated from the 
wheel speeds and this value is stored in the control module. 

In the event of pressure loss, the rolling circumference of the affected tire is reduced . With 
this, the wheel speed of the tire increases and the control module will detect the change 
and post the warning in the Check Control matrix display or will display a waring light in the 
instrument cluster. 

An additional acoustical warning is sounded if the pressure loss is greater than 40%. 

The tire pressure warning system is switched "ON" every time the ignition is switched "ON" 
and it can be switched OFF with the button on the lower dash to the right of the steering 
column. 

NOTE: The system can only react to the pressures in the tires when the 
system is initialized, it cannot check for the correct inflation pressure. 


3 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 



Tire Pressure Warning Systems have 2 basic configurations: 

Systems which uses wheel speed sensor input to detect rotational irregularities to 
determine pressure loss. The systems either use a separate RDW module which r 
receives individual wheel speed input from the DSC module or the RDW functions 
are incorporated directly into the DSC electronics. These systems have numerous 
acronyms to identify them depending upon model and production date etc. 

Some of the acronyms currently in use are: 

RDW - This system is usually associated with the E39 M5 and E46 M3. 

RPA - This term is currently used on the E85 and E46 (from 2001). 

DDS - Tis acronym can sometimes be found when using the diagnosis pro 
gram with the DISplus orGT-1. 

DWS - This system was installed on the E52 Z8. 

Systems which use pressure transmitters located inside the tire assembly. These 
transmitters send signals to external antennae at all 4 wheels. Currently the only US 
market vehicle to use this system is the E65/E66. This system will be covered later 
in this text. These systems are generally referred to as RDC and use Run Flat Tire 
Technology (RFT). 



4 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 







System Components 

The tire pressure warning system consists of the following components: 

RDW Module (On early systems only deleted as of 2001 MY) 

DSC Module 
Wheel Speed Sensors 
RDW/RPA Button 

Warning Indicator (Cluster Check Control or Warning Indicator lamp) 

DSC III Control Module / Wheel Speed Sensor 

The four wheel speed sensor inputs are processed by the DSC control module and four 
dedicated square wave output signals are provided to the RDW control module for its pro¬ 
cessing functions. 

RDW Control Module 

The RDW control module was only used on the early production models such as the E39 
M5 and the E52 Z8. All RDW modules have been eliminated as of the 2001 model year. 
The newer systems incorporate the RDW functions into the DSC module, this eliminates 
the need fora separate RDW module. 

The RDW control module is located behind the glove box in the control module carrier, in 
addition to the four wheel speed signals, the module receives power (KL 15), ground (KL 
31) and a ground signal input from the set/push button switch in the console. 

The control module is connected to the K-Bus for: 

Output display in the check control matrix or Warning Light 

Diagnostic communication through the instrument cluster with the D IS plus tester or 
GT-1. 


The control module processes the wheel speed signals and stores rolling circumference 
values for determining pressure losses in one or more tires. 


5 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 



Set/Push Button Switch 


The push button (with tire failure symbol) is mounted below the instrument cluster to the 
right of the steering wheel. The push button is used to carry out the following functions: 

Initialization of the system - after changing inflation pressures or tires. 

Switching the RDW system OFF - After switching the ignition switch ON, briefly press 
the button "TIRE MONITORING INACTIVE" will be displayed in the matrix. 


Self diagnosis of the control module (only for manufacturing purposes) - however if the 
push button is pressed and held while switching the ignition ON, "TIRE PRESSURE 
INACTIVE" will be displayed in the matrix. 



1 I 



RDW/RPA Button (E85) 


6 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 











Check Control Display 

The check control display is used to show the operating status of the RDW system. The 
displays are as follows: 

"TIRE PRESSURE FAILURE" - (with an acoustic warning) this display will remain active 
until the ignition is switched OFF. 

"TIRE PRESSURE SET" - Will be displayed when the system is put into 
the initialization mode. 

"TIRE MONITORING INACTIVE" - Will be displayed when the system is manually 
switched OFF or there is a system fault. 



7 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 





Principle of Operation 


The Tire Pressure Warning System is designed to inform the driverof a loss in tire pressure. 
Rather than monitored actual tire pressure, the rolling circumference is calculated from the 
wheel speed signals. When a tire loses pressure, circumference decreases which corre¬ 
sponds to an increase in wheel speed. The wheel speeds are compared diagonally and 
with one another to determine rotational speed irregularities. 

If there is a difference, this is recognized as pressure loss. The RPA can inform the driver 
after a short drive, approx. 1-3 minutes, from a vehicle speed > 10 mph. Depending upon 
vehicle application, the driver is warned via an indicator light in the cluster or by a check 
control message. 

When a slow inflation pressure loss is present, it is more difficult for the driver to recognize 
the gradually increasing "spongy" handling of the vehicle (this constitutes approx. 80% of 
flat tire cases). The condition is more difficult to detect with RFT because of the increased 
sidewall rigidity. The Tire Deflation Warning (RPA) monitors tire deflation and will alert the dri¬ 
ver. 

The Tire Deflation Warning (RPA) function is performed by the DSC Control Module or as 
on early systems by the RDW module. The RDW module has been eliminated as of the 
2001 model year, the RDW electronics are now incorporated into the DSC Module. 



Tire Pressure Warning Systems 







































Initialization 


The RDW system must be initialized to allow the control module to adopt the wheel speed 
signals and set the rolling circumferences in its memory. Initialization must be carried out 
when: 

Tire inflation pressures are changed. 

New tires are installed. 

The control module or wheel speed sensors are changed. 

The initialization process is started by pressing the push button >4 seconds (Tire Pressure 
Set will be displayed in the matrix). The system is now in the learn mode and after driving 
off, the control module will start to store the values for the rolling circumferences of the tires 
based on the road speed. 

For leakage detection, three different speed ranges are taken into account and must be 
recognized by the control module to complete a full initialization process. The control mod¬ 
ule must receive useable speed signals for a cumulative total of 4 to 15 minutes depend¬ 
ing on the speed range. 

Once a speed range is set, the control module will then monitor that speed range for and 
pressure losses. The system can only display a pressure loss warning, it can not display the 
exact tire with the pressure loss. All tires need to be checked when the warning is displayed 
in the matrix. 

NOTE: Not all speed ranges need be set for the system to function properly. 



Miles per Hour 


9 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 











Initialization 


Under certain driving conditions the control module will not evaluate the wheel speed sen¬ 
sors as false warnings could be triggered. These conditions include: 

Initialization in a speed range that has not been complete 

During rapid acceleration 

Severe (heavy) braking 

High speed cornering 

Road speeds < 7M PH 

High slip differentials between individual wheels 

No Warning Conditions 

The system can only detect pressure differences between tires, it can not measure absolute 
pressure. The system can not detect the following: 

Natural diffusion that occurs on all tires equally 
A tire blow out 

Pressure loss at the rear axle at speeds >90 M PH 


E85 Initialization/Operation 

The system must be initialized when the tire inflation pressures are changed or when the 
wheels/tires are replaced. 


The RPA switch (1) in the center console switching center must be pressed to start initial¬ 
ization. 


With KL15 "on", press the RPA switch until the RPA indicator light in the 
Instrument Cluster illuminates in "yellow". 


0 ) 


After a a short drive (approx. 1-3 minutes), from a vehicle speed > 10 mph, the system 
learns the new wheel speed sensor reference values and the RPA indicator light (yellow) 
goes out. 


When an inflation pressure loss is determined, the RPA indicator light illuminates in "red" 
The driver is informed of a RPA system failure by the "yellow" illuminated RPA indicator light 


10 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 



Diagnosis 

The RDW is fully diagnoseable via the K-bus interface using the DISplus tester or GT-1 

Information included in the diagnosis includes: 

How often and at what speed the fault occurred 

If the initialization has been carried out for all speed ranges 


KL 15 





ruin 


rum 

n n n 


n n n 



KL 31 


RDW 




11 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 










































Run Flat Tire (RFT) Technology 

Purpose of the System 

BMW Run F lat Tire (RFT) Technology 
which was first introduced on the Z8, 
is standard on the E85 (Z4). RFT 
technology offers large advantages 
to the customer in dynamic stability 
with slow or sudden air pressure loss 
and Deflation Warning. In addition, 
the spare wheel and jacking equip¬ 
ment in the trunk is deleted which 
provides additional storage space. 

A tire with back up running ability 
(RFT) will be differentiated from a 
non-run flat tire by the encircled letter 
designation on the sidewall (for 
example: R5C - Runflat System 
Component). 

Principle of Operation 

If slow or sudden inflation pressure loss occurs in a RFT, it is still mobile because of the 
additional high temperature rubber reinforcements that strengthen the side wall. 

These reinforcements prevent side wall damage when the tire is deflated and also provides 
support during extreme loads (even when negotiating curves). In addition, the special RFT 
wheel (rim) grips the tire for sufficient steering, braking and accelerating power. 

Note: 

- With a sudden inflation pressure loss the vehicle can be driven with 

a maximum speed of 50 mph for a maximum distance of approx. 100 miles. 

- With a slow inflation pressure loss the vehicle can be driven with a maximum 
speed of 50 mph fora maximum distance of approx. 1200 miles. 

- A winter profile RFT will also be offered. 

- In an extreme case, standard tires can be temporarily substituted on the same 
wheel (rim) if RFT is not available. 



12 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 




System Components 


Comparison (cross section) of a standard tire 
to a self supporting RFT: 

1. Standard tire (deflated) 

2. Self supporting RFT (deflated) 



A. High temperature rubber 
reinforcements 


Note: Because of the self supporting charac¬ 
teristics of the RFT, it is difficult to visualize a 
deflation, therefore; always verify air pressure 
with a tire pressure gage (refer to RPA initial¬ 
ization). 



Tire Manufacturer information 

All tires, regardless of brand, must be designated with the RSC icon. This indicates that 
the tire is a Run Flat System Component. The following is a breakdown of the various man¬ 
ufacturers internal designations: 


Manufacturer 

Acronym 

Definition 

Bridgestone 

RFT 

Run Flat Technology 

Continental 

TBA 

Designation To be decided 

Dunlop 

DSST 

Dunlop Self Supporting Technology 

Goodyear 

EMT 

Extended Mobility Technology 

Michelin 

ZP 

Zero Pressure 

Pirelli 

PTM 

Pirelli Total Mobility 


13 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 





RDC Tire Pressure Control (E65/E66) 

Purpose of System 

RDC is an available option for the E65. The system monitors the tire inflation pressures, 
both when the vehicle is being driven and when it is stationary. 

An electronic transmitter module mounted inside each tire measures the tire pressure and 
temperature at regular intervals and transmits the information by radio frequency to the 
RDC control unit. 

The driver is warned with a Check Control message of a tire that needs inflation or a pos¬ 
sible flat tire. 



System Overview E65/E66 


( KOMBI 

_ 



14 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 




Components 

RDC Control Unit 

The RDC control unit is located behind the glove box on the equipment carrier above the 
ZG M. 


The control unit is connected to the K-CAN System bus 



The RDC control unit is responsible for monitoring the individual pressures and tempera¬ 
tures of the tires (including the spare). If one of the tires inflation pressure falls below a spe¬ 
cific threshold then the RDC generates a CC warning and telegrams it over the K-CAN-S. 


The Instrument Cluster displays the check control warning icon and text message accord¬ 
ing to the message sent. The Control Display is informed by the Instrument Cluster of the 
required extended message. 

Receiving Antennas 


The RDC antennas are located behind the 
splash shield of each of the four wheel hous¬ 
es. 

The antennas receive the radio signals from 
the RDC transmitters and pass the signals 
along a shielded cable to the RDC control unit. 




15 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 












Wheel Transmitter Modules 

The transmitter modules are located inside the tire 
attached to the valve stem. The modules contain a 
pressure and temperature sensor, a long life 3.6V 
lithium battery and a radio transmitter. 

Operating freguency for the U.S. : 315M hz 

Battery life: 5 to 7 years 

The transmitter modules are active in an energy saving mode even when they are sitting as 
spare parts on the shelf. 

Each transmitter module has it's own unique I.D. code. The I.D. code is assigned to a posi¬ 
tion on the vehicle (Right rear, left front etc.) after a successful initialization has been com¬ 
pleted. 

The radio signal transmitted by the wheel modules is received when the tire passes close 
to the antenna. The valve stem of the spare tire should be pointed towards the right rear 
wheel house because the spare is also included in the monitoring (although it is not dis¬ 
played on the CD). 

The wheel transmitter module measures its ambient air pressure every minute. If the air 
pressure increases by 0.5 bar between measurements , the transmission rate increases to 
every 0.8 seconds. 

If the increase in air pressure is detected for approximately 216 seconds, the full function¬ 
ality of the wheel module is activated. If the higher pressure then continues, the module 
remains permanently active and measures the air pressure and temperature every 0.3 sec¬ 
onds and transmits the information by radio signal even/ 55 seconds. 

At temperatures over 120°C the transmitter modules are switched off. Once the transmit¬ 
ter cools to below 110°C operation resumes. 



16 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 




Principle of Operation 

Initialization 

After the tires are replaced, rotated or if their inflation pressures are adjusted, then the wheel 
transmitter modules must be initialized using the RDC function in the "Settings" menu of the 
Control Display. 

During initialization the following processes are performed: 


Individual wheel recognition (Identification of wheel transmitter modules). 

Wheel position assignment. 

Plausibility check (setpoint pressures checked). 

Adoption of setpoint pressures as specified pressures. 

The RDC then learns the wheel transmitter module position. 

The minimum air pressure accepted by the RDC on initialization is 1.7 bar (24.7psi). If the 
tire pressures deviate more than 0.4 bar (6psi) per axle the initialization is rejected after a 
plausibility check. 

1.3 bar is the lowest pressure detected by the wheel transmitter module. At that point, a 
tire failure warning will always be issued. 

Complete initialization can take up to 30 minutes. Only the actual driving time over 6 km/h 
is taken into account. During initialization, the CC message "Initializing RDC!" is displayed 
on the Instrument Cluster. 


Check Control Message 

Message displayed in 

displayed in KOMBI 

Control Display 


Initializing RDC! 


0 ) 


"Initializing RDC!" RDC tire pressure 
monitor not available for 15 to 30 min. 
System is temporarily unable to detect 
flat tires 


17 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 



When the initialization from the Control Display is activated, the wheels appear black and 
the pressures are not shown. 


riti£ D2 Privat j 7MC 4 r Q B C MUNCIIEN 



Once initialization is complete, the tires of the caron the graphic turn green and pressure 
values are shown for each tire. 


Tire Pressure Monitoring 

During monitoring, the RDC control unit takes the measured temperature and pressure and 
determines a target pressure value. 

If the tire pressure being monitored falls below the required level by 0.2 bar for more than 
8 minutes, a CC message appears on the instrument cluster after the car is started. The 
driver is prompted to to check the tire pressure. 


"Autumn warning": If the tire temperature is 20°C lower for 14 days than the 
temperature was when the RDC was last initialized the RDC will also warn the driver to 
check the tire pressures. 


Check Control Message 
displayed in KOMBI 

Check tire pressures! 



Message displayed in 
Control Display 


"Check tire pressures!" 
Check tire inflation pres¬ 
sures; refer to owners man¬ 
ual or inflation chart 


When the RDC menu on the Control Display is activated, the car is shown with yellow tires 
The tire pressures must be adjusted and an initialization carried out. 


18 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 





Tire Failure Warning 

If a tire being monitored falls below the specified level by 0.4 bar after temperature calcula¬ 
tion or 16% of the inflated pressure then a CC message appears on the instrument cluster 
with an audible warning tone. A message also appears on the Control Display. 


Check Control Message 
displayed in KOMBI 

Message displayed in 

Control Display 

Flat tire! stop vehicle 
carefully. 

Left front tire is flat, refer to owners 
manual or contact BMW Roadside 
assistance. 


When the RDC menu on the Control Display is activated, the car is shown with the defec¬ 
tive tire in red. In the case of a spare tire failure, all wheels are shown in red. 

Once the tire pressures are restored to the setpoint in the RD5 control unit the tires of the 
car graphic in the Control Display return to green and the Check Control message is with¬ 
drawn. 

See the chapter"E65 Instrument cluster" fordetails on additional Check Control messages. 


19 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 



Review Questions 

1. Where are the transmitters and antennas located for the RDC system on the E65/E66 7 
What is the operating frequency forthe U.S. 7 


2. What conditions cause the wheel transmitter units to go from energy saving mode to full 
functionality 7 


3. When adjusting tire pressures on a vehicle equipped with RDC, what is the maximum 
difference between tires of the same axle allowed by the system 7 


4. When is initialization of the RDC system necessary 7 Explain briefly what the system is 
doing during the learning process. 


20 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 



5. How does the RDW/RPA system detect pressure loss in the tire 7 


6. What conditions are NOT detected by the RDW/RPA system 7 


7. When should initialization be carried out the RDW/RPA system 7 


8. What designation should be common to ALL run flat tires 7 


21 

Tire Pressure Warning Systems 



