Table of Contents 
VAN OS 

Subject Page 

VANOS.3 

Introduction.3 

Solenoid Valves .4 

Intake Solenoid Valve.4 

Exhaust Solenoid Valve.4 

Camshaft Sensors.5 

Intake Camshaft Sensor .6 

Exhaust Camshaft Sensor.6 

VANOS Units .7 

VANOS N55.9 

VANOS Solenoid Valves (N55) .11 

Cam Sensor Wheels (N55).11 

VANOS N63.12 

VANOS N74.12 


Initial Print Date: 03/11 Revision Date: 

















VANOS 

Model: All 
Production: All 

BBIECIIMES 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Using the Status requests (cam sensors) identify whether or not the 
VANOS Solenoids are adjusting the Cam Timing. 

• Explain why it is necessary to check engine timing when the VANOS 
system is faulted. 

• Explain how oil condition, level and pressure affect VANOS operation. 

• Using an ISID, IMIB and ETM properly check the VANOS circuit electrically. 

• Locate and identify the components used for VANOS operation. 


2 

VANOS 


VANOS 


Introduction 

Performance, torque, idle characteristics and exhaust emissions reduction are improved 
by Variable Camshaft Timing. The VANOS system is currently used in all BMW 
engines. 

The Vanos units are mounted directly on the front of the camshafts and adjusts the 
timing of the Intake and Exhaust camshafts throughout the entire spread range from 
retarded to advanced. The ECM controls the operation of the VANOS solenoids which 
regulates the oil pressure required to move the VANOS units. Engine rpm, load and 
temperature are used to determine VANOS activation. 


N52 VANOS units 



The VANOS mechanical operation is dependent on engine oil pressure applied to 
position the VANOS units. When oil pressure is applied to the units (via ports in the 
camshafts regulated by the solenoids), the camshaft hubs are rotated in the drive 
sprockets changing the position which advances/retards the intake/exhaust camshafts 
timing. The VANOS system is “fully variable”. When the ECM detects that the 
camshafts are in the optimum positions, the solenoids maintain oil pressure on the units 
to hold the camshaft timing. 

The operation of the VANOS solenoids are monitored in accordance with the OBD II 
requirements for emission control. The ECM monitors the final stage output control and 
the signals from the Camshaft Position Sensors for VANOS operation. 


3 

VANOS 





Solenoid Valves 


The VANOS solenoid valves are mounted through the front of the cylinder head. There 
are two solenoids, one for the intake VANOS and one for the exhaust. The solenoids 
control the oil flow to the camshaft ports for the intake and exhaust VANOS units. 

The 4/3 way proportional solenoid valve is activated by the ECM to direct oil flow. The 
solenoid valve is sealed to the head by a radial seal and secured by a retaining plate. 



The variable camshaft control serves the purpose of increasing torgue in the lower and 
medium engine speed ranges. The VANOS solenoid valve activates the VANOS adjust¬ 
ment unit on the intake side. The VANOS solenoid valves are driven by the ECM control 
unit. 

The VANOS solenoid valve is connected by means of two lines to the ECM. The ECM 
control unit activates the VANOS solenoid valve as reguired. 

Activation takes place pulse-width modulated with system voltage. PWM activation 
means that the actuator piston can be controlled in any position, making exact position¬ 
ing of the VANOS unit possible. 

Intake Solenoid Valve 

The intake VANOS solenoid valve is responsible for controlling the timing of the intake 
camshaft. 

Exhaust Solenoid Valve 

The exhaust VANOS solenoid valve is responsible for controlling the timing of the 
exhaust camshaft. 


4 

VANOS 


Camshaft Sensors 

There are two camshaft sensors, one for the intake camshaft and one for the exhaust. 
They are mounted at the front of the cylinder head and monitor the impulse wheels 
which are bolted to the front of the VANOS units. 

The sensors are supplied power via the engine electronics fuses. Ground is supplied via 
the ECM. The sensors are hall effect and provide the ECM with a 5 volt square wave 
signal. 

The camshaft sensor operates in accordance with the Hall principle and it is used for 
detecting the camshaft position. A camshaft sensor wheel is mounted on the camshaft 
for this purpose. 

With the aid of the camshaft sensor, the ECM can determine whether the cylinder is in 
the compression cycle or in the charge cycle. 

This deduction cannot be made from the crankshaft position. The corresponding 
assignment is necessary for the purpose of controlling the fuel injection and ignition 
accordingly. 


Camshaft Sensor 


Camshaft Sensor Wheel 




5 

VANOS 




A further task of the sensor is to provide feedback relating to the camshaft position for 
VANOS control. In this way, the ECM can regulate the camshaft position based on a 
characteristic map with the aid of a VANOS solenoid valve. 

The ECM supplies the sensor with a 5V voltage and ground. The sensor sends a digital 
signal via the signal line to the ECM. 

The camshaft sensor operates corresponding to the same principle as the crankshaft 
sensor. The camshaft sensor wheel however, is fundamentally different. A special aper¬ 
ture pattern facilitates emergency operation in the event of the crankshaft sensor failing. 
The resolution of the camshaft sensor signal, however, is too inaccurate to replace the 
crankshaft sensor during normal operation. 

Intake Camshaft Sensor 

The sensor for the intake camshaft has the following tasks: 

• Detection of the camshaft allocation with respect to the crankshaft (cylinder com¬ 
pression cycle or cylinder charge cycle). 

• Positioning the camshaft with respect to the crankshaft for VANOS adjustment. 

With the aid of the sensor, the ECM can determine the position of the intake camshaft 
with respect to the crankshaft and adjust the camshaft with the aid of VANOS corre¬ 
sponding to ECM reguirements. 

Exhaust Camshaft Sensor 

An exhaust camshaft sensor is also used. With the aid of the sensor, the ECM can deter¬ 
mine the position of the exhaust camshaft with respect to the crankshaft and adjust the 
camshaft with the aid of VANOS corresponding to ECM reguirements. 


6 

VANOS 



VANOS Units 


The infinitely variable double VANOS system uses a hydraulic oscillating motor type 
VANOS units for the intake and the exhaust cams. Although they have identical function, 
the oscillating motor VANOS units are a further development of the variable vane type 
motor VANOS units used on previous systems. They are designed as an integrated 
component in the chain drive and are mounted with a central bolt on the respective 
camshaft. When de-pressurized, a coil spring holds the VANOS unit in the base position. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Front plate 

2 

Locking pin 

3 

Oil channel 

4 

Casing with ring gear 

5 

Pressure chamber for advancing 

6 

Oscillating rotor 

7 

Pressure chamber for retarding 

8 

Oil channel 


The VANOS units are controlled by oil pressure from the 4/3 proportional solenoid 
valves. The valves are located in the front of the cylinder head and are controlled by the 
ECM. The ECM regulates the VANOS based on factors such as engine RPM, load and 
coolant temperature. 

N52 VANOS system 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

VANOS unit, Exhaust 

2 

VANOS unit, intake 

3 

Intake camshaft sensor 

4 

Exhaust camshaft sensor 

5 

VANOS solenoid valve 

6 

VANOS solenoid valve 



7 

VANOS 




















The infinitely variable double VANOS system was first introduced on the 
M52B20TU engine. The design is similar to that of two-setting intake VANOS; the main 
difference is that in addition to the timing of the intake camshaft, the timing of the 
exhaust camshaft can also be varied. The system allows for infinite variation of timing of 
both camshafts according to the control commands from the engine management ECM. 

The advantages of infinitely variable double VANOS are: 

• Higher torgue at low and medium engine speeds 

• Smaller guantity of residual exhaust when idling due to smaller valve overlap result¬ 
ing in improved idling 

• Internal exhaust recirculation in the medium power band in order to reduce nitrogen 
oxide emissions 

• Faster warm-up of catalytic converters and lower raw emission levels after a cold 
start 

• Reduction of fuel consumption 

The possible adjustment range of the double VANOS system is clearly identifiable by the 
blue/red shaded areas 



The infinitely variable double VANOS system is used on all current 
engines. The only change to the system is that each engine uses dif¬ 
ferent spread ranges (check engine specifications for the individual 
cam spread). 


As with previous systems, the VANOS units should not be mixed up 
as the spread ranges for the intake and exhaust are different and 
engine damage could result. 


8 

VANOS 



VANOS N55 


The VANOS system has been optimized to provide even faster adjustment speeds of 
the VANOS units. The aluminum VANOS units are much lighter and are also less sus¬ 
ceptible to soiling. It can be seen by comparing the N54 VANOS system with the N55 
VANOS that fewer oil passages are reguired and that the non-return valves are no longer 
on the cylinder head but rather incorporated into the solenoid valves on N55. 



N55, VANOS with oil supply 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Main oil duct 

2 

VANOS solenoid valve, intake side 

3 

VANOS solenoid valve, exhaust side 

4 

Chain tensioner 

5 

VANOS adjustment unit, exhaust side 

6 

VANOS adjustment unit, intake side 


9 

VANOS 



















N55 valve timing diagram 


mm 





N54B3000 

N55B30M0 

Intake valve 0 

[mm] 

31.4 

32 

Exhaust valve 0 

[mm] 

28 

28 

Maximum valve lift, intake 
valve/exhaust valve 

[mm] 

97/9.7 

9.9/97 

Intake camshaft spread (VANOS 
adjustment range) 

[“crankshaft] 

55 

70 

Exhaust camshaft spread (VANOS 
adjustment range) 

[“crankshaft] 

45 

55 

Intake camshaft opening angle 
(max.-min. spread) 

[“crankshaft] 

125-70 

120-50 

Exhaust camshaft opening angle 
(max.-min. spread) 

[“crankshaft] 

130-85 

115-60 

Opening period intake camshaft 

[“crankshaft] 

245 

255 

Opening period exhaust camshaft 

[“crankshaft] 

261 

261 



The N55 has a larger intake and exhaust VANOS adjustment range as 
well as larger intake valve lift, and cam duration than the N54 engine. 


10 

VANOS 





























VANOS Solenoid Valves (N55) 

The non-return valve with screen filter used on the N54 engine have now been integrat¬ 
ed in the VANOS solenoid valves on the N55 engine. This measure has made it possible 
to reduce the number of oil ducts in the cylinder head. The screen filters on the VANOS 
solenoid valve ensure trouble-free operation and reliably prevent the VANOS solenoid 
valve from sticking due to dirt particles. 

Cam Sensor Wheels (N55) 

The sensor wheels are now “deep-drawn” sheet metal components and no longer made 
from two parts. This design increases production accuracy while reducing manufacturing 
costs. 

N55, camshaft sensor wheel 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Rear View 

B 

Front view 


11 

VANOS 







VANOS N63 

The charge cycle in the N63 engine is realized 
with four valves per cylinder, which are driven by 
two overhead camshafts. 

The engine timing can be variably influenced by 
means of the two infinitely variable VANOS units. 

The VANOS units used here have the following 
timing angles: 

• Intake VANOS unit: 50° crankshaft angle 

• Exhaust VANOS unit: 50° crankshaft angle 

The VANOS units on the N63 engine differ from the VANOS units on the N62 engine. 
The function is identical but some components have been omitted and the VANOS unit 
has been optimized. 

On the N63 engine, the individual vanes of the VANOS unit are no longer individual parts 
but rather they have been further developed to form an oscillating rotor (as on the N52 
engine). 

The torsion spring integrated in the N62 VANOS unit is now designed as a coil spring 
accommodated on the front of the N63 VANOS unit protected by a plastic cover. 

VANOS N74 

Like all current BMW gasoline engines, the N74 engine is also equipped with variable 
double VANOS. The VANOS units are common parts shared with the N63 engine, with 
the exception of the intake unit on cylinder bank though this is also designed to the 
same principle, it features a drive flange with a slot for the vacuum pump. The N74 uses 
two VANOS non-return valves, they are now integrated into the VANOS solenoid valves. 

The VANOS units have the following adjustment angles: 

• VANOS unit intake: 50° crank angle 

• VANOS unit exhaust: 50° crank angle 



12 

VANOS 





