Table of Contents 


Emissions Management 

Subject Page 

Introduction .5 

OBD History.5 

OBD I.6 

OBD II .6 

Objectives of OBD II.6 

Emissions Overview .7 

Purpose of the System.7 

What is OBD? .7 

What happens if a problem is detected?.7 

What is the most common problem detected by OBD? .8 

Fuel Filler Cap.8 

Misfire Detection.8 

Engine Misfire Diagnosis .9 

Ignition System.9 

Engine Mechanical Systems.10 

Fuel Quality, Delivery, Injection & EVAPORATIVE Systems .10 

Implausible ECM Control Function or Sensor Input Signals .11 

Misfire Detection.12 

Overview of the National Low Emission Vehicle Program.13 

Emission Reduction Stages .13 

BMW SULEV & PZEV Engines .14 

BMW M56 Engine.14 

BMW N51 Engine .15 

Catalytic Converters.16 

Oxygen Sensors.16 

Fuel Pump System .16 

Fuel Injectors.16 

Secondary Air System .16 

Fuel System .17 

Cooling System .17 


Initial Print Date: 03/11 


Revision Date: 

































Subject Page 

System Monitoring .18 

Permanent Monitoring.18 

Cyclic Monitoring .18 

Drive Cycle.19 

Readiness Code.22 

Readiness Code using the ISTA .22 

OBD II Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTC).23 

BMW Fault Code .24 

OBD II Fault Memory and Fault Codes.24 

Emission Control Function Monitoring & Comprehensive 

Component Monitoring.25 

OBD II System Information on TIS .26 

Scan Tool Connection .27 

16 Pin Diagnostic Socket .28 

BoardNet 2020 .29 

Emission Management.30 

Malfunction Indicator Light (MIL) .30 

Evaporative Emissions.32 

Exhaust Emissions .32 

Adaptation Values.33 

Oxygen Sensors .34 

Oxygen sensor before catalytic converter.34 

Bosch LSH25 Oxygen Sensor .34 

Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor.36 

Bosch LSU ADV (Planar Wideband).37 

Oxygen Sensor after Catalytic Converter .37 

Oxygen Sensor Signals.38 

Direct Oxygen Sensor Heating .39 

Testing the Oxygen Sensor .40 

Catalytic Converter Monitoring.41 

On-Board Refueling Vapor Recovery (ORVR) E9x Vehicles.44 

Ventilation During Engine Operation .45 

Evaporative Leakage Detection (DM-TL).46 

Test Results .48 

Principle of Operation .50 

PHASE 1 - Reference Measurement.50 

PHASE 2 - Leak Detection .51 

Evaporative Emission Purging.52 








































Subject Page 

Carbon Canister.53 

Evaporative Emission Valve.53 

Secondary Air Injection .54 

Secondary Air Injection Monitoring .55 

Secondary Air System.55 

Secondary air pump.55 

Secondary air valve .56 

On-board diagnosis of secondary air system.56 

Misfire Detection.57 

Emission Increase .57 

Catalyst Damage .57 

Ambient Barometric Pressure.58 

Crankcase Ventilation.59 

Crankcase Ventilation (N51 and N52KP) .60 

Crankcase Ventilation (N54).61 

Crankcase Ventilation System Overview (N55) .63 

Naturally Aspirated Mode (N55) .63 

Boost Mode (N55).63 

Crankcase Ventilation System Overview (N54) .69 

Naturally Aspirated Mode (N54) .69 

Boost Mode (N54).69 

Crankcase Ventilation Heating .74 

























Emissions Management 

Model: All Equipped with OBD II 
Production: 1995 to Present 

Manufacturer: Bosch and Siemens Engine Control Modules 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe what is required to illuminate the Malfunction Indicator Lamp 

• Access readiness codes using the ISID 

• Understand how a oxygen sensor operates 

• Understand how the DM-TL system operates 

• Test a DM-TL system using a smoke tester 

• Understand how misfire monitoring takes place 


4 

Emissions Management 





Introduction 


OBD History 

As a result of low fuel costs, together with a high standard of living and a dense popula¬ 
tion, the state of California was affected particularly heavily by air pollution. This spurred 
the state to pass the most comprehensive and stringent emissions and consumption 
laws in the world. The automobile manufacturers were reminded of their obligations and 
this drove them on to comply with the new regulations at enormous expense. 


• In continuing efforts to improve air quality, the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) amended the Clean Air Act in 1990. The Clean Air Act was originally mandat¬ 
ed in 1970. The Clean Air Act has a direct impact on automobile manufactures 
whereby they are responsible to comply with the regulations set forth by the EPA. 
The 1990 amendment of the Clean Air Act set forth all of the changes currently 
being introduced on vehicles sold in the United States today. 

• In 1967, the State of California formed the California Air Resources Board (CARB) 
to develop and carryout air quality improvement programs for California’s unique air 
pollution conditions. Through the years, CARB programs have evolved into what we 
now know as ON Board Diagnostics and the National Low Emission Vehicle 
Program. 

• The EPA has adopted many of the CARB programs as National programs and laws. 
One of these earlier programs was OBD I and the introduction of the “Check 
Engine” Light. 

• BMW first introduced OBD I and the check engine light in the 1987 model year. 
This enhanced diagnosis through the display of “flash codes” using the check 
engine light as well as the BMW 2013 and GT-1. OBD I was only the first step in an 
ongoing effort to monitor and reduce tailpipe emissions. 

• By the 1989 model year all automotive manufactures had to assure that all individ¬ 
ual components influencing the composition of exhaust emissions would be electri¬ 
cally monitored and that the driver be informed whenever such a component failed. 

• Since the 1996 model year all vehicles must comply with OBD II requirements. 

OBD II requires the monitoring of virtually every component that can affect the 
emission performance of a vehicle plus store the associated fault code and condi¬ 
tion in memory. 

If a problem is detected and then re-detected during a later drive cycle more than 
one time, the OBD II system must also illuminate the “Check Engine” Light in the 
instrument cluster to alert the driver that a malfunction has occurred. However, 
the flash code function of the Check Engine Light in OBD I vehicles is not 
a function in OBD II vehicles. 


5 

Emissions Management 




• This requirement is carried out by the Engine Control Module (ECM/DME) as well 
as the Automatic Transmission Control Module (EGS/AGS) and the Electronic 
Throttle Control Module (EML) to monitor and store faults associated with all com¬ 
ponents/systems that can influence exhaust and evaporative emissions. 

OBD I 

The essential elements here are that electrical components which affect exhaust emis¬ 
sions are monitored by the motor-electronics system and an optical warning signal 
(CHECK ENGINE Light) is issued in the event of an OBD l-relevant malfunction. The cor¬ 
responding fault can be read out via a flashing code without the aid of a testing device. 


OBD II 

Since January 1996, OBD II has been compulsory on all vehicles in the US market. The 
main difference from OBD I is that not only are the purely electrical components moni¬ 
tored but also all the systems and processes that affect exhaust emissions and fuel sys¬ 
tem evaporative emissions. 


The operational reliability of the exhaust-treatment system must be guaranteed for 5 
years and/or 100,000 miles; this is maintained by emission certification. In this case, the 
data relevant to exhaust/evaporative emissions are read out via a standardized interface 
with a universal "diagnosis device". If a violation is identified, the vehicle manufacturer in 
question is legally bound to eliminate the fault throughout the entire vehicle series. 


Objectives of OBD II 

• Permanent monitoring of components relevant to exhaust emissions in all vehicles. 

• Immediate detection and indication of significant emission increases over the entire 
service life of each vehicle. 

• Permanently low exhaust emissions in the field. 



6 

Emissions Management 


















Emissions Overview 


Purpose of the System 

What is OBD? 

Today many of the engine’s control systems such as throttle opening, fuel injection, 
ignition, emissions and performance are controlled by an electronic control module and 
the related sensors and actuators. The first on-board diagnostic (OBD) systems were 
developed by the manufacturer as a way to detect problems with the electronic sys¬ 
tems. 

Beginning with 1994 model year, requirements for OBD systems have been established 
by the EPA and CARB. The purpose of the OBD system is to assure proper emission 
control system operation for the vehicle’s lifetime by monitoring emission-related com¬ 
ponents and systems for deterioration and malfunction. This includes also a check of 
the tank ventilation system for vapor leaks. 

The OBD system consists of the engine and transmission control modules, their sen¬ 
sors and actuators along with the diagnostic software. The control modules can detect 
system problems even before the driver notices a driveability problem because many 
problems that affect emissions can be electrical or even chemical in nature. 

What happens if a problem is detected? 

When the OBD system determines that a 
problem exists, a corresponding “Diagnostic 
Trouble Code” is stored in the control mod¬ 
ule’s memory. 

The control module also illuminates a yellow 
dashboard Malfunction Indicator Light indicat¬ 
ing “Check Engine” or “Service Engine Soon” 
or displays an engine symbol. 

This light informs the driver of the need for 
service, NOT of the need to stop the vehicle. 

A blinking or flashing dashboard light indicates 
a rather severe level of engine misfire. 

After fixing the problem the Fault code is deleted to turn off the light. If the conditions 
that caused a problem are no longer present the vehicle’s OBD system can turn off the 
dashboard light automatically. If the OBD system evaluates the component or system 
three consecutive times and no longer detects the initial problem, the dashboard light 
will turn off automatically. 


Have you seen this light? 



A short introduction to OBD 


7 

Emissions Management 





What is the most common problem detected by OBD? 

Fuel Filler Cap 

If the fuel filler cap is not properly closed after refueling, the OBD system will detect the 
vapor leak that exists from the cap not being completely tightened. 

If you tighten the cap subsequently, the dashboard light should be extinguished within a 
few days or after deleting the Fault code. This is not an indication of a faulty OBD sys¬ 
tem. The OBD system has properly diagnosed the problem and accordingly alerted the 
driver by illuminating the dashboard light. 

Please check the fuel filler cap first when the dashboard light comes on to avoid unnec¬ 
essary diagnostic time. To check the fuel filler cap turn the cap to the right until you hear 
a click or the cap reaches the full stop. Make sure that the retaining strap is not caught 
between the filler pipe and the fuel filler cap. If the light should stay on further in depth 
evaporative leak diagnosis is required. 

Misfire Detection 

As part of the CARB/OBD II regulations the Engine Control Module must determine if 
misfire is occurring and also identify the specific cylinder(s). The ECM will determine 
severity of the misfire event, and whether it is emissions relevant or catalyst damaging 
(more information is available in the Emission Management section). In order to accom¬ 
plish these tasks the ECM monitors the crankshaft for acceleration losses during firing 
segments of cylinder specific firing order. If the signal is implausible an erroneous refer¬ 
ence mark can be obtained by the ECM which will result in a misfire fault being set. 

Possible causes of cylinder misfire faults (actual field findings): 

• Vehicle ran low or out of fuel 

• Poor fuel quality (ex. water in fuel, customer uses an additive, etc.) 

• Low/high fuel pressure 

• Ignition coil 

• Fouled spark plug(s) 

• Restricted / contaminated fuel injector(s) 

• Crankshaft position sensor 

• Poor combustion due to low compression or high leakage 

• Blocked/restricted Catalyst 


8 

Emissions Management 




Engine Misfire Diagnosis 


Engine Misfire is the result of inefficient combustion in one or more cylinders. The caus¬ 
es of Engine Misfire are extensive but can be grouped into the following sub-systems. 
Consider the charts below as an additional diagnostic aid once ISTA is connected, the 
correct fault symptom has been chosen and the fault memory has been interrogated. 
Follow the Test Module as displayed by ISTA. 


IGNITION SYSTEM 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION TEST CORRECTION 


Spark Plug: • Incorrect spark plug installed 

• Electrode gap closed or too small 

• Electrode(s) missing 

• Oil or fuel fouled spark plug 

• Ceramic insulation cracked 


Secondary • Verify correct spark plug 

Ignition • Replace if necessary 

• Swap with another cylinder 


Secondary • Wet or moist due to water infiltration, 
circuit: (wiring,* High resistance due to corrosion. 

M73-cap, rotor) 


• Check water ingress, repair, replace 

• Check resistance value, replace 


Ignition 

Coil(s): 


• Secondary/Primary Circuits open or shorted. Secondary 

• Housing cracked, damaged. and Primary 


• Inspect and replace if necessary 

• Swap with another cylinder 


Ignition Coil 
& Engine 
Harness 
Connectors 


• Power supply, Primary control and Primary • Look for open, loose connector, 

ground (shunt signal) circuits impaired. Ignition & corrosion, crossed or backed out 

Term 4A feed- pins (also consider ignition unloader or 
back Preset ECM relay on MY97 and newer cars). 
Measurements • Determine defective condition, 

repair or replace. 


• A secondary ignition oscilloscope display provides vital 
information about the ignition system’s condition. 

• Follow the precautions in group 12 of the Repair Instructions. 

• Use the following scope patterns as a guideline for ignition 
system diagnosis. 


F+ f i' V J* I - ■ 
IrrM 




V: W. a: 




■ Iff- i «ih 

VI »»*?■ ^ >* • 1 Hh| I w kjii ■.■»■■■« 

9 w>ch mmh, bi-hv^i r*d iwfc-r-a »«--** kiwq 

LK/rtV HI H'JVFf FK 'IlHfFK WnnHI b-Tv 

L".■V-L-V 1 -n F-i L-.r.r-Fa O.u.% IFA Ji,. 

Hr —r >>r 1 BOTTOMS IMM friWI 
:jarv vaunmn ira twi 

l-ii,4 — 1 - T ■ ■ Y T - - -1 — L - tm — taH k, j -nkJ 

"bi ij. I id f Ai ud rid -BB La uju^Mia f waJ u isufii 

■ A- unt^wTihniurn^ k i I hi! cl-rr^A I i-bbj idb- 

’M m ■ iB ^ ir. rflhr iwt 


k l FH5-11 wv?. 




Evaluation of secondary signal amplitude at idle speed. 

1. Normal Ignition Voltage Peak: Spark Plug is OK 

2. Low Ignition Voltage Peak: Gap too small (defective) 

3. High Ignition voltage peak: Gap too large (defective) 


0 

0 

© 

© 



© 



NORMAL 
COMBUSTION 
PERIOD 



ONG COMBUSTION 
- PERIOD (SMALL GAP) 

■‘Him m in*/L 




I HORT COMBUSTION 
PERIOD (LARGE GAP) 



9 

Emissions Management 






























































ENGINE MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION TEST CORRECTION 


Pistons, 

• Hole in piston crown, ring(s) broken, 

• Idle Quality - Rough Run- • 

Correct condition as 

Rings, 

valve(s) not seating, valve(s) bent, 

ning Preset. 

required. 

Valves, 

valve spring(s) broken, camshaft lobe 

• Cylinder compression & 


Camshaft: 

cracked, etc. 

leakdown tests. 


Hydraulic 

• HVA oil bore restricted or blocked. 

• Idle Quality - Rough Run- • 

Always consider 

Valve 

• Engine oil pressure builds up too slow. 

ning Preset. 

mechanical com- 

Actuator 

* Intermittent Misfire Fault - Not 

• Listen to HVA 

ponents when 

(HVA): 

Currently Present. 

• Check Oil Pressure 

diagnosing misfire. 


• HVA binding/sticking in bore. 

• Cylinder leakdown • 

Inspect for scoring. 

Vacuum 

• Unmetered vacuum leaks causing a 

• Idle Quality - Rough Run- • 

Correct condition as 

Leaks: 

“lean” operating condition. Possible 

ning Preset. Test for vacuum 

required. 


“Excessive Mixture Deviation” 

leaks per Repair Instr. and SIB 



fault codes. 

on “Crankcase Ventilation”. 

■ 


• Interpret Add. & Multiple adaptation values 


FUEL QUALITY, DELIVERY, INJECTION & EVAPORATIVE SYSTEMS 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION TEST CORRECTION 

Fuel (quality): • Contaminated fuel. • Clean fuel system, replace fuel. 

(water, other non combustible). 


Fuel Delivery: • Fuel pump delivery pressure low, 

restriction in fuel line to fuel rail or 
running loss valve. 

• Fuel filter restricted (clogged). 

• Low fuel in tank. 


• Check fuel 
pressure & 
volume. 

• Check fuel 
pump power 
and ground 


• Determine restriction/flow reduction, 
replace component as necessary. 

• Interpret Additive and Multiplicative 
adaptation values. 


Running Loss • Valve stuck in “small circuit” position. 

Valve: 


• Check valve • Display “diagnosis requests” in ISTA 

and test valve for proper function, repl¬ 
ace valve as necessary. 


Fuel Injectors: 


Leaking fuel injector pintle seats cause 
rich engine starts with hot ambient 
temperatures. 

Blocked (dirty) injector(s). 


• Ti Preset & • Check injectors for leakage, 

status page. • Swap suspect injector with another 

• Sec Ign scope cylinder, 
pattern. 

• Inspect injector, replace if necessary. 


Fuel Pressure • Regulator defective, causes fluctuation 
Regulator: in the injected quantity of fuel causing 

mixture adaptation faults. 


• Fuel pressure • Check nominal fuel pressure value with 

engine operating under varied speeds. 


Evaporative • Defective evaporative system vent 
System: causing fuel tank collapse and fuel. 

starvation. 


• ISTA status, 
Evap test 
with press¬ 
ure tool, 
purge valve 
func. test. 


• Check the fuel tank condition and vent 
line. 

• Check Fresh Air Valve on TLEV E36 
vehicles or LDP/ DM-TL and filter on 
ORVR vehicles for proper system 
“breathing”. 


10 

Emissions Management 







IMPLAUSIBLE ECM CONTROL FUNCTION OR 

SENSOR INPUT SIGNALS 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION TEST CORRECTION 


Crankshaft 
Position 
Sensor or 
Increment 
Wheel: 


• Implausible signal for misfire detection. • ISTA preset 

• Increment wheel loose or damaged measurement, 
(internal on M44, M52 and M54, 

external on M62 & M73). 

• Air gap between sensor and wheel. 

• Noticeable at higher rpm. 


• Determine defective sensor or 
increment wheel and replace. 


Catalyst • Excessive exhaust back pressure 
Damaged: (bank specific fault present, more 

noticeable under heavy load and 
high rpm). 


• ISTA preset • Determine catalyst condition, replace 
measurement or repair as necessary. 

of oxygen 
sensor. 

• Back pressure test per SIB with Special Tool. 


Oxygen • Excessive mixture deviation, 

Sensor: possible vacuum leaks. 


• Monitor 
oxygen 
sensor 
signal via 
ISTA/IMIB. 


• Swap sensor from other bank (if app¬ 
licable) and see if fault transfers to 
other bank. 


Engine • Internal control module fault. 

Control 

Module • Misfire Reprogramming. 


• Check fault • Highly unlikely but must be considered, 
memory. 

• Refer to SIB • Check Model/Prod range - reprogram 


When diagnosing a Misfire fault code, Remember: 

“Misfire” is caused by a defect in the internal combustion engine or a defect in 
the control of the engine operation. 

“Misfire” is the result of improper combustion (variation between cylinders) as 
measured at the crankshaft due to: 

- Engine mechanical defects; breakage, wear, leakage or improper tolerances. 

- Excessive mixture deviation; air (vacuum leaks), fuel and all the components that deliver 
air/fuel into the combustion chambers. 

- Faulty ignition; primary, secondary including spark plugs. 

- Faulty exhaust flow; affecting back pressure. 

- Tolerance parameters; ECM programming. 

A Misfire fault code(s) is the “symptom” of a faulty input for proper combustion. 
When diagnosing a misfire, review the charts to assist you in finding the faulty 
input. 


11 

Emissions Management 







Misfire Detection 


As part of the OBD II regulations 
the ECM must determine misfire 
and also identify the specific cylin¬ 
ders), the severity of the misfire 
and whether it is emissions rele¬ 
vant or catalyst damaging based 
on monitoring crankshaft acceler¬ 
ation. 

In order to accomplish these tasks 
the ECM monitors the crankshaft 
for acceleration by the impulse 
wheel segments of cylinder spe¬ 
cific firing order. The 
misfire/engine roughness calcula¬ 
tion is derived from the differ¬ 
ences in the period duration of 
individual increment gear seg¬ 
ments. 

Each segment period consist of 
an angular range of 90° crank 
angle that starts 54° before Top 
Dead Center. 




SMOOTH RUNNING ENGINE ENGINE MISFIRE DETECTED 

(NOTE SQUARE WAVE SIGNAL) 



If the expected period duration is greater than the permissible value a misfire fault for the 
particular cylinder is stored in the fault memory of the ECM. 

Depending on the level of misfire rate measured the ECM will illuminate the "Malfunction 
Indicator Light”, deactivate the specific fuel injector to the particular cylinder and switch 
oxygen sensor control to open-loop. 


In order to eliminate misfire faults that can occur as a result of varying flywheel toler¬ 
ances (manufacturing process) an internal adaptation of the flywheel is made. The adap¬ 
tation is made during periods of decel fuel cut-off in order to avoid any rotational irregu¬ 
larities which the engine can cause during combustion. This adaptation is used to cor¬ 
rect segment duration periods prior to evaluation for a misfire event. 


If the sensor wheel adaptation has not been completed the misfire thresholds are limited 
to engine speed dependent values only and misfire detection is less sensitive. The 
crankshaft sensor adaptation is stored internally and is not displayed via ISTA. If the 
adaptation limit is exceeded a fault will be set. 


12 

Emissions Management 




































































Overview of the National Low Emission Vehicle Program 


Emission Reduction Stages 

While OBDII has the function of monitoring for emission related faults and alerting the 
operator of the vehicle, the National Low Emission Vehicle Program reguires a certain 
number of vehicles produced (specific to manufacturing totals) currently comply with the 
following emission stages; 


TLEV: Transitional Low Emission Vehicle 

LEV: Low Emission Vehicle 

ULEV: Ultra Low Emission Vehicle. 

SULEV Super Ultra Low Emission Vehicle 


Prior to the National Low Emission Vehicle Program, the most stringent exhaust reduc¬ 
tion compliancy is what is known internally within BMW as HC II. The benefit of exhaust 
emission reductions that the National Low Emission Vehicle Program provides com¬ 
pared with the HC II standard is as follows; 


TLEV: 

50% cleaner 

LEV: 

70% cleaner 

ULEV: 

84% cleaner 

SULEV 

90% cleaner 


Grams/Mile @ 50° F - 

Cold Engine Startup 

Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non-Methane 

Hydrocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.250 

3.4 

0.4 

LEV 

0.131 

3.4 

0.2 

ULEV 

0.040 

1.7 

0.2 


Grams/Mile @ 50,000 miles 

Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non-Methane 

Hydrocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.125 

3.4 

0.4 

LEV 

0.075 

3.4 

0.2 

ULEV 

0.040 

1.7 

0.2 


Grams/Mile @ 100,000 miles 

Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non-Methane 

Hydrocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.156 

4.2 

0.6 

LEV 

0.090 

4.2 

0.3 

ULEV 

0.055 

2.1 

0.3 


13 

Emissions Management 


































PZEV regulations include: 

• Vehicles must meet SULEV tailpipe emissions standard (approx. 1/5 of ULEV stan¬ 
dards) 

• Vehicles conform to Zero Evaporative Emissions 

• Vehicles subject to extended OBD regulations. 

• Emission relevant components warrantied for 15 years or 150,000 miles 

BMW SULEV & PZEV Engines 

BMW M56 Engine 

The following components are used to achieve SULEV (Super Ultra Low Emission 
Vehicle) and ZEV Zero Evaporative Emission requirements: 

• Pistons - Revised to change spark travel path 

• Catalytic Converters - Ceramic carriers with high cell density for better 
“Warm Up” Control 

• Oxygen Sensors - Planar wide band O 2 sensors in front of the cats 

• Vanos - Positioning changed during start up for improved start up and emissions 

• Fuel Pump Control - Revised with raised pressure and more accurate flow control 

• Fuel Injectors - New design for improved fuel flow and higher working pressure 

• Fuel System - All metal fuel system components made of stainless steel 

• Air Intake System - Revised to block HC escape 

• Crankcase Ventilation - Revised 

• Secondary Air System - Mass air flow 
sensor to monitor secondary air flow 

• Cooling System - Revised to reduce 
Ozone levels 



14 

Emissions Management 





BMW N51 Engine 

In order to comply with SULEV requirements, the N51 is another variant of the N52 
engine. There are various measures to meet the EPA/CARB standards, some of which 
are familiar from the previous SULEV (M56) engine. 

Some of the SULEV measures for the N51 include: 

• Near engine catalyst with additional underbody catalyst 

• Secondary air system 

• Optimized combustion chamber geometry in cylinder head 

• Modified piston crown for lower compression 

• Plastic valve cover with integrated crankcase vent valve 
and separator (from N52KP) 

• Stainless steel fuel lines with threaded connections 

• Radiator with “Prem-air” coating 

• Throttle system - EGAS08 carried over from N52KP 

• Airbox with Activated carbon filter for EVAP control 

• Purge system pipes are made from “optimized” plastic 



15 

Emissions Management 




Catalytic Converters 

The catalysts attached in direct proximity to the engine and are equipped with ceramic(s) 
carriers in high cell density technology. These converters reach operating temperature 
faster and offer quicker control of exhaust emissions. Vehicles are also equipped with 
dual downstream converters. 

Oxygen Sensors 

The M56 engine use for Oxygen sensors, two planar broadband sensors upstream of 
the converter and two sensors downstream. 

The planar broadband sensor reach operating temperature very fast and are able to 
effect fuel mixtures in approximately 5 seconds. 

Fuel Pump System 

Fuel system operating pressure is increased to 5 Bar. 

The fuel pump is controlled by the Fuel pump control unit, based on engine demand as 
received from the DME over the Lo-CAN. The fuel pump control unit additionally 
receives information over the K-Bus, specifically crash information from the MRS. 

Fuel Injectors 

Nozzle diameter of the fuel injectors has been reduced 
and the installation angle has been changed. The injec¬ 
tors were also adapted to perform at the higher system 
operating pressure. 

Injectors screw into the rail and a tap to test pressure 
readings is NOT provided. 

Secondary Air System 

The secondary air pump has been 
revised to improve its response time in 
cold weather starting situations. 

A HFM (Hot Film Air Mass Meter) has 
been added to the secondary air system 
to monitor air volume pumped into the 
exhaust for more accurate control of the 
NOx emissions. 




16 

Emissions Management 








Fuel System 

In order to meet the Zero Evaporative Emission requirement, the fuel system was 
completely revised. The fuel tank, tank filler neck, charcoal canister, fuel rail and tank 
ventilation valve are all made of stainless steel. 

When perform repairs on the fuel system, it is imperative that all fitting remain clean and 
that the proper tightening torques are observed. 

The fuel tank is manufactured of high grade steel and completely coated to meet the 
requirements of a minimum durability of 15 years. 

The fuel tank can be exchanged only as a complete unit. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Syphon Jet 

2 

Roll over valve 

3 

Fuel Filter 

4 

Electric fuel pump 

5 

Liquid Vapor Separator 


Cooling System 

The radiator of SULEV looks similar to the standard radiator. 

The surface of the cooling fins are coated with a special 
“PremAir” coating. 

The coating consists of multiple porous layers of a catalytic 
surface. The task of the catalyst coating is to convert Ozone 
into Oxygen. 



17 

Emissions Management 




































System Monitoring 


Within the framework of OBD II, certain components/systems must be monitored once 
per driving cycle while other control systems (e.g. misfire detection) must be monitored 
permanently. A "driving cycle" consists of engine startup, vehicle operation (exceeding 
of starting speed), coasting and engine stopping. 

Permanent Monitoring 

Permanently monitored systems are monitored according to temperature immediately 
after startup. In the event of malfunctions (e.g. oxygen sensor), the Malfunction Indicator 
Light will illuminate immediately. 

The following are monitored permanently: 

• Misfire Detection 

• Fuel System (duration of injection) 

• All emission related electrical circuits, components 
and systems of the ECM, TCM and EML (if equipped). 

Cyclic Monitoring 

Systems monitored once per driving cycle will only result in a fault being registered after 
the corresponding operating conditions have been completed. Therefore, there is no 
possibility for checking when the engine is started up briefly and then shut down. 

The following are monitored once per driving cycle: 

• Oxygen Sensor Function 

• Secondary Air Injection System 

• Catalytic Converter Function (efficiency) 

• Evaporative Vapor Recovery System 

Due to the complexity involved in meeting the test criteria within the defined driving 
cycle, all tests may not be completed within one "customer driving cycle". The test can 
be successfully completed within the defined criteria, however customer driving styles 
may differ and therefore may not always monitor all involved components/systems in 
one "trip". 


18 

Emissions Management 




Drive Cycle 

The following diagram shows how a drive cycle is set (test drive) in order for all the sys¬ 
tems to be monitored once. The test conditions can be created in any desired order 
after startup. 


Vehicle 

Speed 



Example of a Drive Cycle for Completing all OBD II Relevant Checks: 

1. Engine cold start, idling, approximately 3 minutes. Evaluated: 

• Secondary Air System 

• Evaporative Leak Detection (LDP Equipped Vehicles) 

2. Constant driving at 20 to 30 MPH, approximately 4 minutes. Evaluated: 

• Oxygen Sensors - Achieved “Closed Loop” Operation 

• Oxygen Sensors - Response Time and Switching Time (Control Frequency) 

3. Constant driving at 40 to 60 MPH, approximately 15 minutes (sufficient vehicle coast¬ 
ing phases included). Evaluated: 

• Catalytic Converter Efficiency 

• Oxygen Sensors - Response Time and Switching Time (Control Frequency) 

4. Engine idling, approximately 5 minutes. Evaluated: 

• Tank-Leak Diagnosis ( DM-TL Equipped Vehicles after KL 15 is switched OFF) 

The diagnostic sequence illustrated above will be interrupted if: 

? \ * The engine speed exceeds 3000 RPM 

— • Large fluctuations in the accelerator pedal position. 

• The driving speed exceeds 60 MPH 


19 

Emissions Management 













The “Malfunction Indicator Light” (MIL) will be 
illuminated under the following conditions: 

• Upon the completion of the next con¬ 
secutive driving cycle where the previ¬ 
ously faulted system is monitored again 
and the emissions relevant fault is again 
present. 

• Immediately if a “Catalyst Damaging” 
fault occurs (Misfire Detection). 


Monitored 

Components 



Malfunction 

Indicator 

Light 



The illumination of the light is performed in accordance with the Federal Test Procedure 
(FTP) which requires the lamp to be illuminated when: 


• A malfunction of a component that can affect the emission performance of the 
vehicle occurs and causes emissions to exceed 1.5 times the standards required 
by the (FTP). 

• Manufacturer-defined specifications are exceeded. 

• An implausible input signal is generated. 

• Catalyst deterioration causes HC-emissions to exceed a limit equivalent to 
1.5 times the standard (FTP). 

• Misfire faults occur. 

• A leak is detected in the evaporative system, or “purging” is defective. 

• ECM fails to enter closed-loop oxygen sensor control operation within a specified 
time interval. 

• Engine control or automatic transmission control enters a "limp home" operating 
mode. 

• Ignition is on (KL15) position before cranking = Bulb Check Function. 


Within the BMW system the illumination of the Malfunction Indicator Light is performed 
in accordance with the regulations set forth in CARB mail-out 1968.1 and as demon¬ 
strated via the Federal Test Procedure (FTP). The following page provides several exam¬ 
ples of when and how the Malfunction Indicator Light is illuminated based on the "cus¬ 
tomer drive cycle". 


20 

Emissions Management 




































DRIVE 
CYCLE # 1 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 2 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 3 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 4 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 5 

i 

* DRIVE 
CYCLE # 43 

TEXT 

NO. 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT CODE 

ERASED 

MIL 

STATUS 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 







1. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

















2. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 














3. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

NO 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 











4. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 



L_ 


5. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

\ 

1 

k_ 

r 

/ 

6. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

''fault/ 

CODE 

ERASED 

€. - 

V 

OFF 


1. A fault code is stored within the ECM upon the first occurrence of a fault in the sys¬ 
tem being checked. 

2. The "Malfunction Indicator Light” will not be illuminated until the completion of the 
second consecutive "customer driving cycle" where the previously faulted system is 
again monitored and a fault is still present or a catalyst damaging fault has occurred. 

3. If the second drive cycle was not complete and the specific function was not checked 
as shown in the example, the ECM counts the third drive cycle as the “next consecu¬ 
tive" drive cycle. The "Malfunction Indicator Light” is illuminated if the function is 
checked and the fault is still present. 

4. If there is an intermittent fault present and does not cause a fault to be set through 
multiple drive cycles, two complete consecutive drive cycles with the fault present are 
required for the "Malfunction Indicator Light” to be illuminated. 

5. Once the "Malfunction Indicator Light” is illuminated it will remain illuminated unless 
the specific function has been checked without fault through three complete consec¬ 
utive drive cycles. 

6. The fault code will also be cleared from memory automatically if the specific function 
is checked through 40 consecutive drive cycles without the fault being detected or 
with the use of either the ISTA and IMIB.. 

Note: In order to clear a catalyst damaging fault (see Misfire Detection) from 
memory, the condition must be evaluated for 80 consecutive cycles 
without the fault reoccurring. 

With the use of a universal scan tool, connected to the "OBD" DLC an SAE standardized 

DTC can be obtained, along with the condition associated with the illumination of the 

"Malfunction Indicator Light”. Using the ISTA, a fault code and the conditions associated 

with its setting can be obtained prior to the illumination of the "Malfunction Indicator 

Light”. 


21 

Emissions Management 



























































Readiness Code 


The readiness code provides status (Yes/No) of the system having completed all the 
required monitoring functions or not. The readiness code is displayed with an aftermar¬ 
ket Scan Tool or ISTA. The code is a binary (1/0) indicating; 

• 0 = Test Not Completed or Not Applicable - six cylinder vehicles 
(not ready - V8 and VI2) 

• 1 = Test Completed - six cylinder vehicles (ready - V8 and VI2) 

A "readiness code" must be stored after any clearing of fault memory or disconnection 
of the ECM. A readiness code of "0" will be stored (see below) after a complete diag¬ 
nostic check of all components/systems, that can turn on the "Malfunction Indicator 
Light” is performed. 

The readiness code was established to prevent anyone with an emissions related fault 
and a "Malfunction Indicator Light” on from disconnecting the battery or clearing the 
fault memory to manipulate the results of the emissions test procedure (IM 240). 

Interpretation of the Readiness Code by the ECM(s) (SAE J1979) 


The complete readiness code is equal to "one" byte (eight bits). Every bit represents 
one complete test and is displayed by the scan tool, as required by CARB/EPA. For 
example: 


0 = EGR Monitoring (=0, N/A with BMW) 
1 = Oxygen Sensor Heater Monitoring 
1 = Oxygen Sensor Monitoring 
0 = Air Condition (=0, N/A with BMW) 

1 = Secondary Air Delivery Monitoring 
1 = Evaporative System Monitoring 
0 = Catalyst Heating 
1 = Catalyst Efficiency Monitoring 


^IW'tH ow 

!YMHT fOR 
* ric-r—jf*. ririY r 
;«■ .>■■: ■H r - _ i c 



mt li-V-lf iJJ-VuL" 

ODC« « >* fflwliu ur-ajt: I 
■rn, .v 


Drive the car in such a manner that all tests listed above can be completed (refer to the 
drive cycle). When the complete "readiness code" equals "1" (ready) then all tests have 
been completed and the system has established its "readiness". 

Readiness Code using the ISTA 

The readiness code can be checked with the ISTA. This is particularly helpful in verify¬ 
ing that “drive cycle” criteria was achieved. A repair can be confirmed before returning 
the vehicle to the customer by a successfully completed drive cycle. 


22 

Emissions Management 







OBD II Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTC) 


The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) established the Diagnostic Trouble Codes 
used for OBD II systems (SAE J2012). The DTC’s are designed to be identified by their 
alpha/numeric structure. The SAE has designated the emission related DTC’s to start 
with the letter “P” for Powertrain related systems, hence their nickname “P-code”. 


For example: P 0 4 4 0 


P-Powertrain, B-Body, C-Chassis 



DTC Source; 0-SAE, 1 -BMW- 

System; 0-Total System- 

1- Air/Fuel Induction 

2- Fuel Injection 

3- Ignition System or Misfire 

4- Auxiliary Emission Control 

5- Vehicle Speed & Idle Control 

6- Control Module Inputs/Outputs 

7- Transmission 


Sequentially numbered 
fault identifying individual 
components or circuits 
(00-99) 


• DTC’s are stored whenever the "Malfunction Indicator Light” is illuminated. 

• A requirement of CARB/EPA is providing universal diagnostic access to DTC’s via a 
standardized Diagnostic Link Connector (DLC) using a standardized tester (scan 
tool). 


DTC’s only provide one set of environmental operating conditions when a fault is 
stored. This single "Freeze Frame" or snapshot refers to a block of the vehicles 
environmental conditions for a specific time when the fault first occurred. The infor¬ 
mation which is stored is defined by SAE and is limited in scope. This information 
may not even be specific to the type of fault. 


23 

Emissions Management 




BMW Fault Code 


• BMW Codes are stored as soon they occur even before the "Malfunction Indicator 
Light” comes on. 

• BMW Codes are defined by BMW, Bosch and Siemens Engineers to provide 
greater detail to fault specific information. 

• Siemens systems - one set from four fault specific environmental conditions is 
stored with the first fault occurrence. This information can change and is specific to 
each fault code to aid in diagnosing. A maximum of ten different faults containing 
four environmental conditions can be stored. 

• Bosch systems - a maximum of four sets from three fault specific environmental 
conditions is stored within each fault code. This information can change and is spe¬ 
cific to each fault code to aid in diagnosing. A maximum of ten different faults con¬ 
taining three environmental conditions can be stored. 

• BMW Codes also store and displays a "time stamp" when the fault last occurred. 

• A fault gualifier gives more specific detailed information about the type of fault 
(upper limit, lower limit, disconnection, plausibility, etc.). 

• BMW Fault Codes will alert the Technician of the current fault status. He/she will 
be advised if the fault is actually still present, not currently present or intermittent. 

The fault specific information is stored and accessible through ISTA. 

• BMW Fault Codes determine the diagnostic output for ISTA. 

OBD II Fault Memory and Fault Codes 

Within the framework of OBD II, a diagnosis of all emission-related components/func¬ 
tions must take place during driving. Faults will be stored and displayed if necessary. 

For this purpose, the ECM includes OBD II memory. The standardized P codes for 
malfunctions are stored in this memory. The memory can be read out with the ISTA 
or a Scantool. 


24 

Emissions Management 




Emission Control Function Monitoring & Comprehensive Component 
Monitoring 

OBD II regulations are based on section 1968.1 of Title 13, California Code of 
Regulations (CCR), The law set forth in section 1968.1 requires an increased 
scope of monitoring emission related control functions including: 

• Catalyst Monitoring 

• Heated Catalyst Monitoring 
(currently used on BMW 750il_ vehicles) 

• Misfire Monitoring 

• Evaporative System Monitoring 

• Secondary Air System Monitoring 

• Air Conditioning System Refrigerant Monitoring 
(Not applicable for BMW vehicles) 

• Fuel System Monitoring 

• Oxygen Sensor Monitoring 

• Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR) System Monitoring 
(Not applicable for BMW vehicles) 

• Positive Crankcase Ventilation (PCV) System Monitoring 
(Not required at this time) 

• Thermostat Monitoring (if equipped) 

Monitoring these emission requirements is a function of the ECM which uses “data sets” 
while monitoring the conditions of the environment and the operation of the engine 
using existing input sensors and output actuators. 

The data sets are programmed reference values the ECM refers to when a specific mon¬ 
itoring procedure is occurring. If the ECM cannot determine the environmental and/or 
engine operating conditions due to an impaired or missing signal, it will set a fault and 
illuminate the “Malfunction Indicator Light”. 

This input or control signal monitoring falls under another category called 
“Comprehensive Component Monitoring”. The ECM must recognize the loss or 
impairment of the signal or component. The ECM determines a faulted signal or 
sensor via three conditions: 

1. Signal or component shorted to ground. 

2. Signal or component shorted to B+. 

3. Signal or component lost (open circuit). Specific fault codes 
are used to alert the diagnostician of these conditions. 


25 

Emissions Management 




OBD II System Information on TIS 

BMW TIS includes a section with OBD II related information and it is divided into three 
main categories: 

• Mode $06 Interface Data; features a list of current and previous DME’s for 
specific on board monitoring test results. 

• OBD II Overview and Drive Cycle; features a brief summary of the Emissions 
Overview contained in this Reference Manual. 

• OBD II Systems; features a list of current and previous DME’s with information on 
Fault Codes Conditions with possible fault causes and suggested repair procedures 
as well as specific OBD II Description information as per DME version. This section 
is an important tool that can help you in your diagnosis process! 

To access the information contained in the OBD section, access CenterNet, then go to 
TIS and select the category you wish to browse. 



Umi 




► ns 


o 


■ tb.H f, 4J-nil 


BMW of North America, LLC 


.Vhlil t N I: 

E f i b i rvuAi Ls i : r.ifiii 

iflst JSil' 

r :-arrfLfl EidfeTifrl 
+t -i4r j1rci w ism 
'iv- 'j'cnjn™ 

Cpc^rjling Flu*J* 

T*ehrti*0a TruSriRlfl 
■Trjiniij \AiiniY. 

Paris IhTermadari 

i^ilrlirr 


flepplr Interm^tfsn 

■f liuds plLT ta = j£ 

Sp&t ial TOdll 

■Spaiiil juds Daiafcue 

E. IM Inter malic-n 

tVrifnu !i> E3 1 

&MW Hunffl-r 

*KK5 Dp .-3 hiliunlkiit 

H<DS AiiETficrri wpcutafelcj 

t F 1H>SS tv BTA VlHSiWl 


DCS 
■O • • 

fc 1 -" in; ■ Pi Qi i! »irln □ 
W.'I s '.: Tfrfjhf : . 

■' Vt-riirnin Tpniciii.iv 




■ ■. .“T - m 



k-*™ 

LF . 1 b IT 


frfc- 

nw 



PSi-fl 

f™ 

ui 



TIS 


DEDH Systems inform-stlon- 

i xn i k»t i i ^ i ^ i i ^ i £^1 i^i ji^i i J; 


ill* 

1 rp»iv 

1 i Iri -jiJ4. I.1I [ 


*** 

hi# ■'liiliaai 


nixtfic 

ntJT 

c» 


ijv !'! ’ 1 

| yip 


EH 





Cw 



iJc<i Iti 


Efc 


uy mi 



E'l 



rf £■ IIJ 

rtu 

m 


Mr nil 



pi:- 





F±i 



in* 

Tp^.r P rCr 


■brink 



1- 





•JS-.-1 iti 

U 

M 


rfra-d 

TUP* 





NHKfi 

*■] 

PJM 

,‘PL* 


hrrnri 

MV.V3 



FIT 








‘ IFW : 7 

fKW 

E*7 


pwsn 

l/i-i-flyl .. 





'Jig' 1 _ 

ur 





26 

Emissions Management 
































































































































Scan Tool Connection 


Starting with the 1995 750il_, soon after on all 1996 model year and later BMW vehi¬ 
cles, a separate OBD II Diagnostic Link Connector (DLC) was added. 


The DLC provides access for an 
aftermarket scan tool to all emis¬ 
sion related control systems: 

• ECM - Engine Management 
Monitored Emissions 
Functions / Components 

• TCM (AGS/EGS) - 
Transmission Control 

• EML - Electronic Throttle 
Control 

This diagnostic communication 
link uses the existing TXD II cir¬ 
cuit in the vehicle through a sep¬ 
arate circuit on the DLC when 
the 20 pin cap is installed. 


DIS/MoDiC 
COMMUNICATE VIA: 

PIN 15 - RXD (Limited use) 
PIN 20 - TXD 
PIN 17 - TXD 



SCANTOOLS COMMUNICATE VIA: 

PIN 17 - TXD II ONLY 
(20 PIN CAP INSTALLED) 






E 

1 OBD II STBODBROIZED 1 ^ 

J I miLT CODES | IhI 



■ 

,j— 




EML 

CONTROL 

MODULE 



TRANS 

CONTROL 

MODULE 



ABS/ASC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 




CONTROL 

MODULE 


The DLC Connector bridging cap is marked “OBD II” and is found: 



E38 and older models have a cosmetic cover and a secured DLC cover. 


27 

Emissions Management 

































































































































16 Pin Diagnostic Socket 

Model and Production Date: E46 from 6/00 

E39, E52, E53 from 9/00 


For model year 2001 the E39, E46 and E53 will eliminate the 20 pin diagnostic 
connector from the engine compartment. The 16 pin OBD II connector located inside 


the vehicle will be the only diagnosis port. 

The E38 and Z3 will continue to use the 20 
pin connector until the end of production. 

The 16 pin OBD II connector has been in all 
BMWs since 1996 to comply with OBD reg¬ 
ulations requiring a standardized diagnostic 
port. 

Previously before 2001, only emissions rele¬ 
vant data could be extracted from the OBD II 
connector because it did not provide access 
to TXD (D-bus). 

The TXD line is connected to pin 8 of the 
OBD II connector on vehicles without the 20 
pin diagnostic connector. 



The cap to the OBD II connector contains a bridge that links KL 30 to TXD and TXD II. 
This is to protect the diagnostic circuit integrity and prevent erroneous faults from being 
logged. 

The OBD II connector is located in the driver’s footwell to the left of the steering column 
for E39, E46 and E53 vehicles. 


28 

Emissions Management 




Board Net 2020 


Vehicles equipped with BN2020 have the following configuration in the OBD II 
Diagnostic Socket: 


Diagnostic socket 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Not assigned 

9 

Engine speed 

2 

Not assigned 

10 

Not assigned 

3 

Ethernet Rx+ 

11 

Ethernet Rx- 

4 

Terminal 31 

12 

Ethernet Tx+ 

5 

Terminal 31 

13 

Ethernet Tx- 

6 

D-CAN High 

14 

D-CAN Low 

7 

Not assigned 

15 

Not assigned 

8 

Ethernet activation 

16 

Terminal 30F 


Ethernet connection between the diagnostic socket and ZGM 



These five lines are routed from the diagnostic socket to the central gateway module 
(ZGM). 

One of the five lines transmits the activation signal. The remaining four lines are twisted 
pair and are used for data transmission. 



For further information please refer to the F01 Reference Manual. 


29 

Emissions Management 














































Emission Management 


Example of IPO for an Emissions Management System 



One of the main purposes of the ECM is Emissions Management which includes the 
actuation of several components. In the following pages you will find a generic explana¬ 
tion on how this system works. For more detailed information please access BMW 
Training Reference Manuals found on-line. 

The Emissions Management controls evaporative and exhaust emissions. The ECM 
monitors the fuel storage system for evaporative leakage and controls the purging of 
evaporative vapors. The ECM also monitors and controls the exhaust emissions by reg¬ 
ulating the combustible mixture and after treating by injecting fresh air into the exhaust 
system. The catalytic converter further breaks down the remaining combustible exhaust 
gases and is monitored by the ECM for catalyst efficiency. 

Malfunction Indicator Light (MIL) 


The MIL will be illuminated under the 
following conditions: 

• Upon the completion of the next 
consecutive driving cycle where 
the previously faulted system is 
monitored again and the emis¬ 
sions relevant fault is again pre¬ 
sent. 

• Immediately if a “Catalyst 
Damaging” fault occurs (see 
Misfire Detection). 



30 

Emissions Management 




































































The illumination of the light is performed in accordance with the Federal Test Procedure 
(FTP) which requires the lamp to be illuminated when: 

• A malfunction of a component that can affect the emission performance of the vehi¬ 
cle occurs and causes emissions to exceed 1.5 times the standards required by the 
(FTP). 

• Manufacturer-defined specifications are exceeded. 

• An implausible input signal is generated. 

• Catalyst deterioration causes HC-emissions to exceed a limit equivalent to 
1.5 times the standard (FTP). 

• Misfire faults occur. 

• A leak is detected in the evaporative system, or “purging” is defective. 

• ECM fails to enter closed-loop oxygen sensor control operation within a specified 
time interval. 

• Engine control or automatic transmission control enters a "limp home" operating 
mode. 

• Ignition is on (KL15) position before cranking = Bulb Check Function. 

Within the BMW system the illumination of the Malfunction Indicator Light is performed 
in accordance with the regulations set forth in CARB mail-out 1968.1 and as demon¬ 
strated via the Federal Test Procedure (FTP). The following page provides several exam¬ 
ples of when and how the Malfunction Indicator Light is illuminated based on the "cus¬ 
tomer drive cycle". 


31 

Emissions Management 




Evaporative Emissions 

The control of the evaporative fuel vapors (Hydrocarbons) from the fuel tank is important 
for the overall reduction in vehicle emissions. The evaporative system has been com¬ 
bined with the ventilation of the fuel tank, which allows the tank to breath (equalization). 
The overall operation provides: 

• An inlet vent, to an otherwise “sealed” fuel tank, for the entry of air to replace the 
fuel consumed during engine operation. 

• An outlet vent with a storage canister to “ trap and hold” fuel vapors that are pro¬ 
duced by the expansion/evaporation of the fuel in the tank, when the vehicle is sta¬ 
tionary. 

The canister is then "purged" using the engine vacuum to draw the fuel vapors into the 
combustion chamber. This "cleans" the canister allowing for additional storage. Like any 
other form of combustible fuel, the introduction of these vapors on a running engine 
must be controlled. 

The ECM controls the Evaporative Emission Valve which regulates purging of evapora¬ 
tive vapors. The evaporative system must be monitored for correct purge operation and 
Leak Detection. 

Exhaust Emissions 

The combustion process of a gasoline powered engine produces Carbon Monoxide 
(CO), Hydrocarbons (HC) and Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx). 

• Carbon Monoxide is a product of incomplete combustion under conditions of air 
deficiency. CO emissions are dependent on the air/fuel ratio. 

• Hydrocarbon are also a product of incomplete combustion which results in 
unburned fuel. HC emissions are dependent on air/fuel ratio and the ignition of the 
mixture. 

• Oxides of Nitrogen are a product of peak combustion temperature (and temperature 
duration). NOx emissions are dependent on internal cylinder temperature affected 
by the air/fuel ratio and ignition of the mixture. 

Control of exhaust emissions is accomplished by the engine and engine management 
design as well as after-treatment. 

• The ECM manages exhaust emissions by controlling the air/fuel ratio and ignition. 

• The ECM controlled Secondary Air Injection further dilutes exhaust emissions leav¬ 
ing the engine and reduce the catalyst warm up time. 

• The Catalytic Converter further reduces exhaust emissions leaving the engine. 


32 

Emissions Management 



Adaptation Values 

In order to maintain an “ideal” air/fuel ratio, the engine control module is capable of 
adapting to various environmental conditions encountered while the vehicle is in opera¬ 
tion (i.e. changes in altitude, humidity, ambient temperature, ambient pressure, fuel quali¬ 
ty, etc.). 

The adaptation system can only make slight corrections and can not compensate for 
large changes which may be encountered as a result of incorrect airflow or incorrect fuel 
supply to the engine. 

Within the areas of adjustable adaptation, the engine control module modifies the injec¬ 
tion rate under two areas of engine operation: 

1. During idle and low load mid range engine speeds (Additive Adaptation), 

2. During operation under a normal to higher load when at higher engine speeds 
(Multiplicative Adaptation) 

These values are displayed in the “Diagnosis Query” section of ISTA and are a helpful 
diagnostic tool that shows how the system is trying to compensate for a less than ideal 
initial air/fuel ratio. 

Note: If the adaptation value is greater than “0.0 ms” the Engine Control 

Module is trying to en-richen the mixture. If the adaptation value is less 
than “0.0 ms” the Engine Control Module is trying to lean-out the mixture. 


Diagnosis Request 
Status 

Explanation 

Additive mixture 
adaptation (Idle) 

If the value is greater than 0.2ms there is an unmetered air leak or not enough fuel 
being supplied to the system. 

• The O 2 sensor indicates a LEAN condition 

• The engine control module tries to RICHEN the mixture. 

If the value is less than -0.2 ms there is an air restriction or too much fuel is being 
supplied to the system. 

• The O 2 sensor indicates a RICH condition. 

• The Engine Control Module tries to LEAN out the mixture. 

Multiplicative mixture 
adaptation (Part load) 

If the value is greater than 8% there is an unmetered air leak or not enough fuel 
being supplied to the system. 

• The O 2 sensor indicates a LEAN condition 

• The Engine Control Module tries to RICHEN the mixture 

If the value is less than -8% there is an air restriction or too much fuel being sup¬ 
plied to the system 

• The O 2 sensor indicates a RICH condition 

• The Engine Control Module tries to LEAN out the mixture 


33 

Emissions Management 










Oxygen Sensors 


Exhaust gas composition before 
catalytic converter 


The oxygen sensor is an indispensable component 
for controlling and measuring the composition of 
exhaust gas with the aim of conforming to legally 
stipulated emission values. This is achieved by mea¬ 
suring the residual oxygen content in the exhaust 
gas. 

A fuel-air ratio of 1 kg of fuel to 14.7 kg of air is 
required for optimum combustion. 



Oxygen sensor before catalytic converter 

Bosch LSH25 Oxygen Sensor 

The pre-cat Bosch LSH 25 oxygen sensors measure 
the residual oxygen content of the exhaust gas. The 
sensors produces a low voltage (0-1000 mV) propor¬ 
tional to the oxygen content that allows the ECM to 
monitor the air/fuel ratio. 

The sensors are mounted in the hot exhaust stream 
directly in front of the catalytic converters. 

The “tip” of the sensor contains a microporous platinum 
coating (electrodes) which conduct current. The plat¬ 
inum electrodes are separated by solid electrolyte which 
conducts oxygen ions. The platinum conductors are 
covered with a highly porous ceramic coating and the 
entire tip is encased in a ventilated metal “cage”. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Oxygen sensor upstream 
of catalytic converter 

2 

Connection to the 
turbocharger 

3 

Ceramic structure 1 

4 

Catalytic converter outlet 
funnel 

5 

Ceramic structure 2 

6 

Oxygen sensor after ceramic structure 1 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Solids 0.005% 

2 

NO x 0.1% 

3 

HC 0.2% 

4 

CO 0.7% 

5 

C0 2 14% 

6 

H 2 0 13% 

7 

Oxygen + others 1 % 

8 

N 2 1 % 



34 

Emissions Management 


































I Hr:* Riuti 


Rtad I irro 


This assembly is submersed in the exhaust 
stream. The sensor body (external) has a 
small vent opening in the housing that 
allows ambient air to enter the inside of the 
tip. 

The ambient air contains a constant level 
of oxygen content (21%) and the exhaust 
stream has a much lower oxygen content. 

The oxygen ions (which contain small elec¬ 
trical charges) are “purged” through the 
solid electrolyte by the hot exhaust gas 
flow. The electrical charges (low voltage) 

are conducted by the platinum electrodes to the sensor signal wire that is monitored by 
the ECM. 



■M LjMPl 


! ; HiiaP 


If the exhaust has a lower oxygen content (rich mixture), there will be a large ion “migra¬ 
tion” through the sensor generating a higher voltage (950 mV). 

If the exhaust has a higher oxygen content (lean mixture), there will be a small ion “migra¬ 
tion” through the sensor generating a lower voltage (080 mV). 

This voltage signal is constantly changing due to combustion variations and normal 
exhaust pulsations. 

The ECM monitors the length of time the sensors are operating in the lean, rich (includ¬ 
ing the time of rise and fall) and rest conditions. The evaluation period of the sensors is 
over a predefined number of oscillation cycles. 

This conductivity is efficient when the oxygen sensor is hot (250° - 300° C). For this rea¬ 
son, the sensor contains a heating element. This “heated” sensor reduces warm up time, 
and retains the heat during low engine speed when the exhaust temperature is cooler. 



35 

Emissions Management 


























































































Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor 

Engines equipped with planar wideband oxygen sensors (pre-catalyst) are identified by 
its planar shape (type of construction) which is more compact and is made up of thin lay¬ 
ers of zirconium dioxide (Z 1 O 2 ) ceramic films. This modular lamination structure enables 
the integration of several functions including the heating element which ensures the min¬ 
imum operating temperature (750 °C) is reached rapidly. 

In contrast to conventional oxygen sensors, the wideband features can measure not only 
at Lambda=1, but also in the rich and extremely lean range (Lambda=0.7 to complete 
atmospheric oxygen) very rapidly. 

To operate effectively, the oxygen sensor requires ambient air as the “reference gas” 
inside the sensor. The ambient air reaches the inside of the sensor through the 
plug connection and through the harness. The plug connection socket must there¬ 
fore be protected from contamination (wax, preservatives, engine degreasers, engine 
washing, etc.). In the event of the oxygen sensor malfunctioning, the connector should 
always be checked first with regard to contamination and cleaned if necessary. The plug 
connection must be disconnected and then reconnected to remove any oxidation from 
the connector pins. 

The pump cell and reference cell are made of zirconium dioxide and each coated with 
two porous platinum electrodes. They are arranged so that there is a measuring gap of 
approx. 10 to 50 microns between them. This measuring gap is connected by an inlet 
opening to the exhaust gas. The pump cell is controlled by the ECM applying voltage to 
the electrodes to initiate oxygen ion pumping across the porous membrane of the refer¬ 
ence cell, providing a quicker response time. 


Design of broadband oxygen sensor 



•JJ *) V D V S 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Insulation layer 

2 

Heating element 

3 

Reference air channel 

4 

Inner electrode, reference cell 

5 

Ceramic layer made of Zr02 

6 

Outer electrode reference cell 

7 

Inner electrode, O 2 pump cell 

8 

Diffusion gap 

9 

Porous diffusion barrier 

10 

Exhaust inlet hole 

11 

Ceramic layer made of Zr02 

12 

Outer electrode, O 2 pump cell 

13 

Protective layer 


36 

Emissions Management 




























































If the exhaust gas content is lean, the pump cell pumps oxygen away from the measuring 
gap to the outside. The direction of flow is reversed for rich exhaust gas content, then 
oxygen is pumped from the exhaust gas into the measuring gap. The pump current flow 
is proportional to the oxygen concentration (lean) or the oxygen requirement (rich). The 
pump is constantly working to maintain that the gas composition in the measuring gap is 
constantly at Lambda=1. The required current of the pump cell is evaluated by the ECM 
as a signal that represents oxygen content in the exhaust gas. 


Bosch LSU ADV (Planar Wideband) 

The Bosch oxygen sensor LSU ADV is used as the control sensor before the catalytic 
converter. The abbreviation LSU stands for “Lambdasonde Universal” and ADV for 
“Advanced”. The function is similar to that of the LSU 4.9 oxygen sensor and is therefore 
described in detail in the E71 X6 training material under “N63 engine” available in TIS 
and ICP. 


The oxygen sensor before catalytic converter (LSU ADV) offers the following advantages: 

• High signal stability specially during turbocharged operation due to low dynamic 
pressure dependence. 

• Increased durability due to reduced pump voltage. 

• Increased accuracy (by a factor of 1.7 compared to LSU 4.9). 

• Ready for operation in < 5 seconds. 

• Greater temperature compatibility. 

• Improved connector with more effective contacting properties. 

The LSU ADV has an extended measuring range, making it possible to measure 
precisely from lambda 0.65. The new oxygen sensor is ready for operation faster so 
that exact measured values are available within 5 seconds of start up. 

The higher measuring dynamics of the sensor makes it possible to more effectively 
determine and control the fuel-air ratio separately for each cylinder. This results in a 
homogeneous exhaust flow that reduces emissions while also having a favorable effect 
on long-term emission characteristics. 


Oxygen Sensor after Catalytic Converter 

The oxygen sensor after catalytic converter is also known as the monitoring sensor. 
The familiar Bosch LSF 4.2 monitoring sensor are used in most of our NG engines. 

The voltage range is 0.10 to 1.0 volts. 


37 

Emissions Management 



Oxygen Sensor Signals 

The sensor conductivity is efficient when the oxygen sensor is hot (750° C). For this rea¬ 
son, the sensor contains a heating element. This reduces warm up time, and retains the 
heat during low engine speed when the exhaust temperature is cooler. The oxygen sen¬ 
sor heating elements receive power from the IVM (12 V) and the ground supply is pulse 
width modulated by the ECM. 

The monitored voltage signal is constantly changing due to combustion variations and 
normal exhaust pulsations. 

• At a value of Lambda = 1, the pump cell requires approx. 3 mA. 

The oxygen sensor signal voltage is approx. 1.5V 
The reference cell voltage is approx. 450mV 

• At a Lambda value <1 (rich), the oxygen sensor signal voltage is approx. 0.3V 

• At a Lambda value >1 (lean), the oxygen sensor signal voltage is approx. 4.3V 

If necessary, the ECM will “correct” the air/fuel ratio by regulating the ms injection time. 
The ECM monitors the length of time the sensors are operating in the lean, rich and rest 
conditions. The evaluation period of the sensors is over a predefined number of oscillation 
cycles and pump cell amperage. 


38 

Emissions Management 



Direct Oxygen Sensor Heating 

The oxygen sensor conductivity is efficient when it is hot (600° - 700° C). For this rea¬ 
son, the sensors contain heating elements. These “heated” sensors reduce warm up 
time, and retain the heat during low engine speed when the exhaust temperature is cool¬ 
er. OBD II requires monitoring of the oxygen sensor heating function and heating ele¬ 
ments for operation. 

The four oxygen sensor heating circuits receive operating voltage from the ECM Relay 
when KL15 is switched “ON”. Each of the sensors heaters are controlled through sepa¬ 
rate final stage transistors. 

The sensor heaters are controlled with a pulse width modulated voltage during a cold 
start. This allows the sensors to be brought up to operating temperature without the 
possibility of thermal shock. The duty cycle is then varied to maintain the heating of the 
sensors. 

When the engine is decelerating (closed throttle), the ECM increases the duty cycle of 
the heating elements to compensate for the decreased exhaust temperature. 



39 

Emissions Management 


































































































Testing the Oxygen Sensor 

Testing should be performed using ISTA/IMIB Oscilloscope. List. The scope pattern 
should appear for a normal operating sensor. 

If the signal remains high (rich condition) the following should be checked: 

• Fuel Injectors 

• Fuel Pressure 

• Ignition System 

• Input Sensors that influence air/fuel mixture 

• Engine Mechanical 

If the signal remains low (lean condition) the following should be checked: 

• Air/Vacuum leak 

• Fuel Pressure 

• Input Sensor that influence air/fuel mixture 

• Engine Mechanical 

A MIXTURE RELATED FAULT CODE SHOULD BE INVESTIGATED 
| FIRST AND DOES NOT ALWAYS INDICATE A DEFECTIVE OXYGEN 
^ SENSOR! 


40 

Emissions Management 




Catalytic Converter Monitoring 

The efficiency of catalyst operation is deter¬ 
mined by evaluating the oxygen consumption 
of the catalytic converters using the pre and 
post oxygen sensor signals. A properly operat¬ 
ing catalyst consumes most of the 02 (oxy¬ 
gen) that is present in the exhaust gas (input 
to catalyst). The gases that flow into the cata¬ 
lyst are converted from CO, HC and NOx to 
C02, H20 and N2 respectively. 

In order to determine if the catalysts are work¬ 
ing correctly, post catalyst oxygen sensors are 
installed to monitor exhaust gas content exiting the catalysts. The signal of the post cat. 
02 sensor is evaluated over the course of several pre cat. 02 sensor oscillations. 

During the evaluation period, the signal of the post cat. sensor must remain within a rela¬ 
tively constant voltage range (700 - 800 mV). The post cat. 02 voltage remains high 
with a very slight fluctuation. This indicates a further lack of oxygen when compared to 
the pre cat. sensor. 

If this signal decreased in voltage and/or increased in fluctuation, a fault code will be set 
for Catalyst Efficiency and the “Malfunction Indicator Light” will illuminate when the OBD 
II criteria is achieved. 


Good 

Signal 


lli 

3 


a. 

2 

< 


O 

> 


PRE POST 



TIME 



41 

Emissions Management 










On-Board Refueling Vapor Recovery (ORVR) 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Overpressure protection valve 

9 

Atmospheric vent line 

2 

Filling vent valve (rollover valve) 

10 

DM-TL (electrical control circuit) 

3 

Operating vent valve 

11 

ECM (DME) 

4 

Ventilation line 

12 

Evaporative emission (purge) control valve 

5 

Mushroom valve (“T” fitting) 

13 

Evaporative emission (purge) line 

6 

Carbon canister 

14 

Intake manifold 

7 

DM-TL (leakage diagnosis pump) 

15 

Engine air filter 

8 

Filter 

16 

M54 engine 


The ORVR system recovers and stores hydrocarbon fuel vapor that was previously 
released during refueling. Non ORVR vehicles vent fuel vapors from the tank venting line 
back to the filler neck and in many states reclaimed by a vacuum receiver on the filling 
station’s fuel pump nozzle. 

When refueling an ORVR equipped vehicle, the pressure of the fuel entering the tank 
forces the hydrocarbon vapors through the Filling Vent Valve (2) and the large tank venti¬ 
lation line (4) into the Carbon Canister (6). The HC is stored in the Carbon Canister and 
the system can then “breathe” through the DM-TL (7) and the filter (8). 


42 

Emissions Management 













































































The ventilation continues until the rising fuel level lifts the float in the Filling Vent Valve 
(2) and closes the outlet. When the ventilation outlet is closed, a pressure cushion (vapor 
area) is created in the fuel tank. This creates a backup of fuel into the filler neck and the 
tank is full. 

This leaves a vapor area of approximately 6 liters above the fuel level. This area provides 
integral liquid/vapor separation. The vapor condensates separate and drain back into the 
fuel. The remaining vapors exit the fuel tank (when sufficient pressure is present) through 
the Operating Vent Valve (3) to the Carbon Canister. 



A small diameter connection to the filler neck is provided by the 
Mushroom Valve “T fitting” (5). This is necessary for checking the 
filler cap/neck during Evaporative Leak Testing. 

The Operating Vent Valve is also equipped with a protection float in 
the event of an “overfill” situation. 


43 

Emissions Management 



On-Board Refueling Vapor Recovery (ORVR) E9x Vehicles 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Electric Fuel Pump 

13 

Fuel Level Sensor 

2 

Feed Line 

14 

Refuelling Line Connection Piece 

3 

Check Valve 

15 

Refuelling Ventilation Line 

4 

Fuel Filter 

16 

Refuelling Ventilation 

5 

Feed Line to Engine 

17 

Left Operation Ventilation Valve 

6 

Fuel Injector 

18 

Right Operation Ventilation Valve 

7 

Pressure Regulator 

19 

Operation Ventilation Line 

8 

Check Valve 

20 

Diagnosis Module for Tank Leakage (DM-TL) 

9 

Left Suction Jet Pump 

21 

Atmosphere Line 

10 

Right Suction Jet Pump 

22 

Carbon Canister 

11 

Initial Filling Valve 

23 

Fuel Tank Vent Valve 

12 

Fuel Baffle 

24 

Digital Motor Electronics 


44 

Emissions Management 















































































































The ORVR system recovers and stores hydrocarbon fuel vapors during refueling. When 
refueling the E90, a downward open adapter (14) is located on the refueling ventilation 
line (15) in the fuel tank. During the refueling procedure, the air can escape out of the 
tank via the refueling ventilation line (15) and the fuel filler neck. 

When the fuel level rises up to the opening of the refueling ventilation line, it is closed off 
and the fuel level increases in the fuel filler neck up to the fuel station pump. The fuel 
station pump then switches off automatically. 

After the fuel station pump has switched off, an expansion volume (approx. 10 liters) 
remains above the refueling ventilation line. 

Ventilation During Engine Operation 

The fuel vapors produced in the fuel tank pass: 

• through the operation ventilation valves (17 + 18) 

• through the ventilation line (19), 

• into the carbon canister AKF (20), 

• through the purge air line and 

• through the fuel tank vent valve TEV (22), 

• to the engine intake manifold. 

The two operation ventilation valves are located above the refueling ventilation adapter 
(14). They are connected by a line. The left operation ventilation valve (17) only has a 
ventilation function while the right operation ventilation valve (18) additionally has a pres¬ 
sure holding function (50 mbar). 

The aim of the pressure holding function is to avoid the remaining air of the expansion 
volume escaping via the carbon canister while refueling (with refueling ventilation line 
closed). 


45 

Emissions Management 




Evaporative Leakage Detection (DM-TL) 

This component ensures accurate fuel system leak 
detection for leaks as small as 0.5 mm by slightly 
pressurizing the fuel tank and evaporative compo¬ 
nents. The DM-TL pump contains an integral DC 
motor which is activated directly by the ECM. The 
ECM monitors the pump motor operating current as 
the measurement for detecting leaks. 

The pump also contains an ECM controlled change 
over valve that is energized closed during a Leak 
Diagnosis test. The change over valve is open during 
all other periods of operation allowing the fuel system 
to “breath” through the inlet filter. The DM-TL is 
located under the luggage compartment floor with the 
Carbon Canister. 

1. In its inactive state, filtered fresh air enters the 
evaporative system through the sprung open 
valve of the DM-TL. 

2. When the DME activates the DM-TL for leak 
testing, it first activates only the pump motor. 
This pumps air through a restrictor orifice (0.5 
mm) which causes the electric motor to draw a 
specific amperage value. This value is equivalent 
to the size of the restrictor. 

3. The solenoid valve is then energized which seals 
the evaporative system and directs the pump 
output to pressurize the evaporative system. 

• A large leak is detected in the evaporative 
system if the amperage value is not achieved. 

• A small leak is detected if the same reference 
amperage is achieved. 

• The system is sealed if the amperage value is 
higher than the reference amperage. 




AIR INLET 



46 

Emissions Management 























































































































































































































SSP-SP0000052267 Diagnostic module for fuel tank leakage 



fh-iX- 

Th#. miLUin hhil-rf! 


M z - 

l>0MI Wdk r 


To prevent condensation buildup in the DM-TL pump, a heating element is integrated 
into the housing of the pump. The heating element is ground controlled by the ECM. 


47 

Emissions Management 




















































Test Results 

The time duration varies between 
30 & 360 seconds depending on 
the resulting leak diagnosis test 
results (developed tank pressure 
“amperage” within a specific time 
period). 

When the ECM detects a leak, a 
fault will be stored and the 
“Malfunction Indicator Light” will 
be illuminated. Depending on the 
amperage measurement detected 
by the ECM, the fault code dis¬ 
played will be “small leak” or “large 
leak”. 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Current 

2 

Leak = 0.5mm 

B 

Overpressure 25hPa (25mbar) 

3 

No leak in system (leak <0.5mm) 

C 

Time 

4 

Reference measurement (leak 0.5mm) 

1 

Leak >1mm 

5 

Leakage measurement 


48 

Emissions Management 















Refuelling While a Leak Diagnosis is Taking Place: 

The ECM detects refueling during a leak diagnosis as a 
result of the pressure drop when the fuel filler cap is opened 
and the increase pressure while filling the tank is being filled. 

In this case, the leakage diagnosis is interrupted. The sole¬ 
noid valve in the DM-TL is switched off and the tank pres¬ 
sure escapes through the activated carbon canister. 

If refueling does not take place immediately after the fuel 
filler cap has been opened, the system will detect a large 
leak and the a fault will be stored in the ECM. If refueling is 
detected in the next driving cycle (increase in fuel level), the 
fault is cleared. 

The ECM detects refueling from a change in the fuel tank sending unit level. If the filler 
cap was not properly installed, when the leakage test is performed and leakage is 
detected; the variable indicator lamp (shown to the right) and the “Please Close Filler 
Cap” Check Control message will be displayed. 

If the filler cap is correctly installed and leakage is not present the next time the test is 
performed, the “Malfunction Indicator Light” will not be illuminated. 

Starting with 2002 MY, a heating element was added to the DM TL pump to elimi¬ 
nate condensation. 

The heater is provided battery voltage when KL_15 is switched “on” and the ECM pro¬ 
vides the ground path (see page 47). 



49 

Emissions Management 



Principle of Operation 

The Evaporative Leakage Detection is performed on the fuel storage system by the 
DM-TL pump which contains an integral DC motor that is activated by the ECM. The 
ECM monitors the pump motor operating current as the measurement for detecting 
leaks. 

The pump also contains an ECM controlled change over valve that is energized closed 
during a Leak Diagnosis test. The ECM initiates a leak diagnosis test every time the cri¬ 
teria are met. The criteria is as follows: 

• Engine OFF with ignition switched OFF. 

• ECM still in active state or what is known as “follow up mode” (ECM Relay ener¬ 
gized, ECM and components online for extended period after key off). 

• Prior to Engine/Ignition switch OFF condition, vehicle must have been driven for a 
minimum of 20 minutes. 

• Prior to minimum 20 minute drive, the vehicle must have been OFF for a minimum 
of 5 hours. 

• Fuel Tank Capacity must be between 15 and 85% (safe approximation between 
1/4 - 3/4 of a tank). 

• Ambient Air Temperature between 4°C & 35°C (40°F & 95°F) 

• Altitude < 2500m (8,202 feet). 

• Battery Voltage - between 10.95 and 14.5 Volts 

PHASE 1 - Reference Measurement 

The ECM activates the pump motor. The 
pump pulls air from the filtered air inlet and 
passes it through a precise 0.5 mm reference 
orifice in the pump assembly. The ECM simul¬ 
taneously monitors the pump motor current 
flow. The motor current raises quickly and lev¬ 
els off (stabilizes) due to the orifice restriction. 

The ECM stores the stabilized amperage value 
in memory. The stored amperage value is the 
electrical equivalent of a 0.5 mm (0.020”) leak. 





i |C c£ u 

P < 


Tank 




C"han[j,*-45w 


EJoclrm 
■Mwnr LDP 


u M 



FVte 1 

frnsh Air 


50 

Emissions Management 





































































PHASE 2 - Leak Detection 

The ECM energizes the Change Over Valve allowing the pressurized air to enter the fuel 
system through the Charcoal Canister. The ECM monitors the current flow and com¬ 
pares it with the stored reference measurement over a duration of time. 

Once the test is concluded, the ECM stops the pump motor and immediately de-ener¬ 
gizes the change over valve. This allows the stored pressure to vent thorough the char¬ 
coal canister trapping hydrocarbon vapor and venting air to atmosphere through the fil¬ 
ter. 




51 

Emissions Management 






















































































































































































































Evaporative Emission Purging 

Evaporative Emission Purging is regulated by the 
ECM controlling the Evaporative Emission Valve. The 
Evaporative Emission Valve is a solenoid that regu¬ 
lates purge flow from the Active Carbon Canister into 
the intake manifold. The ECM Relay provides operat¬ 
ing voltage, and the ECM controls the valve by regu¬ 
lating the ground circuit. The valve is powered open 
and closed by an internal spring. 

The “purging” process takes place when: 

• Oxygen Sensor Control is active 

• Engine Coolant Temperature is > 67° C 

• Engine Load is present 

The Evaporative Emission Valve is opened in stages to moderate the purging. 

• Stage 1 opens the valve for 10 ms (milli-seconds) and then closes for 150 ms. 

• The stages continue with increasing opening times (up to 16 stages) until the valve 
is completely open. 

• The valve now starts to close in 16 stages in reverse order 

• This staged process takes 6 minutes to complete. The function is inactive for 
1 minute then starts the process all over again. 

• During the purging process the valve is completely opened during full throttle opera¬ 
tion and is completely closed during deceleration fuel cutoff. 

Evaporative Purge System Flow Check is performed by the ECM when the oxygen 
sensor control and purging is active. When the Evaporative Emission Valve is open the 
ECM detects a rich/lean shift as monitored by the oxygen sensors indicating the valve is 
functioning properly. 

If the ECM does not detect a rich/lean shift, a second step is performed when the vehi¬ 
cle is stationary and the engine is at idle speed. The ECM opens and close the valve 
(abruptly) several times and monitors the engine rpm for changes. If there are no 
changes, a fault code will be set. 


OPERATING POWER 
FROM ECM MAIN RELAY 


VAPORS FROM 
CHARCOAL 
CANISTER 




VAPORS TO VACUUM PORT 
ON THROTTLE HOUSING 


52 

Emissions Management 































































Carbon Canister 

As the hydrocarbon vapors enter the canister, they will be absorbed by the active carbon. 
The remaining air will be vented to the atmosphere through the end of the canister, DM 
TL and filter, allowing the fuel tank to “breath”. 

When the engine is running, the canister is "purged" using intake manifold vacuum to 
draw air through the canister which extracts the HC vapors into the combustion cham¬ 
ber. 

The Carbon Canister with DM TL and air filter are located at the right rear underside of 
the vehicle, below the luggage compartment floor. 



Evaporative Emission Valve 


This ECM controlled solenoid valve regulates 
the purge flow from the Carbon Canister into 
the intake manifold. The ECM Relay provides 
operating voltage, and the ECM controls the 
valve by regulating the ground circuit. The 
valve is powered open and closed by an inter¬ 
nal spring. 

If the Evaporative Emission Valve circuit is 
defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“Malfunction Indicator Light” will illuminate 
when the OBD II criteria is achieved. 

If the valve is “mechanically” defective, a drive- 
ability complaint could be encountered and a 
mixture related fault code will be set. 


OPERATING POWER 
FROM ECM MAIN RELAY 


VAPORS FROM 

CHARCOAL 

CANISTER 



Jr 

VAPORS TO VACUUM PORT 
ON THROTTLE HOUSING 



53 

Emissions Management 










































































Secondary Air Injection 

This system is required to reduce HC and CO emissions while the engine is warming up. 
Immediately following a cold engine start (-10 to 60°C) fresh air/oxygen is injected 
directly into the exhaust stream. 

The temperature signal is provided to the ECM by the Air Temperature Sensor in the 
HFM. 

The ECM provides a ground circuit to activate the Secondary Air Injection Pump Relay. 
The relay supplies voltage to the Secon-dary Air Injection Pump. 

The single speed pump runs for approximately 90 seconds after engine start up. 

Below -10° Cl the pump is activated briefly to “blow out” 

( { \ any accumulated moisture. 


SSP-SP0000017943 Secondary air pump 



Secondapy &'t (m % v 


54 

Emissions Management 






















































Secondary Air Injection Monitoring 

The monitoring of Secondary Air is performed 
by the ECM via the use of the pre-catalyst 
oxygen sensors. Once the air pump is active 
and is air injected into the exhaust system the 
oxygen sensor signals will indicate a lean con¬ 
dition (up to 16 seconds). 

If the oxygen sensor signals do not change 
within a predefined time a fault will be set and 
identify the faulty bank. 

If the additional oxygen is not detected for two 
consecutive cold starts, the ECM determines 
a general fault with the function of the secondary air injection system. After completing 
the next cold start and a fault is again present the "Malfunction Indicator Light” will be 
illuminated when the OBDII criteria is achieved. 

Secondary Air System 

As on N73 engine, the N74 is equipped with a secondary air system. Blowing additional 
air (secondary air) into the exhaust gas duct in the cylinder head during the warm-up 
phase initiates thermal post-combustion that leads to a reduction in the unburned hydro¬ 
carbons (HC) and carbon monoxide (CO) contained in the exhaust gas. The energy gen¬ 
erated here heats up the catalytic converter faster in the warm-up phase and increases 
its conversion rate. The catalytic converter response temperature (light-off temperature) 
of 300°C is reached only a few seconds after the engine is started. 

What is new is that there is one pressure sensor before each secondary air valve. The 
function of the secondary air system is monitored by registering the pressure conditions. 

Secondary air pump 

The electrically operated secondary air pump is 
attached to the cylinder head of cylinder bank 1. 

During the warm-up phase, the pump draws in 
fresh air from the engine compartment. This is 
cleaned by the filter integrated in the pump and 
delivered across the pressure line to the two sec¬ 
ondary air valves. 

After the engine start, the secondary air pump is supplied with vehicle voltage by the 
DME via the secondary air pump relay. The switched-on period is about 20 seconds 
and it depends essentially on the coolant temperature at engine start. It is activated from 
a coolant temperature of +5°C to +50°C (40°F to 120°F). 




55 

Emissions Management 























Secondary air valve 

A secondary air valve is bolted onto the rear of each cylinder head. The secondary air 
valve opens as soon as the system pressure generated by the secondary air pump 
exceeds the opening pressure of the valve. Secondary air is fed via the secondary air 
line into the elongated passage of the cylinder head. From the elongated passage, 24 
tap holes lead to the 12 exhaust ducts where the thermal post-combustion takes place. 

The secondary air valve closes as soon as the secondary air pump switches off, thus 
preventing exhaust gas from flowing back to the secondary air pump. 



Secondary Air Valve 
and Pressure Sensor 


On-board diagnosis of secondary air system 

Monitoring takes place with the help of the pressure sensors that are fitted before each 
of the secondary air valves. The exhaust gas oxygen sensors are also used. 

The overall diagnosis is divided into a rough diagnosis that begins immediately after the 
secondary air pump starts up and the fine diagnosis that begins around 12 to 14 sec¬ 
onds after the secondary air injection starts. 

The rough diagnosis uses only the pressure signals. Every fault in the secondary air sys¬ 
tem is detected if there is a drop below a minimum pressure in the event of a leakage or 
if a maximum pressure is exceeded when a valve is clogged or jammed closed. However, 
under certain circumstances, it might not be possible to assign the fault correctly, 
because the pressure sensors indicate the same pressure due to the connecting line. 

The fine diagnosis uses the exhaust gas oxygen sensor signals in addition to the pres¬ 
sure signals. The combination of exceeding or falling short of fault thresholds for the 
pressure and exhaust gas oxygen sensor values means the fault can be precisely 
assigned to the relevant cylinder bank. The fine diagnosis relies on the oxygen sensor 
readiness, this is available much later than in naturally aspirated engines due to the heat 
loss through theturbocharger. 

There is also an electrical diagnosis for the secondary air pump relay and for the pres¬ 
sure sensors. These indicate the usual electrical faults (line disconnection, short circuit 
to ground, short circuit to supply voltage). There is an additional mutual plausibility check 
of the pressure sensors on initialization with ambient pressure. 


56 

Emissions Management 



Misfire Detection 


Misfire detection is part of the OBD II regulations the ECM must determine misfire and 
also identify the specific cylinder(s). The ECM must also determine the severity of the 
misfire and whether it is emissions relevant or catalyst damaging based on moni¬ 
toring crankshaft acceleration. 

Emission Increase 

• Within an interval of 1000 crankshaft revolutions, the ECM adds the detected misfire 
events for each cylinder. If the sum of all cylinder misfire incidents exceeds the pre¬ 
deter- mined value, a fault code will be stored and the “Malfunction Indicator Light” 
will be illuminated. 

• If more than one cylinder is misfiring, all misfiring cylinders will be specified and the 
individual fault codes for each misfiring cylinder, or multiple cylinders will be stored. 
The “Malfunction Indicator Light” will be illuminated. 

Catalyst Damage 

• Within an interval of 200 crankshaft revolutions 
the detected number of misfiring events is calcu¬ 
lated for each cylinder. The ECM monitors this 
based on load/rpm. If the sum of cylinder misfire 
incidents exceeds a predetermined value, a 
“Catalyst Damaging” fault code is stored and the 
“Malfunction Indicator Light” will be illuminated. 

If the cylinder misfire count exceeds the predeter¬ 
mined threshold the ECM will take the following mea¬ 
sures: 

The oxygen sensor control will be switched to 
open loop. 

The cylinder selective fault code is stored. 

If more than one cylinder is misfiring the fault code for all 
individual cylinders and for multiple cylinders will be stored. 

The fuel injector to the respective cylinder(s) is deactivated. 



57 

Emissions Management 













































Ambient Barometric Pressure 


The Integrated Ambient Barometric Pressure Sensor is part of the ECM and is not ser¬ 
viceable. The internal sensor is supplied with 5 volts. In return it provides a linear voltage 
of approx. 2.4 to 4.5 volts representative of barometric pressure (altitude). 

The ECM monitors barometric pressure for the following reasons: 

• The barometric pressure signal along with calculated air mass provides an additional 
correction factor to further refine injection “on” time. 

• Provides a base value to calculate the air mass being injected into the exhaust sys¬ 
tem by the Secondary Air Injection System. This correction factor alters the sec¬ 
ondary air injection “on” time, optimizing the necessary air flow into the exhaust system. 


f\ 

INTEGRAL 

BAROMETRIC 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 



PROVIDES ADDITIONAL CORRECTION 
FACTOR FOR FOLLOWING FUNCTIONS 



58 

Emissions Management 






















































Crankcase Ventilation 


One of the major changes on the new NG6 engines is that the crankcase ventilation sys¬ 
tem has been upgraded and improved. This applies to all of the new NG6 versions 
(N52KP, N51 and N54). 

There are two distinct versions of crankcase ventilation. One type is unique to the N54 
and the other applies to N51 and N52KP. 

The N52, which is still in production continues to use the “external” crankcase ventilation 
system with the electrically heated crankcase ventilation valve/cyclone separator. 

Crankcase Ventilation System on N52 



59 

Emissions Management 



Crankcase Ventilation (N51 and N52KP) 

The crankcase ventilation system on the N51 and N52KP has been modified as com¬ 
pared to the N52. The system is integrated into the plastic cylinder head cover. 

The crankcase gases are regulated by a crankcase ventilation valve similar to the design 
used on the N62. The crankcase vent valve is currently part of the cylinder head cover 
and is not replaceable as a separate component. 

Oil separation is carried out via a “labyrinth” system and two cyclone separators which 
are incorporated into the cylinder head cover. By having the system components inte¬ 
grated into the cylinder head cover, the crankcase gases are heated by the engine rather 
than an electric heater as on the N52. However, there is still one electric heating ele¬ 
ment at the manifold inlet. 

Once the liquid oil is separated from the crankcase vapors, the oil is allowed to drain 
back through check valves back into the engine. 


N52KP Cylinder Head Cover (cutaway view) 



Integrated 
cyclone separator 


Oil drainback valve 


Crankcase vent valve 


60 

Emissions Management 


Crankcase Ventilation (N54) 

Since the N54 is a turbocharged 
engine, the crankcase ventilation 
system has to meet certain design 
requirements. For example, when 
the engine is in turbocharged mode, 
the increased manifold pressure 
should not have an adverse effect 
on the crankcase venting. This is 
why, there is no crankcase ventila¬ 
tion valve in the system. 

The system consists of four small 
cyclone separators which are inte¬ 
grated into the plastic cylinder head 
cover. The flow of crankcase gases 
is metered through a series of 
restrictions which control the ulti¬ 
mate crankcase pressure. 

One of the main operating principles behind the crankcase venting system on the N54 
is that there are two strategies - one for the turbocharged mode and one for “non-tur- 
bocharged” operation such as decel. These strategies are dependent upon the intake 
manifold pressure. 



N54 Cylinder Head Cover (cutaway view) 





cyclone separator 


61 

Emissions Management 



62 

Emissions Management 



Crankcase Ventilation System Overview (N55) 

The blow-by gasses flow into the settling chamber of the cylinder head cover through an 
opening located in the rear of the cover. Here, the blow-by gasses are directed through 
holes on to an impact plate, against which the oil impacts at high speed, and drains off. 
The blow-by gasses, cleaned of oil, flow via the pressure control valve (depending on the 
operating mode) through the non-return valves into the inlet pipe upstream of the 
turbocharger, or via passages in the cylinder head ahead of the intake valves. The sepa¬ 
rated oil is drained via a return flow duct into the oil pan. 

Naturally Aspirated Mode (N55) 

The standard function can only be used as long as a vacuum prevails in the intake air 
manifold, i.e. in naturally-aspirated engine mode. 

With the engine operating in naturally-aspirated mode, the vacuum in the intake air mani¬ 
fold opens the non-return valve (15) in the blow-by duct within the cylinder head cover. 
This draws off blow-by gasses via the pressure control valve. At the same time, the vac¬ 
uum also closes the second non-return valve (12) in the duct to the charge air intake 
pipe. 

The blow-by gasses flow via a distribution rail integrated in the cylinder head cover, 
through the intake passages (16) in the cylinder head, which lead directly into the intake 
ports, ahead of the valves. 

Boost Mode (N55) 

As the pressure in the intake air manifold increases in boost mode, blow-by gasses can 
no longer be introduced via the passages in the cylinder head, otherwise, the boost pres¬ 
sure could enter the crankcase. A non-return valve (15) in the blow-by channel within the 
cylinder head cover closes the connection (16) to the intake air manifold. This protects 
the crankcase from excess pressure. 

The increased demand for fresh air creates a vacuum in the clean air pipe between the 
turbocharger and intake silencer. This vacuum is sufficient to open the non-return valve 
(12) and draw the blow-by gasses via the pressure control valve. 


63 

Emissions Management 



Crankcase Ventilation Overview (N55) 


Crankcase ventilation system in “decel mode” 







64 

Emissions Management 





































































































Index 

Explanation 

A 

Ambient pressure 

B 

Vacuum 

C 

Exhaust gas 

D 

Oil 

E 

Blow-by gas 

1 

Air cleaner 

2 

Intake manifold 

3 

Impact plates 

4 

Oil return channel 

5 

Crankcase 

6 

Oil sump 

7 

Oil return channel 

8 

Exhaust turbocharger 

9 

Oil drain valve 

10 

Charge air intake line 

11 

Hose to charge air intake line 

12 

Non-return valve 

13 

Pressure regulating valve 

14 

Throttle valve 

15 

Non-return valve 

16 

Passages in cylinder head and cylinder head cover 


65 

Emissions Management 














































Crankcase Ventilation System Overview (N55) 


Crankcase ventilation system 
in turbocharged mode (boost mode) 










66 

Emissions Management 




















































































































If a customer complains about high oil consumption and oil is 
discovered in the turbocharger, it should not be immediately assumed 
that the turbocharger is defective. If the oil is present in the fresh air 
pipe (before the turbocharger) then the entire engine should be 
checked. 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Excess pressure 

B 

Vacuum 

C 

Exhaust gas 

D 

Oil 

E 

Blow-by gas 

1 

Air cleaner 

2 

Intake manifold 

3 

Impact plates 

4 

Oil return channel 

5 

Crankcase 

6 

Oil sump 

7 

Oil return channel 

8 

Exhaust turbocharger 

9 

Oil drain valve 

10 

Charge air intake line 

11 

Hose to charge air intake line 

12 

Non-return valve 

13 

Pressure regulating valve 

14 

Throttle valve 

15 

Non-return valve 

16 

Passages in cylinder head and cylinder head cover 


67 

Emissions Management 



























68 

Emissions Management 



Crankcase Ventilation System Overview (N54) 

Naturally Aspirated Mode (N54) 

When the engine has low manifold pressure such as in decel, the crankcase vapors are 
routed through a channel (15) between the cylinder head cover and intake manifold. 

The liquid oil is separated before the channel in the cyclonic separators (3) in the cylinder 
head cover. The liquid oil returns to the engine via the oil discharge valve (4). 

The channel contains a pressure restrictor (16) which regulates the flow of crankcase 
vapors. During deceleration, the crankcase vapors (E) are directed via a check valve (14) 
which is located in the cylinder head cover. The check valve is opened when low 
pressure is present in the intake manifold (throttle closed). 

Also, a PTC heater has been integrated into the intake manifold inlet. The inlet pipe is 
connected to the channel (15) and prevent any moisture from freezing at the inlet. 

Boost Mode (N54) 

When in turbocharged mode, the pressure in the intake manifold increases and then 
closes the check valve (14). Now, a low pressure is present in the charge air suction line 
(10). This causes a low pressure in the hose (11) leading to the manifold check valve 
(12). The crankcase vapors (after separation) are directed through the check valve (12) 
into the charge air suction line (10) and ultimately back into the engine. The check valve 
(12) also prevent boost pressure from entering the crankcase when the intake manifold 
pressure is high. 


69 

Emissions Management 



Crankcase Ventilation System Overview (N54) 


Crankcase ventilation system 




70 

Emissions Management 




































































































Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Overpressure 

7 

Oil sump 

B 

Low Pressure (Vacuum) 

8 

Oil return channel 

C 

Exhaust gas 

9 

Turbocharger 

D 

Liquid oil 

10 

Charge air suction line, bank 2 

E 

Blow-by gases (Crankcase vapors) 

11 

Hose to charge air suction line, bank 2 

1 

Air cleaner 

12 

Check valve, manifold 

2 

Intake manifold 

13 

Throttle valve 

3 

Cyclone separators 

14 

Check valve, charge air suction line 

4 

Oil discharge valve 

15 

Channel to intake manifold 

5 

Venting channel 

16 

Pressure restrictor 

6 

Crankshaft cavity 




71 

Emissions Management 

















































Crankcase Ventilation System Overview (N54) 


Crankcase ventilation system in 
“turbocharged mode” 










Early Production: i 

External Passage ! 

Late Production: j 
Internal Passage 1 










If a customer complains about high oil consumption and oil is 
discovered in the turbocharger, it should not be immediately assumed 
that the turbocharger is defective. If the oil is present in the fresh air 
pipe (before the turbocharger) then the entire engine should be 
checked. 


72 

Emissions Management 




















































































Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Overpressure 

7 

Oil sump 

B 

Low Pressure (Vacuum) 

8 

Oil return channel 

C 

Exhaust gas 

9 

Turbocharger 

D 

Liquid oil 

10 

Charge air suction line, bank 2 

E 

Blow-by gases (Crankcase vapors) 

11 

Hose to charge air suction line, bank 2 

1 

Air cleaner 

12 

Check valve, manifold 

2 

Intake manifold 

13 

Throttle valve 

3 

Cyclone separators 

14 

Check valve, charge air suction line 

4 

Oil discharge valve 

15 

Channel to intake manifold 

5 

Venting channel 

16 

Pressure restrictor 

6 

Crankshaft cavity 





Be aware that any check valve failure could cause excessive oil con¬ 
sumption possibly accompanied by blue smoke from the exhaust. 

This should not be mistaken for a failed turbocharger. Always perform 
a complete diagnosis of the crankcase ventilation system, before 
replacing any turbocharger or associated components. 


73 

Emissions Management 


















Crankcase Ventilation Heating 

Also integrated into the design of the crankcase ventilation is an electric heating system 
designed to prevent moisture buildup. Moisture buildup can eventually lead to ice at low 
ambient temperatures leading to malfunctions of the crankcase ventilation. 

The crankcase vent valve and cyclonic separator are also insulated by a protective foam 
covering to provide additional shelter from low ambient temperatures. 

The PTC heating elements are integrated into the crankcase ventilation valve and hose 
assemblies. There is a junction point on the intake manifold which provides a connec¬ 
tion point for the individual heating elements. 

There is also a heating element located on the centrally located port on the intake mani¬ 
fold. This port is also provided with a separate heating circuit controlled by a PTC 
thermistor. 

The ECM receives the ambient temperature information from the outside temperature 
sensor. 


SSP-SP0000052251 Oil Supply (Engine Breather Heater) 



1 


1 ■' J ■ 

I '.vj ‘-vt- 







- 


Si 




74 

Emissions Management 




































