Table of Contents 


Introduction to Passive Safety 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

History of BMW Safety Systems.3 

Fully Integrated Road SafetyTechnology (F.I.R.S.T.).6 

Energy Absorbing Body Structures .8 

SMART Airbags.9 

Side Airbags.9 

Seatbelts.10 

Battery SafetyTerminal .11 

Head Protection System .12 

Active Knee Protection.14 

Active Head Restraint System (AKS).14 

Rollover Protection Systems .15 

Summary of BMW Passive Safety Systems.16 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 
















Introduction to Passive Safety 

Model: All with Passive Safety Systems 


Production: All 

■biictihis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the History of BMW Passive Safety 

• Understand the differences between Passive and Active Safety 

• Understand the concepts behind F.I.R.S.T. 

(Fully Integrated Road SafetyTechnology) 


2 

Introduction to Passive Safety 


Introduction 


History of BMW Safety Systems 

BMW has a long history of being at the forefront of passenger safety technology. Before 
the introduction of airbag systems, seatbelts provided the primary restraint for protection 
of the occupants during an impact. Three point seatbelts provided the greatest level of 
occupant safety at that time. 

M any other safety innovations were already is use before airbag systems were intro¬ 
duced. Energy absorbing body structures with "crumple zones" uphold the integrity of 
the passenger safety cell. Some of the other features are "breakaway" engine and trans¬ 
mission mountings, collapsible steering column, door mounted impact beams and a 
hood that is designed to fold on impact ratherthan penetrate the windshield. 

There are many other safety innovations which are transparent to the driver, but are cru¬ 
cial to providing a safe environmentforthe vehicle occupants. 



Since 1986, when BMW first introduced the Supplementary Restraint System (SRS) to 
their US model line, BMW has continuously improved the level of occupant protection. 

The driver's side airbag was standard on all US production models from 1986. Later, the 
passenger side airbag became standard on the 1992 models. 

These first systems were made by Cipro and Siemens and consisted of mechanical crash 
sensors located on the innerfenders. An airbag was mounted on the steering wheel and 
a control unit containing a mechanical safing sensor was located in the passenger com¬ 
partment. The vehicle wiring harness was modified to accommodate these systems. 

Laterversions included a standard passengerside airbag from 9/91 production. These 
system were designated Siemens 2C. These systems were replaced byZAE. 

Beginning with the 1994 model year, the ZAE system was introduced on US models. 

The E31, E34, E36 and E38 all used the ZAE I system. ZAE I used crash sensors which 
were integral to the control unit and eliminated the mechanical fender mounted sensors 
on previous models. Also the passengerseat occupancy detection system (SBE) was 
introduced at this time. ZAE 2 was introduced later and now included the detection of 
rear impacts. 


3 

Introduction to Passive Safety 



The M ultiple Restraint System (M RS) addressed the need for side impact protection. 
Starting with the E39, door mounted side airbags were added on the front driver and pas 
sengerside. The MRS system also utilized side impact sensors which were externally 
mounted nearthe b-pillar. In combination with the M RS control unit, the side impact sen 
sors allowed the M RS system to differentiate between front, rear and side impacts. 



Subsequent versions of M RS introduced new technology and enhancements to M RS I. 
M RSII utilized the new head protection system (HPS) and also the new Safety Battery 
Terminal. 

M RS III has new features including the 2-stage airbag and the rear head protection sys¬ 
tem. Also, the M RS III control unit was now connected to the K-bus for diagnosis, 
improved crash signalling and forthefuel pump cut-off feature. 

The only changes to M RS IV were improved software and triggering algorithms. It was 
introduced in 4/01 production on the E46 and E53 and later phased into E38 and E39. 

The latest version of MRS is the MRS4RD system. The "RD" designation indicates a re¬ 
design overthe previous MRSIV system. Numerous modifications include additional 
crash sensors mounted in the front of the vehicle and pressure sensors mounted in the 
front doors. Also, the new passenger seat occupancy detection system (OC-3) which is 
capable of determining the approximate size of the occupant based on weight distribu¬ 
tion. To accommodate these changes, the M RS control unit was increased to 75 pins 
from the previous 50 pin control unit. 

E83 with MRS4RD 



4 

Introduction to Passive Safety 



The introduction of the E65 brought about a new era in passive safety technology. 

The new passive safety system on the E65 was a departure from the M RS philosophy. 
Instead of having the triggering electronics located centrally in the M RS module. The 
new method was to decentralize the triggering electronics by locating the trigger circuits 
in the satellite sensors which are closerto potential impact points. 

The new system is referred to as the Intelligent Safety and Information System (ISIS). 
ISIS consists of a series of satellites connected by an optical bus network called byte- 
flight. The byteflight network was specifically designed a a high speed network for 
use on safety related systems. 

E65 ISIS System Overview 


K-CAN 


D-Bus 



m 


cn 



SIM 


n 


byteflight 

The ISIS concept was also adopted on the new Advanced Safety Electronic (ASE) sys¬ 
tems which was introduced on the E85. The ASE system is also used on the new E60, 
E63 and E64 vehicles. ASE is similar in design to ISIS, and uses the byteflight fiber optic 
network. However the total number of satellites is reduced as compared to ISIS. 


5 

Introduction to Passive Safety 










Fully Integrated Road Safety Technology (F.I.R.S.T.) 

The BMW FIRST safety concept incorporates the environmental considerations (traffic, 
road conditions), the vehicle (active and passive safety), and the people involved. During 
the design process, all of these things are taken into to consideration to create a safe 
environmentforthe passengers as well as considering the durability of the vehicle during 
an impact to comply with federal law and insurance regulations. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Traffic Conditions 

8 

Vehicle Protection 

2 

Environment 

9 

Occupant Protection 

3 

Vehicle 

10 

Seat Belt 

4 

People 

11 

Head Restraints 

5 

Active Safety 

12 

Airbag 

6 

Passive Safety 

13 

Rollover Protection 

7 

Partner Protection 




6 

Introduction to Passive Safety 











































F.I.R.S.T, is the cornerstone behind BMW's safety philosophy. This technology con¬ 
sists of active and passive safety features designed to help the driver avoid accidents as 
well as protect the occupants in the event of an unavoidable accident. 



Active Safety features are designed to help the driver avoid accidents. In other words 
these features allow the driver to actively avoid potentially dangerous situations. These 
features consist of consist of a responsive engine, stable suspension, precise steering 
and excellent all around vision. Systems such as Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) and 
ABS also help the driver retain precise control of the vehicle. 

Traffic and adverse environmental conditions can be offset by systems such as RLS (rain 
sensing wiper control), X-Drive, climate control with mist sensor and driving lights etc. 

Otherfeatures which are "transparent" to the driver include the multi-function steering 
wheel which allows the driverto control the cruise control and audio systems while still 
focusing on the road. The seating position and location of switches and controls are also 
taken into consideration during the design process.The new HUD also allows the driver 
to access important driving information while maintaining concentration. 

Passive Safety features provide vehicle occupant protection when an accident cannot 
be avoided. Today's BMW Passive Safety systems consist of the following features: 

• Energy absorbing body structures 

• Seatbelts with Automatic tensioners and force limiters 

• Dual front airbags with 2-stage deployment 

• Head Protection Systems (front as well as rear on some models) 

• Side Impact Airbags (standard) and Rear Side Airbags (optional) 

• Active Knee Protection Airbags (On some models) 

• Battery SafetyTerminal 

• Active Head Restraints (on some models) 

• Rollover Protection on Convertibles (E36, E46 and E64) and fixed rollover bars on 
the Z3 and Z8 and Z4. 


7 

Introduction to Passive Safety 



Energy Absorbing Body Structures 

One of the first considerations in designing a safe vehicle is the body and chassis design. 
It is vital to protect the passenger in the event of an impact. This is accomplished by 
maintaining the integrity of the "passenger cell" during an accident. 

The main consideration during an impact is to avoid transferring crash energy to the vehi¬ 
cle occupants. By adding energy absorbing crash elements to the vehicle, this energy 
transfer is reduced considerably. 

Passenger Safety Cell E60 



! 


In addition to having energy absorbing structures in the front and rear of the vehicle, there 
are also side impact protection structures in the doors. These structures not only help 
prevent impact intrusion into the safety cell, but also allow the doorto be opened after 
most impacts. 


Engine Support Arm showing "Crumple Zone" 



8 

Introduction to Passive Safety 





SMART Airbags 

Front driver and passenger airbags have been in use with single stage activation since 
1986. Once an impact is detected, the airbags are triggered with one specific level of 
deployment force. 

From 1999, BMW developed the SMART airbag which is designed to deploy in 2 stages. 
There are 4 triggering thresholds which are dependent upon the severity of impact 
detected, the status of the seatbelts and whetherthe passenger seat is occupied. 


Driver's side SMART Airbag (Rearview) Passenger side SMART Airbag (Rearview) 



The two stage airbags are used for both the front driver and front passenger which allows 
for a softer cushioning effect when the bags are triggered at lighter impacts. 

The 2-stage airbags also employ the "cold-gas” inflation method which differs from the 
previous single stage airbags. The gas generators contain an inert gas mixture which is 
released when the airbags are triggered. 

Also, the cold gas inflation method was incorporated into the side airbags and the ITS 
assemblies. 


Side Airbags 

Since the introduction of M RS, side airbags 
have been standard equipment. Rear airbags 
on some vehicles are part of an option package. 

Side airbags are designed to prevent injury to 
the thorax (chest) region of the occupants. 


Side Airbag with InertGas Inflation (Rearview) 



9 

Introduction to Passive Safety 









Seatbelts 


Of all of the safety innovations brought forth by the automotive industry, the safety belt is 
universally recognized as the single most effective safety device. Specifically, the 3-point 
safety belt provides passengers with safety as well as comfort. 

The effectiveness of the 3-point seat belt depends upon the correct positioning of the 
safety belt on the body. 



BMW safety belt systems use an upper anchor point which is height adjustable. In addi¬ 
tion, the tensioning mechanisms allow the belt to remain relatively slack to increase com¬ 
fort while driving. 

The seat belt tensioning device is designed to remove slack in the seatbelt during an 
impact. This increases the effectiveness of the seatbelt and reduces the bio-mechanical 
load on the passenger. 


There are 4 different belt tensioning systems 
which have been in use on BMW vehicles. 
The 4 systems are as follows: 

• Pyrotechnic automatic tensioners/end 
fitting tensioners 

• Mechanical seat belt tensioners 

• Pyrotechnic seat belt tensioners 

• SGS (Seat Integrated Belt System) 

M ore information on the seat belt tensioning 
systems will be covered in the forthcoming 
training modules. 



10 

Introduction to Passive Safety 







Battery Safety Terminal 

The Battery SafetyTerminal (BST) is designed to minimize the risk of short circuits in 
severe accidents. The BST protects the B + cable from the battery to the starter and 
generator by disconnecting the main connections via a pyrotechnic device. 

The rest of the power distribution circuits are protected by various fuses etc. This allows 
those circuits to remain available forSOS calls, powerwindow and lock operation. 


SBK 



The BST assembly is bolted to the positive battery terminal. It consists of a conventional 
battery terminal and a contact sleeve attached to the surface of the terminal. The sleeve 
houses an igniter pellet which contains a small amount of solid propellant. 

Upon impact, the propellant is ignited which separates the battery cable from the positive 
terminal of the battery. 

BST - Not Deployed BST - Deployed 



Once the BST is deployed, it must be replaced. Depending upon application, the entire 
B + cable must be replaced orthere are repair kits available on some models. 


11 

Introduction to Passive Safety 












Head Protection System 

Head injuries accountfora large portion of overall accident statistics. To address this sta¬ 
tistic BMW added the Head Protection System to complement the side airbags already in 
use. HPS was developed by BMW to offer increased occupant protection during aside 
impact and lowerthe instance of head injuries. 

The original HPS, introduced on the E38, consisted of an Inflatable Tubular Structure 
(ITS) which was mounted in the headliner between the A and B pillars. 

The ITS assembly consists of a woven fabric tube containing an innertube of 
polyurethane. A gas generator is used to inflate the ITS assembly. When deployed, the 
ITS increases in diameter and overall length decreases by approximately 100mm. This 
causes the ITS assembly to emerge from the headlinertrim. 



The ITS is designed as a sealed unit, unlike an airbag which deflates immediately. The 
ITS assembly deflates as the gas cools over a period of time, which allows the ITS to 
remain inflated in the event of secondary impacts. 



12 

Introduction to Passive Safety 



RearHPS was introduced later as part of a special rear side airbag option on the E38 and 
E39. The rearHPS does not use a conventional ITS assembly, but rather an "cushion" 
type airbag located in the C-pillar. A vehicle with rearHPS can be identified by observing 
"HPS" in the C-pillar cover. 



The Head Protection System was further developed to increase the level of occupant 
protection. The Advanced Head Protection System was introduced on the E65. It con¬ 
sists of a modified ITS which is now extended by a curtain. There are 2 versions of 
AHPS available. The first, AHPS I, extends from the A-pillarto the B-pillar and protects 
the front passengers. 

The second version, AHPS II, is part of an option for rear passenger head protection. The 
AHPS II extends forthe A-pillarto the C-pillarto protectfront and rear passengers simul¬ 
taneously. The advantages of AHPS include protection from glass splinters and pro¬ 
truding objects as well as optimized coverage for occupants of all sizes. 

AHPS II AHPS I 



13 

Introduction to Passive Safety 










Active Knee Protection 


The Active Knee Protection consists of a knee airbag located on the front driver and pas¬ 
senger sides of the vehicle. The knee airbag preventthe driverfrom sliding underthe 
seat belt during an impact. This effect is known as "submarining". This effect is counter¬ 
acted by the knee airbag and initiates a controlled forward shift of the upper body. 

This increases the effect of the seatbelt and the airbag. 

The knee airbag is available on the E65, E85 and E63/64. 


E65 Driver's Side Knee Airbag E65 Passenger Side Knee Airbag 



Active Head Restraint System (AKS) 

In a rear end collision, the risk for cervical vertebrae injuries (whiplash) is high. To prevent 
this, the objective would be to position the head as close as possible to the headrest. 
This prevents excessive rearward motion. 

On the E65/E66 and E60, the basic seat 
option only allows fora fixed position between 
the backrest and head and eliminates the 
need forthe AKS. However, on vehicles 
equipped with the multi-function seat option, 
the adjustability of the headrest and backrest 
allows forthe possibility of a large gap 
between the headrest and the occupants 
head. 

Forthis reason AKS was developed. The 
AKS is located in the backrest of the multi¬ 
function seat. It is deployed by a pyrotechnic 
device, similarto an airbag. 





14 

Introduction to Passive Safety 





Rollover Protection Systems 

In order to protect the passengers of a convertible in the event of a rollover, BMW has 
developed the Rollover Protections System (RPS). Convertible models with RPS include 
the E36, E46 and E64. BMW roadsters use fixed steel rollover bars, these vehicle 
include the E52 (Z8), E36/7 (Z3), and the E85 (Z4). 

The RPS consists of a set of automatically deployable rollbars which are triggered when 
the vehicle exceeds certain criteria. This criteria is based on the amount of tilt which is 
monitored by a rollover sensor. 

When an impending rollover is detected, the rollover bars lock into place to provide the 
necessary head clearance to protect the occupants. 



Also, the rollover bars can be deployed by the diagnostic equipment fortesting. There is 
also a reset procedure for each model which is done manually. This allows the bars to be 
reset in the event of an erroneous deployment. 



15 

Introduction to Passive Safety 





Summary of BMW Passive Safety Systems 



16 

Introduction to Passive Safety 



























































































