Table of Contents 


Rollover Protection Systems 

Subject Page 

Rollover Protection Systems.3 

E64 Rollover Protection .6 

Components.6 

Triggering Sequence .10 

URSS Service Information.11 

M echanical Deployment (For Service).11 

E46 Rollover Protection System .14 

System Components .15 

Roll Over Bar Cassettes.15 

Actuator Solenoids.15 

Roll OverSensor.16 

Clinometer.17 

"G" Sensor .18 

Roll OverSensorDiagnosis and Testing .19 

Servicing Rollover Bar Cassettes.19 

E36 Rollover Protection .21 

System Components .22 

Roll Bar Cassettes.22 

Emergency Release.23 

Retracting ofthe Rollbars .24 

Rollover Sensor .25 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 Revision Date: 
























Rollover Protection Systems 


Model: E36iC,E46iC,E64 
Production: All with convertible top 

■Biiermis 

After completion of this module you will be able to 

• Understand RPS operation 

• Diagnose RPS concerns 

• Perform Reset procedures 

• Perform RPS system checks 


2 

Rollover Protection Systems 


Rollover Protection Systems 


The Rollover Protection System (RPS) was developed to provide an adequate survival 
space in the event of an accident involving a rollover. This system is used on convertibles 
as an enhancement to the existing safety systems. 



There are several different factors which can cause a vehicle to roll over. The most com¬ 
mon causes are: 

• The vehicle can leave the roadway and travel along a gradient. This can cause the 
vehicle to roll if the "tilt" is excessive. 

• The vehicle can contact a crash barrier at a severe angle. The barrier can act as a 
ramp which also creates the potential fora rollover. 

• The vehicle can skid laterally off the road surface and bury its wheels in a soft sur¬ 
face. The prevailing kinetic energy could be sufficient to overturn the vehicle 

• The vehicle skids laterally off the road surface and contacts a curb orstationary 
object which can result in the vehicle being upended. 

The crucial factors which determine whetherthe vehicle overturns are not just the angle 
of the vehicle, but also the speed at which the vehicle approaches the potential event. 

There are two types of rollover protection used on BMW vehicles. One system is a set of 
rigidly fixed rollover bars used on BMW roadsters. These vehicles include the Z3, Z4 and 
the Z8. All of these vehicles use a set of fixed bars which are bolted or welded to the 
vehicle. 



3 

Rollover Protection Systems 




The second type of rollover protection system used consists of a set of automatically 
deployable rollover bars. These bars are used in conjunction with a reinforced windshield 
frame. These two features work together to provide a survival space for the occupants in 
the event of a rollover. 

E46 Cabriolet 



Reinforced windshield frame 


Deployable rollover bars 


The automatic rollover bars are controlled by a system which monitors the angle of the 
vehicle as well as g-forces acting on the vehicle. Once these threshold values are 
exceeded, the rollover bars are deployed. 

The rollover bars are held in the retracted position against a spring force. They are 
deployed by electrically releasing the solenoids which are holding the bars in place. 
When the bars are released, they are held in position by a locking pawl which uses a 
toothed ratcheting mechanism. 

The toothed mechanism can be released to restore the bars to the retracted position. 

If the bars are not damaged, they can be reset and re-used. 

Each RPS system, depending upon vehicle application, has a mechanical release proce¬ 
dure as well as a mechanical resetting procedure for service personnel. (These topics 
will be covered later in this training module). 



E46 Convertible E64 Convertible 


4 

Rollover Protection Systems 







The vehicles discussed in this training module are those using the automatically deploy¬ 
able rollover bars. This system is referred to as the Rollover Protection System orRPS. 
Anotherterm used forRPS is URSS. This is an abbreviation forthe German words Uber 
Roll Schutz System. This term may be used in some technical reference documents or 
diagnostic equipment test modules. 



E64 with rollover bars in retracted position E64 with rollover bars deployed 


These vehicles, which are all convertibles, include the E36iC, E46iC and the E64. All of 
these vehicles use RPS. Each version differs slightly in function and operation. 

The E36 and E64 each have a set of rollbars which are mounted behind the rear head¬ 
rests. The E46 has a set of rollbars which are deployed through a retractable cover on 
the rear headrests. 


5 

Rollover Protection Systems 







E64 Rollover Protection 


Components 

On the E64,the two extending rollover bars are housed behind the rear seats in a carrier 
structure. Unlike the RPS on the E36/E46 Convertibles, the sensors for rollover detection 
are located in the vehicle center satellite SFZ-R. 

The rollover protection system consists of the following components: 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Cover, rollover protection bar 

7 

Guides 

2 

Support structure 

8 

0 pening for emergency release 

3 

Rollover protection bar 

9 

Actuator retaining screws 

4 

Locking pawl 

10 

Actuator 

5 

Toothed strip 

11 

Lock 

6 

Preload spring 

12 

Electrical connection 


6 

Rollover Protection Systems 


















The additional sensors forthe rollover protection system have been incorporated into the 
SFZ-R. The SFZ-R is located in the center console area and is connected to the SGM 
via byteflight. Any positional changes of the vehicle can be precisely monitored and 
recorded due to the central location of the satellite. 








Main pP 



3 

MVj 

J 

i 

L 



"V 




— 




Arm no Sgn-il 


Din n » 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Safety BatteryTerminal (BST) 

8 

Secondary (auxiliary) processor 

2 

BST output stage 

9 

Safety and Gateway module 

3 

Yaw-rate sensor 

10 

Actuator, right 

4 

Low-g sensor 

11 

Transmitter/receiver module 

5 

Longitudinal and lateral acceleration sensor 

12 

Voltage regulator 

6 

Arming signal interface 

13 

Actuator, left 

7 

Main processor 




7 

Rollover Protection Systems 










































































The following sensors are incorporated into the SFZ-R: 

• Longitudinal acceleration sensor (X-axis) 

• Lateral acceleration sensor (Y-axis) 

• Low-g sensor (Z-axis) 

• Yaw-rate sensor (rotation in the X-axis) 

The longitudinal and lateral acceleration sensors record the positive and negative vehicle 
acceleration. The sensors provide a voltage signal proportional to the acceleration. The 
voltage signal is evaluated by the SFZ-R and this information is sentto the SGM and the 
other satellites via byteflight. 

The Low-g sensor records the acceleration in the Z-axis (vertical). 

The rollover sensor is similar in design to a yaw-rate sensor. The yaw-rate sensor has a 
"comb-like" structure, which consists of a fixed comb structure and a rotational oscillator 
with a moving comb-structure. Together, the comb structures form a capacitor. The 
rotational oscillator is fitted on bearings on an axle in its center. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rotational Axis 

2 

Rotational oscillator with moveable comb structure 

3 

Fixed comb structure with signal pickups 


8 

Rollover Protection Systems 










When the vehicle is in a horizontal position (1), the rotational oscillator turns with the 
comb structure and detects the change of direction (L/R). If the vehicle is brought into a 
tilting position (2), the rotational oscillator is moved out of the comb-structure due to the 
Coriolis effect. 



2 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rollover sensor in original position (flat surface) 

2 

Rollover sensor in tilted position (slope, crash barrier) 

3 

Rollover sensor in original position (180° rollover) 


This causes a change in capacitance, which in turn creates a proportional change in volt¬ 
age in the millivolt range. This is evaluated as the measured variable. The voltage 
change is directly related to the angle and in the same way, the speed of the voltage 
change is directly related to the angle velocity. The angle and the angle velocity are the 
measurements used forthe algorithm calculation. 

The SFZ-R incorporates two processors, a main processor and an auxiliary processorfor 
calculating rollover-detection data. 

The main processor contains the algorithm for calculating rollovertendency. The data 
from the yaw-rate sensor and the low-g sensor are used forthis purpose. 

The longitudinal and lateral acceleration sensors, the yaw-rate sensor and the low-g 
sensor are evaluated in parallel in the auxiliary processor. 

The data is exchanged between the two processors. If, in the event of an imminent 
rollover, both processors arrive at the same result, the following sequence is initiated: 

• The main processor sends the data to the SGM via byteflight. 

• The main processor activates the arming lead to the SGM. 

• The SGM combines and compares both items of information. 

• If the stored threshold values are exceeded both actuators are activated. 

• The actuators release the lock and the rollover protection bars emerge under spring 
pressure. 


9 

Rollover Protection Systems 







Triggering Sequence 

In normal operating mode, the rollover bars are retracted in the support structure. They 
are preloaded by spring pressure and held in place by a lock on the actuators. 

If the rollover sensor in the SFZ-R detects an imminent rollover, data is sent via byteflight 
to the SGM . Atthe same time, the signal to enable the RPS (URSS) is sentto the SGM 
via a copper cable (arming wire). The SGM then activates the two actuators via the out¬ 
put stage. 

The RPS system may be triggered in the following situations: 

• Automatically when an imminent rollover is detected 

• By a defined accident severity in a front, side or rear end collision. 

• Via the diagnostic interface (DIS plus/GT-1) 

• By a mechanical emergency release mechanism 

The RPS system will be triggered along with other safety systems during a rollover as 
follows: 


Accident Severity 1 

Accident Severity 2 

Rollover protection system 

Rollover protection system 

Central locking 

Central locking 

Hazard warning lights 

Hazard warning lights 

Interior light 

Interior light 


BST 


Seatbelt tensioners 


Electric fuel pump cutout 


Emergency telephone call (optional) 


10 

Rollover Protection Systems 



URSS Service Information 

Activation of the rollover protection devices is possible through a Test Plan of the 
DISplus orGTl. 

During Test plan activation observe the following safety precautions: 

• The convertible top M UST be in the down position (Top Open) 

• DO NOT stand overornearthe rollover protection devices priorto or during 
deployment 

Mechanical Deployment (For Service) 

Priorto servicing, repairing or removing the URSS the rollbars must be deployed. If it is 
not possible to activate the system with the DIS plus or GT1, the emergency mechanical 
release should be used. 

1. Open the Convertible top 

2. Trunk open 

3. Remove the baggage compartment floor mat and bulkhead cover 

4. Insert a hook device into the opening of the crossmember until you reach 
the actuator 

5. Insert the hook (alien key) into the hole in the actuator and pull the release lever 


11 

Rollover Protection Systems 




Workshop Exercise - URSS Deployment 


Mechanical Deployment 

Using an instructor designated vehicle (E64). Perform the mechanical release of the 
rollover bars. Prior to servicing, repairing or removing the URSS the rollbars, they 
must be deployed. If it is not possible to activate the system with the D IS plus or GT1, 
the emergency mechanical release should be used. 

With the Instructor's assistance: 

1. Open the Con vertible Top. 

2. Trunk open. 

3. R emo ve the luggage compartment floor mat and bulkhead co ver. 

4. Insert an "L " shaped device (alien key) into the opening of the bulkhead 
cross member until you reach the actuator. 

Note: DO NOT stand over or nearthe rollover protection devices priorto or 
during deployment. 

5. Insert the tool into the base of the actuator (hole) and push up. 

To Reset: 

6. Slide the release latch (under the deployed bar) and slowly compress the bar 
(approximately half way) remove your hand and fully down seat the bar until it 
latches. 

DISplus/GTl Deployment 

Activation of the rollover protection devices is possible through 
Service Functions >Test Plan in the DISplus orGTl. 

During Test plan activation observe the following safety precautions: 

1. The convertible top MUST be in the down position (Top Open). 

Note: DO NOT stand over or nearthe rollover protection devices priorto or 
during deployment. 

2. Slide the release latch (under the deployed bar) and slowly compress the bar 
(approximately half way) remove your hand and fully down seat the bar until it 
latches. 


12 

Rollover Protection Systems 




^ C lassroom Exercise - E64 Rollover Protection 


1. Which component controls the rollover bar actuators on the E64? 


2. On the E64, what sensors does the SFZ-R contain which pertain to rollover detec¬ 
tion? 


3. What is the Low-g sensor used for? 


4. What is the purpose of the arming wire? 


5. Listthe 4 situations in which the rollover bars can be deployed: 


13 

Rollover Protection Systems 

























E46 Rollover Protection System 

RPS on the E46iC, although similarto the E64, is derived from the E36. This system uses 
a separate rollover sensor (URS) which directly controls the actuator circuits. The URS is 
connected to the K-bus for diagnosis and for transfer of information to and from the MRS 
system. 

As with all Rollover protection designs, the vehicle also incorporates a reinforced windshield 
frame. 



KOMBI 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Instrument cluster 

3 

Rollover sensor 

2 

Crash actuator, right 

4 

Crash actuator, left 


14 

Rollover Protection Systems 

























System Components 

Roll Over BarC assettes 

The roll over cassettes are new and construct¬ 
ed completely from aluminum with a pad inte¬ 
grated in the top of the bar. The cassettes are 
bolted into the reinforced carrier behind the 
seat back. When retracted, they are covered by 
the rear head rest which incorporate a flap, at 
the back, that will open when the roll bars 
deploy. 


E46 Rollover Bar Cassette 



ActuatorSolenoids 

A newly designed solenoid, mounted in the 
bottom of the cassette, holds the bars in the 
retracted position until triggered by the roll over 
sensorfor deployment. 



Rollover Bar Actuator 


Each actuator consists of a single acting sole¬ 
noid with a lock for disengaging and engaging 
the rollover protection bar. 


The bar, when triggered, will extend within 300ms. 

The locking pawls on the rollover bar press the toothed strip back mechanically as the bar 
extends. When the protection bar is extended, the locking pawls are supported on the 
toothed strip. When the car is in the overturned position, the force is transmitted via the 
locking pawls on the rollover bars to the toothed strip. 

The retaining hook illustrated below must be held back in orderto return a triggered 
rollover barto its original position. Then the rollover bar can be reset without the use of a 
special tool as in the case of the E36. 



Retaining hook engaged 


Retaining hook released 


15 

Rollover Protection Systems 






Roll OverSensor 

The rollover sensor which contains the clinometer and the G-sensoris installed in the rear 
behind the right rear seat back on the rollover cassette. It also contains the processing 
electronics for rollover detection and deploymentfinal stage fortriggering the rollover bar 
solenoids. 



Two capacitors are also installed for roll bar deployment in the event of a powerfailure 
with the system during an a crash. The sensor is connected to the diagnostic link fortrou¬ 
bleshooting purposes. 


The sensor performs a self check every time the ignition is switched on. If any faults are 
detected, the warning lamp in the cluster will illuminate. If possible, the system will trigger 
the solenoids even though a fault is stored in the fault memory. 

Note:The rollover sensor must be in the installed position when the powersupply 
is switched on. If the rollover sensor is not in the normal position during the 
self test (which is performed afterswitching on), bubble level and g-sensor 
faults may be detected by the self test. A sensor (bubble level or g-sensor) 
which is detected as being faulty is blocked from the triggering process. 


16 

Rollover Protection Systems 













Clinometer 

The clinometer inside the sensor consists ofthree level floats to detect body tilting, trans¬ 
verse and longitudinal acceleration for roll bar deployment, two floats are positioned on 
opposing angles of 52 degrees to the horizontal axis of the vehicle. The third float is posi¬ 
tioned at an angle of 72 degrees to the longitudinal axis. LED transmitters and phototran¬ 
sistor receivers are positioned to read the air bubble float as it moves in the glass tube. 



If the vehicle starts to roll over sideways or end-to-end, beyond the critical angles, the air 
bubble will move and interrupt the LED signal. The electronics ofthe sensorwill then trig¬ 
ger the solenoids and the roll bars will deploy. 



17 

Rollover Protection Systems 








"G" Sensor 


The "G" sensor is used to triggerthe roll bars if the vehicle should become airborne, the 
"G” sensor consists of a reed contact, magnet and spring assembly. As long as the vehi¬ 
cle is in contact with the road surface, the spring does not have enough tension to over¬ 
come the weight of the magnet and gravity. 




However, if the vehicle becomes airborne and weightlessness occurs, the spring will force 
the magnet up and the reed contact will open. This will signal the electronics of the sen- 
sorto triggerthe solenoids and the roll bar will deploy. 

A time period of approximately .3 seconds with a "G” force of approximately 0.9 or less is 
required before the bars will deploy. 


18 

Rollover Protection Systems 



Roll Over Sensor Diagnosis andTesting 

The sensor performs a self check every time the ignition key is switched on. All compo¬ 
nents of the sensor are checked including the output stages for roll bar triggering. If a fault 
is detected, the warning lamp in the cluster is illuminated and the fault is stored in the 
memory of the convertible top module. 

In the event of a powerfailure, capacitors in the sensor can still triggerthe solenoids for 
approximately 5 seconds. 

The RPS system must be checked at various service intervals, referto the latest inspec¬ 
tion sheet for the proper intervals. 


Servicing Rollover Bar Cassettes 

The rollover bar cassettes cannot be repaired. They can only be replaced. In the event 
that replacement becomes necessary, the cassettes must be released before attempting 
to remove. 


This can be done by using the diagnostic equipment (DISplus/GT-1) orvia mechanical 
means. When using the diagnostic interface, use the service functions menu. 



When using the mechanical method, remove the rear seat (upper) as necessary to 
access the rear side of URS. Insert a 4mm punch or equivalent into access hole and 
release rollover bars. 


19 

Rollover Protection Systems 







Workshop Exercise - E46 RPS 


Mechanical Deployment 

Using an instructor designated vehicle (E46). Perform the mechanical release of the 
rollover bars. Prior to servicing, repairing or removing the URSS the rollbars, they 
must be deployed. If it is not possible to activate the system with the D IS plus or GT1, 
the emergency mechanical release should be used. 

With the Instructor's assistance: 

1. Open the Con vertible Top. 

2. Remove upper backrest to expose access hole 

3. Using 4mm punch or equivalent release rollo ver bars. 

Note: DO NOT stand over or nearthe rollover protection devices priorto or 
during deployment. 

To Reset: 

Slide the release latch (under the deployed bar) and slowly compress the bar 
(approximately half way) remove your hand and fully down seat the bar until it 
latches. 


DISplus/GTl Deployment 

Activation of the rollover protection devices is possible with the DISplus orGTl. 

During Test plan activation observe the following safety precautions: 

1. The convertible top MUST be in the down position (Top Open). 

Note: DO NOT stand over or nearthe rollover protection devices priorto or 
during deployment. 

2. Slide the release latch (under the deployed bar) and slowly compress the bar 
(approximately half way) remove your hand and fully down seat the bar until it 
latches. 


20 

Rollover Protection Systems 




E36 Rollover Protection 


The first BMW convertible to use RPS was the E36. The system uses a pair of deploy¬ 
able rollover bars which lock into position to protect the occupants during a rollover. 

As with all vehicles equipped with rollover protection, a reinforced windshield frame sup¬ 
plements the RPS. 

This system uses a rollover sensor located behind the left backrest. Faults with the 
rollover sensor will cause an RPS warning light in the clusterto illuminate. The rollover 
sensor is connected to the data link for access to diagnostics as well. 



The rollover bars can be reset by means of a special tool located in the vehicle tool kit. 
Also the bars can be mechanically deployed or by means of the diagnostic test equip¬ 
ment (DISplus/GT-1). This procedure is necessary to remove the rollover bars in the 
event that service or replacement is required. 


21 

Rollover Protection Systems 



System Components 
Roll Bar Cassettes 

Two roll bar cassettes are located in a reinforced body structure behind the rear seat 
backrests. Each assembly consists of a U-shaped barthat is guided by low-friction plas¬ 
tic bushings. The bar is held in the retracted position against spring pressure by a lever. 
The lever is solenoid controlled to unlock the rear barfor deployment. The two springs 
ensure that the bar will deploy quickly to provide adequate protection. 

When deployed, the bar is held in place by a ratchet and lever assembly that locks the bar 
in the raised position. 



22 

Rollover Protection Systems 



Each rollover bar cassette is a self-contained 
unit which can be replaced separately if need¬ 
ed. The bars are constructed of light alloy 
steel and weigh approximately 11 lbs. each. 

During a rolloverthe bars have the capability 
of absorbing 35KN each. 

If the bars are damaged or malfunction during 
the maintenance procedures, the bars should 
be replaced. No repairs are allowed on the 
bars whatsoever. 

If replacement is required, the bars must be in 
the deployed position before starting work. 

The bars can be deployed via mechanical 
means or by the diagnostic equipment. 

Emergency Release 

As mentioned previously, the rollbars must be 
in the deployed state when replacement is 
required. If the bars can not be released via 
the diagnostic equipment, an emergency 
release mechanism is provided. 



There is a small hole in the actuatorto release 
the bar. A small screwdriver can be inserted 
to release each bar. 


Each actuator lever has an overlap of 1.2mm. 
This is a critical dimension. Less than 1.2mm, 
the bars will deploy. 

Note: Serious injuries could result from 
attempting to remove the rollbars in an armed 
state. Inadvertent deployment could occur 
causing injury. 



23 

Rollover Protection Systems 





Retracting of the Rollbars 

Once the rollbars have been deployed, the rollbars need to be reset (if they are not dam¬ 
aged). In contrast to the E46 and E64, the E36 requires a special tool which can be 
found in the vehicle tool kit. 

The reset procedure is as follows: 

• Remove the rear seat head rest(s) 

• Insert the tool in the slot at the front of the roll bar 

• Press the tool down to release the ratchet lock of the locking lever 

• Push the roll bar down far enough to clearthe ratchet 

• Remove the tool and press the roll bar down until it locks into the actuator 



24 

Rollover Protection Systems 


U(JU 




Rollover Sensor 

The rollover sensor is mounted on the longitudinal axis of the vehicle, behind the left 
backrest. It contains the clinometer and g-sensor as well as the control electronics for roll 
bar deployment. 

The rollover sensor is also connected to the diagnostic link for component activation and 
fault code diagnosis. 

There are capacitors fortriggering the rollbars in the event of an electrical failure. 

Refer to the E46 RPS section for operation of the clinometer and G-sensor. 



25 

Rollover Protection Systems 





^ Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What special tool is required to reset the rollover bars on the E46iC? 


2. Which vehicles use rigidly fixed rollover bars? 


3. What components are contained within the URS on the E46iC? 


4. What precautions should be observed during URS installation on the E46iC? 


5. To which bus system is the URS connected? 


6. What is the G-sensor used for in the E46iC? 


26 

Rollover Protection Systems 



























^ C lassroom Exercise - Review Questions 


7. Which of the following vehicles uses "rigidly fixed" rollover bars? 

A. E46 B. E52 C. E64 D. E63 

8. Which of the following statements is NOT true regarding RPS on the E64? 

A. The sensors for rollover detection are located in the SGM. 

B. The SGM controls the actuator circuits forthe rollover bars. 

C. The SFZ-R contains two processors to calculate rollover protection data. 

D. The rollover bars can be reset without the use of a special tool. 

9. Which of the following components allows the rollover bars to be deployed when 
there is a power loss? 

A. Clinometer B. G-Sensor C. Capacitors D. Actuators 

10. What feature works in conjunction with the RPS rollover bars to provide a sufficient 
survival space forthe vehicle occupants during a rollover? 


Notes: 


27 

Rollover Protection Systems 





















