Table of Contents 


Mk-3 NAVIGATION SYSTEM 

Subject Page 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components 

Navigation Computer..4 

GPS Receiver..5 

Gyro Sensor..5 

GPS Antenna.6 

Display Units.6 

Information/Body Bus Interface.7 

Video/Audio Signals.8 

Speed Signals.9 

Reverse Gear input.9 

Principle of operation.10 

Workshop Hints.12 

Review Questions.17 


Initial Print Date:10/03/00 


Revision Date: 10/24/00 
















Mk-3 NAVIGATION SYSTEM 

Models: E38, E39, E46, E52, E53 

Production Date: E46 from 6/00, all others from 9/00 
Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

Recognize the changes to M k-3 from the previous M k-2 navigation system. 
Identify the components used in the system. 

Review the operating fundamentals of GPS navigation. 

Describe how to properly code and program the M k-3 computer. 


2 

M k-3 Navigation 




Purpose of the System 


The M k-3 navigation system is a factory installed navigation system that replaces the 
previous M k-2 version. The purpose of the system remains the same as previous 
navigation systems: To provide the driver with navigation instructions to an entered 
destination based on the vehicles current position and the roads available selected from 
a digitized road map. 


The principle differences of the Mk-3 system over the previous Mk-2 are: 

GPS receiver is integrated into the M K-3 computer. 

Optimized memory and faster processor resulting in faster start-up and operation. 

New split screen and magnifying feature when equipped with wide screen monitor, 
(software feature) 

Same navigation computer used for color board monitor or monochrome M IR display 
units. 


3 

M k-3 navigation 



System Components 


Mk-3 Navigation Computer 

The Mk-3 navigation computer is located in 
the left side of the vehicles trunk orcargo area. 
(In the case of the Z8 it is installed in the stor¬ 
age box behind the passenger seat.) 

The navigation computer housing contains: 

Map CD drive 

Hardware for navigation function 
GPS receiver 
Gyro sensor 

Output for audio interface 
Output for visual display 
Cooling fan for unit 



There are two different hardware versions available dependent on the angle of installation 
in the vehicle (horizontal or vertical). The Mk-3 is compatible with both board monitor or 
MIR display units (See workshop hints for configuration instructions) 


Identification of the M k-3 computer over the previous versions is easy due to a change in 
the face plate design and the elimination of the "CD-IN" LED. 



Mk-3 Navigation 
Computer 



Mk-1 and Mk-2 
Navigation Computer 



o 


• ON 

• CD-IN 


BMW 




NAVIGATION SYSTEM O 


4 

M k-3 Navigation 

















































Mk-3 computer 


GPS antenna 
connection 



18 pin ELO 
connectors: 

X1313: Violet 
X1312: Blue 


Integrated GPS receiver and Gyro (rotation) sensor 


GPS (Global Positioning System) Receiver 

The GPS receiver module of the previous M k-2 system is integrated into the housing of the 
M k-3 computer, further reducing the complexity and the number of components used in 
the system. The receiver is not serviceable. 

The GPS receiver is responsible for receiving the satellite signals and providing the vehicle's 
position information to the navigation computer. 

Information provided by the GPS receiver to the navigation computer can be displayed in 
the service mode (see workshop hints) but is not typically used in diagnosis. 


Gyro (Rotation) Sensor 

The navigation computer contains the electronic (piezo) Gyro sensor that detects rotation 
(yaw) of the vehicle as a confirmation that the vehicle is turning. The signal provided by the 
gyro is a mili-voltage that changes as the vehicle rotates. The navigation computer uses 
the input to track the vehicle along the digitized map and display the exact vehicle position. 

The signal is available in the sensor test page of the service mode for diagnosis. The 
sensor is not a separately serviceable item and does not require calibration. 


5 

M k-3 navigation 




GPS Antenna 

The GPS antenna is directly connected to the navigation computer via a coaxial cable. 
Locations of the antenna in the vehicles are as follows: 


E38: 

E39 sedan: 

E39 Sport Wagon: 
E46 sedan/coupe: 
E46 Sport Wagon: 
E46 Convertible: 
E52: 

E53: 


Under the rear parcel shelf. 

Under the rear parcel shelf. 

Behind the dashboard on the left side. 
Under the rear parcel shelf. 

Above the rear glass under the spoiler. 
Behind the instrument cluster. 

Left front corner behind the dashboard. 
Above the rear glass under the spoiler. 


Display Units 

Based on the particular model, the factory installed M k-3 system is displayed using a color 
board monitor or on a smaller monochromatic screen (MIR). 


E52 MIR (Multi Information Radio) 




E46/E53 Color Board Monitor 


E38/E39 Wide Screen Color Board Monitor 
(phased in for E53 1/01, E46 9/01) 



6 

M k-3 Navigation 
















































Navigation System Interface 




GPS 

ANTENNA 


Example of E38/E39 with Mk-3 navigation 


7 

M k-3 navigation 































































































































Information/body bus Interface 

The navigation computer is integrated into the vehicle bus system as it’s main communica 
tion link with the vehicle. 


Communication occurs with the following modules: 


BMBT - Control inputs 
Radio - Display data 
GM - Door open 

IKE/Kombi - On-board computer data 

Telephone PSE Box - M onitor display data, mayday function 

DISplus - Coding data 


PSE = Portable Support Electronics 


Video/Audio Signals 


Board Monitor (Top Navigation) 

The RGB video signal for all display functions of the board monitor are produced by the 
navigation computer graphics stage via three output signals. The Red-Green-Blue signals 
are direct inputs to the board monitor. The audio signals for navigation instructions to the 
radio are sent via two separate lines. 


GPS ANTENNA 






VIDEO 

GYRO 

GPS 





RGB 



MIR (Radio Navigation) 

Since a color display is not used for the MIR, the navigation information for the display is 
sent via a NAV bus. The NAV bus is a single dedicated line between the M k-3 computer 
and the M IR. Audio signals for navigation instructions are sent to the radio via two 
separate lines. 





AUDIO SIGNALS 

"TO 

NAV BUS 


Mk3 NAV. 

8 

M k-3 Navigation 



E52 MIR 


























































































Speed Signals 

A speed signal is provided to the navigation computerfordetection of distance traveled and 
vehicle speed to calculate the vehicles position on the digital map. The input is a processed 
signal provided by the vehicles DSC control unit. 

E46: The speed signal used is from the left rear wheel. 

E38/E39/E52/E53: The speed signal used is from the left front wheel. 

Reverse Gear Input 

The reverse gear input is used by the navigation computer to distinguish between the 
vehicle backing up orturning around. 

E38/E39/E 52/E 53: The reverse input is a high signal produced by the LC M III. 



• E46: The reverse input is a high signal supplied by a splice from the back-up lights. 


Automatic Transmission KL15 KL30 



Reversing 
Light Relay 
K6325 


9 

M k-3 navigation 












Principle of Operation 


The Global Positioning System is a satellite based system developed by the US Department 
of Defense that provides both military and civilian users accurate information about 
location. 


The GPS system uses 24 satellites in six 
orbits 12,550 miles above the Earth mov¬ 
ing at 1.7mi per second. Usually 7 to 10 
satellites are in view over any one point on 
the earth. 

The GPS satellites are basically extremely 
accurate clocks that broadcast a coded 
signal representing time. The GPS receiver 
determines it’s distance from the satellite 
by measuring the time it takes between 
satellite transmission of the signal and 
reception to the receiver. The receiver 
does this with at least 2 other satellites and 
uses the information to determine the vehi¬ 
cles latitude, longitude, and altitude. The 
accuracy of the system for civilian use is 
within 100m (300ft). 



The vehicle must have an unobstructed view of the sky to receive the maximum amount of 
satellite signals. Trees, large buildings and excessive cloud cover can block the reception 
of the satellites' transmissions. 




SATELLITE A 


SATELLITE B 


SATELLITE C 



IF SATELITE "A" IS THERE, 

"B M IS THERE AND "C IS THERE, 

MY CALCULATIONS TELL ME THAT 
I AM AT THESE COORDINATES: 



GPS 

RECEIVER 

DEVICE 


GPS SIGNALS 
NCLUDE: 

• EXACT TIME OF SIGNAL 

• CURRENT 
SATELLITE 
COORDINATES 


10 

M k-3 Navigation 


























The GPS antenna passes the signal to the GPS receiver incorporated in the navigation 
computer. A CD with map data is loaded in the CD drive of the navigation computer. The 
navigation computer combines the vehicle position calculated by the GPS with this map 
data. 

The current position of the vehicle can be shown on the on-board monitor by selecting 
"Emergency” from the main menu. 

The driver can enter a destination. The navigation computer calculates a route from the 
current location to this destination based on selectable criteria (main use of highways, 
shortest distance, etc.). The calculated route is shown in the route display. 

The navigation computer generates the RGB color video signal for all on-board monitor 
displays. These three signals are sent over separate shielded wires to the on-board mon¬ 
itor. 

In the case of the E52 M IR (also referred as radio navigation) which does not have a color 
display, the visual display data is sent via one wire called the navigation bus. On both sys¬ 
tems, color and monochrome display, the audio output from the navigation computer for 
voice directions is sent over two separate wires. 

The driver has the choice of displays that utilize a color map with an icon of the vehicle 
being traced on the map or the use of arrow indicators and distance data shown on the 
on-board monitor display. Vehicles equipped with the wide screen board monitor have a 
splitscreen option that includes both display methods. The MIR only makes use of the 
arrows and distance display. With the assistance of voice prompts, the navigation 
computer indicates how and where to get into the correct lane or turn off. 

The navigation computer calculates the distance traveled from the wheel speed signal 
delivered by the DSC control unit. 

The gyro incorporated into the navigation computer housing informs the navigation com¬ 
puter when the vehicle is turning. An alternative route is re-calculated automatically if the 
driver does not follow the original route instructions. 

Once the driver has reached their destination, the navigation computer is ready for 
another destination input. 

Refer to the on-board monitor owners manual for instructions on using the navigation system 
software. 


11 

M k-3 navigation 



Workshop Hints 


Replacing the Mk-3 navigation computer 

When replacing the M k-3 navigation computer be aware that there are two hardware 
variants depending on the installation position (vertical or horizontal). 

The ignition should be in position 0 during removal and replacement of the computer. After 
installing, close all doors, hood and trunk. A bus line reset will be carried out within two 
minutes. Resetting allows the gyro to perform a calibration run. Do not move the car 
during this reset period. 

The coding sequence for the M k-3 navigation computer has been changed from the 
previous M k-2. There is now an additional step (configuration) that must be done before 
the software can be loaded. 


After resetting, a configuration signal is needed to allow the computer to load the correct 
software for use with a board monitor or MIR. This is performed using the DIS coding pro¬ 
gram (CD 22.0 onward) and the Navigation System operating software (CD V15.0 onward). 

Note: Vehicles using the wide screen BM require CD V16.1 onward. 


1. From the DIS/MoDiC Coding /Programming 
select "1 ZCS Coding" 

2. Select the appropriate series 
(E46,E39,E38,E52,E53) 

3. Select "4 Conversion" 

4. Select "3 IKE?Kombi" 

5. Select "2 language" 

6. At the prompt "is the C D ROM present?" 
select yes , but do not install the operating 
software CD ROM yet. 

7. First select the main language and then an 
additional language, (i.e. English-spanish) 

8. Select the gender of the navigation audio 
voice. 

9. Select "automatic coding-yes" 




12 

M k-3 Navigation 




































































10. After coding is done the DIS/MoDiC 
instructs you to follow the instructions on 
the monitor for the installation of the 
Navigation System CD ROM. 

11. Place the navigation system software in the 
navigation computer CD drive. 

Important: Do not switch the ignition off during the 

software loading procedure. Do not use any soft¬ 
ware for the Mk-3 earlier than CD V15.0. 

12. Once loading has been completed, remove the 
CD and then confirm completion by pressing 
the rotary push-button on the monitor. 

13. Turn off the key for 10 seconds, then turn it 
back on and conduct a functional check. 

14. After this step has been finished, encode the 
navigation computer using the "Recoding" path 
in ZCS Coding. The coding process involves 
coding vehicle specific data: VIN, Model, 
Telematics data etc. 




The software status can be confirmed from the 
"Set" screen for M k-3 systems. 

3 = Third generation system Mk-3. 

1 = Device variant (l=Color screen, 2= MIR 
monochrome screen). 

20 = Software version of the graphic 
component (Version 2.0). 



After the navigation computer has been successfully programmed and coded the vehicle 
should be left in an area with a clear view of the sky with the key in KL R for at least 15 min¬ 
utes to complete the calibration process. 


13 

M k-3 navigation 



























































Service Mode 


J ust as M k-2, M k-3 provides an on-screen service mode for diagnosis. The service mode 
provides five different test screens: 

On-board monitor 
Navigation/Graphic element 
GPS 

Sensor Check 
Telematics 


To enter the Navigation Service Mode: 

Turn the ignition key to position 1 (KL R). 

From the Menu screen select "SET". 

Once in the Set screen, press and hold the "MENU” button for 8 seconds. 
The Service Mode menu will appear on the display. 

Select from the Service Mode menu for navigation specific tests. 



Press and hold for 8 seconds after entering 
the "Set" mode 



Service Mode main menu display 


Diagnosis 


Diagnosis is carried out using Test Modules in the Diagnosis Program as well as on-screen 
in the Service mode.The SensorCheck display is intended to be used while test driving the 
vehicle. The following pages contain charts with explanations of the Service Mode display. 




14 

M k-3 Navigation 















































































































































STATUS DISPLAY 

WHAT SHOULD BE DISPLAYED 

WHAT TO DO IF NOT OK 

Wheel Sensors: 

As the vehicle is driven, the 
number should increase with an 
increase in vehicle speed. 

Check fault codes in DSC 
system. If necessary carry 
out wheel speed sensor 
test. 

GPS Satellites: 

With unobstructed upward view 
of sky the display should be > 3 

Check for interference of 
signals to GPS antenna, 
Check integrity of circuit 
from GPS antenna to nav 
computer. 

GPS Status: 

“See Legend below” 


Gyro: 

Direction icon moves with vehicle 
turning movement. 

Milli voltage display value should 
be approx 2500 mV (+/- 400mV) 
when the vehicle is stationary or 
driven straight ahead. 

When the vehicle is turning, the 
signal voltage should increase on 
right hand turns and decrease on 
left hand turns. 

Replace Navigation 
computer. 

Direction: 

Reverse is displayed when range 
selector is in reverse. Forward in 
any other range. 

Check back up light 
signal input. 


GPS Status Text Display 

Description 

1. “GPS fault” 

Problem with GPS system. Swap nav computer and or 
antenna from know good vehicle after checking GPS 
status display information 

2. “Reception Interference” 

Problem with GPS system. Same as above. 

3. “No Almanac” 

No Data yet stored from satellites. The GPS almanac is a 
memory account of received satellite signals. If the vehicle 
battery has been disconnected or after replacing a nav 
computer it has an empty memory and requires satellite 
signals to become functional. After the nav computer 
receives battery voltage and ground, it must be left outside 
with an unobstructed sky above with the ignition switched 
to KL R for approximatly 15 minutes. 

4. “Satellite search” 

GPS is currently searching for satellite signals. 

5. “Satellite contact” 

At least one satellite is found 

6. “Position known” 

Vehicle’s Latitude and Longitude known. Navigation is 
possible. 


15 

M k-3 navigation 


































Menu 


Explanation 

GPS/Status 

G-speed 

Relative speed over the ground 


Heading 

Direction of travel 


Rec status 

Search/trac k/position receiver status 


Pos-src 

Number of satellites available for analysis 


PDOP 

Accuracy of the calculated location 


HDOP 

<8=sufficient determinations of location 


VDOP 

<4=verygood determinations of location 

G PS/Tracking 

CH 

Channel 

info 

PRN 

Satellite detection 


S/N 

Better reception as the value increases 


Visible Sat 

Number of visible satellites, receivable 

Signals, depending on time of 
day/configuration 


Almanac 

Satellite database, loaded automatically after 
15 minutes 

Telematics 

VIN 

VIN (Automatically assigned during coding) 


Color 

Colorcode ortext 


GSM 

Telephone network/contract number 


BMW info 

Customer specific info 


Emergency call out 

On/off status 


Initialization 

Telematics services on/off status 


Logging off 

Logging off telematics services 


PDOP Position Dilution of Precision 

HDOP Horizontal Dilution of Precision 

VDOP Vertical Dilution of Precision 

S/N Signal/noise relationship 

Gyro Piezo gyro sensor (in navigation computer) 

Dir Direction of travel 


16 

M k-3 Navigation 













Review Questions 

1. List the most signoficant changes made to the M k-3 navigation computer over the 
previous Mk-2._ 


2. How can the signal provided by the gyro sensor to the navigation computer be 
checked 7 _ 


3. Describe how the display signals are transmitted from the navigation computer to the 
MIR and board monitor._ 


4. What step is necessary before loading the navigation computer operating software CD 
on a newly replaced navigation computer 7 Where can the software status be confirmed 
after it has been loaded 7 


5. How is the VIN entered into the navigation computer 7 


17 

M k-3 navigation 






