Table of Contents 


WIDE SCREEN ON-BOARD MONITOR 


Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

Component overview.4 

Principle of operation.7 

Workshop Hints.7 

Review Questions.9 


Initial Print Date:10/03/00 Revision Date:9/30/00 








WIDE SCREEN ON-BOARD MONITOR 

Model: E39,E38,E46,E53 

Production Date: E38,E39 from 9/00 

E53 from 1/01 

E46 Cabrio from 3/01 

all other E46 models from 9/01 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

Describe the benefits of the wide screen monitor over the previous versions 
Understand how to operate the wide screen monitor. 

Review the procedures to access the Service Modes. 


2 

Widescreen board monitor 




Introduction 


While the instrument cluster provides all of the important vehicle status information to the 
driver, the on-board monitor is designed as an additional display that can be viewed by both 
the driverand vehicle passengers. Information relating to the vehicle, navigation, audio sys¬ 
tem and telephone can be displayed and controlled from a central location. 

The wide screen on-board monitor replaces both the 5.5" versions in the E38 and E39, and 
the 5" board monitor from the E53 and E46. The wide screen display has a screen size of 
6.5" and an aspect ratio (length:height) of 16:9. 

The benefits of the wide screen design are: 

Larger display area and higher resolution (400X234 pixels). 

Improved display screen technology (Ad-TFT LC). 

Bigger text size. 

Soft keys replace country specific audio function keys. 

Used for all board monitor applications in all markets reducing variants. 

Larger display area makes split screen and magnification features possible (future 
software enhancements). 



3 

Widescreen board monitor 




















Component Overview 



Cassette Drive 

The cassette drive is located behind the on-board monitor screen. In order to access the 
cassette, press the "eject" button, the display screen tilts forward to uncover the cassette 
slot. The images will remain displayed on the screen. 

After pressing the "eject" button again or automatically after 15 seconds the display returns 
to its normal position (cassette must be completely inside or removed). The tilt mechanism 
for the display screen utilizes anti-trap, if the board monitor detects a sudden change in 
speed, the display will reverse direction. 



4 

Widescreen board monitor 




















Display Screen and Control Panel 


The display screen has a diagonal width of 6.5" and an aspect ratio of 16:9 compared to 
the previous monitors that had a ratio of 4:3. The new screen also uses a Ad-TFT display 
(Advanced Thin Film Transistor). This type of screen uses ambient light in addition to back¬ 
lighting in order to illuminate the display. The advantage is a constant contrast and 
brightness level at all ambient lighting conditions. 6i5 iNCH display 

16:9 ASPECT RATIO 



RADIO CONTROL KNOB \ PHOTOCELL SENSOR 
RADIO STATUS LED = Signal from 


ON-BOARD MONITOR CONTROL 
KNOB 


radio via l/K bus. 


AUXILIARY FAN INDICATOR LED 





INFO = Activates the soft key menu for RDS and PTY 


1-6 BUTTONS = Audio presets and CD selection 


AM/FM SELECTION 



MODE/DISPLAY = Mode selects between audio functions. Display alternates between 
radio display and other displays. BC,TEL,NAV etc. 


TELEPHONE STATUS LEDs / EJ ECT = Tilts monitor to access cassette drive. 
TELEPHONE = Send/End button 

TAPE REVERSE/CLOCK = Clock: Pressing with key off displays time. Aux. ventilation 

can be switched by holding button longer. 

TONE/SELECT=Tone: Dolby (cassette only) and audio adjustments. 

Select: Choose between station search methods (a,m or scan). 

FAST FORWARD/REVERSE / STATION SEARCH 
MENU = Returns display to main menu 



Widescreen board monitor 














Wide Screen Board Monitor Interface 




FOR AMPLIFICATION 


CD 

PLAYER 

AUDIO 

SIGNALS 



TAPE PLAYER 
AUDIO SIGNALS 



MFL-CM 




RED SIGNAL 


GREEN SIGNAL 



Example of E38/E39 with Wide Screen Board Monitor 


6 

Widescreen board monitor 
























































































Principle of operation 

The on-board monitor is an input and display device that performs no internal calculations. 

Inputs from the control panel buttons and knobs are converted into l-bus (K-bus E46) 
signals by the B M control panel. All of the devices controlled by the B M are connected to 
the l/K bus interface. 

The navigation computer contains the graphics stage integrated into the navigation 
computer housing. Request for on-board monitor displays are made to the navigation 
computer via the l/K bus. The navigation computer generates the RGB video signals and 
transmits them via 3 shielded wires. 

Audio signals generated by the cassette drive are sent via traditional audio wires (4) to the 
radio (located in the trunk or cargo area) for output to the audio system amplifier. 


Workshop Hints 

Service mode 

Access for the radio, on-board monitor and navigation service modes is available through 
the on-board monitor screen. 

To enter the radio service mode: 

Turn the ignition key to position 1 (KLR). 

Turn the radio on, then off, then on again. 

Press the "INFO" button. From the selection list choose "RDS". 

Press and hold the on-board monitor control knob for at least 8 seconds. 

The audio display window will show the radio serial number as the first display. 

The station search < > buttons are used to scroll through the various settings. 

Turn off the radio to "set" any changes made. 



Note: See the "NG" Radios 
module for a list of the 
tests and settings available 
in the radio service mode. 


7 

Widescreen board monitor 




















To enter the On-Board Monitor and Navigation Service Mode: 

Turn the ignition key to position 1 (KL R). 

From the Menu screen select "SET". 

Once in the Set screen, press and hold the "M EN U" button for 8 seconds 
The Service Mode menu will appear on the display. 

Select "On-board monitor" for monitor specific tests. 




r—"i 

r--' -i 


0 ° 


SERVICE MODE 



On-board monitor 
(NAVIGATION/GRAPHIC ELEMENT 
Video Module 
GPS 

Sensor check 
Telematics 


11.13.2000 Thursday 


10:17 1 





Press and hold for 8 seconds after entering Service Mode main menu display 

the “SET" screen. 







Tests and adjustments available for the on-board monitor are 
Version Information 

Key Function (button and rotary knob test) 

Brightness (Screen brightness adjustment) 


Widescreen board monitor 




























































Diagnosis 


Fault driven diagnosis is possible using the DIS/M 0 D 1 C Diagnosis Program. The Diagnosis 


Program features: 

Identification 

Read/Clear fault memory 
Diagnosis requests 

Fault driven test modules. (E46 concept) 



Review Questions 

1. Which component is responsible for providing the display signals to the wide screen on¬ 
board monitor 7 


2. How does the radio receive the control requests from the on-board monitor control 
panel 7 _ 


3. What tests and adjustments are available in the service mode that are specific to the 
on-board monitor 7 









