F10 Passive Safety Systems 



BMW Service 


Edited for the U.S. market by: 

BMW Group University 

Technical Training 

4 / 1/2010 

V_/ 







General information 


Symbols used 

The following symbol / sign is used in this document to facilitate better comprehension and to draw 
attention to particularly important information: 

A_ 

Contains important safety guidance and information that is necessary for proper system functioning 
and which it is imperative to follow. 


Information status and national-market versions 

The BMW Group produces vehicles to meet the very highest standards of safety and quality. Changes 
in terms of environmental protection, customer benefits and design make it necessary to develop 
systems and components on a continuous basis. Consequently, this may result in differences between 
the content of this document and the vehicles available in the training course. 

As a general principle, this document describes left-hand drive vehicles in the European version. Some 
controls or components are arranged differently in right-hand drive vehicles than those shown on the 
graphics in this document. Further discrepancies may arise from market-specific or country-specific 
equipment specifications. 

Additional sources of information 

Further information on the individual topics can be found in the following: 

• in the Owner's Handbook 

• in the integrated service technical application 

Contact: conceptinfo@bmw.de 
©2009 BMW AG, Munich, Germany 

Reprints of this publication or its parts require the written approval of BMW AG, Munich 

The information in the document is part of the BMW Group technical training course and is intended 
for its trainers and participants. Refer to the latest relevant BMW Group information systems for any 
changes/supplements to the technical data. 

Information status: December 2009 




F10 Passive Safety Systems 

Contents 


1. Introduction.1 

1.1. Pass ive s afety syste m.1 

2. Models.2 

2.1. Overview.2 

3. System Overview.3 

3.1. System wiring diagrams.3 

3.1.1. Bus diagram.4 

3.1.2. System wiring diagram.8 

4. Functions.10 

4.1. Functions of the crash safety module.10 

4.2. Crash-relevant functions.10 

4.2.1. Evaluating the sensor signals.11 

4.2.2. Detecting crashes.11 

4.2.3. Triggering time and triggering sequence.12 

4.2.4. Triggering the output stages of the firing circuits.12 

4.2.5. Sending the crash message.12 

4.2.6. Crash entries.13 

4.2.7. Emergency call function.13 

4.3. System monitoring functions.14 

4.3.1. System self-test.14 

4.3.2. Indication of system operability.15 

4.3.3. Cyclic monitoring.15 

4.3.4. Fault indication and fault code storage.15 

4.3.5. Fault output (diagnosis).15 

4.3.6. Acoustic and visual seat belt warning.15 

4.3.7. Deactivation of the airbags.16 

5. System Components.17 

5.1. Crash Safety Module.17 

5.2. Sensors and switches.17 

5.2.1. Central sensor.17 

5.2.2. B-pillar transverse and longitudinal acceleration sensor.18 

5.2.3. Door airbag sensor, front (pressure).18 

5.2.4. Longitudinal acceleration sensor.19 

5.2.5. CIS mat.19 

5.2.6. Seat belt buckle switch.20 

5.2.7. Emergency call button.20 

5.3. Actuators.21 








































F10 Passive Safety Systems 

Contents 


5.3.1. Adaptive Driver's airbag.22 

5.3.2. Adaptive Front passenger airbag.23 

5.3.3. Knee airbag.24 

5.3.4. Head airbag.25 

5.3.5. Side airbag, front.25 

5.3.6. Front seat belt tensioner.26 

5.3.7. Active head restraints, front.28 

5.3.8. Safety battery terminal.29 

5.3.9. Airbag indicator light.29 

5.3.10. Seat belt warning light.30 

5.3.11. Indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation.30 














F10 Passive Safety Systems 

1. Introduction 

1.1. Passive safety system 

The passive safety system of the FI 0 builds on the objectives and characteristics of the F01. The 
passive safety system fulfils all legislative requirements worldwide. 

Extensive measures were taken on the body and on the occupants safety and protection systems. The 
passive safety system includes, in addition to the restraint systems, a special body structure which 
offers a excellent crash performance. In the event of an accident, the forces are reduced in a defined 
manner and therefore have less impact on the occupants. 

The restraint systems ensure that the risk of injury is significantly reduced. 

The 3rd generation of the Advanced Crash Safety Module ACSM is used on the FI 0 as the central 
airbag control unit for the passive safety system. It differs from the previous crash safety modules in 
that it has an external sensor system. 



F10 Passive safety systems 


1 


F10 Passive Safety Systems 

2. Models 


2.1. Overview 

The passive safety system installed in the F10 is the third-generation Crash Safety Module. The 
following illustration provides an overview of the installed versions for the various models: 


Model series 

Model 

Used as of 

Design 

E60 

5 Series Saloon 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E61 

5 Series Touring 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E63 

6 Series Coupe 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E64 

6 Series Convertible 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E85 

Z4 Roadster 

01/2006 

ACSM 1 

E86 

Z4 Coupe 

05/2006 

ACSM 1 

E88 

1 Series Convertible 

04/2008 

ACSM 2 

E70 

X5 SAV 

11/2006 

ACSM 2 

E71 

X6 SAC 

04/2008 

ACSM 2 

E93 

3 Series Convertible 

03/2007 

ACSM 2 

F01 

7 Series Saloon 

11/2008 

ACSM 3 

F02 

7 Series Saloon long 
version 

11/2008 

ACSM 3 

F07 

5 Series Gran Turismo 

10/2009 

ACSM 3 

F10 

5 Series Saloon 

03/2010 

ACSM 3 


2 











F10 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 

3.1. System wiring diagrams 

The following bus overview provides you with an overview of the FI 0 vehicle electrical system/network 
structure and the integration of the modules into the PT-CAN. 


3 



F10 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


3.1.1. Bus diagram 



F10 Bus overview 


4 
































































































































































F10 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wakeable control units 

2 

Control units authorized to wake up the vehicle 

3 

Startup node control units, for starting up and synchronizing the FlexRay bus 
system 

ACC-SEN 

Active Cruise Control Sensor 

ACSM 

Advanced Crash Safety Module 

AL 

Active steering 

AMPH 

Amplifier High (high fidelity amplifier) 

AMPT 

Amplifier Top (top high fidelity amplifier) 

BSD 

Bit-serial data interface 

BCU 

Battery Charge Unit (for auxiliary battery) 

CAS 

Car Access System 

CIC 

Car Information Computer 

CIC Basic 

Car Information Computer Basic 

CID 

Central Information Display 

CON 

Controller 

D-CAN 

Diagnosis on Controller Area Network 

DDE 

Digital Diesel Electronics (Not for US) 

DME 

Digital Motor Electronics 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

DVD 

DVD changer 

EDCSHL 

Electronic Damper Control, rear left satellite unit 

EDCSHR 

Electronic Damper Control, rear right satellite unit 

EDC SVL 

Electronic Damper Control, front left satellite unit 

EDC SVR 

Electronic Damper Control, front right satellite unit 

EGS 

Electronic transmission control 

EKPS 

Electronic fuel pump control 

EMF 

Electromechanical parking brake 

EPS 

Electronic Power Steering 

Ethernet 

Cabled data network technology for local data networks 

FD 

Rear display 

FD2 

Rear display 2 

FLA 

High-beam assistant 

FlexRay 

FRM 

Fast, preset and fault-tolerant bus system for use in automotive applications 

Footwell module 


5 




















F10 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

FZD 

Roof function center 

GWS 

Gear selector switch 

HKL 

Luggage compartment lid lift 

HSR 

Rear suspension slip angle control 

HUD 

Head-Up Display 

ICM 

Integrated Chassis Management 

IHKA 

Integrated automatic heating / air conditioning 

JBE 

Junction box electronics 

KAFAS 

Camera-based driver assistance system 

K-Bus 

Body bus 

K-CAN. 

Body controller area network 

K-CAN2 

Body controller area network 2 (500 kBit/s) 

KOMBI 

Instrument cluster 

LIN-Bus 

Local Interconnect Network bus 

Local-CAN 

Local Controller Area Network 

MOST 

Media Oriented System Transport 

MOST port 

NVE 

Media Oriented System Transport port 

Night Vision electronics 

PDC 

Park Distance Control 

PMA 

Parking Maneuvering Assistant Control Unit 

PT-CAN 

Powertrain CAN 

PT-CAN2 

Powertrain controller area network 2 

OBD 

Diagnosis socket 

RSE 

Rear seat entertainment system 

SDARS 

Satellite tuner 

SMBF 

Front passenger seat module 

SMFA 

Seat module, driver 

SWW 

Blind Spot Detection 

SZL 

Steering column switch cluster 

TCU 

Telematics Control Unit 

TPMS 

Tire Pressure Monitoring System 

TRSVC 

Control unit for reversing camera and side view 

ULF-SBX 

Universal interface box 


6 




















F10 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

VDM 

Vertical Dynamics Management 

VM 

Video Module 

VSW 

Video switch 

ZGM 

Central Gateway Module 


7 






F10 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


3.1.2. System wiring diagram 



F10 System wiring diagram 


8 


TE09-2331 











































































































































F10 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central Gateway Module 

2 

Acceleration sensor, left engine support 

3 

Instrument cluster 

4 

Car Access System 

5 

Crash Safety Module 

6 

Acceleration sensor, right engine support 

7 

Door airbag sensor, front left (pressure) 

8 

Driver's airbag, two-stage with ventilation 

9 

Clock spring 

10 

Knee airbag, driver 

11 

Indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation 

12 

Knee airbag, passenger 

13 

Front passenger airbag, two-stage with ventilation 

14 

Door airbag sensor, front right (pressure) 

15 

Head airbag, left 

16 

Acceleration sensor, B-pillar left 

17 

Automatic reel with adaptive force limiter, driver's side 

18 

Seat belt buckle contact, driver's seat 

19 

Seat belt pretensioner, driver 

20 

Side airbag, driver's side 

21 

Active head restraint, driver 

22 

Central sensor 

23 

Seat belt buckle contact, front passenger side 

24 

Seat belt pretensioner, front passenger 

25 

Seat-occupancy mat, CIS mat 

26 

Active head restraint, passenger 

27 

Side airbag, passenger side 

28 

Head air bag, right 

29 

Acceleration sensor, B-pillar right 

30 

Automatic reel with adaptive force limiter, front passenger's side 

31 

Telematics Control Unit for emergency call 

32 

Safety battery terminal 


9 




















F10 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 

4.1. Functions of the crash safety module 

The main function of the Crash Safety Module is to constantly evaluate all sensor signals in order to 
detect a crash situation. As a result of the sensor signals and their evaluation, the crash safety module 
identifies the direction of the crash and the severity of the impact. 

Also included is information on seat occupancy and whether or not the driver and/or front passenger 
have their seat belts fastened. From this information, measures are taken to selectively trigger the 
necessary restraint systems. 

The crash safety module monitors the system itself and indicates that the system is ready for 
operation when the airbag indicator light goes out. 

In the event of a fault during operation, this is stored in a fault memory, which can be read out for 
diagnostic purposes. 

If a crash situation is detected, this is communicated to the other users in the bus-system network by 
a crash message. The relevant control units respond to this signal by executing their own functions 
according to the severity of the crash. 

These functions include: 

• Opening the central-locking system 

• Activating the hazard warning flashers 

• Switching on the interior light 

• Deactivating the electric fuel pump 

• Switching off the auxiliary heating 

• Automatic emergency call. 

Another function of the Crash Safety Module is the acoustic seat belt warning, which uses visual and 
audible signals to remind the driver and front passenger to fasten their seat belts. 

The functions of the Crash Safety Module are divided into the following areas: 

• Crash-relevant functions 

• System monitoring functions 

• Additional convenience functions. 

4.2. Crash-relevant functions 

The Crash Safety Module must fulfill the following crash-relevant functions: 

• Evaluating the sensor signals 

• Detecting crashes 

• Determining the triggering time and the triggering sequence 

• Triggering the output stages of the firing circuits 


10 




F10 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 

• Sending the crash message to all bus users 

• Crash documentation 

• Emergency call function 

4.2.1. Evaluating the sensor signals 

The sensors serve to detect and verify front-end, side-on and rear-end crashes. In addition, the system 
is also equipped with rollover detection. 

The sensors are directly connected to the crash safety module, where its signals are evaluated and 
processed. 

4.2.2. Detecting crashes 

European version vehicles are equipped with the following sensors: 

• One transverse and longitudinal acceleration sensor in the central sensor (yellow) 

• One transverse and longitudinal acceleration sensor in each of the B-pillars (green) 

• One airbag sensor for pressure in each of the front doors (blue). 

• One longitudinal acceleration sensor on each of the engine supports (red) 


Ow 

C 

On* 



F10 ACSM Sensors 

The longitudinal acceleration sensors can measure both positive and negative acceleration. Using 
these signals, a front-end or rear-end crash is detected. 

A side-on crash is detected using the lateral acceleration sensors and airbag sensors in the doors. 


11 


TE09-2333 











F10 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 


A crash in which the force-transfer direction is not perpendicular to the vehicle's longitudinal or 
transverse axis is detected by means of a combined transverse and longitudinal acceleration. 

The longitudinal acceleration sensors on the engine supports serve to detect a front-end crash and its 
severity. 

4.2.3. Triggering time and triggering sequence 

The Crash Safety Module uses the values transmitted by the sensors to determine the direction and 
severity of the crash. 

In the case of a front-end crash, for example, correspondingly high acceleration values must be 
detected by the longitudinal acceleration sensor in the B-pillar and by the longitudinal acceleration 
sensor in the central sensor. Based on the acceleration forces, an algorithm detects the severity and 
direction of the crash. Using this information, the triggering times and the sequence of the restraint 
systems to be activated is calculated. 

A possible imminent rollover is also detected and the appropriate protection systems are activated. 

4.2.4. Triggering the output stages of the firing circuits 

The Crash Safety Module is powered by the Car Access System 4 (CAS 4) through terminal 30B. 

At terminal 30B, the Crash Safety Module is in offline mode. This means that it is active on the data 
bus and can fulfill all diagnostic functions. The triggering of the ignition circuits is blocked and only 
possible from terminal 15, on completion of the system self-test. Likewise, the Crash Safety Module is 
ready for ignition, even if in terminal R the engine turns OFF. 

The ignition capacitors are charged via a switching controller. These capacitors make the firing energy 
available in the event of a crash. If the voltage supply is interrupted during a crash, the firing capacitors 
serve briefly as an energy reserve. 

The output stages of the firing circuits consist of a high-side and a low-side power circuit-breaker. The 
high-side power circuit-breaker controls the firing voltage, while the low-side power circuit-breaker 
switches to ground. The output stages of the firing circuits are controlled by a microprocessor. 

The high-side and low-side power circuit-breakers also serve the purpose of checking the firing 
circuits during the system self-test. 

4.2.5. Sending the crash message 

In the event of a collision involving triggering of the restraint systems, the Crash Safety Module sends 
a crash message to the users in the bus-system network. Parallel to this, the TCU is informed via a 
direct single-wire connection to transmit an emergency call. 

Then, the respective control units perform the following functions depending on the crash severity: 


12 



F10 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 


Function 

Control unit 

Switch off electric fuel pump 

Digital Motor Electronics (DME) 

Via electronic fuel pump control (EKPS) 

Switch off the auxiliary heating 

Integrated automatic heating and air 
conditioning (IHKA) (Not for US) 

Release central locking 

Junction box electronics (JBE) 

Switch on hazard warning flashers 

Footwell module (FRM) 

Switch on interior lights 

Footwell module (FRM) 

Transmit emergency call (only when airbag 
triggered) 

Telematics Control Unit (TCU) 


4.2.6. Crash entries 

In the event of a collision where one or more actuators are triggered, a crash entry is stored in a non¬ 
erasable memory. After three crash entries, a non-erasable fault memory entry is stored with the 
instruction to replace the Crash Safety Module. 

A 

Note: The three crash entries can also be stored during the course of an accident. Each crash entry is 
assigned a system time. 

The electronic control unit remains capable of firing even after three crash entries. The crash entries 
cannot be erased and are used to diagnose the device. A maximum of three crash entries can be 
stored. The control unit must then be replaced. 


4.2.7. Emergency call function 

The emergency call functions are country-dependent and are available to customers in countries 
with BMW Assist infrastructure. This means an appropriate service provider with a call center must 
be available. Another precondition for being able to make an emergency call is the availability of a 
telephone network. 

With BMW ASSIST, the customer has a manual and an automatic emergency call as well as other 
functions. 

A manual and an automatic emergency call function is provided as standard. Furthermore, the 
driver has the option of activating a breakdown call. Irrespective of whether the customer orders a 
telephone or not, each vehicle is equipped with a telematics control unit TCU, a telephone antenna, an 
emergency antenna, a handsfree kit and a GPS antenna for determining position. 

Manual emergency call 

The manual emergency call is intended for customers to request help quickly if they are present when 
an accident occurs without being involved themselves. 


The emergency-call button is located in the roof function Center. The emergency call button is 
connected directly to the TCU. 


13 









F10 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 


Pressing the emergency-call buttons establishes a voice connection with the relevant country 
provider. The voice connection is indicated by a flashing LED in the switch. 

Automatic emergency call 

The crash safety module sends a crash telegram to the TCU in the event of an accident of 
corresponding crash severity. The TCU places an emergency call, which at the same time contains the 
location of the vehicle. 

Parallel to this, attempts are made to set up a voice connection with the vehicle occupants to obtain 
more information on the accident (severity of the accident, number of injured) so that further rescue 
operations can be initiated. 

Extended automatic emergency call 

Vehicles with BMW Assist have an additional function, the extended automatic emergency call 
(Advanced Automatic Crash Notification). 

Using various sensor data of the extended automatic emergency call system, the risk of injury is 
determined and transmitted to the emergency coordination center. 

The emergency call includes additional specific information about the accident. Thus the call center 
has more accurate information about the accident and the risk of injury, which can be passed on to the 
emergency coordination center. The emergency coordination center can then initiate the appropriate 
actions. 


4.3. System monitoring functions 

The Crash Safety Module has the following system monitoring functions: 

• System self-test (pre-drive check) 

• Indication of system operability 

• Cyclic monitoring 

• Fault indication and fault code storage 

• Fault output (diagnosis) 

• Acoustic and visual seat belt warning 

• Deactivation of the front passenger front airbag, the knee airbag and side airbag in via the 
seat-occupancy detector. 

4.3.1. System self-test 

The Crash Safety Module performs a system self-test as of terminal 15. The airbag indicator light is 
activated for approximately five seconds during the system self-test. 

When the system self-test is concluded and no fault has been found, the airbag indicator light goes out 
and the system is ready for operation. 


14 




F10 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 


4.3.2. Indication of system operability 

Crash Safety Module system operability is indicated by the airbag indicator light going out in the 
instrument panel. 

4.3.3. Cyclic monitoring 

Once the system self-test has been successfully concluded and the system is ready for operation, a 
cyclic monitoring procedure is performed for fault monitoring purposes. Cyclic monitoring serves the 
purpose of internal diagnosis of the electronic control unit and the overall airbag system. The cyclic 
monitoring is carried out continuously as of terminal 15 and it is also continued after reaching logical 
terminal R and after the engine is OFF. 

4.3.4. Fault indication and fault code storage 

The Crash Safety Module has a non-volatile fault memory. A fault entry is signalled by the airbag 
indicator light illuminating. 

A distinction is made between internal and external faults when entering the fault code. Events such as 
triggering of an airbag or seat belt pretensioner are also stored in the fault memory. 

A 

Note: The entry of a triggered restraint system in the fault memory does not mean that the restraint 
system was defective in the crash situation, rather it only means that the ignited restraint system is not 
available for further triggering. 


4.3.5. Fault output (diagnosis) 

With the aid of the BMW diagnosis system, Integrated Service Technical Application (ISTA), the fault 
memory can be read out via the diagnostic interface. After rectifying the faults or after replacing the 
triggered components, the fault memory can be cleared with the diagnosis command "Clear fault 
memory". 

4.3.6. Acoustic and visual seat belt warning 

All vehicles with Crash Safety Module come standard with an acoustic and visual seat belt warning. 
The Crash Safety Module detects whether the driver and front passenger have fastened their seat belt. 
If not, a corresponding acoustic and visual indicator reminds them to fasten their seat belt. Both seat 
belt buckle switches are monitored separately. 

For a description of the exact sequence of the acoustic and visual seat belt warning, refer to the 
information bulletin entitled "Passive safety system F01/F02". 


15 




F10 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 

4.3.7. Deactivation of the airbags 


Automatic deactivation of the airbag is provided in order to fulfill the requirements of the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration NHTSA. The child seats listed in the regulation (for an 
approximately one-year old child on the front passenger seat) must cause deactivation of the airbags. 

To do so, a seat-occupancy mat is used to classify the occupant on the front passenger seat. As a 
further development of the Occupant Classification 3 mat (OC3 mat), the Capacitive Interior Sensing 
mat (CIS mat) is used in the F10. 

The CIS mat consists of two elements: a sensor wire, which runs parallel to the seat heating in the seat 
cushion and an evaluation unit. 

The CIS mat measures the capacitance and ohmic resistance between the sensor wire (anode) 
and the ground of the vehicle (cathode) at a frequency of 120 kHz. The change in capacitance and 
resistance enables the CIS mat to determine whether an adult or a child in a child seat is on the front 
passenger seat. 



Measuring procedure of the CIS mat, example: F07 


Deactivation of the front passenger airbag, side airbag and knee airbag on the front passenger side is 
signalled by the indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation. 

The indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation in the roof function center is illuminated if a 
child restraint system tested according to the requirements of the NHTSA with a small child has been 
detected on the front passenger seat or the front passenger seat is unoccupied. 

The brightness of this light is controlled by automatic regulation of the display lighting. 


16 







F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

5.1. Crash Safety Module 

The Crash Safety Module is contained in a housing with three sockets. 

Two sockets serve to connect the wiring harness. One other socket is provided for the cockpit wiring 
harness. 



F10 Crash Safety Module 


The Crash Safety Module is located in the cockpit module behind the glove box, as it was not possible 
to locate it centrally on the transmission tunnel due to the size of the Crash Safety Module and the 
wiring harness connection. Only the associated sensor system has remained on the transmission 
tunnel, close to the center of gravity. 


The Crash Safety Module does not contain any sensors. These have been relocated to an additional 
central sensor on the transmission tunnel. 


5.2. Sensors and switches 

The following sensors and switches are installed: 

• Central sensor for longitudinal and lateral acceleration 

• Sensor for transverse and longitudinal acceleration at the B-pillars 

• One airbag sensor in each of the front doors (pressure). 

• One longitudinal acceleration sensor on each of the engine supports 

• CIS mat 

• Seat belt buckle switch 

• Emergency call button 


5.2.1. Central sensor 

The central sensor on the transmission tunnel contain a transverse and a longitudinal acceleration 
sensor. 


17 







F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 



F10 Central sensor 


5.2.2. B-pillar transverse and longitudinal acceleration sensor 

The transverse and longitudinal acceleration sensors in the B-pillars serve to detect head-on, side-on 
and rear-end crashes. 

The left and right sensors are identical in design. 



F10 B-pillar transverse and longitudinal acceleration sensor 


5.2.3. Door airbag sensor, front (pressure) 

The airbag sensors in the front doors are used for side impact detection. In addition to the high 
transverse acceleration values, the pressure in the cavity of the door increases in the event of a side-on 
crash. 

The airbag sensors are located on the inner door panel of the front doors. 


18 


F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 



5.2.4. Longitudinal acceleration sensor 

Two longitudinal acceleration sensors are installed in the front area of the engine supports. The 
measured values are transmitted to the Crash Safety Module and evaluated there. 



5.2.5. CIS mat 

A Capacitive Interior Sensing mat (CIS mat) is installed in the front passenger seat for seat-occupancy 
detection. This replaces the OC3 mat, which was previously installed for this function. The CIS mat 
detects whether an adult or a child in a child seat is in the front passenger seat. Deactivation of the 
front passenger airbag, side airbag and knee airbag is signalled by the illumination of the indicator 
lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation in the roof function center. 

The CIS mat consists of two elements, a sensor wire, which runs parallel to the seat heating in the 
seat cushion, and an evaluation unit. The CIS mat measures the capacity and the ohmic resistance 
between the sensor wire (anode) and the ground of the vehicle (katode) at a frequency of 120 kHz. The 
CIS mat uses changes in the capacity and the resistance to determine whether an adult or a child is in 
the front passenger seat. 


19 









F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

5.2.6. Seat belt buckle switch 

The seat belt buckle switches are located in the seat belt buckles of the driver's and front passenger's 
seat. 

The seat belt buckle switch detects whether the seat belt buckle tongue is in the seat belt buckle. The 
supply of power to the sensor and the evaluation are carried out by the Crash Safety Module. 

From terminal 15, the seat belt buckle switch is monitored continuously. The signal is used for the 
visual and acoustic seat belt warning and for determining which restraint systems are to be triggered. 



5.2.7. Emergency call button 

The emergency-call button is located in the roof function center. 







SOS^ 


yr 


PASS 

AIR BAG 

OFF 










I 


FI 0 Roof function center with emergency call button 


20 


F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

5.3. Actuators 

The following actuator are installed in the FI 0: 

• Driver's airbag 

• Front-passenger airbag 

• Knee airbag, left and right 

• Head airbag, left and right 

• Side airbag, front left and right 

• Belt tensioner, front left and right 

• Active head restraints, front left and right 

• Safety battery terminal. 

In addition, the following indicator lights inform the occupants of the status of the safety systems: 

• Airbag indicator light 

• Seat belt warning light 

• Indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation 

The following two graphics show the airbags in non-triggered and triggered status. Depending on the 
type of the specific crash, only certain airbags are triggered. 



FI 0 Triggered airbags 


21 



F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

5.3.1. Adaptive Driver's airbag 

The task of the driver's airbag is to decrease the risk of injury for the driver in the event of a head-on 
crash. The driver's airbag is located in the impact plate on the steering wheel. The driver's airbag is 
equipped with a gas generator. 



FI 0 Steering wheel with driver's airbag 


An active vent valve and a two-stage generator are installed which, depending on the detected crash 
severity, the stages can be triggered with different timing. 



FI 0 Adaptive Driver's airbag steering wheel with the airbag removed. 


22 




F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Gas generator with exhaust vents 

2 

Actuator for vent valve 


© ® ® 



FI0 Adaptive Driver's airbag, rearview. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Connection of the squib for the active vent valve 

2 

Connection of the ignition squib for the first stage of the driver's airbag 

3 

Connection of the ignition squib for the second stage of the driver's airbag 


Note: The Active driver's and passenger's airbags are equipped with an active vent valves. 

5.3.2. Adaptive Front passenger airbag 

The task of the front passenger airbag is to reduce the risk of injury to the passenger in the event of a 
head-on collision. The front passenger airbag is located in the dashboard. When the front passenger 
airbag unfolds, the dashboard is broken open at pre-defined locations. The front passenger airbag 
opens in the direction of the windshield, exits towards the top and rests against the windshield and the 
dashboard. The front passenger airbag is equipped with a two stage generator which, depending on 
the detected crash severity, the stages can be triggered with a time difference. 


23 











F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 


© ©© © © © 



FI 0 Active Front passenger airbag 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Cover 

2 

First stage squib 

3 

Airbag housing 

4 

Actuator for the active vent valve 

5 

Inflator assembly 

6 

Second stage ignition squib 


Note: The Active driver's and passenger's airbags are equipped with an active vent valves. 


5.3.3. Knee airbag 

The US legal requirements call for the passive restraint (without seat belt) of the occupants. Therefore, 
to control the occupant forward displacement in the event of a head-on collision, knee airbags are 
installed on the driver's side and front passenger side. 


24 

















F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 



► 


8 


F10 Knee airbag 


5.3.4. Head airbag 

As additional protection of the occupants' head, the F10, uses curtain (head) airbags. 

The curtain airbag extends from the A-pillar to the C-pillar and covers the entire area of the side 
windows. It unfolds between the occupants and the side structure. 

System features: 

• Extended covered area across all front windows, front and rear 

• Reduction of risk of injury to occupants by glass splinters 

• Covered area epitomized for occupants of different sizes 

5.3.5. Side airbag, front 

As in the F01, the front side airbags are triggered from the front seat backrests. 

The side airbags and the gas generators are located in a plastic housing referred to as the airbag 
module. This is built into the front seat backrest and is covered by the rear panel. 

In the event of activation, the side airbag emerges between the backrest frame and backrest rear panel 
as it unfolds between the side structure and occupant. 



Note: It is important that no additional seat covers are installed as they would greatly impair 
the airbag function or even defeat it entirely. 


25 




F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 


J) 



FI 0 Seat with side airbag 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Side airbag 


5.3.6. Front seat belt tensioner 

In the FI 0, the familiar three-point seat belt is the belt system used on the front seats. 


© © 



FI 0 Seat belt 


26 









F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Seat belt tensioners 

2 

Side airbag 

3 

Automatic reel with adaptive force limiter 


Seat belt tensioners 

The task of the pyrotechnic belt tensioner is to minimize the seat belt slack in the pelvis and shoulder 
areas in the event of an impact, thereby improving the restraining action. 

The belt tensioners are located on the driver's seat and front passenger seat. The belt tensioners are 
ignited in certain crash situations. 

The seat belt buckle is connected by means of a steel cable to the piston in the tensioning tube. If the 
squib is triggered, gas pressure is created, which moves the piston in the tensioning tube. At this, the 
seat belt buckle is pulled down by the cable and the seat belt is tensioned. 



F10 Belt tensioner 

t— 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Seat belt buckle switch 

2 

Connection for ignition squib 

3 

Tensioning tube with piston 


Automatic reel with adaptive force limiter 

For the driver and front passenger, an automatic reel is installed as on F01/F02. 

With the aid of a gas generator, there is a changeover from a high to a low power level during the 
impact, in order to reduce the belt restraining forces. 


27 













F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

With optimal tuning in connection with the airbags, the kinetic energy of the occupant is more 
uniformly reduced over the duration of the impact. Thus lower occupant stress values are achieved. 

The operating principle of the adaptive force limiters in the FI 0 are the same as on the F01. 

5.3.7. Active head restraints, front 

For the FI 0, there are two versions depending on the installed seat. Both have a head restraint with 
pyrotechnic actuator which, in the event of a rear-end collision with sufficient severity, optimizes the 
distance and the height relative to the head. This reduces the load in the cervical spine area in the 
event of a rear-end collision. The headrest is activated at an early stage, even before the backward 
displacement of the occupant's head. 

In order to offer as much convenience as possible, the front section of the manually adjustable 
head restraints can be pulled forward or pushed backward approximately 30 mm. It is a two-stage 
adjustment. This allows for three different positions for the head restraint depth adjustment. 

On the multi-function seat, the headrest is adjusted by means of the headrest adjustment. 



F10 Manually adjustable head restraint 


The active head restraint minimizes the load in the cervical spine area in the event of a rear-end 
collision. For the occupants in the vehicle, the correct adjustment of the head restraints and the 
distance of the head from the head restraint are of crucial importance. 

In the event of a rear-end collision, the active head restraint reduces the distance between the head 
and the head restraint before the occupants are displaced backwards. This reduces the risk of injury to 
the cervical vertebrae, even in the event of a small accident. 


28 




F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

A 

Note: If the active head restraints have been triggered, the pyrotechnic actuators must be 
replaced in the workshop. It is essential to refer to the repair instructions. 


A _ 

Note: Never use any seat or head restraint covers on the head rest that can impair the 
protective effect. 


5.3.8. Safety battery terminal 

The safety battery terminal is triggered at different thresholds when the Crash Safety Module detects 
a head-on, side-on or rear-end crash of sufficient severity. The connecting cable between the battery 
and starter/alternator and positive battery connection point is then disconnected pyrotechnically. The 
safety battery terminal is located directly at the positive terminal of the battery. 

Despite the safety battery terminal being blown off, it is guaranteed that all consumers relevant to 
safety such as hazard warning flashers, interior lighting and telephone will continue to be supplied with 
voltage. 



5.3.9. Airbag indicator light 

The airbag indicator light is located in the instrument cluster. Crash Safety Module system operability 
is indicated by the airbag indicator light lighting up and then going out during the pre-drive check. 

The airbag indicator light is controlled by means of a message on the PT-CAN from the Crash Safety 
Module. The instrument panel receives a message on a cyclical basis. If the message fails to arrive, the 
airbag indicator light is activated. 


29 








F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 



FI 0 Airbag indicator light 


5.3.10. Seat belt warning light 

A visual and audible warning is issued if the seat belt is not fastened or is unbuckled when the vehicle 
is in motion. 



FI 0 Seat belt warning light 


The status of the seat belt buckle contacts of the seat bench is briefly visible in the TFT display of the 
instrument panel when the vehicle starts or a contact changes. 

5.3.11. Indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation 

In the FI 0, the indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation is in the roof function center. The 
indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation if the CIS mat detects a child seat with a child 
approximately one year old or if the front passenger seat is not occupied. 

The brightness of the indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation is controlled by the 
automatic brightness control of the display illumination. 


30 



F10 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 







SOS^ 


yr 


r*-2 

PASS 

AIR BAG 

OFF 










l 


F10 Roof function center with indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation 


31 



Bayerische Motorenwerke Aktiengesellschaft 
Handlerqualifizierung und Training 
RontgenstraBe 7 

85716 UnterschleiBheim, Germany 


