Table of Contents 

Introduction to C hassis Dynamics 

Subject Page 

Introduction to Chassis Dynamics.3 

Vehicle Dynamics.4 

Neutral Steer.5 

Understeer.5 

Oversteer .6 

Chassis Forces.7 

Kinematics .7 

Longitudinal Forces .8 

Lateral Forces .8 

Rotational Forces .8 

Tire contact area.9 

Tire contact patch.9 


Initial Print Date: 3/06 Revision Date: 















Introduction to C hassis Dynamics 


Model: All 

Production: All 

■BIICTItfIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand Chassis Dynamic Principles in BMW Vehicles 

• Understand Chassis Related Technology 


2 

Introduction to Chassis Dynamics 



Introduction to C hassis Dynamics 


One of the trademark characteristics of a BMW is its ability to handle like a sports car 
and still provide a pleasing driver experience. To keep ahead of the competition, BMW 
has continually raised the barfrom a performance standpoint. BMW engines are usually 
"Best in Class" in the premium segment. However, to remain a leader it is not only the 
engine which must outperform the rest of the pack. The chassis must allow for optimal 
comfort and safety as well as superior handing and braking. 



This training module will help the technician understand the basics of vehicle dynamics. 
Terminology, as it applies to BMW chassis systems, will also be explained in this section. 
A thorough understanding of current chassis technology is needed to diagnose and 
perform service procedures of these vehicles. 

The information learned in this training module will provide fundamental knowledge 
needed to understand such systems as Dynamic Stability Control, Active Steering and 
Active Roll Stabilization. 


3 

Introduction to Chassis Dynamics 






Vehicle Dynamics 

A vehicle's cornering performance is also referred to as its self-steering properties. This 
handling performance is considerably influenced by the changing ratio of lateral force to 
wheel load on the front and rear axles. Lateral force increases as centrifugal force 
increases. 

BMW vehicles are designed to have the best possible weight balance. A 50/50 weight 
ratio between the front and rear axles is always the intended design target. 

The engineers at BMW always strive to achieve these goals during the design process. 
This effort can be seen by the use of lightweight components. New materials such as 
aluminum, magnesium and high-strength steel are used throughout various models. 
Even new materials, such as plastic, have been incorporated into the body. 

For example, the E60 takes advantage of the lightweight front end technology (GRAV). 
On all modern BMW vehicles, the vehicle battery is installed in the rear of the vehicle for 
better weight balance. 



4 

Introduction to Chassis Dynamics 










Neutral Steer 

The slip angles arising as a result of lateral force are the same on the front and rear axles. 
Neutral cornering facilitates the best use of lateral forces and thereby the highest limit 
cornering speeds. However, it also reduces the subjective feel for vehicle stability. In 
addition the breakaway cannot be calculated as it can occur via both the front and rear 
axles. 

Understeer 

The ratio of lateral force to wheel load is greater on the front axle than on the rear. The 
vehicle follows a larger cornering radius than that corresponding to the steering angle. 

It also slides to the outside of the turn via the front axle. When designing the chassis, this 
behavior is often the preferred option, because when the vehicle breaks away it can be 
returned to a straightline course which it is possible to calculate. Take, for example, a 
vehicle which begins to break away via the front axle while being driven to the limits; if the 
steering angle is then reduced, the vehicle will recoverto assume a straightline course. 

BMW chassis are designed so that they have slight understeer characteristics. 



5 

Introduction to Chassis Dynamics 



Oversteer 

The ratio of lateral force to wheel load is greater on the rear axle than on the front. 
The vehicle follows a smaller radius than that corresponding to the steering angle. 
The vehicle slides to the outside of the turn via the rear axle. 



6 

Introduction to Chassis Dynamics 








Chassis Forces 

The chassis connects the vehicle with the road. Both force and drive torque are 
transferred to the road via the chassis. The chassis also has to absorb all cornering 
forces when the vehicle is cornering. 

The chassis is therefore exposed to a huge number of forces and moments all of which 
act in different ways. It is essential that all these forces and moments can be transmitted 
in an optimum way via the tire contact areas. 

As vehicles get more powerful and demands for ride comfort and driving safety rise, so 
the demands placed on the modern chassis increase considerably too. 




t 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

Fv 

Wheel contact force 

Fre 

Resulting force 

Fu 

Driving force 

K 

M aximum force 

Fs 

Cornering force 

X,Y,Z 

Coordinate axes 


Kinematics 

From a physics point of view, kinematics are the laws which give rise to sequences of 
movements. 

Where chassis engineering is concerned, kinematics is the sequence of movements at 
the wheels and wheel-guiding components. Kinematics therefore have a direct effect on 
the position of the wheel forthe respective load conditions. 


7 

Introduction to Chassis Dynamics 













Longitudinal Forces 

Longitudinal forces act on the vehicle 
through the vehicle centerline. These 
forces are created by acceleration and 
braking. Also, any up or downhill 
movement will influence the longitudinal 
forces acting of the vehicle. 


Lateral Forces 

Lateral forces are also known as "trans¬ 
verse" forces. These forces are most 
prevalent during turns. Crosswinds also 
contribute to lateral force. 




Rotational Forces 

Rotational forces are more commonly 
known as "yaw". Yaw motion is the 
vehicle rotation around a vertical axis. 
These forces are also experienced dur¬ 
ing turns. The speed of this force indi¬ 
cates the degree of turning force. 



8 

Introduction to Chassis Dynamics 







Tire contact area 

The tire contact area is the area which is covered by the wheel standing on the road. 



Tire contact patch 

The tire contact patch is the effective contact area of a tire in operation. It is therefore the 
tire contact area which is deformed by interfering forces (lateral forces, braking and accel¬ 
eration forces) and by road surface quality. 

The tire contact patch therefore describes the area of road which is touched by the tire 
when the vehicle is in operation. 



BMW suspension systems are designed to allow forthe optimum contact patch when the 
vehicle is in operation. For example, the "double-pivot" suspension is designed to keep 
the outside front tire as close to a zero camber angle on turns. 


9 

Introduction to Chassis Dynamics 





