TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Chassis Dynamics 


Subject Page 

Objectives of the Module .2 

Electric Power Steering ..7 

Purpose of the System.7 

System Components.8 

Inputs and Outputs.11 

Principle of Operation.12 

Workshop Hints.14 










Chassis Dynamics 


Model: E85 

Production Date: Start of Production MY 2003 


Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Describe how the “Sport” button affects the EPS system. 

• Understand what must be performed on the EPS column for removal/installation. 


2 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




Electric Power Steering (EPS) 

Purpose of the System 

With a conventional power assisted (hydraulic) steering system, a belt driven pump pro¬ 
vides pressure to the control valve which is integral in the power steering rack. When the 
steering shaft is turned, the control valve provides pressure to assist (decrease effort) in 
turning the steering gear. 

On some BMW vehicles, this control pressure is reduced by increasing vehicle speed via 
an electronically controlled bleed off valve (Servotronic). However; hydraulic power assited 
steering systems utilize a reservoir, hydraulic fluid, pump, hoses/lines, cooler, hydraulic 
valve/steering rack, Servotronic valve, purpose built steering shaft and column. 

Electric Power Steering (EPS) is used for the first time by BMW in the E85. It provides the 
typical BMW power assisted steering characteristics and “feel”. The EPS is a very direct, 
sporty steering element with a change-over between normal and “Sport” mode by the 
Dynamic Driving Control (Sport) button. 

The EPS differs from the conventional hydraulic power assisted steering system by utilizing 
electrical/electronic components to provide power assisted steering while retaining a com¬ 
plete mechanical connection. The EPS is a "dry system", the hydraulic components and oil 
are not required. 

The programmed EPS control functions are 
influenced by vehicle speed and provide addi¬ 
tional benefits regarding steering tuning, 
absorption adjustments and active steering 
return characteristics. 

The EPS system includes: 

1. EPS Control Module 4. Steering Rack 

2. EPS Electric Motor 5. Steering Gears 

3. Lower Steering Column 6. Steering Angle Sensor 

The advantages of EPS are: 

• Less maintenance and assembly 

• Improved driving dynamics 

• Increased comfort 

• Increased driving safety 

• Weight reduction 

• Increased environmental compatibility 

• Less power consumption 



7 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




Improved Driving Dynamics: 

- The EPS Electric Motor provides good power assisted steering control characteristics. 

- Active return to center. 

- Switchable steering characteristic (Dynamic Driving Control). 

- Use of light weight sport steering wheels (1 kg less than other steering wheels). 

Increased Driving Comfort: 

- Decouples unnessesary steering oscillations (from road disturbances) while maintaining 
relevant road feel information (different road conditions) to the driver. 

- Speed dependent steering assist force (parking vs. high speed driving). 

Increased Driving Safety: 

- EPS provides a direct mechanical connection to the steering gear , conveying direct road 
feel. 

- Speed dependent steering actively absorbs left/right roll. 

Increased Environmental Compatibility: 

- Reduced fuel and engine power consumption 

- Leak free "dry system" 

System Components 

The EPS system is divided into 3 component groups: 

• Upper steering column assembly • Steering gear with rack 

• Lower steering spindle 

Upper Steering Column Assembly 

The upper steering column mechanical section starts at the steering wheel and ends at the 
connection to the lower steering spindle. The upper steering column is secured by 4 bolts 
to a bracket which is welded to the instrument panel support frame. In addition, the sup¬ 
port frame bracket is secured by 4 bolts to the body. 

The electrical section pertains to the EPS 
servo unit which consists of the EPS 
Control Module and the electric motor. 

The remaining upper steering column 
section contains the steering lock with 
ignition switch and the steering column 
adjustment mechanism (manual tilt and 
telescopic). 

8 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




Servo Unit 


The servo unit provides active steering-effort assistance as required by steering force and 
vehicle conditions. The servo unit is located on the upper steering column and is protect¬ 
ed in the passenger compartment, it consists of: 

• Electric motor 

• Worm gear 

• Control unit 

• Internal sensors for electric motor speed, steering torque, temperature and voltage. 

• Coil-spring cassette for the internal steering torque sensor. 


1. Magnet wheel 

2. Steering torque sensor 

3. EPS control module 

4. Electric motor 

5. Worm gear shaft 

6. Steering angle sensor 

7. Shipping/service 
steering locking pin 

- Install before remov¬ 
ing steering column. 

- Remove after 
installing column. 

8. EPS housing 

9. Driven gear (meshes 
with worm gear) 

10. Torsion bar 



The electric motor and the worm gear in the servo unit produce a new acoustic pattern in 
the passenger compartment. The system acoustics can be heard in particular situations: 


• When the steering wheel is spun quickly 

• When the steering wheel is turned while the car is stationary 

• When the steering wheel is turned in a quiet atmosphere (e.g. radio not turned on) 


This acoustic pattern is not a system fault. The conventional sounds generated by hydraulic 
steering systems (pump modulation, limiting valve) are eliminated. 

Note: The EPS Control Module cannot be replaced separately, the entire assembly with the 
exception of the Steering Angle Sensor must be replaced as a unit (VIN specific part #). 


9 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



Lower Steering Spindle 

The lower steering spindle connects the upper steering column to the steering gear. It runs 
in the engine compartment from the bulkhead through two universal joints to the steering 
gear. The lower steering spindle is encased in a plastic sleeve for corrosion protection. The 
sleeve is made from high temperature resistant plastic. The two parts of the lower steering 
spindle interslide in a ball-bearing mounting. 

The ball-bearing mounting is neces¬ 
sary for: 

• Self adjusting length 

• Equalization during steering 
wheel height adjustment 

• Telescopic colapsing in event of a 
crash 

1. Ball bearing mounting 

2. Telescopic compartment 



Steering Gear 

The steering gear is a purely mechanical rack and pinion system. The steering deflection 
forces are counteracted by a damped thrust member, which is integrated in the steering 
gear. 

This thrust member has an integral damper element in addition to the tension spring. In the 
event of rapid steering movements, the rack is not influenced by high deflection forces. 
Without a damped thrust member, the rack would cause noises when returning at high 
speed. 


1. Steering gear 

2. Position lug 

3. Thrust member 


Note: The thrust member 
preload is not adjustable. 



10 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 





EPS - Input and Output Signals 



1. MS45ECM 6. 

2. Fusebox 7. 

3. Upper steering column with EPS 8. 

servo unit and control module 9. 

4. Electric motor internal speed sensor 10. 

5. Internal steering torque sensor 


Dynamic Driving Control “Sport” button illumination 
DISplus 

DSC control module 
Steering angle sensor (LWS) 

Dynamic Driving Control “Sport” button - function 
request via ECM 


Notes: 


11 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 






Principle of Operation 


EPS controls servo assistance for steering. In addition to the measuring the driver’s steer¬ 
ing torque, the EPS Control Module also monitors further inputs such as: 

• Vehicle speed • Dynamic Driving Control (Sport) button 

• Steering angle velocity • Internal system temperature 

• Steering angle 

The EPS calculates an assistance setpoint. The electric motor is activated via the integrat¬ 
ed power electronics and the torque is transmitted through the worm gear to the driven 
gear (attached to the steering column output shaft). 

The Servotronic function (vehicle speed dependent steering assistance) is also integrated. 
The corresponding assistance and damping characteristics are stored in the EPS Control 
Module. The required assistance torque is gradually increased when the engine is started 
and reduced (with a delay) when the engine is switched off. 


Steering Torque Measurement 

The driver’s steering torque is measured by a steering torque sensor integrated in the servo 
unit. The function is based on the magnetoresistive principle, these sensors are curently 
used in BMWs include wheel speed sensors (DSC III MK60) and Valvetronic position sen¬ 
sors (E65 - N62 engine). The magnetoresistive elements resistance changes as a function 
of the magnetic field acting on them. 

The input shaft of the upper steering spindle is connected by a torsion bar to the output 
shaft. A magnet wheel is mounted on the input shaft. The magnetoresistive element is 
mounted on the output shaft. 

The magnetic field lines are deflected by the magnet 
wheel as a result of the rotation of the input shaft with 
respect to the output shaft (slight twist due to the 
resistance from the tires on the road, steering gear, 
etc.). This deflection generates a resistance change 
(in one of the resistors) causing a voltage change in 
the evaluation electronics. 

Two output signals (different voltage values) are generated which are constantly monitored 
for plausibility by the EPS Control Module. Based on this voltage change, the EPS calcu¬ 
lates the extent of the driver’s steering torque. The leads for signal transmission, power 
supply and ground run in a coil spring cassette mounted on the pinion shaft. The coil spring 
cassette is located in the worm gear housing. 



12 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



Steering Angle Measurement 


To be able to perform active steering wheel resetting (return to center), the EPS Control 
Module requires the following: 


• Steering wheel center position 

• Present steering wheel angle 

The above information is input to the EPS Control 
Module by the steering angle sensor (LWS), in addition 
to the DSC system requirement. The steering angle 
sensor is located on the lower steering column in the 
passenger compartment. 

Note: The steering angle sensor must be calibrated 
(like the E46 DSC). 



4. Steering angle sensor (LWS) 


Dynamic Driving Control Function 


When the Dynamic Driving Control function is selected with the “Sport” button, the engine 
management system directs the request signal via the PT-CAN Bus to the EPS Control 
Module. 


The EPS Control Module switches 
to sporty vehicle handling. This 
provides higher steering and hold¬ 
ing forces. 


1. MS45 ECM 

2. Dynamic Driving Control “Sport” button 

3. EPS servo unit and control module 

4. Steering angle sensor (LWS) 

5. DSC control module 




13 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




Indicator Light 


The instrument cluster contains an indicator light for the EPS system. This light alerts the 
driver to significantly reduced steering effort assistance or to a complete shutdown of assis¬ 
tance. This may be caused by: 


• Fault in the EPS Control Module or an associated control module (DSC, 
ECM). 

• Undervoltage/overvoltage 

• Overloading of EPS 



Workshop Hints 

Servo Assistance Reduction or Shutdown 

When the EPS system is overloaded, it protects itself by reducing or shutting down servo 
assistance while retaining a complete mechanical connection for steering. The driver 
notices the increased steering torque and receives a visual signal from the indicator light. 

The following causes will implement protective measures: 

• Servo assistance is reduced/shut down if a fault relevant to EPS is detected in an asso¬ 
ciated Control Module/sensors (ECM, DSC Control Module, Steering Angle Sensor). A 
fault code is stored and the indicator light in the instrument cluster illuminates in the event 
of complete assistance shutdown. 

• Power assisted steering is reduced as EPS internal temperature increases (due to over¬ 
loading). When reduction of the power is not sufficient to cool the system down, servo 
assistance is reduced down to zero. A fault is stored and the indicator light in the instru¬ 
ment cluster illuminates. When the temperature cools down, servo assistance returns 
within 2 seconds to the present requested value. 

• In the event of overvoltage (> 17 V), servo assistance shuts down immediately to protect 
the output transistors. A fault is stored and the indicator light in the instrument cluster 
illuminates. When the voltage drops (< 16 V), servo assistance returns within 2 seconds 
to the present requested value. 


14 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



• If an undervoltage (< 9 V) is detected, servo assistance is immediately reduced down to 
0. A fault is stored and the indicator light illuiminates in the event of complete assistance 
shutdown. When the voltage returns to a level > 10 V, servo assistance increases with 
in 2 seconds to the requested value. In all cases, the indicator light goes out when the 
fault is no longer present. 


Default Structure 

Default 1 - Complete shutdown (Control Module, under/over voltage, no assist. 

Default 2 - When the steering is held in left/right lock position > 40 seconds, power is 
reduced by 50% (due to increasing internal temperature). 

Default 3 - Vehicle speed signal is missing, Servotronic feature is deactivated. 

Default 4 - When the Steering Angle Sensor (LWS) input is defective, active return center¬ 
ing is deactivated. 


Working on Steering Column 

Before performing any work on the steering column, it is required that the steering locking 
pin is engaged in the “centering" position! This prevents turning of the steering spindle dur¬ 
ing installation. 

7. Shipping/service steering locking pin 

- Install before removing column. 

- Remove after installing column. 


If the steering spindle is turned, 
this will break the internal sensors’ 
connecting harness to the EPS 
Control Module. 

The connecting harness is located 
in the coil spring. The spring is 
installed in the servo unit housing. 

When the lower steering spindle is disconnected from the steering gear, it is important 
when reinstalling to ensure that the center marking on the lower steering spindle is aligned 
with the center marking on the steering gear. The upper steering spindle and the steering 
gear are equipped with plastic lugs which determine the correct installation position of the 
lower steering spindle. 



15 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 



General Information 


Caution: The mass balance spring is under 
extreme tension. Be careful not to bend the 
spring tab mounting retainers. 

Note: Only the ignition starter switch, the lock 
cylinder and the Steering Angle Sensor (LWS) 
can be replaced as separate components on 
the upper steering column. 



The mass balance spring (arrow) should be disconnected when work is performed on the 
upper steering column. 


Diagnosis 

System faults and additional information pertaining to vehicle responses are stored in the 
EPS Control Module’s fault memory and can be diagnosed with DISplus/GTI. 


K-Sus 





LWS 

EPS 

DSC 


pm can 




l '.-it: i 




D53 



16 

E85 Chassis Dynamics 




