Table of Contents 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 

Subject Page 

Dynamic Stability Control System.3 

Fading Support.5 

Braking Readiness.5 

Brake Disk Drying.6 

Soft Stop .6 

Start Assist .7 

Electronic Control Brake (ECB) Actuation Interface .7 

Yaw Moment Compensation.7 

System Components .8 

Inlet & Distribution Valves .8 

Wheel-Speed Sensors.8 

DSC Sensor.8 

DSC Module .9 

Steering-Angle Sensor .9 

DTC Button .9 

Brake Fluid Level Switch.9 

Brake Light Switch .9 

Parking Brake Warning Switch .9 

Sensor Information .11 

General Overview .12 

Anti-lock Braking System(ABS).13 

Electronic Brake Force Distribution (EBV).13 

Cornering Brake Control (CBC).13 

Automatic Stability Control (ASC).13 

Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) .14 

Engine Drag Torque Control (M SR) .14 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC).14 

RPA:Tire Defect Indicator.15 

CBS: Condition Based Service .15 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 06/05 
































Dynamic Driving Systems 


Model: E90 

Production: From Start of Production 

■MICTIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Establish an understanding of the changes in the DSC system 


2 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 


Dynamic Stability Control System 


The E90 in the U.S. is equipped with a new Dynamic Stability Control System (DSC) 
referred to as M K60E5, manufactured by ContinentalTeves, which builds upon the sys¬ 
tems used in other BMW models. With this system several new functions are intro¬ 
duced that result in significantly improved comfort during brake intervention (due to uti¬ 
lization of a P WM signal on the input control valves) and more precise wheel braking. 

New functions introduced with M K60E5: 

• Fading Support 

• Braking Readiness 

• Brake Disk drying 

• Soft Stop 

• Start Assist 

• Electronic Control Brake Actuation (ECBA) 

• Yaw M oment Compensation with AFS 

These new functions contribute to increased directional stability, optimized comfort, 
enhanced system availability/response plus reduce the minimum braking distance. 

In the MK60E5 the designation "E5" represents the 5 pressure sensors which are inte¬ 
grated into the hydraulic control unit: 

• A combined pressure sensor on the inlet side which monitors the plausibility of the 
pressures of the tandem brake master cylinder (T HZ) 

• Fourfurther sensors on the outlet side which measure the braking pressure of the 
assigned wheel brake 

Note:Thatthe labeling of the DSC button has been changed to DTC and the 
MK60E5 system will also be used on the New M5. 


3 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 





The new functions available on the M K60E5 DSC system are a result of the following 
additional components: 

• Solenoid valves with variable map forflow rate - utilizes a PWM signal 

• 5 brake pressure sensors integrated in the new DSC module 

• 4 active wheel-speed sensors with direction of rotation detection 

• 1 longitudinal-acceleration sensor on the circuit board of the DSC control module 

• DSC sensortaken with redundant signals on vehicles with Active Steering (2x rate of 
yaw, 2x lateral acceleration) 



4 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Fading Support 


High temperatures (>550°C)can occuratthe brake discs when brakes are applied overa 
long period (i.e. brakes applied while traveling downhill) or as a result of multiple 
"extreme" brake applications (i.e. applied pressure >80 bar). As the temperature of the 
brake disc increases, the level of friction that can be generated when the brake pads are 
applied is decreased (coefficient of friction is reduced as brake disc temperature increas¬ 
es), which can result in a diminishing brake effect (fading). 

In orderto reduce the brake "fading" effect the DSC system (M K60E5) calculates the 
temperature of the brake discs, based on: 

• Applied brake pressure 

• Duration of brake application 

• Rate of vehicle deceleration 

In the event the DSC system detects fading, brake pressure is increased in line with the 
calculated temperature model in orderto maintain a constant ratio of brake pedal force to 
vehicle deceleration (if necessary, pedal travel is increased to compensate forthe fading 
effect). 

The DSC system detects fading as follows: 

• DSC compares the current vehicle deceleration with a nominal value based on the 
current brake pressure. 

• DSC increases brake pressure until the nominal deceleration is achieved or until all 
wheels are subjectto ABS control. 

• Process is ended when the brake pedal is released. 

Note: The increase in brake pressure depends on road speed (under 100 km/h). 

At the time this function is activated, a Check-Control message (brake warning light) 
appears in the LCD display in the instrument cluster (warning threshold 1). If the brake- 
disc temperature increases further, the legally stipulated brake warning lamp is also acti¬ 
vated (warning threshold 2). 

Braking Readiness 

If the DSC system notices that the accelerator pedal is released quickly, the brakes are 
immediately pretensioned, to shorten the brake apply response time. To accomplish this 
task the DSC system generates a low braking pressure by applying a PWM signal to the 
solenoid valves, without creating any measurable deceleration of the vehicle. By applying 
a small amount of brake pressure the working clearance between the brake pads and 
brake disc is reduced. If the brakes are not applied within a certain time, the brake pres¬ 
sure that was applied is reduced. 

The pre-tensioning of the brakes depends on the vehicle's speed (above 70 km/h). 


5 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



The Brake Readiness function is activated underthe following conditions: 

• Vehicle speed >70 km/h 

• Minimum time between rapid accelerator pedal release and brake application <8 
sec. (DM E provides the signal regarding rapid release of accelerator pedal to DSC 
via PT-CAN) 

Brake Disk Drying 

Brake disk drying removes moisture that gathers on the brake disks while traveling on wet 
roads or in the rain. 

In orderto dry the brakes while the vehicle is traveling down the road, the DSC module 
generates a low brake pressure which lightly" applies the brakes disks and "wipes down" 
the disks without creating a measurable deceleration of the vehicle. 

The application of the low brake pressure signal is done on a cyclical (regular) basis and 
is dependent on: 

• Road speed (greaterthan 70 km/h 

• Signal from rain sensor indicating continuous wiper operation (e.g. stage 1 or 2) 

The drying action cycle is performed approximately every: 

• 200 sec during stage 1 operation 

• 120 sec during stage 2 operation 

Note:The cycle is altered if the brakes are applied by the driver during these 
times. 

This function results in a shorter response time if the brakes are applied during the cycli¬ 
cal low brake pressure application. 

Soft Stop 

Soft stop prevents a "jerky" stop causing the occupants to "lurch" forward, when braking 
the vehicle to a standstill. 

Activation offunction: 

• Light brake application (<25 bar) under constant pressure 

• Road speed (under 5 km/h) 

The soft stop function reduces the braking pressure at the rear axle just prior to the vehi¬ 
cle reaching a complete stop in orderto reduce "jerking/jolt" effect normally encountered 
when reaching a standstill. The DSC system calculates the moment that standstill can be 
expected based on the current road speed plus rate of deceleration and reduces braking 
pressure accordingly. 


6 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Start Assist 


The start-off assistant prevents the vehicle from moving unexpectedly, based on the 
degree of incline, as the driver releases the brake pedal and moves to the accelerator 
pedal (ie. when pulling away on a hill). 

The "start assist" function is accomplished as follows: 

• Gradient (degree of incline) is determined by the longitudinal-acceleration sensor 
located in the DSC control module. 

• Based on the degree of incline, the necessary braking torque or engine torque is cal¬ 
culated by the DSC module. 

• Brake pressure needed to hold the vehicle is momentarily maintained (approx 2 sec). 

• Brake pressure is reduced as soon as the available engine torque is sufficient to 
move the vehicle or accelerator is not depressed within approx. 2 sec. 

The function can be activated when driving forward or backwards and is deactivated 
when the parking brake is applied and can not be activated if the transmission is in neu¬ 
tral. 

Note: If no move is made to pull away within approx. 2 seconds of the brake 
pedal being released, the start-off assistant will be deactivated. 

Electronic Control Brake (EC B) Actuation Interface 

The interface between Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) and Active Cruise Control (ACC) 
has been improved with the introduction of the Longitudinal Dynamic Management 
(LDM) system, which is responsible forthe transmission of the signals associated with 
ACC/cruise control operation. 

The software in the DSC control module has been enhanced and allows the demands of 
the ACC to be evaluated more quickly thereby allowing pressure at the brakes to be built 
up or reduced more efficiently with regard to vehicle deceleration and comfort. 

Yaw Moment Compensation 

With conventional systems, the driver has to actively steerthe vehicle in a straight line 
if the brakes are applied on a road surface with non-uniform traction levels ("split p"). 

In this situation counter steering keeps the vehicle in its track and helps to achieve 
acceptable braking distances. 

On the E90, if the vehicle is equipped with the Active Front Steering (AFS) option and 
brakes are applied on a road surface with non-uniform traction levels ("split p"), DSC in 
conjunction with AFS, initiates the active steering actions in orderto stabilize the vehicle 
and shorten the braking distance. The function is accomplished by having the DSC con¬ 
trol module calculate the yaw rate plus interpret information from the front steering angle 
sensor and transmit the information to the AFS control module, which establishes the 
yaw-moment compensation correction angle needed for stabilization/counter steering. 


7 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



System Components 

The DSC system consists of the following: 

Inlet & Distribution Valves 

These solenoid valves used to be digitally actuated: either OPEN or CLOSED. 

On this system the inlet valves for the wheel brakes and distribution valves are actuated in 
such a way that the flow rate is variably controlled via a PWM signal. 

Wheel-Speed Sensors 

Four active wheel-speed sensors measure the speed of the individual wheels. This type 
of sensor is also able to recognize the direction of wheel rotation. 

DSC Sensor 

The DSC sensor on vehicles equipped with active steering utilizes 2 yaw rate sensor ele¬ 
ments to transmit redundant signals capturing the rate of yaw (rotation about the vertical 
axis) and lateral acceleration to the AFS module via the chassis CAN (F-CAN) 



8 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 




DSC Module 

The DSC module consists of the hydraulic module and the DSC control electronics. 

All 5 brake pressure sensors are integrated into the valve block ofthe DSC module. 

Note: The circuit board ofthe DSC control module also contains an integrated 
longitudinal-acceleration sensorwhich is used forthe start assist func¬ 
tion. 

Steering-Angle Sensor 

The steering angle sensor is located in the steering column switch cluster (SZL) and 
optically measures the angle of rotation ofthe steering wheel. 

Signal path to the DSC control module: Steering column switch cluster-> F-CAN 
(looped through J BE) -> DSC control module 

DTC Button 

The DTC button is located in the center console between the central air vents and has 
three operating modes: 

1. DSC operational (standard setting) 

2. DTC operational (If DTC button is depressed once DSC switches Off) 

3. DSC and DTC completely deactivated (If DTC button is depressed for extended period) 
Signal path to the DSC control module: DTC button ->J BE -> PT-CAN -> DSC module 
The instrument cluster receives the signal through the K-CAN. 

Brake Fluid Level Switch 

If the brake fluid level is too low, this will be detected (via a reed contact in the expansion 
tank) and an appropriate message is sent to the DSC control module. 

DSC is deactivated if there is insufficient brake fluid. 

Signal path to the instrument cluster: DSC module -> PT-CAN ->J BE -> K-CAN -> 
Instrument cluster 

Brake Light Switch 

Together with the signals from the brake pressure sensors, braking actions are recog¬ 
nized. 

Parking Brake Warning Switch 

DSC will recognize skidding that has been deliberately initiated by the driver and regula¬ 
tion will not take place, since a handbrake turn should remain technically possible. 


9 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



E90 - DSC Hydraulic Circuit 


V 


• 1 ) 


V 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Brake Fluid Expansion Tank 

12 

Inlet Valve (Analog), Right Front 
with Switching Orifice 

2 

Rear-axle Brake Circuit 

13 

Inlet Valve (Analog), Right Rear 

3 

Front-axle Brake Circuit 

14 

Inlet Valve (Analog), Left Rear 

4 

Pressure Sensor, Push Rod Circuit 

15 

Outlet Valve, Left Rear 

5 

Pulsation Damper 

16 

Outlet Valve, Right Rear 

6 

Isolating Valve 

17 

Outlet Valve, Left Front 

7 

Electric Changeover Valve 

18 

Outlet Valve, Right Front 

8 

Self-Priming Return Pump 

19 

Wheel Brake, Right Front 

9 

DamperChamber 

20 

Wheel Brake, Left Front 

10 

Accumulator Chamber 

21 

Wheel Brake, Right Rear 

11 

Inlet Valve (Analog), Left Front 
with Switching Orifice 

22 

Wheel Brake, Left Rear 


10 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 

















































































































































































Sensor Information 


Sensor 

Functional principal 

Manufacturer 

Active wheel-speed sensors* 

Magneto-resistive principle 

Teves 

Steering angle sensor (LWS) in steering column 
switch cluster (SZL) 

Optoelectronic 


Yaw rate sensor 

Twin tuning fork principle 

Teves 

Lateral-acceleration sensor 

Capacitive principle 

Teves 

Longitudinal-acceleration sensor** 

Integrated in DSC control module 


5 pressure sensors 

Integrated in hydraulic block 


Brake light switch 

Hall principle 


Brake-fluid level switch 

Reed contact switch 



* Wheel-speed sensors with grey shield = M K60E5 with direction-of rotation detection 
(the braking response when traveling in reverse is different then it is for vehicle traveling 
forwards, output to navigation system, EGS etc.) 

* Wheel-speed sensors with black shield =MK60psi (Used on E87 Non U.S. Model) 
does not have direction of rotation capability 

** For the start assist function 


11 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 


























General Overview 


The DSC system is a Driving Stabilization System and offers the following advantages: 

• DSC optimizes driving stability when pulling away, accelerating, braking and coast¬ 
ing. 

• DSC recognizes and reduces unstable driving conditions such as understeering or 
oversteering. 

• DSC improves traction, especially with Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) 

Within the limitations of the laws of physics, DSC helps to keep the vehicle on a safe 
course. 

To do this, DSC must know the following parameters regarding the vehicles driving 
dynamics: 

• Yaw rate as a measure of rotary movement of the vehicle around the vertical axis 

• Lateral acceleration 

• Road speed 

• Longitudinal acceleration 

In addition, the driver's intentions are recognized via input from: 

• Steering angle sensor 

• Brake pressure sensor 

• Throttle setting/accelerator pedal position 

The values are used to establish the actual condition in which the vehicle is currently 
moving and to compare these values with those calculated by the DSC control module. If 
the actual values differ from the calculated values, DSC is activated and initiates brake 
actions or engine control functions. 

Advantages: 

The DSC system counters all dynamically unstable driving conditions within the physical 
limitations dictated by the laws of physics, to enhance driving comfort and safety. 


12 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Anti-lock Braking System(ABS) 

ABS prevents the wheels from locking when the brakes are applied. 

Advantage: Optimum utilization of road surface friction - the vehicle remains stable and 
steerable. 

Brake pressure is regulated at all wheels to ensure that each wheel runs with optimum 
slip. When this happens, slip is controlled so that the maximum possible braking and lat¬ 
eral stability forces can be transmitted. 

Electronic Brake Force Distribution (EBV) 

EBV is a component of ABS and controls the brake force distribution between the front 
and rear wheels. 

Advantage: Regardless of the vehicles load state, the best possible braking distance is 
achieved while maintaining driving stability. 

Modern vehicles have relatively large brakes on the rear axle to shorten braking distances. 
To prevent the rear wheels from being overbraked in certain driving situations, EBV per¬ 
manently monitors wheel slip and controls rear axle slip independent of the front axle. 

Cornering Brake Control (CBC) 

CBC is an extension of ABS. CBC enhances driving stability if the brakes are applied 
when cornering. 

Advantage: If the brakes are applied in a corner, optimum brake force distribution ensures 
tracking stability. 

When cornering, even very light braking can shift the axle-load distribution to the left or 
right so that driving stability is impaired. If required, CBC generates a stabilizing load 
moment when the brakes are applied lightly outside the ABS intervention range. 

Automatic Stability Control (ASC) 

ASC prevents the wheels from spinning when the vehicle is accelerating. 

Advantage: Improved traction and vehicle stability. 

If one of the wheels of the drive axle is on a high-grip surface and the other is on a slip¬ 
pery surface, the wheel tending to skid is braked. 

ASC also intervenes in the engine control (to reduce the ignition angle, injection quantity, 
throttle valve setting) in order to reduce/inhibit vehicle acceleration in the event of wheel 
slip. 


13 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) 

The functions of the DTC correspond to those of DSC with a slightly modified regulating 
characteristics. DTC is activated by deactivating DSC (DTC button depressed). DTC 
intervenes in the braking actions to imitate the function of a conventional differential lock. 

Advantage: DTC allows better traction. 

Vehicle stabilization intervention (e.g. reduced power output) is delayed slightly, compared 
to DSC, which enhances traction with a slight loss of driving stability. 

This function offers a compromise between driving stability and traction, especially when 
accelerating and/or driving uphill on a loose surface or snow-covered road surface (sur¬ 
face friction requiring more slip). 

DSC provides a high degree of driving stability with adequate traction, however DTC 
offers better traction with a slight reduction in stability. Therefore, the deactivation of 
DSC should be reserved for emergencies (driving in deep snow, for example). 

Engine Drag Torque Control (MSR) 

If the vehicle is operated in low gear while coasting downhill or if is the vehicle is suddenly 
shifted into a lower gear, the drive wheel may be slowed down by the engine braking 
effect to rapidly which can result in an unstable operating condition, resulting in the drive 
wheels locking up. 

Engine Drag Torque Control (MSR) provides protection against locking of the drive 
wheels. 


Advantage: The drive wheels retain their lateral stability in overrun mode. 

The wheel speed sensors tell MSR as soon as the wheels are about to lock. MSR then 
briefly reduces the engine's drag torque by opening the throttle slightly. 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

DBC supports the driver in emergency braking situations. It does this by automatically 
increasing braking pressure if the brake pedal is not depressed with sufficient force. 

Advantage: Shortest possible braking distances in emergency braking situations by 
achieving ABS regulation on all four wheels. 

The brake pedal is frequently not depressed strongly enough in emergency braking situa¬ 
tions. The ABS feedback control range is not reached (or not on all 4 wheels). 


14 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



RPA: Tire Defect Indicator 

RPA is not a driving dynamic function. 

DSC uses the Run Flat Indicator (RPA) to monitorthe tire pressure throughout the jour¬ 
ney. 

The RPA records the wheel speeds using the wheel-speed sensors of the Dynamic 
Stability Control (DSC). The RPA compares the speeds of the individual wheels with the 
average speed. In this way the RPA is able to detect a loss of tire pressure. 

The RPA detects a drop in pressure below about 30% ±10% of the initial value. The 
RPA indicator and warning light indicates a drop in tire pressure. 

The RPA will indicate this after just a short distance, as a rule after a few minutes, from a 
certain minimum speed (e.g. 25 km/h) up to the permissible top speed. 

Initialization is started manually. Then (after a journey has started), initialization runs auto¬ 
matically. In other words, the circumference of individual tires are recorded and evaluated. 

The initialization phase lasts approx. 5 to 15 minutes forthe individual speed ranges. 


CBS: Condition Based Service 

CBS is not a driving dynamic function. 

Condition Based Service, as the name suggests, is a means of ensuring that the car is 
serviced as and when necessary. CBS comprises various maintenance operations, e.g. 
engine oil, spark plugs and brake pads. 

The remaining distance forthe front and back brake pads are calculated separately in the 
DSC control module. 

When making the calculation, the condition of the brake pad wear sensors is taken into 
account (reference point at 6 mm and 4 mm). 


Important 


a 


Referto ST056 C hassis Dynamics for more detailed informa¬ 
tion regarding the operation of the DSC System Functions. 


15 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 




Workshop Exercise - Dynamic Stability Control 


Check procedure for initialization of steering angle sensor using diagnostic eguip- 
ment (DISplus/GTl). 


16 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 





Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What new function are introduced with the M K60E5 system and what do they do? 


2. On what othervehicle will M K60E5 be used? 


3. What is the purpose of the 5 pressure sensors? 


4. What is Yaw M oment Compensation? What option must the vehicle have 
installed? 


5. What is different with the DSC button?? 


6. What is different with the wheel speed sensors used on the E90? 


17 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



































