Table of Contents 

E60 Dynamic Drive 

Subject Page 

Purpose of the System.4 

Dynamic Drive.4 

System Overview.5 

Mechanical Components.5 

Inputs/Outputs.6 

System Schematic.7 

Components .8 

Lateral-Acceleration Sensor.8 

Fluid Level Sensor.8 

Dynamic Drive Control Unit .8 

Active Stabilizer Bar.9 

Function of Pressure Relief Valves .10 

Operating Principle of Oscillating Motors.10 

Front-Axle Stabilizer Bar.11 

Rear-Axle Stabilizer Bar.11 

Valve Block .12 

Pressure Control Valves.12 

Directional Valve.12 

Failsafe Valve.12 

Selector-Position Recognition Sensor .13 

Front-Axle/Rear-Axle Pressure Sensors.13 

Tandem Pump.13 

Fluid Reservoir.13 

Cooler .13 

System Functions.14 

Affect of the Self-Steering Behavior.15 

Operating States.17 

Notes for Service.19 

Service Information .19 

Steering-Angle Adjustment .19 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 


Revision Date: 09/03 
































Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Notes for Service (cont.) 

Dynamic Drive Commissioning .19 

Dynamic Drive Venting .20 

Diagnosis .21 

System Shutdown (Failsafe Status).22 

Restricted Control Comfort.23 

Restricted System Monitoring.24 

Programming .25 

Coding .25 










Model: E60 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 
Dynamic Drive 

Objectives: 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify and locate components of the Dynamic Drive System 

• Understand Operation of the Dynamic Drive System 

• Understand diagnosis and service operation of Dynamic Drive 


3 

E60 Dynamic Drive 




Purpose of the System 

Dynamic Drive 

The design of the Dynamic Drive is the same as the system fitted in the E65. The function 
of the Dynamic Drive in the E60 is identical to the function of the Dynamic Drive in the E65. 
The disadvantage of a passive stabilizer bar is that the basic suspension hardens in the 
case of straight-ahead driving and one sided jouncing. This reduces comfort. 


Yawing, swerving 



Dynamic Drive has two active stabilizer bars which have a positive effect on the roll tilt angle 
and handling. 

Split stabilizer bars on the axles act as the basis of the Dynamic Drive. The halves of the 
stabilizer bars are joined by way of a hydraulic oscillating motor. One half of the stabilizer 
bar is connected to the oscillating motor shaft while the other is connected to the oscillat¬ 
ing motor housing. 

When you are driving straight ahead, the system improves suspension comfort because the 
stabilizer bar halves are non-interacting and therefore do not harden the basic suspension 
when suspension is used on one side. 


4 

E60 Dynamic Drive 















System Overview 

Mechanical Components 



1. Hydraulic-fluid reservoir 

2. Tandem pump 

3. Hydraulic-fluid cooler 

4. Front oscillating motor 

5. Valve block 


02704.02 

6. Control unit 

7. Lateral-acceleration sensor 

8. Hydraulic lines 

9. Rear oscillating motor 


5 

E60 Dynamic Drive 










Inputs/Outputs 


'Z) \ o 


Dynamic Drive system overview 



8 


9 


10 


11 


02238.02 


1. Dynamic Drive control unit 

2. Current distributor, front, power supply 

3. Hydraulic reservoir, fluid level 

4. Lateral-acceleration sensor 

5. Car Access System control unit 

6. DSC module 


7. Steering-angle sensor 

8. Dynamic Drive valve block 

9. Digital Motor Electronics 

10. Safety and Gateway Module 

11. Instrument cluster 


6 

E60 Dynamic Drive 



































System Schematic 




1. Lateral-acceleration sensor 

2. Dynamic Drive control unit 

3. Dynamic Drive valve block 

4. DSC control unit 

5. Digital Motor Electronics 

6. Instrument cluster 


7. Safety and Gateway Module 

8. Car Access System control unit 

9. Hydraulic-fluid level sensor 
PT-CAN Powertrain CAN 
K-CAN Body CAN 


7 

E60 Dynamic Drive 




































































































Components 

Lateral-Acceleration Sensor 

The lateral-acceleration sensor supplies the main sensor signal. When cornering, it mea¬ 
sures the vehicle's lateral acceleration up to a measuring range of } 1.1 g. It is mounted 
beneath the right-hand front seat on the floor plate. 

5 

[V] 

3 
2 
1 
0 

-15 -10 -5 0 5 a q [m/s 2 ] 15 

Lateral-acceleration sensor;natural color connector, Lateral-acceleration sensor,characteristic curve 

individual connector coding 




Fluid Level Sensor 

The fluid level sensor detects the fluid supply in the fluid reservoir. The fluid level sensor is 
mounted on the fluid reservoir. Short circuits/open circuits cannot be detected by the fluid 
level sensor. A line break is interpreted as a loss of fluid. 

Dynamic Drive Control Unit 

The Dynamic Drive control unit is located on the right side of the passenger compartment 
in the A-pillar area. 

The control unit is supplied with power via terminal 30 and is protected by a 10 A fuse. 

A vehicle authentication process takes place when the system is started. This compares 
the vehicle identification number from CAS with the vehicle identification number which is 
encoded in the Dynamic Drive control unit. 

Then the control unit's hardware and software is checked. 

All the outputs (valve magnets) are subjected to a complex check for short circuits and 
breaks. If there is a fault, the system switches the actuators into a safe driving condition. 

The control unit switches off if there is undervoltage or overvoltage. 

The control unit learns the offset for the steering angle and the lateral acceleration during 
startup and during driving. 


8 

E60 Dynamic Drive 









Active Stabilizer Bar 


The active stabilizer bar consists of the 
oscillating motor and the halves of the 
stabilizer bar with press-fitted roller 
bearings which are mounted on the 
oscillating motor for connection to the 
axle carriers. The use of roller bearings 
ensures optimum comfort thanks to 
better response and reduced control 
forces. 

The oscillating motor and the oscillating 
motor housing are joined by one half of 
the stabilizer bar. 



Oscillating motor 

02434.02 

1. Oscillating motor shaft 2. Oscillating motor housing 


The oscillating motor of the front-axle 
stabilizer bar is fitted with 2 pressure 
relief valves. 

Pneumatic lines are connected to the 
pressure relief valves. These pneumat¬ 
ic lines end in a filter element (conven¬ 
tional fuel filter) which is inserted in the 
diagonal strut on the left wheel arch. 

The filter element is located in different 
positions in the engine compartment 
depending on the mounting position of 
the various engines. 



1. Oscillating motor 3. Pneumatic lines 

2. Pressure relief valves 


The positions for the pressure relief 
valves are fitted with screw plugs on 
the oscillating motor of the rear-axle 
stabilizer bar. 



1. Filter element 


9 

E60 Dynamic Drive 








Function of Pressure Relief Valves 

When the vehicle is driven on poor road surfaces, the stabilizer-bar movements give rise to 
brief vacuum pressures (cavitation) in the oscillating motors which in turn cause rattling 
noises. 

Pressure relief valves have been fitted on the front oscillating motor in order to eliminate 
these noises. These pressure relief valves allow filtered air to flow into the oscillating motor 
through the connected pneumatic lines. This prevents cavitation. 

This small quantity of air is absorbed by the hydraulic fluid (Pentosin) to form an emulsion, 
which is discharged during the next activations of the oscillating motor. The air is separat¬ 
ed in the expansion tank. 

Because no noises can be heard at the rear axle, the pressure relief valves have been omit¬ 
ted from the rear oscillating motor. 

Operating Principle of Oscillating Motors 

The oscillating motor has three functions to perform: 

• It guides the torque into the two halves of the stabilizer bar. 

• It decouples the two halves of the stabilizer bar. 

• In the event of system failure (failsafe mode), the front axle stabilizer bar creates suf- 
ificient damping via the oscillating motor hydraulic fluid (hydraulic locking). It now 
works like a conventional stabilizer bar. 

Exception: If the oscillating motor chambers no longer contain any fluid as a result 
of a leak, the front axle stabilizer bar can no longer create damping. 

Since one half of the stabilizer bar is connected to the shaft, and the other with the hous¬ 
ing, the two halves turn in opposite directions. 

The shell is forced upwards on the outside of a curve, and dragged down on the inside of 
a curve. 

The maximum body torque on the 
front and rear axle occurs when there 
is a high degree of lateral accelera¬ 
tion. The system pressure is then 180 
bar at the front axle and 170 bar at 
the rear axle. 



10 

E60 Dynamic Drive 


Front-Axle Stabilizer Bar 

The stabilizer bar is mounted on the front-axle carrier. The stabilizer links are connected to 
the "goose-necks" of the swivel bearings. 


Tt -t) z> -V 



1. Stabilizer-link connection to swivel bearing 4. Oscillating motor 

2. Stabilizer-bar bracket 5. Stabilizer links 

3. Stabilizer bar 


Rear-Axle Stabilizer Bar 

The stabilizer bar is mounted behind the rear-axle carrier. The stabilizer links are connect¬ 
ed to the rear-axle swinging arms. 



1. Hydraulic lines from valve block 4 . Oscillating motor 

2. Stabilizer links 5 . Hydraulic lines 

3. Stabilizer bar 


02416 02 


11 

E60 Dynamic Drive 





















Valve Block 


The valve block is located on the floor plate behind the front right wheel-arch trim. 



1. Rear-axle pressure sensor 

2. Rear-axle pressure-limiting valve 

3. Front-axle pressure-limiting valve 

4. Line 1, front-axle oscillating motor 

5. Front-axle pressure sensor 

6 . Line 2, front-axle oscillating motor 

7. Failsafe valve 


8 . Directional valve 

9. Line 1, rear-axle oscillating motor 

10. Hydraulic reservoir 

11. Line 2, rear-axle oscillating motor 

12. Selector-position recognition sensor 

13. Tandem pump connection 


Pressure Control Valves 

There is a pressure control valve on both the front and rear axles. They both adjust the actu¬ 
ation pressures for the front- and rear-axle stabilizer bars. 

Directional Valve 

The directional valve is electrically actuated. It specifies the direction of 
the high-pressure fluid (active pressures) and the reservoir fluid for 
right-hand and left-hand bends. 

Failsafe Valve 

The failsafe valve (safety valve) is electrically actuated. The failsafe valve responds in the 
event of a power-supply failure or an identified fault in the system. The failsafe valve shuts 
off the front-axle oscillating motor when de-energized. Thus the active stabilizer bar 
behaves like a normal mechanical stabilizer bar and brings about understeering. 


12 

E60 Dynamic Drive 
















Selector-Position Recognition Sensor 

The task of this sensor is to detect the specific position of the directional valve. 

2 positions can be detected: 

• Left-hand control 

• Right-hand control 

Front-Axle/Rear-Axle Pressure Sensors 

The pressure sensors are responsible for detecting the front and rear axle stabilizer bar 
hydraulic pressures. The sensors are mounted on the valve block. The pressure sensor off¬ 
set values are taught-in by the control unit once, during commissioning. 

Tandem Pump 

The tandem pump, which is driven by the engine via a ribbed V-belt, consists of a radial- 
piston part for the Dynamic Drive and a vane part for the power steering. 

When the engine is idling, the pump speed is approximately. 750 rpm. 

The pump's minimum fluid flow rate is 4.5 l/min at approximately. 5 bar and 3.3 l/min at 
200 bar. This means that sufficient system dynamics are also guaranteed when the engine 
is idling. 

From a pumping speed of approximately. 1165 rpm, the maximum fluid flow rate is limited 
to 7 l/min. 

Dynamic Drive and power steering have a joint fluid reservoir and fluid cooler. 

Fluid Reservoir 

The fluid reservoir is identical on all vehicles, whether they have the Dynamic Drive function 
or not. The reservoir incorporates a fluid filter. A fluid level sensor is provided for the mini¬ 
mum quantity. 

Cooler 

The cooler ensures a long-term fluid temperature of < 120 °C and a short-term fluid tem¬ 
perature of < 135°C in all hydromechanical components under all conditions. 


13 

E60 Dynamic Drive 


System Functions 


The car sets lateral acceleration while cornering (aq) which affects the vehicle body at the 
centre of gravity (SP). The body rolls around the roll axis (RA) which is predefined by the 
front and rear axle kinematics. This sets the roll angle (max. 5°). This produces a maximum 
change in level on the wheel arch of +/-10 cm. 



A. Car without Dynamic Drive 

B. Car with Dynamic Drive 
M. Rolling moment 

aq. Lateral acceleration 
(p Roll angle 



02708_02 


Ma. Body torque 
SP. Centre of gravity 
RA. Roll axis 
Fq. Lateral force 

h. Lever arm centre of gravity height 


In the vehicle with Dynamic Drive, the rolling moment M can be compensated for by the 
active stabilizer bars up to a lateral acceleration aq of approximately. 3 m/s 2 (0.3 g). 

Note: The tire suspension created by the rolling moment (M) is not compensated for. 

The distribution of the active body torque between the front and rear axle depends on the 
road speed. 


14 

E60 Dynamic Drive 






























Affect of the Self-Steering Behavior 

The self-steering behavior can be decisively influenced by the distribution of the stabilizing 
torque on the axles. The greater the stabilizing torque on an axle, the lower the lateral forces 
transmitted on this axle. 

Two cases are described below with different distribution of stabilizing torque on the axles: 

1. Identical stabilizing torque on both axles 
Handling is "NEUTRAL." 

The front wheels can apply about the same amount of lateral force on the road as the rear 
wheels without drive torque. The handling conditions are neutral. 

A vehicle which is tuned to neutral handling conditions provides very agile handling, the 
steering reacts very quickly. The driver experiences precise handling. 

Even an inexperienced driver can control a vehicle which is tuned to neutral handling very 
well at low speeds. 

2. Larger stabilizing torque on the front axle 
Handling is "UNDERSTEERING." 

The front axle wheels cannot apply the same amount of lateral force on the road as the rear 
axle wheels. The vehicle suffers understeer. 

A larger steering-wheel angle is required to be able to follow the desired course. 

A vehicle with understeer can generally also be controlled well by an inexperienced driver 
at higher speeds and higher cornering speeds. 

This very sensitive handling reduces the vehicle's agility. 

Dynamic Drive sets the stabilizing torque on the front and rear axles such that a different 
handling characteristic is produced for low and high speeds. 


15 

E60 Dynamic Drive 


The passive vehicle is configured as slightly understeering irrespective of the speed range. 
Dynamic Drive is neutral in the low speed range. The driver has to steer less in order to 
negotiate the same bend. This results in optimum handling and agility. 

In the upper speed range, both vehicles behave almost identically with regard to the 
required steering angle on the same bend. 

The hydromechanical concept is designed so that a larger active stabilizing torque cannot 
occur on the rear axle than on the front axle under any circumstances. This means that 
mechanically and hydraulically the vehicle with Dynamic Drive is safeguarded such that no 
oversteering and therefore for normal customers no critical handling characteristics can 
occur under any circumstances. 


Comparison Between the Conventional Stabilizer Bar and the Active 
Stabilizer Bar 

Active stabilizer bars introduce fewer comfort-reducing forces into the body than passive 
stabilizer bars. In this case a differentiation must be made depending on the frequency with 
which the forces were introduced. 


Road stimulus 

Stabilizer bar behavior 

At approximately. 1 Hz 
(body natural frequency) 

At smaller strokes the active stabilizer bar is easier to turn than a 
conventional stabilizer bar. The forces introduced into the body are 
fewer, the vehicle becomes more comfortable and body sound is 
improved 

From 8 Hz 

(wheel natural frequency) 

Both stabilizer bars behave in a similar way. On a vehicle 
with an active stabilizer bar this is because the fluid is not 
displaced so quickly. 


16 

E60 Dynamic Drive 






Operating States 


SMV 


SMH 



Hydraulic schematic normal function, failsafe valve energized 


SMV 

Front oscillating motor 

RV 

Directional valve 

SMH 

Rear oscillating motor 

DSH 

Rear-axle pressure sensor 

VI 

Front-axle hydraulic circuit 1 

DSV 

Front-axle pressure sensor 

V2 

Front-axle hydraulic circuit 2 

PVV 

Front-axle pressure valve 

HI 

Rear-axle hydraulic circuit 1 

PVH 

Rear-axle pressure valve 

H2 

Rear-axle hydraulic circuit 2 

P 

Tandem pump 

FS 

SSE 

Failsafe valve 

Selector-position recognition sensor 

T 

Fluid reservoir 


17 

E60 Dynamic Drive 
























































SMV 


SMH 



SMV 

Front oscillating motor 

RV 

Directional valve 

SMH 

Rear oscillating motor 

DSH 

Rear-axle pressure sensor 

VI 

Front-axle hydraulic circuit 1 

DSV 

Front-axle pressure sensor 

V2 

Front-axle hydraulic circuit 2 

PVV 

Front-axle pressure valve 

HI 

Rear-axle hydraulic circuit 1 

PVH 

Rear-axle pressure valve 

H2 

Rear-axle hydraulic circuit 2 

P 

Tandem pump 

FS 

Failsafe valve 

T 

Fluid reservoir 

SSE 

Selector-position recognition sensor 




18 

E60 Dynamic Drive 




























































Notes for Service 

Service Information 

If the Dynamic Drive fails, DSC can no longer be deactivated or if it is already deactivated 
it does not switch back on automatically. 

The connections for all the hydraulic components are designed in different dimensions and 
lengths so that they cannot be transposed. 

A faulty acoustic transmission in the vehicle interior predominantly occurs through the 
assembly and cable connections. The cables must not appear on the surface, they must 
lie correctly in the supports without any slack or tension. They are covered by the under¬ 
body covering. 

Steering-Angle Adjustment 

After working on the steering, it is necessary to carry out a steering angle adjustment with 
the steering-column switch cluster (SZL) control unit! 

The Dynamic Drive system is dependent on the exact zero balance of the steering angle! 

The maximum tolerance for a deviation is +/-1°. Precise performance of a wheel-alignment 
check and adjustment is essential! 

Steering-angle adjustment must always be performed on the KDS and in accordance with 
the BMW specifications! Each time the Dynamic Drive or SZL control unit is flashed results 
in a loss of the zero position! A steering-angle adjustment is necessary! 

Dynamic Drive Commissioning 

The commissioning procedure must always be carried out once the system has been 
opened or a part has been replaced. This also applies after the lateral-acceleration sensor 
has been replaced. 

The following conditions must be guaranteed for matching the lateral acceleration sensor 
and the two pressure sensor offset values: 

• The vehicle must be stand level on all four wheels 

• The vehicle must be unladen 

• The engine must be idling 

• Rest status (doors closed, persons are not allowed in the vehicle) 

No persons may remain within the vicinity of moving chassis parts during the commission¬ 
ing (both in the works and the workshop). In addition you must ensure that the basic com¬ 
missioning conditions (temperature range, constant engine speed etc.) are maintained. The 
ground clearance must not be limited and the doors must be closed. The arms of the hoist 
may no longer be situated beneath the car. 


19 

E60 Dynamic Drive 


The commissioning procedure is split into five stages which follow on from each other auto¬ 
matically: 


1: direction valve test 

(from 3 to 3.4 s) 

First the direction valve is tested by evaluating the sig¬ 
nal of the selector-position recognition sensor. 

II: low-pressure test 

(from 3.4 to 4.3 s) 

The failsafe and direction valves are without power dur¬ 
ing this stage. Then tests are carried out with pressure 
control valves with and without power on the front and 
rear axle. The body is then tilted. The sides of the vehi¬ 
cle must be clear. 

III: front-axle high pressure test 

(from 4.3 to 9.9 s) 

Pressure of 180 bar is applied to the front-axle oscillat¬ 
ing motor. Air in the system, internal leaks and a 
blocked oscillating motor are detected. 

IV: rear-axle high pressure test 

(from 9.9 to 15 s) 

Pressure of 170 bar is applied to the rear-axle oscillat¬ 
ing motor. Air in the system, internal leaks and a 
blocked oscillating motor are detected. 

V: pressure-control valve test 

(from 15 to 25 s) 

The characteristic curves of the front and rear axle are 
checked (setpoint/actual-value comparison). Faulty 
pressure control valves are detected. 


Dynamic Drive Venting 

A venting routine must be carried out using the diagnostic tester if the Dynamic Drive sys¬ 
tem was opened hydraulically. 

The venting operation is performed exclusively by way of the commissioning routine of the 
diagnostic tester and not at the pressure relief valves or at the screw plugs of the oscillat¬ 
ing motors! 

If the test still detects air in the system, a short movement trip should be made if necessary. 

The commissioning routine must then be repeated after the short trip. 

In the event of an extreme leak or suspected subfunction of the pressure relief valves 
(noticeable by the rattling noises in the front end), the pressure relief valves and the pneu¬ 
matic lines must be replaced with new components. 


20 

E60 Dynamic Drive 








Diagnosis 

The following faults can be detected at the components: 


Component 

Fault type 

Fault detection via: 

Control unit 

De-energized or faulty 

Instrument cluster through absence 
of alive counter, VIN not recognized 
during authentication, watchdog 

Pump 

No pressure 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison 
pressures 

Directional valve 

Stuck in "energized" position (spring 
break, swarf) 

Directional-valve sensor 


Stuck in "de-energized"position (line 
break) 

Directional-valve sensor and current 
monitoring 

FA pressure control valve 

Open (de-energized, p = pRA) 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison, 
pressure,front axle, current measure¬ 
ment 


Closed (mechanical fault) (pFA= pmax) 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison, 
pressure,front axle 

RA pressure control valve 

Open (de-energized) (p = 0) 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison, 
pressure,rear axle, current measure¬ 
ment 


Closed (mechanical fault) 

(pRA and pFA = pmax) 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison, 
pressure,rear axle, 

Failsafe valve 

Stuck open 

Pre-drive check 


Stuck closed(line) 

Current measurement 

Actuator front/rear axle 

Leaking (no torque) 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison 
pressure 


Blocked 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison 
pressure 

CAN bus 

Omitted completely (line disconnected) 

CAN timeout 

Steering angle, vehicle speed 
lateral acceleration 

Implausible or omitted 

Plausibility monitoring and fault 
detection,CAN bus signals 


21 

E60 Dynamic Drive 














Component 

Fault type 

Fault detection via: 

Sensor aq 
(lateral acceleration) 

Omitted completely (line 
disconnected) 

Voltage monitoring 


Incorrect signal 

Check plausibility via CAN signals 

Fluid level sensor 

No signal (line) 


Front-axle pressure sensor 

No signal (line) 

Voltage monitoring 


Incorrect signal 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison, pressure, front 
axle 

Rear-axle pressure sensor 

No signal (line) 

Voltage monitoring 


Incorrect signal 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison, pressure, RA 

Directional-valve sensor 

No signal 

Voltage monitoring 


Incorrect signal 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison, direction valve 

and selector-position recognition 

sensor 


System Shutdown (Failsafe Status) 

Depending on the fault, the system displays one of the following responses. 

The following faults result in system shutdown, i.e. all output stages are de-energized: 

• Fault in the front-axle stabilizer bar 

• Fault at the front-axle pressure sensor 

• Fault in the pressure build-up (pump, pressure-limiting valve on the front axle) 

• Fault in the control unit 

• VIN is not sent via the CAS / omitted / incorrect 

• Direction-valve position fault, faulty selector-position recognition sensor 

• No PT-CAN signal 


22 

E60 Dynamic Drive 











The de-energized failsafe valve shuts off the chambers of the active stabilizer bar. A fluid 
compensation is only performed by way of internal leakage of the oscillating motor and the 
valve block. The non-return valves in the valve block permit additional suction of fluid so 
that no cavitation occurs in the front-axle oscillating motor. 

The chambers of the rear-axle oscillating motor must not be shut off. The handling corre¬ 
sponds virtually to that of a conventional vehicle. The crossover to the failsafe status can 
also be controlled in the event of extreme maneuvering. 


Warning message 

Handling instruction 

Cornering stability! Drive slowly around bends 

Driving-stability system not functioning, driving stability 
restricted. No high cornering speeds. 


Continued driving possible, contact BMW Service 
immediately 

In the event of a fluid loss in the Dynamic Drive hydraulic system or in the steering circuit, the 
fluid level sensor in the fluid reservoir responds. 

The driver is alerted so that damage to the tandem pump caused by continued driving is avoided. 

Warning message 

Handling instruction 

Fluid loss! Caution Stop, engine off 

Fluid loss in the chassis and steering systems. 

Q* 

Continued driving not possible, contact BMW Service imme¬ 
diately 


Restricted Control Comfort 

A lateral acceleration is calculated from the road speed and steering wheel angle from the 
CAN signals. This signal is faster than the actual lateral acceleration and compensates the 
time delay of the hydromechanical system. In the event of a fault in these two signals, the 
system responds with a delayed roll compensation. This arises only in the case of extreme¬ 
ly quick steering maneuvers and is barely noticeable in normal cornering maneuvers. 

In the event of a faulty lateral-acceleration sensor, the lateral acceleration is calculated 
exclusively from the CAN signals. No impairment of function can be detected by the cus¬ 
tomer. 


In the event of a fault in the rear-axle circuit, i.e. a stabilization at the front axle only, the cus¬ 
tomer notices that the vehicle is subject to larger rolling motions. Agility diminishes at road 
speeds < 120 km/h. 


23 

E60 Dynamic Drive 












The system also responds if the fault "Failsafe valve stuck open" is detected in the pre-drive 
check. 


An electrical fault in the rear-axle pressure sensor may result in minor failures in roll-angle 
compensation. To be on the safe side, slightly more stabilizing torque is exerted on the front 
axle than in normal operation. This can be felt by the driver. 


Warning message 

Handling instruction 

Cornering stability slightly restricted 

Chassis stabilization slightly restricted around 
bends. Continued driving possible, contact BMW 
Service at next opportunity 


Restricted System Monitoring 


Dynamic Drive receives via PT-CAN the following sensor signals from 
DSC and SZL: 

• Lateral acceleration 

• Yaw velocity 

• Road speed 

• Steering-wheel angle 

These signals are used to check the lateral-acceleration sensor. 

Drop-out of the engine-speed signal (DME) results in restricted control comfort. 

In the event of a fault in the lateral acceleration and yaw velocity CAN signals, the system 
is lacking two items of redundant information. Since this information is used exclusively for 
checking the other signals, the Dynamic Drive function is preserved with full control com¬ 
fort. 

Although the Dynamic Drive function is not impaired, the driver receives the display 
"Chassis control comfort restricted." He/she is prompted to visit a garage/workshop at the 
next available opportunity. 


Warning message 

Handling instruction 

Cornering stability slightly restricted 

Chassis stabilization slightly restricted around 
bends. Continued driving possible, contact BMW 
Service at next opportunity 


24 

E60 Dynamic Drive 








A "dynamic" driver will notice the absence of the steering-angle signal. 

The warning messages must be acknowledged by the driver. Each warning message goes 

out only after it has been acknowledged. 

Once the cause of the fault has been rectified, the control unit can be returned to full func¬ 
tion. 

There are two reset conditions depending on how fast a fault is to be detected: 

• All faults which are no longer present are reset with "ignition off." It is necessary here 
to wait until the sleep mode has been obtained before "ignition on" is activated 
again. 

• Sporadic faults which can mostly be traced back to communication faults in the 
CAN bus are then automatically reset while the vehicle is moving straight ahead or 
stationary provided they have only occurred briefly and rarely. In this case, the cus¬ 
tomer cannot detect the activation while the vehicle is moving or stationary. 

• The associated faults with important additional information are stored in the fault 
memory. This additional information contains the kilometer reading/mileage at which 
the fault occurred, whether the fault is currently present and the frequency with 
which the fault in question has occurred. Thus, when the vehicle is brought into the 
garage/workshop, it is possible to carry out a specific analysis of the currently pre 
sent fault and also an analysis of a sporadic fault. 

Programming 

The Dynamic Drive control unit is programmed. 

Coding 

The Dynamic Drive control unit is coded. 


25 

E60 Dynamic Drive 


