Table of Contents 
E61 Sport Wagon 

Subject Page 

Suspension.3 

Air Suspension.3 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 04/05 





E61 Sport Wagon 

Model: 530xiT 
Production: From April 2005 

iBiicnwis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Know the differences between the E60 and E61 

• Know the location of various components in the E61 


2 

E61 Sport Wagon 


Suspension 


The E61 features an all-aluminium chassis as already introduced on the E60. A variant 
of the integral link rear axle IV has been developed for the Touring that makes for a com¬ 
pletely flat luggage compartment floor while providing a very large through-load space. 
The 530xiT is eguipped with an automatic self-levelling suspension provided by air sus¬ 
pension at the rear axle as standard. 

Air Suspension 

The air spring installed in the E61 is similar in operation to the system installed in the 
E65. 

The advantages of an air spring on the rear axle can be felt particularly in vehicles with 
high payload (such as a sport wagon) as mainly the axle load at the rear axle changes 
when loading and unloading the car. 

With a conventional steel spring, the change in the axle load affects not only the ride 
height but also the vibration and suspension geometry. 

There would also be a change in the camber of the rear axle wheels at high payload - 
this would result in increased load at the inner shoulders of the tires which in turn would 
mean reduced load bearing capacity of the tires. 

The air springs and dampers are supported independently on the floor pan of the car 
body. 



3 

E61 Sport Wagon 




In previous air suspension systems the air supply unit was located in the luggage com¬ 
partment are under the spare tire. For the first time, the air supply system (LVA) on the 
E61 is not located in the vehicle interior but rather on the underbody between the spare 
wheel well and battery box. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Pressure accumulator 
with compressor 

2 

Valve block 


Location of air supply system 


Since the air reguired to raise the vehicle can no longer be drawn from the vehicle interior, 
air must be taken via a filter from a protected area. The area between the wheel arch pan¬ 
eling of the rear right wheel is used for this purpose. 



Location of air filter for LVA 


4 

E61 Sport Wagon 












