Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Electronic Damper Control - Continuous (EDC-K) 

History.13 

System Components.14 

Damper Valve Details.15 

Principle of Operation.17 

System Faults and Reactions.21 

Workshop Hints.23 








DRIVING DYNAMICS SYSTEMS 


Model: E65 - 745i 
Production Date: 11/2001 


Objectives of The Module 

After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

Explain how EDC-K influences hydraulic damper operation 
Identify the correct EDC-K solenoid valve resistance value. 


2 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




Electronic Damper Control - Continuous (EDC-K) 

History 

With EDC I in the 1987 E32, BMW AG was the first European manufacturer to introduce a 
fully automatic electronically adjustable damper system. EDC I provided manual selection 
during driving between hard, sport and soft damping. Since the market launch, this 2-stage 
system has been continuously enhanced and evolved into EDC III, it has set the standard 
for adjustable damper systems in the 5 and 7 Series. 

EDC III evaluates the status of the road surface, vehicle load, driving speed and driver's 
reguest to automatically activate one of three damper programs: soft, medium or hard. The 
driver also has the option of selecting a comfort or sports program. 

EDC-K is a further development of EDC III. The German abbreviation "K" stands for con¬ 
tinuous damping force adjustment. The major change from EDC III is the damper valves 
and the activation control. 


Rear Dampers 



42 - 06-11 


EDC-K operates with a continuously adjustable valve in each damper. The damping force 
is adjusted for individual piston speed. The damping force adapts continuously to the low 
freguency movement of the vehicle body, resulting in a significant increase in driving com¬ 
fort. The driver has the option to select a comfort or sports setting by using the Controller 
in the Control Display menu. 

The EDC-K system is an option offered under the Adaptive Ride Package. 


13 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


System Components 

EDC-K Control Module: The control module 
is located in front of the glovebox and is pow¬ 
ered by B+, operating within a voltage range of 
9 to 16V. In the event of undervoltage, the EDC- 
K system shuts down to prevent excessive bat¬ 
ten/ draw. 

The control module incorporates various con¬ 
trol functions that determines the current 
applied to the damper valves. 


Vertical Acceleration Sensors: The three 
vertical acceleration sensors provide a varying 
voltage signal (0.2 - 4.5V) to the control module 
indicating the speed of body movement. The 
three sensors are identical and have a measur¬ 
ing range of ± 2.5 g. 

The front sensors (1) are mounted on the inside 
top of the wheel archs and the rear sensor (2) is 
mounted on the side of the rear wheel arch. 

42 - 06-13 

Electronically Adjustable Dampers: The front and rear axles are equipped with twin 
tube gas pressurized dampers supplied by Mannesmann Sachs Boge. The fully variable 
dampers are map controlled and do not have fixed stages. 

Each damper incorporates an adjustable proportioning control valve on the piston. The 
wiring harness for this valve is routed through the hollow piston rod. Damper oil flows 
through this valve during compression and rebound. The control valve generates a pres¬ 
sure drop between the lower and upper chambers depending on the oil flow volume. 

The front and rear axles are separately activated to achieve an optimum response for vibra¬ 
tions in all driving conditions. The valves are deactivated in the event of a control module 
failure or when the ignition is switched "OFF". The dampers automatically rest in the hard¬ 
est setting (without power). On vehicles equipped with Dynamic Drive, the spring struts 
have different valve configurations on the front and rear axles. The dampers are de-ener¬ 
gized when the vehicle is stationary. They are energized initially from 5 km/h. 



14 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




1. Pre-tensioning screw 

2. Solenoid coil 

3. EDC-K Damper valve 

4. Primary valve 

5. Floating seat ring 

6. Valve spring 

7. Armature 



EDC-K Damper Valve - Detail 


Infinitely Variable Control Valve: Without power, the maximum hydraulic resistance is set 
by the screw (1), which pre-tensions the valve spring (6). This is the hardest damper set¬ 
ting, also known as the failsafe (rest) setting. 

The valve spring provides maximum tension on the armature (7), which presses down on 
the EDC-K Damper valve (3). This in turn presses down on the floating seat ring (5) which 
offers resistance to the oil flow by restricting the orifices (indicated by arrows). 

When the solenoid coil (2) is energized by the EDC-K control module, the armature is mag¬ 
netically pulled upwards against the valve spring tension. The armature will exert less pres¬ 
sure on the EDC-K Damper valve. The tension is decreased on the floating seat ring 
decreasing the orifice restriction. The oil flow will increase, resulting in softer damping. 

When the solenoid coil receives maximum power, the effect will be the lightest tension on 
the floating seat ring. The orifices are unrestricted, providing the softest damping. 


15 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 

























































Damper Valve - Hydraulic Details 


Compression Stage: The rod and attached piston is forced 
downwards in the damper cylinder. The oil in the cylinder pro¬ 
vides lubrication and resistance to the piston movement 
(shown to the right). 

The oil is forced through the primary valve which pushes the 
EDC-K Damper valve upwards. The floating seat ring rests at 
the bottom and the oil will flow through the orifices which con¬ 
trol the rate (direction indicated by the arrow). 


ft-scori Moverrsnl 





dll PLlu 



42-06-15 


Rebound Stage: The rod and attached piston is forced 
upwards in the dampercylinder. The oil in the cylinder provides 
resistance to the piston movement (shown to the left). 

The oil will flow through the orifices forcing the floating seat ring 
up against the EDC-K Damper valve. The oil continues to flow 
through the primary valve to control the rate (direction indicat¬ 
ed by the arrow). 

The armature is controlled (electronically) by the EDC-K control 
module to regulate the EDC-K Damper valve and floating seat 
ring positions which varies the resistance to oil flow by restrict¬ 
ing the orifices. 


42-06-16 


16 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 














































Principle of Operation 

EDC-K is a microprocessor controlled damper adjusting system. The system consists of 
mechanical, hydraulic and electrical/electronic subsystems. Acceleration sensors record 
the driving/road surface conditions and the control module receives the sensor frequency 
signals forevaluation. The sensorsignals are compared with each other for plausibility. The 
control module logic activates the damper valves according to internal programmed maps 
to dampen body and wheel movement as needed. 

The driver can use the Controller and Control Display menu to select between comfort and 
sports programs. The system is diagnosable with the D IS plus. In the event of sensorfaults, 
the system is switched to a "safe state" by supplying fixed power to the damper valves. In 
the event of a system failure (no power), the dampers are mechanically sprung to the 
firmest setting. 

The EDC-K function is divided into 3 blocks: 

Control Module 

Sensors and program selection option 
Actuators - 4 electronically adjustable dampers 


The input signals for the system are generated by: 


Sensor/Switch 

Siqnal 

Calculated Variable 

Location 

Acceleration sensors 
front axle, rear axle 

Vertical acceleration 
front, rear 

Vertical velocity, 

Compression/rebound 

trave 

Sprint-strut 
dome FR, 

FL, RR 

Steering angle sensor 

Steering angle 

Steering angle velocity 

SZL 

Wheel speed sensors 

FL/FR 

Wheel speed 

Driving speed, 
acceleration/braking 

Wheel hubs 
FL/FR 

Program selection 

Comfo it/sports 
program 


Controller 


In addition to the forces calculated in each measured movement, there are vertical, longi¬ 
tudinal, transversal, copy and tolerance control logic. 


17 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 










EDC-K Electronic System Overview 



VL - Front left acceleration sensor 

CD - Control Display 

VR - Front right acceleration sensor 

DWR - Damper valve, front right 

HR - Rear right accelerator sensor 

DWL - Damper valve, front left 

DF A - Front left wheel speed sensor 

DVHR - Damper valve, rear right 

Con. - Controller 

DVHL - Damper valve, rear left 

LWS - Steering angle sensor 

ZGM - Central gateway module 


Vertical Dynamics Control 

Vertical Dynamics Control responds to vertical (up/down) body movements based on 
wheel/body acceleration and speed. A distinction is made between a low frequency body 
vibration (approx. 1 Hz) and a high frequency wheel vibration (approx. 10 to 15 Hz). 
Because the body speed cannot be measured, a characteristic value is calculated from the 
acceleration signals. This value is adapted based on the vehicle speed, frequency ranges 
and road surfaces. 


18 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 
















































































The higher frequency vibrations of the axle are calculated as the wheel dynamics value 
based on the wheel speed signal inputs. The value is determined from the irregularities of 
the wheel rotation when driving over bumps. This control operation takes place separately 
for both axles. 


Longitudinal Dynamics Control 

The Longitudinal Dynamics Control responds to acceleration and braking body movements 
(fon/vard/backward). The vehicle speed signals are monitored by the control module: two 
direct wheel speed inputs from the DSC control module and three digital inputs from the 
PT-CAN Bus. Two of the signals on the PT-CAN Bus correspond to the 2 wheel speed sig¬ 
nals from DSC and the third signal is the averaged vehicle speed. 

The EDC-K control module assesses the plausibility of these signals. A Longitudinal 
Dynamics value is calculated from the wheel speed signal, which represents the level of 
acceleration or deceleration. The dampers are adjusted (on both axles) to the harder set¬ 
ting to counter act the longitudinal movement. 


Transversal Dynamics Control 

The Transversal Dynamics Control responds to transversal movement (dive and squat - 
front to back roll). This value is calculated from the steering angle sensor and the vehicle 
speed signals. The onset of "yaw" movement is detected very early from the steering angle 
sensor signal. A harder damper setting to support the vehicle as it enters a curve is acti¬ 
vated at an early stage. The front and rear axles are separately controlled. 


Copy Control 

The Copy Control function responds to the compression and rebound of the body (encoun¬ 
tering bounces on one side of the vehicle) while driving straight ahead. Through comfort¬ 
able damper tuning, EDC-K responds to one sided unevenness due to the road surface. 
This prevents a side to side rolling motion while driving straight ahead. 

Once vehicle "copying" is detected, a harder damping combination is applied to the front 
and rear axles. Detection is based on the evaluation of the right and left vertical accelera¬ 
tion signals from the front axle. 


19 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 


Tolerance Adaptation 

The clamper force is diminished as part of the operating time function. Diminishing damper 
forces are compensated by current (amperage) reductions which are calculated by the tol¬ 
erance control. This also individually compensates for mechanical damper wear on each 
axle. 


Control Strategy 

All of the dampers are controled simultaneously until a single damper control in particular 
is required. For stability reasons, the smallest desired output current of the four damper 
controls (hardest damper setting) is set. 


Plausibility Monitoring and Safety Concept 

The EDC-K inputs and outputs are checked for plausibility. Depending on the type of fault, 
restricted operation of the damper control system will occur while a high degree of safety 
and comfort is maintained. 

The control display informs the driver when an EDC-K system fault has occurred. There are 
two different shutdown options in the event of faults. 

In partial operation, medium damping is set by a fixed current at the front and rear axle 
valves. 

When the entire system is shut down, the de-energized valves instantly switch (spring 
loaded) and remain in the "hard damping" setting. 


In the event of system faults, the chassis and suspension is set to a safe condition that is 
acceptable to the driver. The valves, sensors, electric circuits and EDC-K control module 
are fault monitored. 


Notes: 


20 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 







System Faults and Reactions 


Malfunction 

Fault response 

CAN steering angle signal correction 

Deviation > 10 s 

Fixed current, fault in memory, gong at end of 
trip 

Acceleration sensors (front, left, right, rear) 

Fixed current output for front axle, rear axle 

Fault in memory, gong at end of trip 

Wheel speed front left/right 

1) Control operation with replacement 
sensor 

2) Fixed current output forfront and rear 
axles 

External voltage supply fault fluctuation (nominal 
should be 5 V +/- 10%) 

Fixed current output for front axle, rear axle 

Fault in memory, gong at end of trip 

Voltage supply to EDC control module between 

2 V and 8 V 

Valves de-energized, fault in memory, gong 

During trip 



Valve failure 

Valves de-energized, fault in memory, gong 
during trip 

Voltage wake up, <2V standing & wake up>7V 

Valves de-energized, fault in memory, gong 
during trip 

No vehicle speed via CAN Bus 

Fixed current, fault in memory, gong at end of 
trip 

Control module EEPROM faulty 

Fixed current, fault in memory 

Control module - no alive message from EDC-K 

Valves de-energized, fault in memory, gong 
during trip 


CAN Interface 

The steering angle value is prepared and is transmitted by the SZL overthe CAN Bus. Both 
of the front wheel speed signals (including the direct DSC wheel speed signal), the vehicle 
speed reference value and the mileage reading are provided by the DSC control module 
overthe CAN Bus to the EDC-K control module. 


Power Supply 

Low current supply to the damper valves results in hard damping and a high current results 
in soft damping. The EDC-K control module determines the setpoints and outputs pulse- 
width modulated (PWM) signals to the damper valves to regulate the current flow. Current 
flow limitation is ensured by an overcurrent detection and deactivation. All of the analog 
inputs are protected by diodes against positive and negative overvoltage. The following 
analog signals are processed by the EDC-K control module: 


Vehicle supply voltage 
EDC-K switched output voltage 
Damper valve voltage and current 


21 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 















Valve Activation/Output Stage Circuit 

The solenoid valves have low resistance, approximately 2.2 ohms per valve at room tem¬ 
perature because high current is needed at a low voltage. The current is set in the 0 to 2 
Amps range depending on the desired damping force. The setpoint value will not exceed 
2 Amps to avoid valve damage. The solenoid valves are connected in series for each axle 
and are supplied with a ground (PWM for continuous adjustment) from the EDC-K control 
module. 

Rear Axle EDC-K Valves Series Connection 


uC = M icrocontroHer (EDC-K control module) 
PWM = Pulse width modulation (output signal) 
DVHR = Right rear damper valve 
DVHL = Left rear damper valve 



Controller and Control Display Operation 


42-06-18 


Sports program: The driver can activate/deacti¬ 
vate the sports program by the Controller in the 
Control Display menu. 

A firmer damping is set when the EDC-K 
request is set to "SPORT". EDC-K always 
reverts back to the comfort program each time 
the engine is restarted. 



R-r.rr. oil IWL4 

RDC 


42-06-02 


Notes: 


22 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 
































Workshop Hints 
Diagnosis 

System monitoring and plausibility: For safety reasons, faults with one damper valve will 
result in deactivation of all damper valves. Fault detection takes place on each axle. To pin¬ 
point which valve is faulty, use the DISplus to measure the resistance of the individual valves 
(per axle). The resistance of a good valve is 2.2 ohms ±10% at room temperature (20 2 C). 

Acceleration sensors: The EDC-K control module does not distinguish individual malfunc¬ 
tions between the sensors. The power supply to the three sensors is connected in parallel 
in the control module (without isolation). A short circuit in the supply voltage to one of the 
sensors will also affect the supply to the other sensors. 

A maximum of seven different faults can be stored for the acceleration sensors. The cod¬ 
ing data will indicate the functions of the control module (vehicle and country specific). 


Notes on Service 

When the steering angle sensor is removed, the steering wheel must be manually posi¬ 
tioned to the straightahead position and this position re-initialized in the 5ZL. The steering 
wheel straight ahead position is permanently monitored while driving. 

EDC-K diagnosis detects electronic damper faults on the complete axle only. Mechanical 
testing of individual dampers can be carried out in the dampertest. Mechanical wearcaus- 
es the dampers to weaken over the service life, therefore a running time memory adapts 
the damper curves towards a harder setting (over time). Faulty dampers must be replaced 
together (in pairs) on a single axle. After a replacement, the running time memory for the 
front or rear axle must be reset with the DISplus. 


A 10 Pin AdapterCable is available to adaptthe 
M FK cables to the EDC-K control module when 
using the DISplus (Test Plan). 

Special Tool #90 88 6 372 050 


42-06-20 



23 

E65 Driving Dynamics Systems 




