Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Parking Brake (EMF) 

Purpose of the System.9 

Functions.10 

System Components.11 

Electro-mechanical Actuating Unit.12 

Emergency Release.14 

Principle of Operation.16 

Safety Concept.22 

EMF Self Diagnostics.25 

Workshop Flints.26 

Check Control and Control Display Fault Descriptions.28 












BRAKES 


Model: E65 - 7451 
Production Date: 11/2001 


Objectives of The Module 


After Completing this module, you will be able to: 

Explain the 2-Stage Brake Pad Wear Sensor 

Demonstrate parking brake operation including "Auto Hold" activation. 

List and perform the procedure to resume operation after an emergency release 


2 

E65 Brakes 





Parking Brake (EMF) 

Purpose of The System 

The Electro-mechanical Parking Brake (EM F) is used forthe first time in series production. 
The EMF is used to secure a stationary vehicle, preventing it from rolling away by firmly 
locking the parking brake. The EMF is an automatic comfort oriented system that replaces 
the previous handbrake or foot operated parking brake. The driver can apply and release 
the parking brake by pressing a push button. 


The system is designed for the characteristic 
requirements of the E65: 

Consideration for safety 
Optimum functionality 
M aximum system usage 
Best comfort and convenience 

The Parking Brake push button is located in the 
instrument panel to the left of the headlight 
switch. The push button is an integral compo¬ 
nent of the Light M odule. 



42 - 06-06 


The EMF mechanically locks the 
parking brake when the vehicle is 
stationary and provides an inde¬ 
pendent brake system as 
required by law (in addition to the 
service brakes). 

The EMF system offers addition¬ 
al comfort and safety functions. 


1. EMF actuator 

2. Bowden cable 

3. Drum brakes (integral in the rear 
brake discs) 



42 - 06-08 


9 

E65 Brakes 


EMF System 






















Basic Functions: There are two different parking brake functions depending on the oper¬ 
ating status of the vehicle. 


Locking (Brake Applied): 


With the engine running or the vehicle rolling, the parking brake function acts on the 
front and rear axle by the DSC hydraulically applying the service brakes. 


When the engine is not running and the vehicle is stationary, the electro-mechanical 
parking brake is applied. 

Dynamic Braking: 

Braking required to decelerate a moving vehicle is identified by the DSC system when 
the parking brake push button is pressed while driving. The braking procedure is regu¬ 
lated by the DSC hydraulically applying the service brakes and takes place for as long 
as the push button is pressed. 


Automatic Hold: This comfort function is selected using the controller or with the free pro¬ 
grammable button on the multifunction steering wheel. After braking to a standstill, the 
vehicle is held by the DSC hydraulically applying the service brakes. The brakes are 
released by pressing the accelerator pedal. The hold and release function prevents "creep¬ 
ing" in stop and go traffic and "roll back" before pulling away on an incline (Hill Hold). 

Brake Pedal "Feel": The response of the brake pedal may change slightly (accompanied 
by an activation sound) because the parking brake function is activated using the brake 
system's hydraulic circuits - this is normal. 

Emergency Release: A mechanical emergency release is provided to release the parking 
brake in the event of an actuating unit failure or a dead battery. It is possible to release the 
mechanical actuating parking brake unit using the emergency release tool and an open end 
wrench found in the vehicle tool kit. 

Note: In addition, refer to the automatic transmission section for the emergency mechani¬ 
cal parking lock release procedure. 

Special Function: During vehicle operation, brake lining "seating" is conducted at defined 
intervals to ensure and maintain the effectiveness of the parking brake. The brake lining 
seating is performed to remove corrosion from the parking brake shoes and brake drums. 
The procedure automatically takes place approximately every 1000 km or once a month 
and is transparent to the driver. 

10 

E65 Brakes 







System Components 






I 




EMF Parking Brake 




42 - 06-09 


1. DSC module 

2. Wheel speed sensors 

3. Service brake, front axle 

4. Control display 

5. Controller 

6. EMF actuating unit 


7. Parking brake 

8. Service brake, rear axle 

9. Mechanical emergency release tools 

10. Parking brake push button 

11. Display in instrument cluster 


n 

E65 Brakes 









































































































Electro-mechanical Actuating Unit (EMF): The EMF receives the parking brake request 
and activates an electric actuator (motor) to tension the parking brake cables. The EMF 
actuating unit is located under the luggage compartment floor in front of the spare wheel 
recess. 


1. Actuator (motor with 2 Hall sensors) 

2. Gear mechanism 

3. Balance arm 

4. End stop 

5. Guide tube for emergency operation 
(release) 

6. Cable module 

7. Control module 

8. Bowden cable (one of two) 


End Stop: The end stop is the 
"zero point” for the initial position 
which is required for the parking 
brake cable installation (release - 
no tension). 

The balance arm rests against 
the end stop the first time the 
brake is released when the igni¬ 
tion is on (KL15). 



42 - 06-10 


Electro-mechanical Actuating Unit 


i 



Hall sensors are mounted on the 
motor to detect the speed and 
position. The control module 
detects the end stop by the 
increase in actuator motor cur¬ 
rent and the decrease in the 
motor speed (Hall sensors). 

1. Electric motor 

2. Hall sensors 

3. Spindle (worm) 

4. Control module 



12 

E65 Brakes 


EMF Actuation 


42 - 06-04 





















When activated, the spindle is turned by the motor using a gear drive mechanism to apply 
the parking brakes. The balance arm is pulled by the spindle (worm) and will compensate 
for the slight difference in side to side cable length. The balance arm is linked by connect¬ 
ing levers to pull the cable pulleys inwards towards the direction of the spindle rotation. The 
cables are attached to the cable pulleys which are pulled "in” to apply the parking brakes. 
Once the hold position is reached, the spindle worm gear ensures cable tension and will 
not release with out spindle rotation. 


1. Cable pulley 

2. Actuator motor 

3. Balance arm 

4. Gear drive mechanism 

5. Spindle 

6. Control module 



2 

Cable Operation 


Gear Drive Mechanism with Coil Spring: This is designed as a three stage (reduction) 
gear mechanism consisting of a worm, spur gear and spindle. The holding force for the 
parking brake is assisted by a coil spring mounted on the end of the spindle. 


1. Spindle 

2. Coil spring cover 

3. Coil spring 

4. Emergency release drive gear 



1 

2 

42 - 06-13 


13 

E65 Brakes 


Gear Drive Mechanism 


When the brake is released, the spindle is turned by the motor and gear drive mechanism 
in the opposite direction. The balance arm, connecting levers and cable pulleys are pushed 
outwards by the spindle (worm). The cables are also pushed "out” to release the parking 
brakes. To assist in the release, return springs are installed in the parking brake assemblies 
inside the brake discs. 

Note: With the manual emergency release, the spindle can be turned through the gear drive 
mechanism with the tools found in the vehicle tool kit to release the parking brake. 


Workshop Hints 


Emergency Release: The parking brake is manually released directly through the gear 


drive mechanism. 


The tools in the vehicle tool kit to release the 
parking brake are: 

1. Screwdriver handle 

2. Emergency-release tool (spring loaded) 

3. 10 mm open-end wrench 



Caution: Make sure the transmission is in the 
Park position before releasing the parking 
brake! 


42 - 06-09 


Emergency Release 


To release the brake, the extension rod is insert¬ 
ed through a guide tube located in the luggage 
compartment floor in front of the spare wheel 
recess (1). Maintain pressure on the tool. 


Using the open end wrench and the screwdriv¬ 
er handle, turn the release tool in a counter¬ 
clockwise direction (2). The cable tension 
release will be felt during this procedure. 



42 - 06-10 


Note: After a power failure/interruption, it is possible that the vehicle can not be moved after 
releasing the parking brake using the emergency release. The parking lock of the automatic 
transmission can still be engaged. Refer to the automatic transmission section for the 
emergency mechanical parking lock release procedure. The parking brake may only be 
used again if it is released manually after a power interruption. If this is not performed, the 
the parking brake may fail to operate correctly! 

14 

E65 Brakes 














Resuming Operation after Emergency Release: When the voltage supply has been 
restored after the emergency release, the parking brake push button must be pressed 3 
times at intervals of approx. 5 seconds to initialize the system. This procedure is also 
described in the Owner's Handbook and Towing Instructions for BMW 7 Series. 


1st press - The control module attempts to release the brake. Since the brake has been 
released mechanically by the emergency release, the motorcannot run back and blocks. 
The control module recognizes a disengaged setting. 


2nd press - The motor will move forward applying the parking brake. The control mod¬ 
ule detects an engaged setting. The "P" indicator light illuminates in red. 


3rd press - The motor will run backward releasing the parking brake and the "P" indica¬ 
tor light goes out. The parking brake is ready for operation. 


Control Module: The parking 
brake control module (integral in 
the EM F) is linked to other control 
modules for communication by 
the PT-CAN and K-CAN Busses. 
Diagnostic communication is pro¬ 
vide through the ZG M overthe PT- 
CAN Bus. 


LM Light module 
DSC Dynamic stability control 
TEMF Parking brake push button 
CAS Car access system 
ZGM Central gateway module 
DFA VL speed signal (seperate 
hard wire backup), left front wheel 



| I 




Hard Wire 
Switch Input 



42 - 06-15 


When the parking brake push button is pressed with the engine running, a fixed brake pres¬ 
sure is built up by the DSC hydraulic unit and applied to the service brakes. 


The force applied at the spindle is calculated in the parking brake control module. The con¬ 
trol module first determines the current flow of the actuating motor accounting for the tem¬ 
perature of the motor coil (affecting resistance). Hall sensors are mounted on the motor to 
detect the speed and position. The actuating force is calculated by evaluating the speed 
reduction of the motor (speed is a function oftorgue). 


15 

E65 Brakes 











































Principle of Operation 


Parking Brake Control 


Two separate controls are provided to operate the 


ncir/inn h ro 1/ r\ 


functions. 


1. The Push Button, located in the instrument panel to the left 
of the steering wheel is used for the basic function. This 
will apply and release the parking brake when the vehicle 
is stationary and provide "Dynamic Braking" when the vehi¬ 
cle is driven depending on the vehicle speed. 

When the vehicle is stationary, it functions as an ON/OFF 
(momentary) push button. Only in the Dynamic Braking 
mode, the brake is applied for as long as the button is 
pressed. 



2. The action Held in the menu of the control display provides a second control The menu 
screen is activated and controlled by the driver to activate or deactivate the "Automatic 
Hold" parking brake function. 




i 


This function can also be activated and de¬ 
activated with the free programmable but¬ 
ton on the multifunction steering wheel (if set 
in the Control Display). 


Godt miM 

i* = 


POC Ki 


CriniJni-t EOC 


S u-.V 


Indicator Lights 


42 - 06-07 


The driver is informed of the parking brake system status by an indicator light in the instru¬ 
ment cluster. When a fault is present, an additional message in the Control Display will pro¬ 
vide more information. The parking brake control module communicates via the PT-CAN 
and K-CAN Busses. The light is activated as part of the pre-drive check when the ignition 
is switched on. 


Parking brake indicator lamp 


Function lamp 


16 

E65 Brakes 


n a n 
MM IVIA 


jvn 

jLrVJF jp jjt 

i i M 


—( m 

m % 


\\ V, \ 
r. \ V » l 

IM \\ 

r II 

# mf 
Jeff 


Auto P 


42 - 06-17 



















Indication 


In the basic function, application of the parking brake is indicated by a red LED in the brake 
symbol and by the letter P on the inside. The letters "PARK" are illuminated in the indicator 
light for as long as the parking brake is applied. 

The P symbol indicates that the requested status of "release" or "apply" is reached. When 
the parking brake is operated while driving (Dynamic Braking), an acoustic warning signal 
is additionally activated (multiple gong). 


Automatic Hold Indication 

Standby of the automatic hold function is indicated by the green lettering "AUTO-P" inte¬ 
grated in the light. The parking brake signal is additionally indicated when the automatic 
hold function is active and the vehicle is stopped. The parking brake symbol lights up in 
green because the hold function is activated by the DSC with all 4 wheel (service) brakes. 

After the brake has been released when starting off (automatically), the green parking brake 
symbol goes out and only the green standby indication "AUTO-P" remains active. The tran¬ 
sition from hydraulic to mechanical mode takes place automatically when the engine is 
switched off. The light changes from green to red indicating the parking brake is applied 
and the DSC (service brakes) are released. 


Additional Indication 

The driver is alerted of parking brake malfunctions by a yellow indicator light in the instru¬ 
ment cluster. In addition, the same symbol is illuminated in the variable indicator warning 
field and briefly explained by a text note. 

In addition to the parking brake status, the variable indicator light is also made available to 
other control modules. It is only used by the parking brake control module for specific 
faults. 

When the variable indicator light appears, the fault is explained in the Check Control dis¬ 
play accompanied by additional information in the Control Display (Condition Based 
Service). 


17 

E65 Brakes 


1. Parking brake indicator light 

2. Check Control display 

3. Variable indicator warning field 



Indication Examples: 



Instrument Cluster 


18 

E65 Brakes 


System function 


Indicator lamps 


Parking brake released 


((p)) 


Auto P 




Parking brake applied 


ff lAtt 

I Jf J 


HT-ft 111 


Dynamic braking 
+ 

Acoustic signal (gong) 


fin \f II 

VVy/ 

Auto P 




Automatic hold standby 





Automatic hold active 


m 

AutO P 


*v mj; 


System error 



in 


























Basic Parking Brake Function with the EMF 

Situation: "Ignition ON" and the engine is not running. When the vehicle is stationary, the 
parking brake is released or applied by pressing the push button. The light in the instru¬ 
ment cluster is either not lit or is red. The lettering "PARK" is illuminated while the brake is 
released or applied. Pressing the button while the vehicle is rolling triggers the dynamic 
braking function. 

Changing from the EMF to DSC: When the EMF is applied and the engine is started, the 
system changes over to the service brakes using the DSC. The EMF is not released until 
the service brakes are applied. The light is permanently red and the transfer is not indicat¬ 
ed to the driver (transparent). 


Changing from DSC to EMF: When automatic hold is activated or the ignition is switched 
"OFF" (even if automatic hold was not activated), the service brakes are released after the 
changeover to the EMF takes place. If automatic hold was activated, the indicator light 


changes from green to red. If the service brakes are applied, they will be released after the 
changeover to EMF. The indicator light will remain red during this changeover. 


Parking Brake Function with DSC (Service Brakes) 

Situation: "Engine Running". When the push button is pressed, the service brakes are 
released or applied by the DSC and the indicator light is either off or red. When the vehicle 
is moving and the push button is pressed, Dynamic Braking is applied. 


The parking brake push button acts as a switch atspeeds below 3 km/h, pressing the push 
button once will trigger an immediate function change. The brakes are released before 
starting off by pressing the push button. When attempting to start off without releasing the 
parking brake, the DSC will further increase the service brake pressure and a warning 
(gong) will alert the driver When the parking brake is set and the driver exits the vehicle 
(CAN signal - driver's seat occupancy) with the engine running, the EMF parking brake will 
be applied in addition to the DSC service brakes. 


Ignition Key Removed (Rest Status) 

When the parking brake is applied, the P-light remains on for a certain period indicating 
"brake hold" to the driver The parking brake can be released at any time by pressing the 
push button until the ignition key is removed (car wash function). The rest status is 
assumed when the ignition key is removed. The parking brake can not be released when 
the ignition key removed (child safety). The ignition key must be inserted and the ignition 
switched on to release the parking brake. 

19 

E65 Brakes 


Automatic Hold Function 


The Automatic Hold function is activated by selecting "Auto P” in the Control Display (or 
M FL free programmable button) only when the engine is running and the hood is closed (or 

the hood contact switch is in the service position). It then remains operational until the next 
time the engine is switched off. When selected, the vehicle is automatically held by the ser¬ 
vice brakes each time it comes to a stop. This also applies when the Automatic Hold func¬ 
tion is requested and the vehicle is stationary. 

When the vehicle is stationary, the brake pressure that the driver applies from the brake 
pedal is "locked in". When the vehicle comes to a stop without operating the brake pedal 
(roll to a stop), hydraulic pressure is built up by the DSC pump. Increased pressure will be 
automatically supplied if the vehicle begins to roll (detected by the wheel speed sensors). 

When the automatic transmission is engaged in a drive gear, the brakes will be automati¬ 
cally released by pressing on the accelerator pedal. The next time the vehicle stops it will 
be automatically held by the service brakes. The standby status of the automatic mode is 
indicated by the green lettering "Auto-P". When the vehicle is stationary, the parking brake 
symbol is additionally illuminated in green. 

The Automatic Hold function is deactivated by selecting "OFF” in the Control Display (or 
M FL free programmable button). This will not change the current parking brake status. This 
means when the vehicle is stationary, it remains held hydraulically after selecting "Auto-P 
OFF". The parking brake indicator light will change from green to red and the "Auto-P" indi¬ 
cator will go out. 

The Automatic Hold function is always aborted when the push button is pressed and must 
be reactivated by selecting "ON" in the Control Display (or MFL button). When the engine 
is switched "OFF" in the Automatic Hold function, the EM F will apply the parking brake. 


The parking brake can be released at any time by pressing the push button until the igni¬ 
tion key is removed (car wash function). The parking brake will apply after the ignition key 
has been removed. 


Automatic Hold Safety Control 

Release of the Automatic Hold function by pressing the accelerator pedal is based on two 
safety functions. 

Situation: Hood open. Automatic release of the service brakes when the accelerator pedal 
is pressed is inhibited when the hood is open (CAN signal - hood contact switch) while the 
engine is running. 

20 

E65 Brakes 



In this situation, the parking brake can only be released by pressing the push button 
(Automatic Hold deactivation). When the hood is closed, the Automatic Hold must be 
selected again by the driver. This situation also applies when the luggage compartment 
(trunk) lid is open and Reverse is engaged. 

Situation: The driver exits the vehicle. When the driver exits the vehicle (CAN signal - dri¬ 
ver's seat occupancy) with the engine running, the automatic release of the service brakes 
by pressing the accelerator pedal is inhibited. The EM F parking brake will also be applied 
and the transmission will automatically shift to the P-position. 

When the driver re-enters the vehicle (CAN signal - driver's seat occupancy), the brake 
pedal must be pressed and a transmission drive gear must be engaged to drive off. The 
brake light switch signal requests the EMF to release the parking brake. The Automatic 
Hold function must be selected again by the driver. 


Dynamic Braking 

Two separate controls are required by law for brake operation, the brake pedal and hand¬ 
brake lever were previously used. In the E65, the footbrake and the push button in the 
dashboard fulfills the requirements. 

When the vehicle is moving and the engine is "OFF", the EM F parking brake is applied when 
pressure is maintained on the push button at speeds below 3 km/h. During this situation, 
the parking brake is applied for 0.8 seconds. For the next 2 seconds there is an increase 
in the braking power and the rate of deceleration is maintained as long as the push button 
is pressed. 

The Dynamic Braking function is active while the vehicle is rolling at speeds above 3 km/h 
(when the ignition is in position KLR or KLI5) when pressure is maintained on the push but¬ 
ton. This maintains vehicle stability by preventing overbraking of the rear axle using DSC 
hydraulic pressure build-up application to the service brakes. The required brake pressure 
is made available as fast as possible by the DSC. 

Since braking takes place hydraulically on all four wheels, higherdeceleration rates are pos¬ 
sible with minimum operating force as compared to the EMF parking brakes. This con¬ 
trolled braking contributes to increased vehicle safety. For safety reasons, traffic is warned 
when Dynamic Braking is active by the brake lights. 

To avoid incorrect operation, the "Release Parking Brake" display and gong draw the dri¬ 
ver's attention to Dynamic Brake operation. This function should only be used in excep¬ 
tional circumstances. 


21 

E65 Brakes 


When Dynamic Braking is activated until the vehicle comes to a stop, the vehicle will remain 
held by the service brakes and the red P-indicator light remains on. If the brake pedal is 
pressed during this operation, the DSC interprets this as a higher priority and will override 
the parking brake function. 

Exiting the dynamic emergency braking function: After emergency braking the vehicle to a 
stop, the vehicle will remain held by the service brakes even after releasing the parking 
brake push button. The service brakes will not be released until the push button is pressed 
again. 


Safety Concept 

Fault Messages 

The EM F and DSC control modules momtorthe system forfaults and alert the driver. A fault 
has different priorities depending on driving situations: vehicle stationary/moving and start¬ 
ing off/deceleration. To avoid damage, faults in the EMF actuating mechanism like cable 
breakage and stretch (actuating range exceeded) are detected by the Hall sensors in the 
motor. 

If the EMF control module is defective, fault messages will not be available. The instrument 
cluster recognizes the absence of the normally active parking brake message (alive - 
enable) over the PT-CAN Bus and will display a fault message. The safety concept is based 
on a staged shut down strategy. In addition to the yellow warning light, information is avail¬ 
able in the Control Display. 


Fault 

Availability 

Availability 

Availability 

Back-up system 


Parking brake 
(mechanically) 
v=0 

Dynamic braking 
(hydraulic) 
v>0 

Automatic 

hold 


Can signal error 

OK 

OK 

Not 

available 

Service brake 
+ 

auxiliary brake 

DSC 

Hydraulics 

fault 

OK 

Not 

available 

Not 

available 

Service brake 
+ 

auxiliary brake 

Actuating 

mechanism 

fault 

Not 

available 

Ok 

Not 

available 

Park position 
automatic 
gearbox 

Fault in parking 
brake control unit 

Not 

available 

Not 

available 

Not 

available 

Park position 
automatic 
gearbox and, if 
applicable service 
brake + auxiliary 
brake 


22 

E65 Brakes 












General Parking Brake Fault Concept 


Fault division between DSC and EMF control module: DSC faults that only affect the park¬ 
ing brake will result in a shut down of the hydraulic function (Dynamic Braking not possi¬ 
ble). These are typically faults that result in a shut down of the ABS functions and M anual 
Emergency Mode will be assumed by the EM F. If the fault is only a CAN Bus fault, Dynamic 
Braking will be possible. 


Shut Down Stage of "Manual Emergency Mode" 


This will only apply when the EMF actuating unit is not in operation and is implemented for 
one of the following DSC faults: 


DSC control module defect 

Electrical defect (example: wiring harness) 

Sensor fault (brake pressure sensor, wheel speed sensors) 
EMF actuator fault, DSC hydraulic unit 
CAN communication fault 


Shut Down Stage "Only Dynamic Braking Available" 


This stage will provide Dynamic Braking by the DSC hydraulic service brakes 
of an EMF actuating failure. 


the event 


Fault in the actuating motor Hall sensors 

Actuating motor fault 

Fault in control electronics 

Fault in actuating mechanism (mechanical) 

Electrical faults 


Shut Down Stage "Total Shut Down" 


Parking brake control module failure 
Push button fault 

Electrical faults including voltage supply 


All fault codes are stored in the EMF control module and is also informed of the DSC con¬ 
trol module fault status. 


23 

E65 Brakes 





Fault Regeneration 


If a fault is detected, the system remains in the current stage until the ignition is switched 
"OFF". A shut down situation will not be deactivated until the faulty component is operat¬ 
ing correctly. If the fault is not present during the next restart, the shut down stage is can¬ 
celled to resume normal operation. Component tests are carried out continually, even dur¬ 
ing the shut down situation. 

The fault information remains stored in the fault code memory. If correct function of the 
component cannot be determined after a fault has occurred, the parking brake will remain 
in the safe, shut down state until the next workshop visit with the exception of: CAN time¬ 
out error, overvoltage and temperature protection. After properly repaired, the fault can be 
deleted with the DISplus. 


Regeneration of CAN Faults 


CAN timeout faults can be regenerated. The shut down stage is cancelled if the signal is 
received correctly for a certain period of time. 


Monitoring and Fault Detection 

Electrical faults monitoring: The wiring to the EMF control module including the actuator 
motor are monitored for breaks or shorts to B+ and ground. 


Hydraulic interface monitoring: The DCS checks the plausibility of the deceleration reguest 
by the parking brake during Dynamic Braking and the hydraulic Hold Function. If the 
reguest and feedback do not agree within a defined time (5 seconds), the corresponding 
shut down stage is assumed and a fault code will be stored. 


Input signals monitoring: In the event of a faulty input signal, the entire system is shut down 
with a Check Control error message and a stored fault code. 


Parking brake push button monitoring: The push button signals are continually monitored 
(hardwired to the EMF control module). In the event of a push button plausibility fault, the 
entire parking brake system is shut down and the "Parking Brake Push Button Defective" 
fault code is stored. The DSC control module also checks the plausibility of the parking 
brake push button signals that are transmitted via the CAN Bus (from the EM F control mod¬ 
ule). If faulty, the "Parking Brake Push Button Signals via CAN Implausible" fault code is 
stored and partial shut down is carried out (Dynamic Braking is not possible). 


24 

E65 Brakes 





Speed signals monitoring: Total shutdown of the parking brake system will occur with the 
loss of all 3 speed inputs. 


The direct digital wheel speed signal (separate hard wire backup, front left) is contin¬ 
ually checked for the plausibility of the signal edge change. 

The plausibility of the reference speed signal from the DSC over the PT-CAN Bus and 
the direct digital wheel speed signal is continually and mutually checked. 

The reference speed signal from the DSC is compared with the automatic transmission 
output speed. 

Fault codes: 

Direct wheel speed signal implausible or faulted 
DSC speeds implausible or no message 

EGS automatic transmission output speed implausible or no message 


Hall sensors monitoring: The plausibility of the actuating motor Hall sensors is continually 
checked. When there are deviations that are out of tolerance, partial shut down (only 
Dynamic Braking available) is implemented and the "Parking Brake Actuating Unit 
Defective, Plausibility of Hall Sensors" fault code will be set. 

In addition, the plausibility of the position is checked during the actuating motor operation. 
When the Hall sensor signal is not received, the parking brake system is shut down and a 
fault code will be set. 

EM F actuating unit monitoring: After the ignition is switched on and a fault is present, it will 
be detected before a required parking brake function is active. 


EMF Self Diagnostics 

The self diagnostic functions are divided into several modes. These modes are executed in 
priority for diagnosis. When the vehicle is stationary and self diagnosis is being executed, 
the parking brake function is fully operational. Fewer diagnostic modes are allowed while 
the vehicle is moving. A self diagnostic mode that will restrict or completely deactivate the 
parking brake function is executed only when the vehicle is stationary. 


25 

E65 Brakes 





Certain faults in CAN communication will cause the manual emergency mode and the 
Automatic Hold will not function. The "manual level" is operational and the parking brake 
will still be applied and released by the EM F or DSC when the push button is pressed with 
the vehicle stationary. Dynamic Braking also remains available. The loss of the Automatic 
Hold function is indicated only with the variable parking brake indicator lamp. 


Workshop Hints 

Please familiarize yourself with the statements below regarding new procedures when mak¬ 
ing repairs to the Electro-mechanical Parking Brake. Consult the Repair Information in TIS 
for additional information on the following procedures: 

The parking brake shoes are adjusted the same way as current BMW models by turning 
the adjuster with a screwdriver through the wheel bolt hole of the wheel hub. 

Parking brake cable removal: To remove the parking brake cable assemblies, the EMF top 
cover must be removed and the end stop plate must be raised with a screwdriver. Using 
the brake release tool (found in the vehicle tool kit), release the parking brake completely 
so that the balance arm is turned back to the stop. This will allow the pulleys to rotate far 
enough so that the cable crimp can be disengaged from the recess in the pulley. 

Parking brake initialization: The parking brake must be initialized with the DISplus after 
replacing the brake shoes. The brake cable "free play" is learned by the EMF control mod¬ 
ule from the Hall sensors in the actuating motor. 

Parking brake lining seating: When the parking brake shoes are replaced, the new brake 
linings must be seated (bedded down) to achieve adequate holding power. A "Special 
Bedding Down Routine" is integrated in the parking brake software and can be accessed 
with the DISplus found under Service Functions - Chassis - Parking Brake - Workshop 
Bra king-in. 

The parking brake indicator light in the instrument cluster will flash red (at a low frequency) 
to signal the standby status of the brake bedding down program. After activating the pro¬ 
gram, the ignition must not be switched off and the bedding down procedure must be car¬ 
ried out within 30 minutes. 

If more than 30 minutes have lapsed, the parking brake button is pushed, or the ignition is 
turned off before the procedure is carried out, the brake bedding down program will be ter¬ 
minated. The system will resume the normal parking brake function. 


26 

E65 Brakes 


The brake linings are seated by the EMF applying a reduced holding force. The braking 
force at the spindle during this procedure is 20% of the maximum actuating force. 

The procedure is activated when the vehicle is stationary (for example: stopped at a traffic 
light). The brake shoes "scrub” when the vehicle starts off. The EMF releases the parking 
brakes when a speed of 15 km/h is reached or 30 seconds after the start of the seating 
procedure. 

For safety reasons, the seating procedure is immediately terminated when any DSC func¬ 
tion is required. The seating procedure is also terminated when the push button is pressed 
or the ignition is turned off. 

Travel monitoring: Normal parking brake lining wear increases the actuating travel over the 
service life. Based on the reference point (stop in the EM F unit), the Hall sensors in the actu¬ 
ating motor allows the EMF control module to measure the travel range. 

When the defined travel limit is exceeded, information is provided to the driver and a fault 
is stored in the EMF control module. This can also be checked using the D1Splus found 
under Service Functions - Chassis - Parking Brake - Position Travel Check. 

Brake testing on a roller dynamometer: The E65 parking brake operation can be tested on 
a brake roller dynamometer. The parking brake test can be conducted with the engine run¬ 
ning by pressing the parking brake push button. With the engine turned off, the parking 
brake test can activated by pressing the parking brake push button. The actuating unit will 
quickly apply and lock the parking brake. 

Assembly Mode: Replacement EMFs are shipped in "assembly mode" to surpress activa¬ 
tion until the brake cables and EMF are completely assembled and installed in the vehicle. 
This prevents unintentional operation of the EMF by the parking brake push button and can 
also be activated (for safety reasons) on an existing EM F in the vehicle when work is being 
performed. 

Before initial operation, the assembly mode must be deactivated by using the D IS plus 
found under: Service Functions - Chassis - Parking Brake - Assembly Mode. 

When installing the EMF, make sure that the seal to the body and the seals for the parking 
brake cables are correctly installed. 

Coding data: The coding data for the parking brake system is stored in the EMF control 
module (EEPROM) and the DSC control module (EEPROM). The coding data is entered by 
the DISplus when a control module is replaced. 


27 

E65 Brakes 




Check Control and Control Display Fault Descriptions 



Parking brake lamp 




(0) 

Auto P 

KT-B1 AO 





Cause 

CC message 

Control display information 

Rest condition 




Parking brake lamp 

Variable indicator lamp 








(0) 

Auto P 

KT-6U0 

1 

((P)) 

AutoP 

KT"H139 



Cause 

CC Message 

Control display information 

Held mechanically (up to 

10km/h}; parking brake 

Inoperative while driving; 

Parking brake can only be 

Operated manually 

Parking brake 
inoperative 
while driving 

Parking brake only be applied or 
released manually with the vehicle 
stationary. Parking brake without 
emergency function. 

M echanically released; parking 
brake can only be 

Operated manually 

Parking brake 

automatic 

hold inoperative! 

Parking brake notoperated 
automatically when vehicle 
stopped/parked. Operate parking 
brake manually or use gearbox 
position P 

Held mechanically or held 
hydraulically in dynamic braking 
mode when stationary; parking 
brake can only be operated 
manually 

Parking brake 

Automatic 

Hold inoperative! 

Parking brake not operative 
Automatic when vehicle 
Stopped/parked. Operate 

Parking brake manually or use 
gear box position P 

Actuating unit failure while 

Driving; held hydraulic in dynamic 
braking mode when stationary 

Parking brake automatic hold 
Inoperative/park with P 

When driving off: release 

Parking brake with emergency 
release function if necessary. 

First engage gearbox position P! 
Use gearbox position P when 
parking 


28 

E65 Brakes 























Parking brake overheated 
(only with engine off) 


Overheating; held hydraulically in 
Dynamic braking mode up to stop 


Parking brake overheated 


1. Parking 

brake overheated, avoid 
operation 

2. Parking brake 
Overheated operation 
not possible 


Parking brake overheated, 
Operation not possible 


1. Parking brake 
overheated, 
avoid operation 

2. Parking brake 
Inoperative while 
driving 1 


1. Parking brake overheated 
due to too freguent 
operation. Holding force 
reduced, risk of damage 1 . 

2. Parking brake overheated due 

to freguent operation. 
Operation with vehicle 
Stationary no longer possible. 
Emergency braking function 
during vehicle operation still 
maintained. _ 

Parking brake overheated due to 
Too freguent operation. 
Operation with vehicle stationary 
No longer possible. 

Emergency braking function 
During vehicle operation still 
maintained. _ 

1. Parking brake overheated 
due to freguent operation. 
Holding force reduced, risk 
of damage 1 

2. Parking brake can only be 
applied or released manually 
with the vehicle stationary. 
Parking brake without 
Emergency brake function. 


Parking brake lamp 


Variable indicator lamp 


Cause _ 

Actuating unit failure 


Actuating unit failure on first 
Occurrence 


Auto P 


CC message _ 

Parking brake inoperative / 
park with P 


1. Risk of damage to 
parking 

Brake 1 

2. Parking brake 
moperative/park 
with P 


(©) 

Auto P 


Control display function _ 

When driving off: release 
Parking brake with emergency 
Release function if necessary. 
First engage gearbox position P 1 
When parking: use gearbox 
Position P. _ 

When driving off: release parking 
brake with emergency 
Release function if necessary. 
First engage gearbox position P 1 
When parking: use gearbox 
Position P. 


29 

E65 Brakes 




















Overheating (reversible) 

Parking brake overheated, 
Operation not possible 

Parking brake overheated due to 
freguent operation. 

Operation with vehicle stationary 
no longer possible. Emergency 
braking function during vehicle 
operation still maintained. 

Released mechanically; parking 
brake inoperative 

While driving; parking brake 
can only be operated 
manually 

Parking brake inoperative 

While driving 

Parking brake can only be 

Applied or released manually 
with the vehicle stationary. 

Parking brake without 
emergency brake function. 

Parking brake overheated 

1, Parking brake overheated, 
avoid operation 

2. Parking brake inoperative 
while driving 

1. Parking brake overheated 
due to freguent operation 
Holding force reduced, 

Risk of damage! 

2. Parking brake can only be 
applied to released 
manually with the vehicle 
stationary. Parking brake 
without emergency brake 
function. 

Alive failure or total failure 

Parking brake inoperative / park 
with P 

Parking brake inoperative. To 
park: use gearbox position P. To 
start off: if necessary, release 
brake with emergency release 
function. First engage gearbox 
position P 1 Visit nearest BMW 
Service Center 

Alive failure or total failure 

On first occurrence 

1, Risk of damage to parking 
brake! 

2. Parking brake inoperative, 
park with P 

Parking brake inoperative. To 
park; use gearbox position P. to 
start off: if necessary, release 
brake with emergency release 
function. First engage gearbox 
position P 1 Visit nearest 

BMW Service Center 


Notes: 


30 

E65 Brakes 



















Parking brake lamp 

Variable indicator Lamp 




KT-S1* 1 





A 

uto 

P 


A 

,uto 

P 

KT*81fl 1 

Cause 

CC message 

Control display information 

Overheating (reversible), 
dynamic braking during 
vehicle operation 

1. Release parking brake 

2. Parking brake 
overheated operation 
not possible 

Parking brake overheated due 
to frequent operation. 

Operation with vehicle stationary 
no longer possible. 

Emergency braking function 

During vehicle operation still 
maintained. 

Dynamic braking during 
Vehicle operation 

1, Release parking brake 

2. Parking brake automatic 
hold inoperative 

Parking brake not operated 
Automatically when vehicle 
Stopped/parked. Operate 
parking brake manually or use 
gearbox position P. 

Failure during vehicle 
operation; dynamic braking 
during vehicle operation 

1, Release parking brake 

2. Parking brake 
inoperative/park with P 

When driving off: release parking 
brake with emergency release 
function if necessan/. First 
engage gearbox position Pi 
when parking: use gearbox 
position P. 


Notes: 


31 

E65 Brakes 




























Cause 


Parking brake lamp 


A 



P 


KT-aiil 


Flashing 


(®) 

Auto P 


KT-BldO 


CC message 


Variable indicator lamp 


m 


p 


Mil. 


Control display information 


When stationary with engine 
off, while mechanically 
releasing or applying brake 


Parking brake automatic hold 
inoperative! 


Parking brake not operated 


arking brake lamp 


(®) 

Auto P 


Variable indicator lamp 


t3' 


(®) 

Auto P 


t3 


Flashing 


Auto P 


KP&lit 


Cause 


CC message 


Control display information 


Total failure due to 
redundancy fault in parking 
brake push-button; flashing 
at high freguency fora 
certain time when push¬ 
button pressed (rapid 
flashing with gong) _ 


Parking brake inoperative/ 
Park with P 


Parking brake inoperative. To 
park: use gearbox position P. 

To start off: if necessary, release 
brake with emergency release 
function. First engage gearbox 
position P 1 Visit nearest BMW 
Sen/ice Center. 


32 

E65 Brakes 






















Parking brake lamp 



P 


KT*SH1 


flashing 


<®> 



<TSflU 


Variable indicator lamp 



T-fi tS 


Cause 


CC message 


Control display information 


When stationary (up to 
lOkm/h) while mechanica 
releasing or applying brake; 
(slow flashing-xsoding data 
instrument cluster) 


Parking brake inoperative 
while driving 


Parking brake can only be 
Applied or released manua 
with the vehicle stationary 
Parking brake without 
emergency brake function. 


Notes: 


33 

E65 Brakes 
































