Table of Contents 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 

Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

TREAD Act.5 

System Identification and Terminology.6 

FlatTire Monitoring Systems .7 

FTM System Overview.8 

FTM System Overview (E65/E66).9 

FTM System Overview (5 and 6 Series E6X) .10 

FTM System Overview (E90/E91).11 

FTM System Overview (E85/E83/E53/E46) .12 

System Components .13 

Wheel Speed Sensors.13 

FTM Reset Button .14 

E90 Reset .14 

Soft Key Reset .15 

Warning Lamp.15 

Central Information Display.16 

Check Control Display.17 

FTM Control Module.18 

System Software .18 

FTM System Operation .19 

Spare Tire.20 

System Functions .21 

Self Test .21 

System Reset .21 

Detects Drop in Tire Pressure .21 

Visual and Acoustic Warning .21 

Signal Output .21 

Special Conditions for System Function .22 

Old or Worn Tires .22 

System Reset.23 

Reset Procedure.24 

Vehicles with RPA Button.24 

Vehicles with BC Button (on-board computerfunction) .24 

Vehicles with Central Information Display .24 

Preconditions for Activation .24 

FlatTire Indication .24 


Initial Print Date: 3/06 


Revision Date: 5/06 







































Subject Page 

TPM Systems (up to 2003 production) .25 

TPM System Components .26 

RDC Control Unit.26 

Receiving Antennae.27 

Wheel Transmitter Modules .28 

TPM System Operation.29 

Autumn Warning.29 

Tire Failure Warning.29 

System Reset.30 

TPM Systems (from 9/05).31 

TPM System Overview .32 

TPM System Components .33 

TPM (RDC) Control Unit.34 

Central Receiving Antenna.35 

TriggerTransmitter Modules.36 

Wheel Transmitter Module .37 

Control Display .38 

Instrument Cluster.39 

System Operation .40 

Wheel Management .41 

Control Display Screens.42 

One Tire with Reduced Pressure .42 

Several tires with Reduced Pressure .43 

Workshop Hints.44 

System Reset (Initialization) .44 

Run FlatTireTechnology .46 

RFT Operation.46 

RFT Design.46 

Tire Manufacturer Information.46 

Wheel Construction .47 

































Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 

Model: All withTPMS 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify BMW Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 

• Locate and Identify Components ofTPM Systems 

• Diagnose and RepairTPM Systems 


3 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 




Introduction 


According to numerous studies and statistical analysis, many vehicles on the roads today 
are driving with under-inflated tires. First and foremost, this a safety issue which could 
ultimately result in catastrophic tire failure (a.k.a. "blowout"). M any "blow-outs" can be 
traced back to preliminary damage from puncture ora slow loss in tire pressure. 



In addition to safety issues, under-inflated tires can cause a reduction in fuel economy 
and overall tire life. Studies by tire manufacturers have shown that tire life can be 
reduced by 50% when the tires are under-inflated by as little as 20%. 

Therefore the overall consequences of improperly inflated tires include: 

• Increased tire wear resulting in decreased tire service life 

• Impaired vehicle handling 

• Reduction in safety for the vehicle occupants 

• Reduced fuel economy 

Since most tire pressure loss occurs gradually, the driver does not usually perceive the 
reduced tire pressure. Therefore various systems have been developed to aid the driver 
by monitoring tire pressure loss and report this information to the driver. 

The intent of this training module is to include all systems which monitortire pressure 
loss. The first U.S. model BMW to utilize this technology was the E39 M5. Various 
systems have been in use since that time on some models. 

Recent government legislation now mandates that all light vehicles sold in the U.S. must 
have a "Tire Pressure Monitoring System" orTPMS. 


4 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 










TREAD Act 


In 2000, there was much media attention surrounding tire safety issues. The leading tire 
manufacturers were involved with many law suits regarding catastrophic tire failures. 
These well publicized incidents involved injury and fatalities. 

In response to these issues, the U.S. Congress enacted legislation entitled the 
"Transportation Recall Enhancement, Accountability and Documentation (TREAD) Act in 
November of 2000. 

The TREAD Act encompasses many aspects of tire industry issues. The act includes 
items such as tire labeling requirements, tire testing standards, information on tire safety 
related recalls etc. There are also provisions for issues on child safety restraints. 

However, the focus of this training module is to train technicians aboutTire Pressure 
Monitoring Systems (TPMS). TPM systems are also one of the primary components of 
theTREAD Act. TPM systems allow early detection oftire pressure loss which is not 
usually detected by the driver until vehicle handling and safety is affected. 

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) is the government agency 
responsible forthe creation and enforcement of the mandates of the TREAD Act. Initially, 
NHTSA approved the installation of "Indirect"TPM systems. 

IndirectTPM systems monitortire pressure "indirectly” by monitoring the rotational speed 
of the tire via the wheel speed sensors. The AB S/DSC system can then detect pressure 
loss by comparing wheel speed information between all 4 tires. Any loss in tire pressure 
would result in a change in tire diameter and therefore a change in rotational speed. 

The guidelines of theTREAD Act found that "Indirect" TPM systems are ineffective in 
detecting tire pressure loss until the tire was under-inflated to an unsafe level. Therefore, 
NHTSA mandated that auto manufacturers install "Direct”TPM systems on all vehicles. 

DirectTPM systems monitortire pressure directly by using pressure sensors at each 
wheel which report tire pressure and temperature information to relevant vehicle systems. 
Tire pressure loss is then reported to the driver via an illuminated warning symbol. Direct 
TPM systems also offerthe capability of monitoring tire pressure when the vehicle is at a 
standstill. Indirect systems must be driven in orderto collect sufficient data to detect tire 
pressure loss. 

As perNHTSA guidelines, passenger cars and lighttrucks must have the "Direct"TPM 
systems installed via a specific timeline from 2005. By 2007, all auto manufacturers must 
be in 100% compliance. 

Aside from the obvious safety benefits, DirectTPM systems will also assist the driver by 
maintaining fuel economy and extending tire life. 

This training module will help the technician to diagnose and repair both "Indirect" and 
"Direct” TPM systems. The first step in the diagnosis the these systems is identification. 
The following text shows some tips on identifying these systems. 


5 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 



System Identification and Terminology 

In orderto accurately diagnose TPM systems, the system must be properly identified. 
These systems have had numerous acronyms which are used to describe the various 
systems. Forthe purposes of this training module, the systems will be broken down into 
two basic configurations. These are as follows: 

• Systems which monitorwheel speed - These "lndirect"systems will be 
referred to as Flat Tire Monitoring systems or FTM. FTM systems take advantage of 
components already installed in the vehicle. The wheel speed sensors, which are 
already an input to the DSC control unit, are used to monitorwheel speed. When a 
tire starts to deflate, the overall diameter changes. This affects the rotational speed, 
which is picked up by the DSC module. The DSC module contains software forthe 
purpose of calculating the speed changes and reporting the pressure loss to the dri¬ 
ver via an illuminated indicator or symbol. The only additional components which are 
installed is the switch for system initialization. Early generation systems used a mod¬ 
ule which received wheel speed input from the DSC module. 

* Systems which monitor actual tire pressure - These "Direct" systems will be 
referred to as Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems orTPM systems. TPM systems 
use wireless sensors which are part of the tire valve stem. These sensors monitor 
actual tire pressure and send this information to a module via multiple antennae. 
These systems are preferred due to the fact that the actual tire pressure is moni¬ 
tored ratherthan by variations in tire rotational speeds. 

There is a simple way to identify the difference between the two systems. On systems 
which monitor actual tire pressure, the tire valve stem is threaded and has a "hex head" 
on the valve stem. The systems which monitorwheel speed have conventional rubber 
valve stems. 


TPM System FTM System 



"Threaded” Valve stem on vehicles which monitor 

actual tire pressure. 


"Rubber” Valve stem on vehicles which monitor 

wheel speed. 


6 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 





FlatTire Monitoring Systems 


FTM systems are "indirect" systems which were first used on U.S. models with the 
introduction of the E39 M5 in 2000. Since that time, FTM systems have been included 
on most other models including the 7 Series. 

There have been numerous abbreviations and terminology used to describe FTM 
systems in the past. However, FTM will be used from this point forward to describe 
those systems which "indirectly" monitortire pressure loss through wheel speed detec¬ 
tion. 

Some of the past abbreviations include: 

• RDW - is derived from the German term "Reifen Druck Warnung" which means 
Tire Pressure Warning. This term was used to describe some of the early systems 
used on the E39 M 5 and E46 M 3. 

• RPA - comes from the German words "Reifen Pannen Anzeige" which translates 
to Tire Failure (Puncture) Indicator. This abbreviation is most closely associated 
with the E85, E60 and E46 (from 2001). 

• DDS - This an english based abbreviation for Deflation Detection System. This 
term is occasionally found when using the diagnostic equipment such as the 
DISplus/GT-1. 

• DWS - This is also an english abbreviation forthe system used on the Z8 (E52) and 
it stands for Dunlop Warning System. 

Regardless of the terminology used, the most important concept to understand is the 
difference between the Direct and Indirect systems. 


KL 15 


ru~u~i 

runun 

runun 

njnun 


KL 31 



E39 M5 
(US Model) 



K BUS 


DIS & MoDiC 



7 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 




















































FTM System Overview 


FTM Systems (Indirect monitoring systems) 

Series 

Chassis 

Option/Date 

System Design 

Deflation 

Warning 

System Reset 
(initialization) 

3 Series 

E46 

Option from 9/03 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong 

RPA Reset Button 

3 Series 

E46M3 

Standard from SOP 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong 

RPA Reset Button 

3 Series 

E46 (ix) 

Option from 9/01 

System uses 
separate control unit. 

Yellow telltale + 
gong 

RPA Reset Button 

3 Series 

E90/E91 

Standard from SOP 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong 

RPA Reset via Stalk 
Switch or Controller 

5 Series 

E39 (M5) 

Standard 

System uses 
separate control unit. 

Yellow telltale + 
gong 

RPA Reset Button 

5 Series 

E 60/E 61 

Standard 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong and 

CC Message 

Soft Key Reset via 
CID Menu and 
Controller 

6 Series 

E 63/E 64 

Standard 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong and 

CC Message 

Soft Key Reset via 
CID Menu and 
Controller 

7 Series 

E 65/E 66 

Optional from 9/02 
Standard from 12/03 

System integrated 
into CIM 

Yellow telltale + 
gong and 

CC Message 

Soft Key Reset via 
CID Menu and 
Controller 

Z4 

E85 

Standard 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong 

RPA Reset Button 

SAV 

E53 

Standard from 4/04 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong 

RPA Reset Button 

SAV 

E83 

Standard 

System integrated 
into DSC 

Yellow telltale + 
gong 

RPA Reset Button 


8 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 














































































FTM System Overview (E65/E66) 







Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Chassis Integration Module 

6 

Car Access System 

2 

Multi-Audio System Controller 

7 

Safety and Gateway Module 

3 

Kombi 

8 

Wheel Speed Sensors 

4 

Central Information Display 

9 

Dynamic Stability Control 

5 

Controller 




9 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 


















































































































































































FTM System Overview (5 and 6 Series E6X) 



■* iiiirrvb 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wheel speed sensors 

6 

Controller 

2 

DSC Control module 

7 

Instrument cluster 

3 

M-ASK orCCC 

8 

SGM (up to 9/05) or KGM (from 9/05) 

4 

Car Access System (CAS) 

9 

Diagnosis line 

5 

Central Information Display (CID) 




10 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 


























FTM System Overview (E90/E91) 



n FC-m 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wheel Speed Sensors 

7 

Instrument C luster (Kombi) 

2 

DSC Control Module 

8 

Diagnostic Bus 

3 

Central Information Display (CID) 

9 

J unction-box electronics (J BE) 

4 

M-ASK orCCC 

10 

Steering Column Switch Cluster (SZL) 

5 

Controller (CON) 

11 

Turn Signal Stalk Switch 

6 

Car Access System (CAS) 




11 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 






































FTM System Overview (E85/E83/E53/E46) 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wheel Speed Sensors 

4 

Diagnostic Bus 

2 

DSC Control Module 

5 

RPA/FTM Reset button 

3 

Instrument C luster (Kombi) 




12 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 






















System Components 

FTM systems consist of the following major components: 

• Wheel Speed Sensors 

• FTM Reset Button (used for system reseta.k.a. initialization). 

• Warning Indicator Lamp 

• Check Control Display (E39 M5) 

• Control Display E65/E66 (orCID on 5 and 6 series) 

• FTM (RDW) Control Module (used only on early systems such as E39 M5, E46Xi 
and E52 Z8) 

Wheel Speed Sensors 

The wheel speed sensors, which are already part of the ABS/DSC system provide 
information regarding rotational speed variations between wheels. The wheel speed 
signals are compared to determine the amount of tire pressure loss. 

These sensors vary in design depending upon vehicle. These systems use "active” 
type sensors which can be hall effect or magneto resistive. 



13 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 





FTM Reset Button 

The reset button (1) is used to initialize 
(reset) the system. The reset procedure 
allows the FTM system to "learn" the tire 
rotational speeds at various vehicle speed 
ranges. 

The button provides a ground input to the 
DSC module (orRDW module on early 
systems). It is located near the center 
console in the SZM (vehicle dependent). 

The button can be found on the E46, E53, 

E83, E85, E52 and E39 (M5). 

E90 Reset 

The E90 (without CCC) requires the use of 
the turn signal stalk to reset the FTM 
system. The reset is in the instrument 
cluster. 

To reset the FTM system, press button (2) 
on the turn signal stalk up or down until the 
appropriate menu is displayed. 

When the correct menu is attained, press 
the "BC” button (2) to confirm selection. 

Press the BC button for 5 seconds until the menu displays a "checked box" next to the 
"INIT" indicator. 




14 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 
















Soft Key Reset 

On vehicles which use a Control Display such as E6X or E90/91 with CCC, the FTM 
system is reset via a "softkey" in the "Vehicle Settings Menu". The controller is used to 
reset the system when needed. 


Komm unrkatiGn 



Entertain merit 


A /£ A BAYERN 3 TMC ©T-ill 2150 


Warning Lamp 

Depending upon the vehicle, there will be a yellow FTM indicator lamp in the instrument 
cluster. The location will vary between models. 



15 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 











Central Information Display 

A fault in the FTM or drop in tire pressure will be indicated by the FTM indicator and 
warning light in instrument cluster. At the same time, the symbol will light up in the LC 
display. 



en rii,i.'ru'.i 


BMW Jibin' 

it psiftnppiliy 


k JSf Chctk Co-Ttno Vkc-idwnige^ 1 

A ftpirGnnflnnp' vorelch-llg anr.atak 


£ ,j Z B AYE H N 3 TP TMC n11:35 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

i—i 

Cluster warning light for FTM 

3 

CC Message "Tire Puncture” 

2 

"Vehicle Setting Menu" 




16 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 





































Check Control Display 

The E39 M5 displayed the CC messages in the instrument cluster matrix display. The 
tire pressure failure message is displayed here in the event of a tire pressure loss or 
system malfunction. 



17 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 












FTM Control Module 

The FTM systems on the early vehicles such as the E39 M5, E52 Z8 and E46 AWD 
utilized a separate control module for the FTM system. The control module received 
wheel speed input from the DSC module. The wheel speed signals were evaluated in 
the FTM module. If any faults or rotational irregularities were determined, the FTM mod¬ 
ule would signal the clustervia the K-bus. 





System Software 

The newer FTM systems do not utilize a separate FTM module. The operating software 
in distributed to other modules (usually the DSC module). The system operating 
software is located in the following modules: 

• E65/E66 - The software is located in the CIM. TheCIM receives wheel speed input 
from the DSC. 

• E39 M 5, E52 Z8 and E46 AWD (xi) - The system software is located in the FTM 
control module. 

• All othervehicles with FTM - The operating software is located in the DSC. 


18 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 


















































FTM System Operation 

The FT M system is designed to inform the driver of a loss in tire pressure. Rather than 
monitor actual tire pressure (as direct systems do), the rolling circumference is calculated 
from the wheel speed signals. When a tire loses pressure, the circumference decreases 
which corresponds to an increase in wheel speed. The wheel speeds are compared with 
one anotherforthe purpose of determining rotational irregularities. 

A difference in wheel speed is recognized as a pressure loss. The FTM system can 
inform the driver after a short drive if there is a possible under-inflated tire. Depending 
upon the vehicle, the driver is warned via an indicator light in the cluster or by a check 
control message. A gong will sometimes accompany the warning light as an additional 
method of alerting the driver. 

When pressure loss from the tire is gradual, the driver may not perceive a problem until 
the vehicle handling is compromised. The condition is made difficult to visually detect 
when "Run Flat” tires are used. This is due to the additional sidewall stiffness which can 
"mask" an under-inflation situation. The FTM system can alert the driver in advance of 
any pressure loss in the tires. 

The FTM system will detect a drop in pressure below about 30 % ± 10 % of the initial 
value. The FTM indicator and warning light indicates a drop in tire pressure. The FTM 
system will indicate this after just a short distance. Usually, after a few minutes, from a 
certain minimum speed (e.g. 25 km/h) up to the permissible top speed. 


w 

so 

C 

0> 

'(/> 



-a 

a> 

a> 

Q. 

(/) 

Q) 

n 

so 

0) 

tf) 



o 

To 

+■* 

o 

+■* 

o 

> 

'-p 

so 



▲ 


20 — 
15 — 

10 — 
4 — 


TIRE PRESSURE FAILURE WARNING RANGE 

■ 





9 62 81 100 118 155 


► 


Miles per Hour 


19 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 











During the reset process, the set tire pressure is taken as the initial value forthe current 
set of tires. If all 4 tires lose pressure at the same rate, the wheel speeds will also change 
at the same rate. The RPA is unable to detecta uniform drop in pressure in all tires (e.g. 
due to diffusion = natural loss of airfrom all 4 tires) 



As per BMW guidelines, the tire pressure should be checked regularly. The owner's 
manual states at least twice a month and prior to any long trips. Tire pressure information 
can be found on the tire pressure placard on the b-pillar. There are also tire pressure 
charts in the owner's manual as well. 

Note: The overall responsibility forthe maintenance of correcttire pressure 
resides with the driver at all times. 

SpareTire 

When using the "space saver” type spare tire, be aware that the FTM system will not 
operate properly due to the reduced overall diameter of the spare tire. Have the tire 
repaired as soon as possible to ensure a high level of driving safety. 


20 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 



System Functions 

The Run Flat Indicator (RPA) comprises the following functions: 

• Self-test 

• Reset (Initialization) 

• Detects drop in tire pressure 

• Visual and acoustic warning 

Self Test 

The RPA performs a self-test when terminal 15 is switched ON. A fault in the RPA is indi¬ 
cated by the RPA indicator and warning light and by a symbol in the LC display. 

System Reset 

Reset is started manually (e.g. by pressing the RPA button). Then (afterthe journey has 
started), Initialization will run as a fully automatic calibration sequence. In other words, the 
circumference of individual tires are recorded and evaluated. 

To allow a drop in tire pressure to be detected, the system considers different speed 
ranges and driving situations. Taking account of the driving situation means that the 
system has to be primed for each speed range individually. 

From 09/2004, these speed ranges and driving situations have been combined into 3 
calibration ranges. This means greater clarity for output via the BMW diagnostic 
equipment. 

The reset (initialization) phase lasts approximately 5 to 15 minutes forthe individual 
speed ranges. The end of the reset phase is not indicated. 

Detects Drop in Tire Pressure 

The RPA records the wheel speeds using the wheel-speed sensors from the DSC.The 
RPA compares the speeds of the individual wheels and computes an average speed. In 
this way the RPA is able to detecta loss of tire pressure. (In the event of a tire losing pres¬ 
sure, the tire rolling circumference of the affected tire is also reduced.) 

Visual and Acoustic Warning 

A drop in pressure in one tire of approximately. 30 % ± 10 % from the initial value is indi¬ 
cated by the RPA indicator and warning light. In addition, an acoustic signal sounds. 

Signal Output 

Depending on the model concerned, either via the instrument cluster, M-ASK orCCC. 

Note: In the event of a DSC malfunction, the FTM system will also register a 
malfunction. This is due to the fact that the wheel speed sensors are 
monitored by both the DSC and FTM systems. 


21 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 



Special Conditions for System Function 

The following operating conditions may cause a delay in the warning being given in the 
event of a drop in tire pressure: 

• Heavy braking 

• Rapid acceleration 

• High rate of lateral acceleration 

• Cornering (in a tight corner) 

• Vehicle speed dropping below a minimum speed (the RPA only responds when a 
certain minimum speed has been reached) 

• Large difference in slip (between axles or between wheel on one side of vehicle) 

• Initialization not being completed in current speed range (see "Controls") 

• Winter conditions 

The following operating conditions may cause a delay in the warning being given in the 
event of a drop in tire pressure: 

• Driving with snow chains fitted 

Driving with snow chains may impairthe correct function of the RPA. The system will 
work as normal again afterthe snow chains have been removed and the vehicle is driven 
fora few minutes. (The reset process will not need to be repeated) 

Note: Do not perform reset (initialization) when snow chains are fitted. The 
reset process will be affected by the irregularities caused by the snow 
chains. 

Old or Worn Tires 

Only install tires with the same tread depth. Avoid fitting tires with greatly different tread 
depth (from approximately. 2 millimeters) on one axle. The different diameters mean that 
the correct operation of the FTM system is no longer guaranteed. 

In the following cases, the system will not emit a warning despite a drop in tire pressure 
being detected: 

• The same amount of pressure is lost in 2 or more tires. 

• Drops in tire pressures caused by diffusion and affecting all 4 tires equally 

• If a tire is damaged with a sudden loss of all pressure (tire blowout, warning is given 
too late) 


22 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 




System Reset 


The FTM system is reset using the following control elements depending upon vehicle 
and optional equipment: 

• FTM button (all early vehicles w/o CCC orE9X) 

• On-board computer button on turn-signal/main-beam switch (E90/91/E92 w/o CCC) 

• With iDrive in the Central Information Display (CID) with the controller (all with 
CCC/NAV) 

Note: It is important to always perform a system reset immediately after 

correcting the tire pressure, especially if a tire is changed orthe wheels 
are interchanged. Only checktire pressures when the tires are cold. 

Set the tires to the correct pressure before performing Initialization. During Initialization, 
the set tire pressure is taken as the initial value for the current set of wheels. 

Correct the tire pressures when the tires are cold to prevent the data recorded from being 
affected by temperature. 

Note: The maintenance of tire pressure is the responsibility of the driver. 

Checktire pressures regularly, at least twice a month and before embarking on lengthy 
journeys. During reset, the set tire pressure is taken as the initial value for the current set 
of tires. 

The FTM should be reset during the following scenarios: 

• If tire pressure is changed (tire pressure is corrected or reset) 

• If the position of the tires is changed (change of axles, wheels), even if the tire pres¬ 
sure is not changed 

• If a tire is changed orthe wheels are interchanged (e.g. old tires for new tires, 
summertires for winter tires, etc.) 


23 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 



Reset Procedure 

The reset procedure is performed with KL15 ON. The engine can be OFF orON, butdo 
not drive off. Depending on the vehicle, the FTM is reset as follows: 

Vehicles with RPA Button 

Press and hold the RPA button until the RPA indicator and warning light lights up yellow 
fora few seconds. Then drive the vehicle through various speed ranges for at least 15 
minutes. 

Vehicles with BC Button (on-board computerfunction) 

In the on-board computerfunction select "RPA" and "INIT" (LC display) with the rocker 
switch on the turn-signal/main-beam switch. Press the BC button to confirm. 

Press and hold the BC button for approximately. 5 seconds, until a box with a tick appears 
behind the "INIT" display.Then drive the vehicle through various speed ranges forat least 
15 minutes. 

Vehicles with Central Information Display 

Initialization is performed via the Central Information Display (CID) and controller. 

• Select "RPA/FTM" in the "Settings" menu and confirm. 

• Select "Set" and confirm. 

• Then drive the vehicle through various speed ranges forat least 15 minutes. The 
end of the Initialization phase is not indicated. 

Preconditions for Activation 

The flat tire indicatoris automatically activated when terminal 15 is switched ON.The 
FTM cannot be switched off manually. 

FlatTire Indication 

A flat tire is indicated as follows: 

• E53, E83, E85 - Yellow FTM indicator and warning light without acoustic signal 

• E60, E61, E63, E64, E65, E66, E90, E91 - Yellow FTM indicator and warning light 
with acoustic signal 

An FTM system failure is indicated by a yellow FTM indicator and warning light without 
an acoustic signal. 


24 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 



TPM Systems (up to 2003 production) 


TPM systems are "direct"systems which monitor actual tire pressure. The first BMW to 
use the "direct" system was the early production E65/E66. The system was then 
referred to as Tire Pressure Control or RDC. The E46 also received an optional version 
of the RDC type system which was available up to 8/03 production. 

The system is capable of monitoring actual tire pressure when the vehicle is stationary or 
when being driven. There are transmitters which are part of the valve stem assembly. 
These transmitters send signals to the RDC control unit via antennae mounted in the 
wheel well area. 

When the system detects pressure loss, the driver is warned via a Check Control 
message and an acoustic warning (gong). 



Note: TheTPM system on these pages were installed on the E65/E66 
and E46 vehicles as options until 2003 production. The newer 
(NHTSA mandated)TPM systems from 3/2006 are covered on 
pages 32 through 47. 


25 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 










































TPM System Components 


Components of the TPM system differfrom the FTM systems. These components 
include: 

• RDC Control Unit 

• Receiving Antennae 

• Wheel Transmitter Module 

• Warning Indicator Lamp 

• Control Display (E6X vehicles) 


RDC Control Unit 

The RDC control unit is located behind the 
glove box on both the E65/E66 and the 
E46. The control unit is connected to the 
K-CAN bus on the E65/E66 and the K-Bus 
on the E46. 

The RDC control unit receives input signals 
from the 4 antennae and monitors the 
signals for individual pressure and tempera¬ 
ture information. 

If the inflation pressure of one of the tires 
(including the spare) falls below the prede¬ 
termined threshold, the RDC generates a 
CC warning telegram on the K-CAN (or K- 
bus on E46). 


Operating Frequency 



The RDC module is designed to operate 
on a specific operating frequency. It must 
be matched to the the frequency of the 4 
antennae. The systems will operate on two 
possible frequencies - 315 M Hz and 433 
Mhz. 

The label on the RDC module contains 
information about the operating frequency. 
All components including the RDC module, 
antennae (4) and the 4 wheel transmitter 
modules must have the same frequency 
rating in order for the system to operate 
properly. 



RDC Module Location on E46 


26 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 


























Receiving Antennae 

The system uses 4 antennae located in each 
of the 4 wheel well areas behind the splash 
trim. The purpose of the fourantennae is to 
receive the signals from the wheel mounted 
transmitters and transferthis information to 
the RDC control unit. 

There are two possible types of antennae 
used. The 433 M hz antenna which is black 
(dark gray) in color and the 315 M hz antenna 
which is light gray in color. 



Antenna location in wheel well 


433 Mhz Antenna 



315 Mhz Antenna 



27 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 







Wheel T ransmitter Modules 

The wheel transmitter modules are located inside the 
tire and attached to the valve stem. The modules 
contain sensors which monitor pressure as well as 
temperature. There is also a 3.6 volt, long-life lithium 
battery which is used to power up the sensor 
electronics as the internal transmitter circuitry. 

The transmitter modules are active in an energy 
saving mode even when they are sitting as spare 
parts on the shelf. 



Each transmitter module has it's own unique ID code. 
The ID code is assigned to a position on the vehicle 
(LR,RR etc.) after a successful initialization has been 
completed. 

The radio signal transmitted by the wheel modules is 
received when the tire passes close to the antenna. 
The transmitter module measures internal tire air 
pressure every minute. If the air pressure increases 
by 0.5 bar between measurements, the transmission 
rate increases to every 0.8 seconds. 



If the increase in air pressure is detected for approximately 216 seconds, the complete 
functionality of the transmitter is activated. If the higher pressure continues, the module 
remains permanently active and measures the air pressure and temperature every 0.3 
seconds and transmits the information by radio signal every 55 seconds. 


At temperatures over 120 degrees Celsius, the transmitter modules are switched off. 
Once the transmitter module cools below 100 degrees Celsius, operation resumes. 


The wheel electronics modules must match the frequency of the antenna and RDC 
module. If any of these system components are mis-matched,the system will not 
function correctly. 


Note: The valve stem of the spare tire should be pointed to the right rear wheel 
well. The spare tire is monitored by the RDC module, but not displayed 
on the screen of the control display. Also, special care should be taking 
when mounting and dismounting tires from the rims. Damage to the 
wheel electronics could occur. 


28 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 




TPM System Operation 

During monitoring, the RDC control module takes the measured temperature and 
pressure readings to determine a target pressure value. 

If the tire being monitored falls below the required level by 0.2 barfor more than 8 
minutes, a Check Control Message appears in the instrument cluster after the car is 
started. The driver is prompted to check tire pressure. 

Autumn Warning 

If the tire temperature is 20 degrees Celsius lowerfor 14 days than the previously 
measured temperature during the last initialization, the RDC system will also prompt the 
driverto check tire pressures. 


Check Control Message displayed in the Cluster 

Message displayed in Control Display 

Check tire pressures! 

E9 

“Check tire pressure!" Check tire inflation pres¬ 
sure; referto owner's manual or inflation chart. 


When the RDC menu on the control display is activated, the car is shown with the tires 
highlighted in yellow. The tire pressures must be adjusted and an initialization carried out. 

Tire Failure Warning 

After the temperature calculation, if the monitored tire falls below the specified pressure 
of 0.4 bar, a CC message will appear on the instrument cluster with an audible warning 
tone. These warnings will also be set if the monitored tire pressure falls by more than 
16%. A corresponding CC message will also be shown on the Control Display. 


Check Control Message displayed in the Cluster 

Message displayed in Control Display 

Flat tire! Stop vehicle carefully. 

Left front tire is flat, referto owner's manual or 
contact BMW roadside assistance. 


When the RDC menu on the control display is activated, the car is shown with the defec¬ 
tive tire in red. In the case of a spare tire failure, all of the tires are shown in red. 

Once the tire pressures are restored to the setpoint in the RDC control unit, the tires will 
return to green in the control display. The CC message is also withdrawn. 


29 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 









System Reset 

After the tires are replaced, rotated or if their inflation pressures are adjusted, then the 
wheel transmitter modules must be initialized (reset) using the RDC function in the 
"Settings" menu ofthe Control Display. 

During initialization the following processes are performed: 

• Individual wheel recognition (Identification of wheel transmitter modules). 

• Wheel position assignment. 

• Plausibility check (setpoint pressures checked). 

• Adoption of setpoint pressures as specified pressures. 

The RDC (TPM) system then learns the wheel transmitter module position. 

The minimum air pressure accepted by the TPM system on during reset is 1.7 bar 
(or24.7psi). If the tire pressures deviate more than 0.4 bar (6psi) per axle the reset 
process is rejected after a plausibility check. 

1.3 bar is the lowest pressure detected by the wheel transmitter module. At that point, a 
tire failure warning will always be issued. 

Complete reset procedure can take up to 30 minutes. Only the actual driving time over 
6 km/h is taken into account. During initialization, the CC message "Initializing RDC!" is 
displayed on the Instrument Cluster. 

When the initialization from the Control Display is activated, the wheels appear black and 
the pressures are not shown. Once initialization is complete, the tires ofthe car on the 
graphic turn green and pressure values are shown for each tire. 



30 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 



TPM Systems (from 9/05) 


As perthe TREAD act guidelines, future tire pressure monitoring systems on BMW 
vehicles will be of the "direct" type. However, there will be some design changes from 
the first generation "direct" systems. This new system can also be referred to as the 
"trigger” type system. This is due to the use of trigger transmitter modules which will be 
explained in more detail later in this section. 

The first models to receive the new systems will be the 5, 6 and 7 series from M arch of 
2006. TheX3 will also have the new TPM system from March. The 3 series 
(E90,91,92) as well as the M 5 and M 6 will be equipped with the direct system as well. 
The Z4 will balance out the module line in October. To be in compliance with the new 
NHTSA regulations, all new models produced from September of 2007 will use the new 
system. 



The main function of the system is to monitorthe tire pressure during vehicle operation. 
The most important auxiliary function of the system is the option of independently 
detecting the wheels (vehicle's wheels) mounted on the vehicle and their position. 

The control unit obtains the radio telegrams from the electronic wheel electronic mod¬ 
ules which are controlled via the trigger transmitters. The system recognizes the vehi¬ 
cle's own wheels and the mounting position of the wheels by evaluating the trigger loca¬ 
tion as well as statistical evaluation of the received information. The control unit checks 
the individual system components. 

The spare wheel is not monitored as the electronic wheel module does not transmit 
telegrams when stationary (exceptforthe specified post-run phase). 


31 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 





TPM System Overview 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wheel Electronics 

2 

TriggerTransmitter 

3 

TPM Control Module 

4 

Instrument C luster Display 

5 

Reset (initialization) Button 
(or via controller with CCC) 

6 

Central Receiving Antenna 


32 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 




























TPM System Components 

Components ofthe newTPM system differ somewhat from the early TPM system. The 
TPM components include: 

• TPM (RDC) Control Unit 

• Central (Digital) Receiving Antenna (1) 

• TriggerTransmitterModules (4) 

• Wheel Electronics Modules (4 +1 for spare - optional) 

• Control Display (E6X vehicles) 

• Instrument Cluster 



TPM ► 






\ 


Status: TPM active 


87.5 FM 


TP 


33 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 


<*->\ 




TPM (RDC) Control Unit 

The TPM control unit processes the information received from the central receiving 
antenna and compares to the previously learned tire pressure data. When the tire 
pressure deviates from the specified values, the TPM control unit sends a fault telegram 
which is indicated in the cluster with a corresponding message in check control. 

The location of the control unit varies depending upon the vehicle application. Refer to 
the most current ETM for exact location. 



Note: The new RDC (TPM) module is notcompatible with earlierTPM systems 
made priorto March 2006. 


34 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 




Central Receiving Antenna 

The central receiving antenna is a digital antenna which operates on the 433 MHz 
frequency. The antenna is responsible for receiving the tire pressure information from the 
wheel electronics modules. This information is then sent to the TPM control module via 
the LIN interface. 

Antenna location is model dependent. The antenna is waterproof which allows external 
mounting, usually nearthe center of the vehicle. The LIN bus arrangement ensures that 
there is no RF wiring inside the vehicle. This eliminates any potential interference from 
any other systems such as CAS/EWS communication. 

The antenna contains a receiving antenna, RF receiver, a LIN bus interface and a 
microprocessorfordemodulating and decoding. 



35 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 





T rigger Transmitter M odules 

The trigger transmitter modules are located behind the inner wheel well trim. There is 
one transmitter at each wheel. The trigger is responsible for sending command signals to 
the wheel electronics modules. 

The trigger transmitter communicates with the wheel electronics in the 125 KHz range. 

In orderto communicate with the TPM (RDC) module, the trigger transmitters are 
connected to the LIN bus. 

The trigger transmitter is supplied with B + and ground. The third connection isforthe 
LIN bus. 



36 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 


Wheel T ransmitter Module 

The wheel transmitter modules are mounted in the tire and wheel assemblies. The 
module is fitted to the tire valve assembly as on past models. The module is capable of 
measuring the tire pressure and the temperature. Acceleration is also measured as a 
means of determining wheel movement for various operating modes. 

The wheel transmitter module transmits information to the central antenna in the 433 
M Hz range. However, the module receives information and commands from the trigger 
modules in the 125 KHz range. Therefore, the wheel transmitter module contains the 
necessary electronics for these two frequency ranges. 



Electronic assignment of the wheel electronic modules is not carried out until movement 
is detected. This is to avoid any signals from vehicles in close proximity. Especially 
vehicles which are equipped with similarTPM systems. 

Data is transmitted to the central receiving antenna via a transmit stage in the wheel 
transmitter module. The module at each wheel has an individual identifier (ID) which is 
also transmitted every time data is transmitted. The RF transmission takes place in the 
433 M Hz range. 

Each electronic wheel module transmits at regular intervals (approximately 30 seconds). 
Also, when there is a trigger request, the measured values are sent. In addition, the tire 
temperature is measured at regular intervals. 

When the tire pressure loss exceeds 0.2 bar, the wheel transmitter module will go into a 
"rapid-transmit mode" immediately. In this case, the wheel transmitter module measures 
and sends the information from the tire at shorter intervals. 

The measured data are sent from the wheel via a transmit stage in the electronic wheel 
module. A system with relatively few measured data transmission operations is sufficient 
fortire pressure monitoring if it additionally features an option for detecting fast pressure 
loss. The electronic module in the wheel can therefore be designed for minimum current 
consumption and can be battery operated. 


37 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 



Control Display 

On vehicle equipped with a control display, the tire status is indicated in the TPM menu. 
The tire pressure status is indicated by the color of the tires in the graphic. The colors 
are as follows: 

• Green - Tire pressure is OK and matches the learned tire pressure. 

• Yellow - There is a flat tire ora major drop in tire pressure has been detected. 

• All wheels yellow - There is a flat tire ormajortire pressure loss in several tires. 

• Gray - The system cannot detect a flat tire due to a system malfunction or the 

system is currently in reset mode. Also, any RF interference from other 
devices can cause this situation. 

The system reset is also performed using the controller. 


< TPM ► 

>s 

li 

n Rp^PtTPM? 



Yes ! 



| No 

jB ^B 



MJ 


Status: TPM active 



87.5 FM TP 

■ 

■ 



38 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 




Instrument C luster 

The TPM indicator is located in the instrument cluster. The indicator is 
yellow and alerts the driverto the CC message in the control display. 
Also, any system malfunction is indicated by a flashing yellow indicator 
followed by a continuous illumination. 

When this occurs, the tires in the control display will be shown in gray. 




sV 


lildKhtLrm ajl 

55 RTi<5hI ims i rhlt-« Inii -H"! 

-Jk VGrtoriHuHta 
__ 

r>‘ Ejr: 3 i;ellungpfAj _ it£'.« 3 t 


TV>-\ rbhruuj] 

ir« Wn j kj 


[■I s - Kcniir 


iDHES^-nltbStnlll 


A Mi r i;hv ViiiiT-- |#wilrr 


s®) -i- 


s- Clii.-ck Lijnirol ► 

jl Riiirin|jiiiiial^ ■ r.Hliij .11,1.1m, 





i,J d rp iMf 91 H 


i vsi: 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

TPM warning indicator (yellow) 

3 

CC Message 

2 

Vehicle setting menu 




39 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 






















System Operation 


The primary responsibility of the new TPM system is to monitortire pressure and warn 
the driver of impending flat tire situations. This new TPM system is referred to as the 
"trigger type" system due to the trigger transmitters installed at all four wheel well areas. 

This system differs from the past "direct" systems in a few areas. There is only one 
centrally located digital receiving antenna. This antenna receives input from all 4 of the 
wheel electronics modules (5 if the vehicle has a full size spare) located in each tire and 
wheel assembly. The central digital receiving antenna is connected to the TPM control 
unit via the LIN bus. 


The wheel electronics modules will transmit information when prompted by signals from 
the triggertransmitters. The triggertransmitters communicate to the wheel electronics 
overthe 125 KHz frequency. 

In contrast to the past wheel electronics module, the new design has the capability of 
bi-directional communication. In other words, the wheel electronics not only transmit 
information but receive information and commands from the triggertransmitter modules. 


TPM Control 
Module 


UN-Gu-s 



LlN-Ekifi 


I 



125 kHz 

TrtgcjB - Tran^Ertiifter 
sends command k> 
Whee Electronics 
MccMe co 

Inkmiattcin. 


■ 



Digital 

Antenna 


Wheel 

Electronics 

Module 


WlsttH EluuLrunks 
MotfUlprcaponcis by 
yfr uJintj t&l&aram li' 
D\$M Antenna which 
inductee tne til-iCiro'ir 
ID. pressure temp 
inform aUm; 


Note: The wheel electronics from the previous system will not work on the 
new system. 


40 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 

















Wheel Management 

One of the important functions of the TPM system is the ability to manage wheel 
locations and properly report the correct wheel location. When the vehicle is NOT in 
motion, the system has the capability to determine where the wheel electronics are 
located on the vehicle. Each one of the wheel electronics module has it's own unique 
electronic ID number which is sent to the central receiving antenna. 

When an electronic wheel module receives at least 2 telegrams in response to a trigger 
signal, this electronic wheel module is marked as the system wheel. 

The wheel position assignment of an wheel electronics module is also based on the 
response to the trigger signal. Once the assignment has been determined, the positions 
are stored in an non-volatile memory (NVRAM). 

Based on the information of the acceleration sensor in the electronic wheel module, a 
distinction is made between the spare wheel and the remaining road wheels in the road 
wheel detection module forthe purpose of assisting wheel position assignment. 

In orderto avoid any signal conflictfrom adjacent vehicles (with similarTPM systems), the 
"learning" procedure is performed only while the vehicle is driving. 

The wheel management function uses a "confirmation phase” to establish whetherthe 
previous wheel assignment order is still correct or whether any new wheels have been 
installed or rotated for service. The confirmation phase is necessary so that the system 
can automatically detect changes in the mounted wheel order. 

The check takes place during vehicle operation (while driving), in orderto rule out any 
potential signal interference from adjacent vehicles. 


41 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 



Control Display Screens 

OneTire with Reduced Pressure 

The yellow indicator lamp in the instrument cluster is switched on permanently and an 
audible indication (gong) is additionally sounded as soon as a tire undershoots one of 
the previously specified warning limits. If the vehicle is equipped with the corresponding 
option, the test "Low Tire" is additionally shown together with the position in the cluster. 
If the vehicle is equipped with an control display (M M |), the affected tire is indicated in 
yellow. The unaffected wheels retain their green color. 

The "LowTire" status means thatdriving safety is no longer ensured.The driver is 
requested to stop and check the condition of the tire. It is the responsibility of the driver 
to decide whether he can continue the journey at low speed to the next repair workshop 
or whether an on-site repair is necessary. 


^ TPM ► 



42 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 




Several tires with Reduced Pressure 

The yellow indicator lamp in the cluster is immediately switched on permanently and an 
audible indication (gong) additionally sounds as soon as several tires undershoot the 
previously specified warning limits. If the vehicle is equipped with the corresponding 
option the text "LowTire" is additionally indicated without the position in the instrument 
cluster. All wheels are now shown in yellow in the M MI. 

If a warning is already in effect, on the occurrence of the second warning event, a posi¬ 
tion-specific warning is replaced by the nonspecific warning. Each tire failure event is 
signalled audibly. 



TPM ► 


Reset 



Status: Tire low! 

87,5 FM 


TP 



i 



43 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 






Workshop Hints 

System Reset (Initialization) 

The TPM system should be reset whenever any changes are made to the tire and wheel 
assemblies. For example, if a tire is replaced or if the tires are rotated for service. Also, 
the system should be reset whenever any repairs are made to the TPM system. 

The driver of the vehicle is solely responsible for maintaining the correct tire pressure 
when in use. As per BMW recommendations, the tire pressure should be checked 2 
times per month. 

Before system reset (initialization), the technician (or driver) should set the tire pressure 
to the specified pressure (as dictated by the tire pressure placard in the b-pillar). These 
pressures are a cold specification and should be set as such. 

Depending on the vehicle, the system reset can be carried out via a button or via the 
controller (on vehicles with a control display i.e 5, 6 and 7 series). 



Once the reset mode is initiated, the vehicle must be driven in order to complete the 
process. This is to ensure that there is no RF interference or erroneous signals from 
other vehicles which use similarTPM system components. 

During this period, the control display will show the message "Status: Resetting TPM". 
The tires on the control display will be gray in color until the process in complete. This 
should take only a few minutes. 

When the reset is complete, the yellow TPM indicator will go out. The tire pressure and 
temperature values are stored in conjunction with the ID of the wheel electronics. 
Therefore, the wheel position is stored in the TPM control unit. 


44 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 







In orderforthe reset procedure to be completed, the tires must be at the minimum 
allowable pressure which is approximately 1.4 bar (20 psi) to 1.6 bar (23 psi). If the tire 
pressure is too low, the system will not complete the reset procedure. When complete, 
the control display will switch to "Status"TPM active" and the tires will switch to green. 


< V® TPM ► t 

1 Reset 


■■■■■ 



-_ m 


( H 

ll 1 


V V 


Status: TPM active 


87.5 FM 

TP 

■ 

■ 


Note: New target pressures are adopted solely byway of Initialization. If a 
wheel is exchanged and the system is not re-initialized, the newly 
mounted wheels will be "taught-in" and monitored to the previous 
target pressures. 


45 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 




Run FlatTireTechnology 


Run FlatTire (RFT) technology has been in development by the tire industry for many 
years. An RFT tire allows the driverto continue safely in the event of a tire puncture or 
complete loss ortire pressure. The sidewalls on an RFT tire a specially reinforced to 
support the vehicle with zero air pressure. 

The RFT tire design maximizes safety and allows the driverto maintain vehicle control in 
the event of sudden or slow air pressure loss. This also eliminates the need forthe dri¬ 
verto changes tires in unsafe situations. Therefore, the spare tire and jacking equipment 
can be deleted from some vehicle. 

The first U.S. model BMW to be equipped with RFT technology was the E52 (Z8). 

The Z4, which has standard RFT, takes advantage of the reduced space requirement. 
Many current model BMW vehicles have standard RFT orthey are available as an option. 

RFT Operation 

If a slow or sudden pressure loss occurs in a RFT, mobility is maintained due to the 
additional high temperature rubber reinforcements that strengthen the side wall. 

These reinforcements prevent side wall damage when the tire is deflated and also pro¬ 
vide support during extreme loads. In addition, the special wheel forthe RFT tires 
"grips" the tire to maintain sufficient steering, braking and accelerating power. 

RFT Design 

In the illustration to the right shows a comparison 
between a standard tire and one equipped with RFT self 
supporting technology. 

Both tires have zero pressure. The non-RFT design (1) 
shows that the sidewalls will be completely collapsed 
providing no support. 

The RFT design (2), shows that the side walls will main¬ 
tain limited support for the vehicle to allow the driverto 
get to a safe area fora tire replacement or repair. 

Tire Manufacturer Information 

All "Runflat" tires, regardless of brand must carry a specif¬ 
ic designation to indicate that the tire is a "Runflat" system 
component. Therefore, the tires will have an "RSC" icon 
on the sidewall. 

The chart on the opposing page is a breakdown of the 
various internal designations from the individual tire 
manufacturers: 



46 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 








Tire Manufacturer 

Abbreviation/Acronym 

Definition 

Bridgestone 

RFT 

Run Flat Tire 

Continental 

SSR 

Self Supporting Runflat 

Dunlop 

DSST 

Dunlop Self Supporting Technology 

Goodyear 

EMT 

Extended MobilityTechnology 

M ichelin 

ZP 

Zero Pressure 

Pirelli 

PTM 

Pirelli Total Mobility 


Note: Due to the characteristics of the self-supporting tire design, a tire which 
is underinflated may not appear to be low on air pressure. Therefore, 
always verify actual air pressure with a tire gauge. Do not assume that 
the tire is properly inflated. Check the tire inflation placard in the driver's 
side doorjamb area for correct inflation pressures. 


Wheel Construction 

The wheel design must compatible with the RFT 
system. A self-supporting tire must be capable of 
gripping the rim to keep the tire beads intact. The 
wheels used must be of the "double-hump” design. 

The "double-hump” design features 2 raised areas 
on the rim to help retain the tire bead. 

These are referred to as EH2 wheels as opposed to 
the previous "H2” wheels. Standard H2 wheels will 
accept RFT designed tires but may not retain the tire 
properly in the event of a failure. This would render 
the safety features ofthe RFT system useless. 

Note: When the Runflattire is at zero pressure. 
The vehicle can be driven up to 100 
miles at a maximum speed of 50 miles 
per hour. Always referto the vehicle 
Owner's Manual for specific guidelines. 



"double-hump" 


"EH2" Wheel 


47 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 



















Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What is the difference between "direct" and "indirect" tire pressure monitoring 
systems? 


2. In accordance with BMW guidelines, how often should the tires' pressure be 
checked? 


3. Where can the correct tire pressure specifications be found? 


4. How should the tire pressure be checked? Hot or Cold (Why?) 


5. On the earlyTPM (RDC) system, is it important for the RDC control module, 
wheel electronics and antennae to be the same frequency? (Why?) 


48 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 


























Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


6. What is the difference between the wheel electronics modules from the early 
TPM system (up to 2003) and the new TPM system (from 3/06)? Are the 
wheel electronics interchangeable between the two systems? (Why?) 


7. What is meant by an "EH2" rim? 


8. When is necessary to reset a TPM or FTM system? 


9. On the new TPM system (from 3/06), how is the spare tire detected and 
distinguished from the installed wheels? 


10. On the new TPM system (from 3/06), what is indicated in the CIDwhen the 
wheels are displayed in gray? 


49 

Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems 

























