Table of Contents 

Features and Technology 

Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

Design .6 

The Roundel.6 

Quad Headlights .6 

Optimum Weight Distribution .6 

Kidney Grills .7 

Hofmeister Kink .7 

Aerodynamic Design.7 

Drivetrain.8 

VANOS.8 

Valvetronic.9 

Direct Injection.10 

Chassis and Suspension .12 

AFS/AL .12 

ARS .13 

Tire Pressure Monitoring .14 

System Identification and Terminology .14 

xDrive .16 

Dynamic Stability Control.17 

Features:.17 

Traction Control.17 

Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) .17 

Electronic Brake Proportioning .18 

Antilock Braking (ABS) .18 

Dynamic Brake Control .18 

Hill Descent Control (AWD models only).19 

Brake Fade Compensation.19 

Brake Standby.19 

Brake Drying .19 

Comfort Stop.19 

Start-off Assistant.19 

M Differential .20 


Initial Print Date: 07/06 Revision Date: 06/08 


































Subject Page 

Body Electronics.22 

Bluetooth.22 

iDrive Concept.23 

Digital Radio Sources.24 

HD Radio .24 

Sirius Satellite Radio .25 

BMW ASSIST .26 

Safety Plan.26 

Convenience Plan.28 

Optional Services.28 












Features and Technology 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Familiarize yourself with some of the technology in BMW vehicles 


• Be able to set the correct time, date and radio stations on all BMW models 


• Familiarize yourself with the different sound and navigation systems on all 
BMW models 


3 

Features and Technology 












Introduction 


BMW defined the sports luxury vehicle division. Over the years other automobile manu¬ 
facturers have tried to obtain some of the market share originally held exclusively by the 
BMW. 

Other manufacturers have copied our designs, handling characteristics, and even our 
marketing styles, but BMW continues to be the benchmark for setting standards. For 
BMW to maintain its leadership position in this category it reguires innovative design 
concepts and technology. 



BMW Group Research and Innovation Center (FIZ) 


4 

Features and Technology 




BMW World and BMW Group Corporate Headquarters 



© BMW AG 


This section is intended for new center personnel as an overview of some of the technol¬ 
ogy behind BMW vehicles. Specific information on these systems discussed in this sec¬ 
tion can be found in TIS under Technical Training Information. 

The topics are divided into three major sections which are: 

• Drivetrain 

• Chassis/Suspension 

• Body Electronics 


5 

Features and Technology 








Design 


The Roundel 


The most recognizable of all BMW design ele¬ 
ments is its distinct logo, known as the Roundel. 
Seen from a distance, even as a blur, the blue-and- 
white propellers of the Roundel signal that you're in 
the presence of greatness. With its colors deriving 
from the Bavarian flag and the propeller motif sym¬ 
bolizing BMW's origins as a manufacturer of aircraft 
engines, the Roundel expresses the pride and 
sense of tradition that go into the design of every 
BMW. 




Quad Headlights 

The four round headlights or "eyes" of the 
BMW represent one of the most recent 
BMW design elements. They first emerged 
with the six-cylinder 320i and 323i as a rank 
marker designed to distinguish them from 
"lesser" 3s that sported only two headlights. 

By the late 1980s, the four-eyed look had 
become the norm for most BMWs and 
remains a distinctive marker today. 

Optimum Weight Distribution 

All current BMWs have their front wheels relatively far forward and their engine as far 
back as practical. BMW even positions the battery toward the rear of the vehicle to dis¬ 
tribute its relatively heavyweight. The resulting weight distribution comes within 3.3% of 
the ideal 50/50 balance, far closer than most cars deliver. BMW fore-aft weight balance 
aids handling during braking, cornering and accelerating. Optimum balance for optimum 
performance. 



6 

Features and Technology 








Kidney Grills 


One of the most visible of BMW design 
elements, often seen rising up in rear-view 
mirrors, is the traditional "kidney" grille. 
Introduced at the 1933 Geneva auto show, 
the distinct shape of the kidneys first 
emerged from an effort to reduce aerody¬ 
namic drag. Overtime, they have evolved 
from tall ovals into their now-emblematic 
low, wide kidney-like shape. They continue 
to symbolize the timelessness of BMW 
design and engineering. 

Hofmeister Kink 



Certainly the BMW element with the most 
unusual name is the Hofmeister kink, the 
distinctive bend in every BMW's C-pillars 
(the metal roof supports that separate the 
rear side windows from the back glass). 
Although it appeared as early as the 1930s, 
the kink formally debuted with the "New 
Class" 1500 Sedan at the 1961 Frankfurt 
auto show and was named after Wilhelm 
Hofmeister, then director of design for BMW. 
Aside from its pleasing visual effect, the 
Hofmeister kink subtly highlights a BMW 
trademark: rear-wheel drive. 



Aerodynamic Design 

The mantra of BMW design is "form follows function." For example, the integrated front 
spoiler on all BMWs reduces the amount of air flowing under the car, hence minimizing 
front-end lift at speed. The very shape of BMWs is a result of precise aerodynamic engi¬ 
neering. Each closed-body BMW has been designed for a low drag coefficient. With air 
flowing smoothly over the body, the engine has less drag to overcome. BMWs are also 
designed to minimize aerodynamic lift. Thus the legendary cornering and road-hugging 
agility of The Ultimate Driving Machine®. 


7 

Features and Technology 













Drivetrain 


VANOS 

VANOS is a combined hydraulic and 
mechanical camshaft control device man¬ 
aged by the vehicle's engine manage¬ 
ment system. VANOS was introduced for 
the US in 1992 on the 5 Series eguipped 
with a M50B25 engine. 

VANOS significantly enhances emission 
management, increases output and 
torque, and offers better idling quality and 
fuel economy. 

The VANOS system is based on a mech¬ 
anism that can modify the position of the 
intake camshaft relative to the crankshaft. 

Double-VANOS adjusts both the intake 
and exhaust camshafts. 

VANOS operates on the intake camshaft in accordance with engine speed and accelera¬ 
tor pedal position. 

• At the lower end of the engine-speed scale, the intake valves are opened later, 
which improves idling quality and smoothness. 

• At moderate engine speeds, the intake valves open much earlier, which boosts 
torque and permits exhaust gas re-circulation inside the combustion chambers, 
reducing fuel consumption and exhaust emissions. 

• At high engine speeds, intake valve opening is once again delayed, so that full 
power can be developed. 

An advantage of double-VANOS is that the system controls the flow of hot exhaust 
gases into the intake manifold (EGR valve function). This is referred to as "internal" 
exhaust gas re-circulation, allowing small amount of exhaust gas to be recycled. 



8 

Features and Technology 






Valvetronic 

Valvetronic was introduced in the US on 
the MY2002 E65 7 Series vehicle 
equipped with the N62B44 engine. 

Valvetronic engines use a combination of 
hardware and software to eliminate the 
need for a conventional throttle mecha¬ 
nism. A Valvetronic engine replaces the 
function of the throttle butterfly by using 
the amount of valve lift to regulate the 
amount of air entering the combustion 
chamber. 

The valves are of a conventional design, 
but the intake camshaft uses a secondary 
eccentric shaft with a series of levers and 
roller rockers, activated by a motor. The motor moves the eccentric shaft and varies the 
position of the pivot point of the rocker thus changing the amount of valve lift achieved. 

The Valvetronic feature requires its own computer (separate unit) apart from the engine 
management system but is networked to the engine control module by the use of a high 
speed CAN bus. 

Benefits: 

• Valvetronic reduces maintenance costs, improves cold start behavior, lowers exhaust 
emissions, and provides a smoother running engine. Valvetronic does not need spe¬ 
cific fuel grades or fuel qualities because of its fine atomization of fuel. 

• Because Valvetronic allows the engine to breathe more freely, fuel consumption is 
reduced by 10%. The fuel savings are greatest at lower engine revolutions and allow 
for decreased engine emissions. 

At light throttle, the throttle butterfly partially or even nearly closes. The pistons are 
still running, taking air from the partially closed intake manifold. The intake manifold 
between the throttle and the combustion chamber has a partial vacuum, resisting 
the sucking and pumping action of the pistons, wasting energy. Automotive engi¬ 
neers refer to this phenomenon as "pumping loss". The slower the engine runs, the 
more the throttle butterfly closes, and the more energy is lost. 

Valvetronic minimizes pumping loss by reducing valve lift and the amount of air 
entering the combustion chambers. 

• In Valvetronic engines coolant flows across the head, resulting in a temperature 
reduction of 60%. The water pump size is cut in half, reducing power consumption 
by 60%. 



9 

Features and Technology 


Direct Injection 

The term “direct injection” refers to a fuel injection 
system which injects fuel directly into the combus¬ 
tion chamber rather than into the intake manifold. 

This technology has been around since the 
1930’s, but has not been in widespread use until 
the late 20th century. The first passenger car to run 
on direct engine was a car called the “Gutbrod” in 
1952. 

The first application of this technology on a BMW 
was in 2003 on the 760Li. The N73 V-12 engine 
utilizes the latest direct injection technology com¬ 
bined with Valvetronic. 

For the 2007 model year, BMW has introduced a 6-cylinder engine with direct fuel 
injection. The N54, which is turbocharged, uses the second generation of direct 
injection (Dl 2), which is referred to as High Precision Injection (HPI). 

As the name suggest, the direct injection (Dl) system use a fuel injector which sprays fuel 
directly into the combustion chamber. The fuel injection pressure (N73) is from 80 to 120 
bar. The A/F mixture in a Dl engine is formed inside of the combustion chamber. 

In comparison, a manifold injection system sprays fuel into the intake manifold or into the 
intake port near the intake valve. In this case, the A/F mixture is formed outside of the 
combustion chamber. The injection pressure on most manifold injection systems is 
between 3 and 5 bar. 

The Dl system allows for increased engine efficiency and has several distinct advantages 
over manifold injection systems: 

• The fuel is evaporated and atomized in the combustion chamber, which provides a 
“cooling effect” on combustion. A cooler combustion chamber allows an increase in 
air density, which allows for more available oxygen. In addition, cooler combustion 
allows for an increase in compression ratio which eguates to improved efficiency and 
engine power. 

• By injecting the fuel directly into the combustion chamber, there is less possibility for 
fuel to condense or accumulate on the manifold walls or the back of the intake valve. 
This results in less fuel needed to achieve the desired A/F ratio. 

• The increased injection pressure causes the fuel droplet size to be reduced. This 
allows for improved atomization and therefore improved mixture formation. 



10 

Features and Technology 








11 

Features and Technology 










































Chassis and Suspension 


AFS/AL 

Active Front Steering (AFS) or Active Steering 
(AL) was introduced on the E60 5 Series 
models as part of the Sport Package. 

AFS varies the steering transmission ratio 
electronically in direct relation to the style 
and speed of driving and road conditions. 

AFS is different than variable assist power 
steering, which only varies the amount of 
effort, not the actual steering ratio. 

Benefits: 

• At low and medium speeds, the steering becomes more direct. This reguires less 
turns of the steering wheel and increases the car’s agility in city traffic or when park¬ 
ing. 

• At high speeds the steering becomes less direct offering improved directional sta¬ 
bility. When cornering at high speeds, or when undertaking sudden movements, the 
steering wheel will require more input to make the wheels turn. 

• AFS works in conjunction with Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) by monitoring the 
yaw rate and changing the steering angle accordingly. This reduces the number of 
DSC interventions, providing more control to the driver and increased comfort for 
the passengers. 

AFS works by inserting an electric motor with a worm gear drive that drives a planetary 
gear set located between the steering rack and the steering column. 

When the steering wheel angle senor detects driver input, the AFS control unit registers 
the data and then powers an electric motor to increase mechanical advantage in terms 
of rotation amount and turns the front wheels at more or less turns that the driver input. 
At lower speeds the system dials in a more direct steering ratio allowing a small move¬ 
ment of the steering wheel to result in a greater movement at the road wheels. 



12 

Features and Technology 




ARS 


Active Roll Stabilization winds up the stabilizer bars in the front and rear suspension to 
resist body lean while cornering. Because the system is actively controlling only when 
needed, the spring rates and stabilizer bar stiffness are reduced. This results in a 
smoother ride. 



This system consists of: 

• Active anti-roll bars, replacing conventional mechanical (“passive”) front and rear 
bars. Each bar consists of left and right portions, twisted in opposite directions by 
a hydraulic motor between them. 

• Valve/sensor block containing various system valves and sensors. 

• Lateral-acceleration sensor to detect how hard the vehicle is cornering. 

• Electronic control unit (ECU) regulating the entire system. 

• Tandem oil pump which, via its two sections, provides hydraulic pressure for ARS 
and the power steering. 

Whenever the vehicle enters a corner or begins an avoidance maneuver, “lateral accelera¬ 
tion” is generated. This is read by the sensor, which transmits a signal to the control unit 
which processes this signal and transmits it to the valve/sensor block. The valve block 
determines the hydraulic pressure applied to the active anti-roll bars to control body roll. 

The key word here is “active.” 

Active Roll Stabilization: 

1. Generates resistance to body roll by twisting the front and rear anti-roll bars. 

2. Stronger and more highly “tailored” than can conventional anti-roll bars. 

3. Does not offer resistance to bumps in as do conventional anti-roll bars. 

4. Increases the vehicle’s maximum cornering capability. 

5. Improves steering response, particularly in the range of cornering where body roll is 
most tightly controlled. 


13 

Features and Technology 
















Tire Pressure Monitoring 


System Identification and Terminology 

In order to accurately diagnose TPM systems, the system must be properly identified. 
These systems have had numerous acronyms which are used to describe the various 
systems. For the purposes of this training module, the systems will be broken down into 
two basic configurations. 

These are as follows: 

• Systems which monitor wheel speed - These “Indirect ” systems will be 
referred to as Flat Tire Monitoring systems or FTM. FTM systems take advantage of 
components already installed in the vehicle. The wheel speed sensors, which are 
already an input to the DSC control unit, are used to monitor wheel speed. When a 
tire starts to deflate, the overall diameter changes. This affects the rotational speed, 
which is picked up by the DSC module. The DSC module contains software for the 
purpose of calculating the speed changes and reporting the pressure loss to the dri¬ 
ver via an illuminated indicator or symbol. The only additional components which are 
installed is the switch for system initialization. Early generation systems used a mod¬ 
ule which received wheel speed input from the DSC module. 

• Systems which monitor actual tire pressure - These “Direct” systems will be 
referred to as Tire Pressure Monitoring Systems or TPM systems. TPM systems 
use wireless sensors which are part of the tire valve stem. These sensors monitor 
actual tire pressure and send this information to a module via multiple antennae. 
These systems are preferred due to the fact that the actual tire pressure is moni¬ 
tored rather than by variations in tire rotational speeds. 

There is a simple way to identify the difference between the two systems. On systems 
which monitor actual tire pressure, the tire valve stem is threaded and has a “hex head” 
on the valve stem. The systems which monitor wheel speed have conventional rubber 


valve stems. 


TPM Control 
Module 



14 


Features and Technology 










In 2000, there was much media attention surrounding tire safety issues. The leading tire 
manufacturers were involved with many law suits regarding catastrophic tire failures. 
These well publicized incidents involved injury and fatalities. 

In response to these issues, the U.S. Congress enacted legislation entitled the 
“Transportation Recall Enhancement, Accountability and Documentation (TREAD) Act in 
November of 2000. 

The TREAD Act encompasses many aspects of tire industry issues. The act includes 
items such as tire labeling requirements, tire testing standards, information on tire safety 
related recalls etc. There are also provisions for issues on child safety restraints. 

However, the focus of this training module is to train technicians about Tire Pressure 
Monitoring Systems (TPMS). TPM systems are also one of the primary components of 
the TREAD Act. TPM systems allow early detection of tire pressure loss which is not 
usually detected by the driver until vehicle handling and safety is affected. 

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) is the government agency 
responsible for the creation and enforcement of the mandates of the TREAD Act. Initially, 
NHTSA approved the installation of “Indirect” TPM systems. 

Indirect TPM systems monitor tire pressure “indirectly” by monitoring the rotational speed 
of the tire via the wheel speed sensors. The ABS/DSC system can then detect pressure 
loss by comparing wheel speed information between all 4 tires. Any loss in tire pressure 
would result in a change in tire diameter and therefore a change in rotational speed. 

The guidelines of the TREAD Act found that “Indirect” TPM systems are ineffective in 
detecting tire pressure loss until the tire was under-inflated to an unsafe level. Therefore, 
NHTSA mandated that auto manufacturers install “Direct” TPM systems on all vehicles. 

Direct TPM systems monitor tire pressure directly by using pressure sensors at each 
wheel which report tire pressure and temperature information to relevant vehicle systems. 
Tire pressure loss is then reported to the driver via an illuminated warning symbol. Direct 
TPM systems also offer the capability of monitoring tire pressure when the vehicle is at a 
standstill. Indirect systems must be driven in order to collect sufficient data to detect tire 
pressure loss. 

As per NHTSA guidelines, passenger cars and light trucks must have the “Direct” TPM 
systems installed via a specific timeline from 2005. By 2007, all auto manufacturers must 
be in 100% compliance. 

Aside from the obvious safety benefits, Direct TPM systems will also assist the driver by 
maintaining fuel economy and extending tire life. 

This training module will help the technician to diagnose and repair both “Indirect” and 
“Direct” TPM systems. The first step in the diagnosis the these systems is identification. 
The following text shows some tips on identifying these systems. 


15 

Features and Technology 


xDrive 

BMW’s “intelligent” all-wheel drive system was 
introduced on the E83 and E53 9/2003 produc¬ 
tion. It is now available on current all wheel drive 
versions of BMW models. 

BMW caters to the needs of customers that 
desire vehicles with exceptional handling and per¬ 
formance while driving in snow/winter conditions 
by offering xDrive all-wheel drive. 



Operation of xDrive: 


• Driving torgue is always transmitted to the rear wheels. At least 50% of the torque is 
always sent to the rear wheels. 

• The portion of torque that is transmitted to the front wheels is achieved by a multi¬ 
disc clutch. This clutch assembly can be fully open, fully engaged or at any level of 
partial engagement in between. At full engagement the torque split to the front and 
rear wheels is exactly half. 

• Engagement pressure on the multi-disc clutch is directed by an electronic control 
system in response to actual road and driving conditions. 

The purpose of xDrive is not just to optimize traction; it can also enhance both handing 
performance and stability on dry as well as slippery road surfaces. 

Th xDrive system is incorporated in to the DSC logic. The DSC system utilizes the xDrive 
transfer case to compensate within physical limits for excessive oversteer and understeer. 
xDrive adjusts the front/rear torque distribution to avoid these tendencies. 


If an oversteer condition is sensed, the multi-disc clutch engages, sending the 
maximum possible torque to the front wheels; thus making the vehicle take on 
front wheel drive characteristics. 


If an understeer condition is detected, the clutch disengages completely, sending 0% 
of the driving torque to the front wheels. 

Under normal operating conditions, the vehicle torque split is 60% rear and 40% front 
with few exceptions. 


16 

Features and Technology 


Dynamic Stability Control 

DSC encompasses three functions that aid in 
traction control: 

• Anti-Lock Braking System (ABS) 

• Automatic Stability Control (ASC) 

• Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

Features: 

Traction Control 

Controls engine power and the brakes to limit wheelspin and thereby improve the driver’s 
control of the vehicle under conditions where a wheel or wheels might spin, primarily on 
slippery roads. The DSC system continually processes data from the wheel-speed sen¬ 
sors. Anytime a drive wheel begins to lose traction (rear wheels on most models, any 
wheel on AWD models), the system senses this and acts on the engine’s throttle(s) or 
Valvetronic and ignition timing to reduce engine torgue. It also acts on each brake individ¬ 
ually as necessary to help bring wheelspin under control, enhancing driving stability on 
slippery surfaces (or even on dry roads under extreme acceleration or cornering). 

BMW’s traction control is an all-speed system. Engine intervention is possible at any 
speed. 

Below 25 mph, the brakes are also applied selectively and separately as necessary to 
optimize traction very guickly. Between 25 and 50 mph, the rear brakes are applied as a 
pair. Above 50 mph, traction control operates entirely through engine intervention. 

Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) 

It has always been possible to de-activate Dynamic Stability Control functions (except 
antilock braking) via a console switch. In all RWD models except M models, a capability 
called Dynamic Traction Control is also incorporated. 

DTC improves utilization of available road traction under specific conditions: 

• on sand, gravel, deep snow or packed snow. 

• climbing hills with deep or packed snow. 

• when there is deep snow on only one side of the road. 

• when driving with tire chains. 

The driver may either fully de-activate DSC (except ABS) or activate the DTC mode. In 
the 3, 5, 6 and Z4 Series, DTC is selected via a brief push on the DSC console switch; 
full de-activation of DSC reguires a longer (2 sec.) push on the switch. In the 7 Series, 
DTC selection is via iDrive. Even with DSC de-activated, ABS always remains functional. 



17 

Features and Technology 


Electronic Brake Proportioning 

Anytime the brakes are applied, a vehicle’s front end becomes more heavily loaded; the 
rear “gets lighter.” To deal with this, front to-rear proportioning of braking force is varied 
according to braking severity. 

Via the wheel-speed sensors, EBP actually measures the slip at each wheel when the 
brakes are applied 7, and regulates pressure accordingly to the front and rear brakes. 
Braking force is thus apportioned optimally at all times, making best use of available brak¬ 
ing traction at the tires and helping distribute brake and tire wear more evenly. 

Antilock Braking (ABS) 

During braking, anytime a wheel begins to lock up (slide), DSC releases and re-applies 
(cycles) the individual wheel brakes to prevent this from occurring. As only a rotating tire 
can deliver effective braking power to the road, the antilock function helps the driver 
achieve quick, controllable deceleration or stopping when necessary, helping avoid 
skidding. 

Dynamic Brake Control 

Reinforces the driver’s brake-pedal effort in emergency braking. The system recognizes 
when the driver has made a “panic” brake application, and increases the level of assis¬ 
tance. By forcing the ABS to function optimally, this helps ensure that the most effective 
braking is achieved. 

Cornering stabilization. For this most sophisticated DSC function, the following 
inputs are employed: 

• The wheel-speed sensors 

• A steering-angle sensor (measures turning of the steering) 

• A lateral-acceleration sensor (measures how “hard” the vehicle is cornering) 

• A yaw sensor (measures the vehicle’s rotation around its vertical axis) 

• A brake-pressure sensor (informs the system of any application of the brakes 
by the driver) 

Together, these sensors precisely measure the vehicle’s cornering motion. With their 
inputs feeding into the powerful DSC microprocessor, the system detects any deviation 
from the normal cornering path (abnormal understeer or oversteer) and gently regulates 
the vehicle into a controlled situation. 


18 

Features and Technology 


The following key features appear in more than one BMW Series: 

BMW features applies individual wheel brakes to help the driver keep the vehicle on the 
intended path. Thus in these critical situations, when the driver may be attempting a 
maneuver beyond the normal control range of the vehicle, he or she is more likely to 
retain control and avoid an accident. 

Although it obviously affects the vehicle’s handling, this function should be considered 
primarily a safety feature; in other words, it should not be interpreted as a feature that 
allows faster cornering or more abrupt maneuvers. 

Hill Descent Control (AWD models only) 

Helps the driver maintain speed and stability on steep downhill runs. The driver needs 
only to press a dedicated button on the console; HDC takes over, gently applying the 
brakes as necessary to keep the speed to a brisk walking pace. 

Brake Fade Compensation 

“Brake fade” is the loss of effectiveness when brakes heat up under hard use. When this 
occurs, a given degree of deceleration reguires more pressure on the brake pedal. As 
brake temperature rises, Brake Fade Compensation automatically increases the hydraulic 
pressure in the brake system relative to pedal application, so the driver does not have to 
press harder on the pedal. 

Brake Standby 

When the driver lifts off the accelerator pedal abruptly, DSC recognizes that sharp braking 
may be about to occur and applies just enough pressure in the brake system to snug up 
the pads against the rotors. Thus when the driver’s foot reaches the brake pedal, the 
short “time lag” normally resulting from bringing the pad to the rotor is eliminated. Actual 
braking sets in more guickly; the reduced stopping or deceleration distance could reduce 
the likelihood of an accident. 

Brake Drying 

Acting on input from the windshield wipers’ rain sensor, the pads are periodically brought 
up to the rotors - just enough to eliminate any film of water between pads and rotors, but 
not enough to cause any brake application. 

Comfort Stop 

Especially with automatic transmissions, unless the driver consciously eases off on the 
brake pedal, a jerk can occur as the vehicle comes to a stop. Comfort Stop automatically 
eases off, making for smoother stops. 

Start-off Assistant 

Similar in part to the 7 Series’ Automatic Hold function, this function keeps the vehicle 
from rolling backward when stopped facing uphill. The driver can then start up without 
doing a ballet with the clutch, brake and accelerator (manual transmission) or doesn’t 
have to hold the accelerator or brakes while stopped on a hill (automatic transmission). 


19 

Features and Technology 


M Differential 


The main distinction between a conventional limited-slip differential and the M Variable 
Differential Lock is that where the former senses torque, the latter senses wheel speed 
(rpm). Under dry to not-quite-dry road conditions, the 25% limited-slip has traditionally 
enhanced the handling of sporty rear-wheel-drive BMW's; yet under slippery conditions, 
this differential type has limited ability to improve traction. In particular, this limitation 
applies when one wheel is on slippery, the other on firmer ground; it cannot transmit more 
torque than the slippery side permits. 

On all current BMW models, electronic traction control (a function of Dynamic Stability 
Control, nearby) addresses this issue, although not in a manner conducive to sporty, M 
Car-style driving. 

The M Variable Differential Lock specifically addresses low- and split-traction situations in 
a way that reinforces sporty handling, imparting to the M3 a slippery road ability no high- 
performance, rear-wheel-drive sports car ever before had. 

Anytime a speed difference develops between the two rear (driven) wheels, a shear 
pump, driven by this difference, develops pressure in the unit’s silicon viscous fluid. This 
pressure is directed to a multi-disc clutch that transfers driving torque to the wheel with 
the better road grip (“select high”). The greater the speed difference between the two 
wheels, the harder the clutch engages. As this difference in wheel speeds diminishes, the 
clutch begins to ease off. 

This mechanism accomplishes sophisticated action by entirely natural means. There is 
no external pump, no external source of lubrication or operating fluid. The very motion to 
be controlled - differences in speed between one wheel and the other - generates its 
locking action. 

Viscous fluid is so-called because it develops internal force (via an increase in viscosity) 
whenever it is sheared; this is why the relatively small difference between one wheel 
speed and the other can generate the necessary action. 


20 

Features and Technology 


21 

Features and Technology 










































Body Electronics 


Bluetooth 

Bluetooth technology uses radio frequencies, 
instead of wires, to connect various electronic 
devices to each other. This allows you to connect 
your computer, keyboard and mouse; share 
addresses between your PDA & laptop, and send 
music from your MP3 player to your wireless head¬ 
phones. This versatile feature can also wirelessly connect 
compatible mobile phones to vehicles for hands-free calling. 

With a Bluetooth mobile phone, drivers can make and answer 
calls, as well as browse and select phone book entries, just by 
using the multifunction steering wheel controls and radio keys. 

Do I need to add a special antenna or cradle for Bluetooth and what is the 
range for staying connected between the phone and the vehicle? 

New BMW's that come factory-installed with Bluetooth capability do not require a 
special cradle. The phone can be kept in your vehicle’s glove box, trunk or even in your 
pocket - anywhere within a 30-foot radius of the vehicle, depending on the power of 
your Bluetooth device, signal interference, or objects that might be between the phone 
and the vehicle’s Bluetooth antenna.. Please note that docking cradles providing phone 
security, battery charging and improved antenna connection are available for selected 
phone models. 

Certain 2003 and 2004 BMW's can be retrofitted with Bluetooth as a BMW center- 
installed accessory. This requires using a special, console cradle. For costs and more 
details, see your BMW center. 

Can I access my mobile phone Phonebook entries in the vehicle? 

After the initial pairing procedure is completed, your Phonebook contacts will 
automatically download to the vehicle’s hands-free system. Any changes you make in 
your phone’s phonebook will be automatically updated in the vehicle when the phone 
connects to the hands-free system. If more than one phone is paired to the vehicle, 
individual phonebook information will be used for each phone. For added protection, 
the contact information will only be available in the vehicle when the phone is connected 
to the hands-free system. 

How secure is the Bluetooth connection between my mobile phone 
and the vehicle? 

To protect your privacy, the BMW Bluetooth hands-free system requires a Bluetooth 
Passkey code to pair a mobile phone. This Bluetooth Passkey must be entered only 
once during the initial pairing procedure. To reduce the risk of interference or intercep¬ 
tion, Bluetooth wireless technology hops communication frequencies 1,600 times per 
second. In addition, BMW provides encryption to further protect the privacy of your calls. 



22 

Features and Technology 




iDrive Concept 



Contemporary automobiles and particularly contemporary luxury automobiles - pose an 
ever-growing challenge to their designers: how to accommodate the extensive functions 
that modern technology offers without overwhelming the driver and creating a driving 
environment cluttered with controls. 

iDrive is BMW’s solution to this challenge. 

BMW has applied the Navigation System’s 
proven concept: a color monitor with control 
menus, and a controller. 


More functions than ever are controlled in this manner, and the con 
trailer has migrated from the monitor panel to a central position 
between the front seats. This controller acts like a “fixed position 
mouse” that controls the menus located in the control display 
or central information display (vehicle dependent). The 
controller is egually accessible to the driver and front 
passenger, and is finished in satin aluminum. 

There are two different versions of the controller. 

• One controller includes force feedback: 

According to the functions it is controlling, it 
gives the user an appropriate tactile feed¬ 
back. 

• The other controller has fixed notches and 
provides no force feedback. It’s operation of 
the CD/CID is the same. 



23 

Features and Technology 











Digital Radio Sources 


H5) Radio 

Pure Digital. Clear Radio. 

BMW Group will introduce HD Radio 
Technology developed by the iBiquity Digital 
Corporation starting with the 9/2005 produc¬ 
tion 7 Series. 

iBiquity Digital is the sole developer of HD 
Radio technology. This technology is 
approved by the FCC for the US market. This 
company does not actually produce radios nor 
audio equipment. They are responsible for 
licensing this technology for use in the radio 
industry. 



The benefits to digital radio are: 


• AM will sound like present day FM 

• FM will have compact-disc-like quality 

• Improved Fidelity 

• Free programming (only cost is for IBOC receiver) 

• Supplemental Program Services (SPS) - Station ID, Title, Artist, Album, Genre, etc. 

• Improved Reception (depending on digital data received) 

• Analog to Digital (Digital to Analog) switching depending on reception quality 

• From March 2007 Multicasting is available on some models 


The HD Radio technology used in our IBOC control unit practically transparent to the 
user in terms of tuning. 


IBOC is the acronym for In-Band On-Channel. This signifies that the location for the 
digital radio signals can be found in the exact same location on the “dial” as the analog 
signals. FM101.1 in the “analog realm” is also FM101.1 in the “digital realm.” 


Initially, radio station broadcasting with iBiquity Digital’s HD Radio technology broadcasts 
two signals in the same frequency range. One signal is analog with an 8 second delay 
and the other is digital. This is known as “Hybrid Mode.” 


Eventually the radio stations will stop transmitting in “Hybrid Mode” and will go to purely 
digital. The time frame is not yet established. 


24 

Features and Technology 




Sirius Satellite Radio 

BMW offers our customers the latest in radio 
technology. The 3, 5, 6 and 7 Series can be 
factory equipped with the system; these models 
are also available with factory preparation for 
SIRIUS installation by BMW Centers. 

SIRIUS delivers 120 channels of the best in digital entertainment coast-to-coast. 65 of 
these channels are 100% commercial-free music, featuring multiple categories as widely 
varied as hip-hop and classical. 50 further channels are devoted to news, sports and 
entertainment from content partners such as NASCAR, ESPN, Fox News, NPR, CNN 
Headline News and Radio Disney. And as the official Satellite Radio Partner of the NFL, 
SIRIUS leads in live sports on satellite radio, offering the entire NFL every week and up to 
40 live NHL games per week. 

SIRIUS channels are delivered by three powerful satellites for seamless coverage any¬ 
where in the continental U.S., and optimized for superior sound resolution by proprietary 
S>PLEX technology. 

Hardware for the vehicle consists of: 

• a SIRIUS Satellite Receiver 

• a Satellite Antenna 

• a SIRIUS-compatible audio system 

Once the equipment is installed and activated, the customer simply selects the satellite 
radio mode (example: AM/FM/CD/Satellite). As with FM and AM, users will be able to 
scan and set their favorite presets. The audio display can show the channel name, chan¬ 
nel number and (in the case of music channels) artists and music title. 


SIRIUS& 

SATELLITE RADIO 

THE BEST RADIO ON RADIO 


25 

Features and Technology 


BMW ASSIST 


The BMW Assist system incorporates an integrated wireless telephone with advanced 
digital and analog service plus a Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite receiver to 
determine your vehicle's location. Combined, they enable BMW Assist to enhance the 
BMW driving experience. 

With BMW Assist, the customer will feel prepared and protected 24 hours a day, 

7 days a week in the case of situations they may find. 

The features of ASSIST can be broken down into three main categories: 

• Safety Plan (core program) 

• Convenience Services (optional; reguires Safety Plan) 

• Options 

Safety Plan 

(Standard on 2007 5, 6, & 7 Series and with option code 639) 

To make a safety service reguest simply press the “SOS” button. This transmits the vehi¬ 
cle location and information. A specialist responds via the hands-free telephone 
system to coordinate the best course of action for your situation and notify emergency 
services. 

The vehicle will attempt to call BMW Assist automatically in the event of a serious acci¬ 
dent. 

If the vehicle ever gets stolen, the BMW Assist service can help the police locate it. This 
feature may save the customer money on their insurance premium, as well as give peace 
of mind. 

Automatic Collision Notification 

The BMW Assist system transmits the vehicle’s current location and vehicle information 
to the BMW Assist Response Center automatically after an airbag deploys or a severe 
rear impact occurs. A trained response specialist will then attempt to contact the vehicle 
via the hands-free telephone system, and will notify the appropriate emergency services 
of the location and situation, even if response is not returned to the operator/specialist. 


26 

Features and Technology 


Emergency Request (SOS) 

By activating “Emergency” on the control display or pressing the “SOS” button, you 
transmit your location and vehicle information. A BMW Assist response specialist then 
speaks with you to determine the nature of your emergency and to coordinate the 
response to your specific assistance needs. The specialist can direct emergency services 
to your vehicle's location, provide you with emergency directions to the nearest hospital 
or police station, and even notify your emergency contacts about your situation. 

Enhanced Roadside Assistance 

If you experience a flat tire, run out of gas, or need any other roadside help for your vehi¬ 
cle, just press the “Wrench” or “Roadside Assistance” button to transmit your location 
and vehicle information. The BMW Assist Response Center then links you to BMW 
Roadside Assistance for the appropriate dispatch to your location, even if you don't know 
where you are. 

Stolen Vehicle Recovery 

(7 Series from 9/20055/6 Other Series from 10/04) 

If the BMW is eguipped with this capability and is ever stolen, the BMW Assist Response 
Center can be notified by calling toll free (888) 333-6118 immediately after filing the 
police report. 

The center can remotely activate the BMW Assist system to locate the vehicle and help 
the police recover it. 

Customer Relations 

For guestions, compliments or concerns, The BMW Customer Relations department can 
be reached by pressing the ASSIST button or selecting customer relations from the 
CD/CID Drive Menu. 

7 Series drivers can also easily contact their preferred BMW center. 

TeleService 

(5,6, & 7 Series from 2004, 3 Series from 2007) 

The vehicle's service condition (condition based service) is transmitted automatically or 
the customer’s reguest to the preferred BMW center. The customer’s service advisor will 
then call the subscriber to set up a convenient appointment. 


27 

Features and Technology 


Convenience Plan 

For an addition yearly rate, the BMW ASSIST Safety Plan can be Upgraded to include the 
Convenience Plan. 

A personal concierge is available to assist with business or personal arrangements such 
as making hotel or dinner reservations, buying event tickets, or even finding that perfect 
gift. 

Concierge 

This feature takes advantage of BMW Assist Concierge and utilize BMW's expert 
resources for travel arrangements, service referrals, shopping, entertainment, business 
outings and much more. BMW Assist Concierge addresses needs in many areas in life, 
not just those related to the driving experience. 

The concierge service is part of the Convenience Plan and can be used at anytime, from 
anywhere by dialing toll-free (800) 233-8896 or via http://concierge.bmwassist.com. 

Directions 

Pressing the “SOS” button allows the customer to contact a navigation specialist for step 
by step directions to a desired street address or point of interest. 

If the vehicle is eguipped with the iDrive based navigation system, the address and 
number of the location desired can be automatically downloaded to the vehicle. 

Critical Calling 

This feature allows the customer to place up to 4 operator assisted calls a year (five 
minute maximum allowable time). This feature is excellent in case the customer forgets 
their mobile phone but needs to make an urgent call to a family member or colleague. 

Traffic 

Up to-date traffic reports along the route can be obtained as well as the weather forecast 
locally or at the destination. 

Weather 

The BMW ASSIST operator can also help with the weather forecast of your desired desti¬ 
nation. 

Optional Services 

Make hands-free personal calls with the BMW handset or an approved Bluetooth® phone. 

Hands-free Personal Calling 

Using an approved Bluetooth® cellular phone will allow the customer to call hands-free 
without any cords or cables getting in their way. The phone will completely integrate with 
the vehicle’s electrical system. 


28 

Features and Technology 


