Table of Contents 


Service and Maintenance 

Subject Page 

Quality Certification I (QCI) .4 

Display Vehicle Check- BMW Technician .4 

Delivery Check-BMW Technician .5 

Sample Quality Certification I.6 

Transportation Mode.7 

Deactivating Transport Mode.7 

Vehicle and Key Memory.8 

Vehicle Memory.8 

Key Memory.8 

Service.9 

Required Preconditions.9 

Vehicle Memory Configuration Procedure.9 

Vehicle/Key Memory Service Considerations .9 

FZV Key Initialization Procedure.9 

Technician Awareness.9 

Service Maintenance Programs.10 

Scheduled Maintenance .10 

Engine Oil Service .10 

BMW Inspection I.11 

BMW Inspection 2 .11 

Condition Based Service.11 

Sample 2005 BMW Service Maintenance Checklist .12 

Service Interval Indicator System .14 

SIAII.14 

SIA II Components.14 

Instrument Cluster with LED Display.15 

DME.15 

Vehicle Speed Input .15 

Engine Temperature Sensor.15 

Principle of Operation .15 

Service .16 

Reset Procedure using Special Tool .16 

Instrument Cluster Replacement .17 

Diagnosis.17 

SIA III .18 

SIA III Components:.18 

Instrument Cluster (IKE, KOMBI) with LED Display.18 

DME.18 

Principle of Operation .18 

Initial Print Date: 02/06 Revision Date: 









































Subject Page 

Service .19 

Reset of the SIA III: .19 

Instrument Cluster Replacement .20 

Diagnosis .21 

Read SIA Data .22 

SIA IV.23 

SIA IV Components:.23 

Instrument Cluster (IKE, KOMBI) with LED Display.23 

DME.23 

ASC/DSC Control Module.23 

Principle of Operation .24 

Service .24 

Reset Procedure using the Reset Mode.25 

Reset Procedure using Diagnosis Program .26 

Instrument Cluster Replacement .26 

Diagnosis.26 

Connected Service.27 

Condition Based Service (CBS).28 

Coded Keys.28 

Key Reader .28 

Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM) .28 

TeleService .28 

Transfer and Analysis of Vehicle Operation and 

Service Data (FASTA).29 

Condition Based Service (CBS).30 

Principle of Operation .30 

Sensor Based (CBS) Schedules.30 

Engine Oil Condition.31 

Microfilter State of Wear.31 

Front and Rear Brake Linings State of Wear .32 

Internal Calculation of CBS Service Items .33 

Service Indications.34 

Service Need Display (SBA) .34 

Check Control Message .34 

CBS Indicator in the Control Display.35 

CBS Reset.36 

DISPIus/GTI.36 

Instrument Cluster.37 

CBS Data Correction.39 

CBS Handover Inspection .42 

Key Reader.43 

Key - Vehicle Data Holder and Business Card .43 

Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM).44 

BMW Group Technical Hotline .45 













































Service and Maintenance 


Model: All 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Know the requirements of the Quality Certification. 

• Perform Oil Service and Inspection I and II as specified. 

• Understand the Battery Maintenance Requirements. 

• Locate BMW Service Bulletins 


3 

Service and Maintenance 





Quality Certification I (QCI) 


Every new vehicle which arrives at the BMW center requires that a Quality Certification 
(QCI) be performed. The QC I is performed in two parts. 

• Display Vehicle Check 

• Delivery Check 

When performing a QCI, a checklist has to be competed. Refer to Centernet for latest 
forms (based on Model and Model Year). 

The requirements for a vehicle’s Quality Certification vary slightly by model. The check¬ 
list must be adhered to strictly. 

Every item checked off signifies that it has been verified and in proper working condition. 
If an item is found defective an extra line has to be added on the repair order. 

The QCI checklist has two sections that should be checked off by a technician. 


Page Size 

Page Color 

Operation 

Half 

blue 

Display Vehicle Check performed by Technician. 

Perform when vehicle is being used for showroom display or demonstrator. 

Full 

White 

Display Vehicle Check performed by technician. 

Delivery Check performed by Technician. 

Delivery Check performed by BMW Client Advisor. 

Perform when vehicle is being prepared for customer sale. 


Display Vehicle Check- BMW Technician 

The Display Vehicle Check is performed if the vehicle is to be stored on the centers lot 
or in the showroom. The vehicle is inspected for shipping damage and any defects that 
may not have been caught at the VPC (Vehicle Preparation Center). 

• Complete the upper portion of the checklist and the box labeled 00 00 008 Display 
Vehicle Check-Technician. 

• Remove the top copy of the checklist and attach it to the repair order. 

The remaining portion of the checklist should be left in the vehicle or put into the vehicle 
sales file. 


Note: The automobile inventory should be verified frequently, so there are no 
open recalls/campaigns. Recalls/campaigns should be performed prior 
to the TECHNICIAN DELIVERY CHECKLIST to avoid any delays during 
delivery, including spot deliveries. 


4 

Service and Maintenance 














Delivery Check- BMW Technician 

The Delivery Check is performed no more than 24 hours prior to the customer taking 
delivery of the vehicle. The purpose of the Delivery check is to ensure that no damage 
or system problems have appeared since the vehicle was first checked at arrival to the 
center. The BMW center must deliver a vehicle to the customer free of any defects at 
time of delivery, this is difficult to ensure if the vehicle has not been inspected for several 
days or weeks. 

Vehicles that are sold before arrival to the center or to be put into service as Loaner Cars 
may have both parts of the QC I performed together, this is referred to as a Spot Delivery. 
In this case the vehicle will not be sitting on the lot more than 24 hours before delivery. 

Always refer to the latest Service Information for special instructions and warranty 
information that is necessary to properly perform a QC I. 


Notes: 


5 

Service and Maintenance 




















Sample Quality Certification I 

“ p “ w QUALITY CERTIFICATION I 

2006 325i/330i (E90), 525i/530i, 7 Series 



DOT TIRE DATA 


1) 











2) 











3) 











4) 











Spare 












00 00 008 DISPLAY VEHICLE CHECK - TECHNICIAN 


Check for Transportation Damage _ 

Remove 6 Series Convertible Top Shipping Cover 
Check Car Cleaned - Interior & Exterior _ 

Check Cleanliness of Engine Compartment 
Remove Transportation Battery Disconnect Switch 


Initialize Windows and Sunroof (incl. toll function & child safety button) 

Connect Approved BMW Charger if displayed in Showroom 


Remove Shipping Spacers if equipped 


00 00 010 DELIVERY CHECK - TECHNICIAN 
(Prior to Customer Delivery) 


Note: Items in the DISPLAY VEHICLE CHECK should also be included. 


Customer Name: _ 

Stock No.:_ 

Chassis #:_ 


Model:_ 
. Year:_ 


BMW Center Name: _ 
BMW Center No.:_ 



DELIVERY CHECK-SALESPERSON |||| 

(Prior to and at Customer Delivery): [LTj 

M -i 

Car Cleaned - Interior & Exterior 

1 

Check Tire Pressure (incl. spare tire if equipped) 

Check Battery Voltage (12.65V minimum) 

Check for Appropriate Fuel Level 

Warning Lights & Check Control 

Install Navigation System Map DVD 


Sound System (incl. CD player & telephone) 


Record Vehicle/Key Memory Features as per Customer's Preferences 
using form ZUS3077 


Seats/Headrest/Steering wheel (incl. memory function) 


Oil Level and other Fluid Service Locations, top up if needed 


Jack & Lug Wrench (secured) and Spare Tire in Trunk Tool Kit Complete* 


Check Operation of BMW Options and Accessories 


New Owner Auto Program Video 


Provide cellular telephone body kit to customer (7 Series) V 


Complete BMW Assist Agreement (before initialization by techni*jsai5w 


Program phone numbers for BMW center and BMW Customer Relations 

into BMW Assist menu. 


Wallet Key Adapter in Tool Kit (7 Series) 


CBS Hand-Over Inspection 



ROAD TEST: „ 

Transmission (incl. Auto P & display) 



Park Distance Control (PDC) Opej^t^n/^dSipped 




ROAD TEST (OPER AI1QM LA OH JSTMENT): - 

Check/Adjust Tire pressure (incl. spare tire if equipped) 


Check for Appropriate Fuel Level 


Program Vehicle/Key memory as per customer’s preferences using 
form ZUS3077 


Enter BMW Assist Phone Numbers per completed Aqreement 


Check for and correct Check Control Messages 


BMW Assist: perform test call 


Warning Liqhts 


Engine Operation 


Transmission (incl. auto P & L on 7 Series) Function Selector 
(incl. instrument panel display) 


Park Distance Control (PDC) Operation, if equipped ^ ^ 


Steering (wheel in center position) 


Foot/Parking Brakes (before and during roadtestjV \ 


Initialize the Flat Tire Monitor System if equipped wiV Run-Flat Tires 


Check Handlinq and Wheel Balance l * 


Absence of Rattles, Squeaks and Wincfccois^^ 


Cruise Control Operation v 


Telephone (7 Series) » \ 


Speaker and Fader Operation (incSbass, treble & balance) 


On-Board Computer and ton^^isplay 
(incl. service indicatorandifelk control) 


Check Operation ofCMW Options and Accessories 


Windshield WiM/W^kSi^tems 


lnterior/ExterlC:Mlrrors (incl. dim & memory functions) 


Seats/Harfdrestgip^eering Wheel (incl. memory function) 



OWNER’S PORTFOLIO iftN^ENTS (stored in center console): 

Vehicle Owner's ManVfl S 



Combined Service/Wa^^ntWRoadside Assistance Booklet 



Telephone Owni^ Manual (7 Series) 



Radio code cards'^/ 



Dealer DireS^^Atlas 



Roadside As^tance Temporary ID Card 



Sale^flifcice and Parts Managers’ Business Cards 



BMW Accessories Booklet 



Accident Guidelines and Checklists 



Driver’s Reference Guide 



BMW Assist reference card 



Three Keys (incl. wallet key) 



Purchase Agreement 



Sales Document 



Key Memory Programming Checklist 



Note: Recommend to Customer to Review Vehicle Owner’s Manual, New 1 

Owner Audio Program Video, Quick Reference Guide, and 7 Series 

Battery Switch 


n driver’s door pocket 


Review Service Schedule/Warranty/Roadside Assistance 
Introduce to Service Department 


AFTER ROAD TEST: 

Read Out Diagnostic System - Correct Faults as Necessary 


Program State and/or Emissions Inspection (if required) into service display 


Install Front License Plate Bracket if needed 


Stamp the Service Booklet in the QC1 space 



CHECK AND ADJUST: 

Doors, Trunklid and Hood 


CHECK: _ 

Battery Voltage (12.65V minimum) 


REMINDER: 

Please complete and mail the postage paid and 
pre-addressed VEHICLE CONDITION REPORT. 


COPY DISTRIBUTION: _ 

BLUE WHITE 

SALES SERVICE 


GREEN _ GOLD 

SALES CUSTOMER 


SD92-285 (03/05) 


Technician:_Date: 

(Display Vehicle Check) 

Technician:_Date:. 

(Delivery Check) 


Customer: 


Date:. 


The BMW Experience 


6 

Service and Maintenance 

















































































































































































Transportation Mode 


Transport Mode minimizes battery current draw while vehicles are in transit to BMW 
centers. 

Transport Mode replaces the more traditional battery switch. Transport Mode has been 
phased in on all BMW models starting from the E39 (5 Series). 

Transport Mode immobilizes vehicle convenience features. Actual features immobilized 
vary between vehicle models, but typically include radio operation, interior lights, etc. 

Transport Mode must be deactivated at QC1. 

Note: Once deactivated, Transport Mode cannot be reactivated 

Deactivating Transport Mode 

To deactivate Transport Mode, connect the vehicle to the DISPIus or GT1. Connect an 
approved BMW battery charger. 

For E65 only, select "Diagnosis", then select "Function Selection / Service Functions / 
Maintenance / Transport Mode / Delete Transport Mode / Test Plan". Then follow the on¬ 
screen instructions to deactivate Transport Mode. 

For all other BMW models , select "Diagnosis", then select "Function Selection / Service 
Functions / Body / Transport Mode / Delete Transport Mode / Test Plan". Then follow the 
on-screen instructions to deactivate Transport Mode. 


7 

Service and Maintenance 



Vehicle and Key Memory 


This feature provides the flexibility of allowing the owner to customize certain functions 
of select vehicle systems and automatically identifies users of the vehicle by a key identi¬ 
fication signal provided by the remote keyless entry system (FZV). VKM coding is done 
at the time of delivery during the QC I. 

Vehicle & Key memory is marketed as a combined feature but is actually two separate 
functions of the select vehicle control systems. 

Vehicle Memory 

The owner is provided with a list of available system functions that can be customized to 
their liking. Prior to delivery, CIP is used to encode the owner’s chosen selections into 
the appropriate control modules. 

Key Memory 

This feature provides the added convenience of identifying users of the vehicle whenev¬ 
er a lock or unlocked signal is generated via the individual FZV keys. A maximum of four 
FZV keys can be used with the Key Memory feature. 

Each of the four keys generate a unigue key identification signal (key number) that is 
transmitted simultaneously with the lock/unlock signals to the General Module. Key 
Memory does not respond to Lock/Unlock reguests from the mechanical drivers door 
lock. 

Most of the key memory functions reguire the vehicle be configured using the “KEY 
MEMORY” function of the DISplus or GT1. However, there are a few features that store 
settings automatically without configuration such as IHKA blower speed and temp set¬ 
ting. 

There are features that function as both a Vehicle & Key Memory feature. 

Example: The Automatic Seat Adjustment feature is encoded as a Vehicle Memory 
Function with the following possibilities: 

• when unlocking, 

• when opening a door after unlocking 

• or not active at all. 

If active, the seat positions are stored and reactivated by the Key Memory function for 
individual users of the car. 


8 

Service and Maintenance 




Service 


Required Preconditions 

Before configuring Vehicle or Key Memory Functions, connect a battery charger to the 
vehicle. This will ensure adeguate battery voltage during the VKM configuration. 

If battery voltage drops below 11.8 volts, the procedure will terminate. 

Vehicle Memory Configuration Procedure 

Please refer to Progman section located under the Workshop Applications tab of this 
book. 

Vehicle/Key Memory Service Considerations 

If a Vehicle/Key Memory capable control module becomes defective and needs replace¬ 
ment, the specific customized data will be transferred over to the new replacement unit 
during the encoding process. 

If this is not possible due to extensive control module failure, the owner must be made 
aware of the situation and requested to provide the options they originally selected. For 
this reason, it is advantageous to print the selected features as mentioned in the Vehicle 
& Key Memory configuration procedures. 

FZV Key Initialization Procedure 

Also mentioned in the BMW Features section of this manual, If FZV keys need re-initializ¬ 
ing, make sure they are initialized in the same order. 

Technician Awareness 

Vehicle Memory/Key Memory Configuration changes the functionality of the systems. It is 
recommended that the Vehicle/Key memory selections be reviewed for the vehicle you 
are working on. There may be an owner selected function activated that is not a common 
selection, causing misunderstanding of the system's function. 


9 

Service and Maintenance 


Service Maintenance Programs 


There are two different types of service maintenance requirement used in BMW vehicles 
depending on the model and production date. The two maintenance programs are: 

• Scheduled Maintenance 

• Condition Based Service 

Early BMW vehicles are dependent on a scheduled service maintenance program. This 
means that when a certain criteria is met, usually an oil change, the vehicle will have to 
undergo either an extensive oil service or a major inspection. 

Starting with the E65 (7 Series) the BMW service program utilized is condition based. 
Condition Based Service (CBS) allows for the servicing of specific vehicle components 
only when it needs the actual service. 

Scheduled Maintenance 

A Service Maintenance Checklist has been developed for early BMW passenger cars 
that require scheduled maintenances. The checklist incorporates space to record values 
called for in specific checking operations. 

These include disc brake pad thickness, tire pressures, and the freeze point tempera¬ 
tures of the engine coolant and of the windshield washer fluid. 

Because the vehicle will be visiting the workshop less frequently it is very important that 
the maintenance and anytime dependent services be carried out thoroughly and cor¬ 
rectly. Follow the Service Maintenance Checklist for the necessary steps required to 
properly complete the service. 

Engine Oil Service 

Starting with the introduction of the 1999 3 Series (E46), BMW introduced an extended 
oil change interval of approximately 15,000 miles depending on engine operating condi¬ 
tions. The engine oil change interval of approximately 15,000 miles was carried over to 
all 2001 BMW models. (Before this the interval was approximately 7,500 calculated 
miles). 

However, engine oil should be changed at least once a year. This revision (annual oil 
change) is retroactive to earlier model years and is included in the BMW Maintenance 
Plan. To coincide with the increased oil change interval, BMW also introduced "BMW 
High Performance Synthetic Oil" SAE 5W-30. 

BMW recommends the use of BMW High Performance Synthetic Oil SAE 5W-30 or 
Castrol RS SAE 10W-60 Synthetic. 


10 

Service and Maintenance 




BMW Inspection I 

The next scheduled maintenance procedure performed after an oil service is an 
Inspection I. 

The advanced technologies used in engine management systems and improvements 
in low maintenance engine design have reduced the required maintenance in each 
inspection service significantly. 

BMW Inspection 2 

The BMW Inspection 2 includes all of the procedures outlined in the Inspection I, but 
includes additional steps that are only necessary with higher accumulated miles. 

Condition Based Service 

Starting with the introduction of the E65, the CBS program does away with the sched¬ 
uled maintenance program that requires the replacement of components that might not 
need immediate replacement. 

Condition Based Service monitors wear and tear on important parts. Its sensors can 
determine when a component needs to be replaced or upgraded. Even if the degree of 
wear cannot be gauged directly, such as in the case of the air conditioning microfilter, the 
system uses algorithms to determine when a service check-up should be performed. 
'Made-to-Measure Maintenance' 

Several parameters provide the information for this system - mileage, temperature, driving 
style and more. Overall, Condition Based Service maximizes safety and keeps the vehicle 
on the road longer, as the car is serviced only when it is necessary. You get the most out 
of your automobile, and are always well informed. 


Notes: • For the most recent list of approved motor oils and their engine 
application refer to bulletin SI B11 08 98. 

• Intervals for services may vary slightly especially if it is a 
Motorsport model. 

• Always complete the appropriate maintenance checklist when 
performing a scheduled maintenance. 


11 

Service and Maintenance 


Sample 2005 BMW Service Maintenance Checklist 


BMW of North America, LLC 

2005 3 Series, Z4 (X3 and X5- use 2004 checklist SD92-260) 

Service Maintenance Checklist 

Customer’s Name 

Chassis Number 

Indicate # Lights illuminated in 
Service Interval Indicator 


|g |g 

|g |g 

|G |Y 

1?J 

Only operations that pertain to this vehicle will be performed. 

BMW center 

Mileage (on Service Interval Ind.) 

NOTE: Any other requested repairs not listed or covered by the applicable BMW Limited 
Warranty will be charged to the owner and invoiced separately. 






Repair Order No. 

Mileage (on odometer) 

State and federal statutes require a properly completed copy 
of this form to be retained in the BMW center’s customer file. 


/ 

/hj 

/Us' 

//Vi 

/.V S’ 

/'v <P 

j / / 
£/§ / 
7f / 9 


TECHNICIAN’S SIGNATURE 


E85 

E46 

r 

BMW Oxygen Sensor Replacement, required at intervals of 120,000 mi. 

(325i SULEV: 150,000 mi. M3: 100,000 mi.) 

• 

• 

• 


BMW Spark Plug Replacement, required at intervals of__,000 mi. 

100 

100 

60 


BMW Automatic Transmission Service; change ATF at intervals of 100,000 mi. 

• 

• 



1200 Mile Service 


Read out diagnostic system. 



• 


Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. Use only Castrol TWS 

Motorsport SAE 10W-60 Synthetic oil, or Castrol Formula RS 10W-60 Synthetic oil, BMW p/n 07 51 0 009 420 



• 


Replace transmission fluid. 



• 


Replace differential oil. 



• 


Check all warning/indicator lights, check control. 



• 


Road test with check of brakes, suspension, shock absorbers (external), steering, clutch/manual transmission. 



• 


BMW Engine Oil Service 


Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. 

We recommend BMW High Performance 5W-30 Synthetic oil, p/n 07 51 0 017 866 

• 

• 



Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. Use only Castrol TWS 

Motorsport SAE 10W-60 Synthetic oil, or Castrol Formula RS 10W-60 Synthetic oil, BMW p/n 07 51 0 009 420 



• 


Replace microfilters. 

Note: reduce replacement interval in dusty operating conditions. 

• 

• 

• 


Check overall thickness of front and rear disc brake pads using special tool. 

Record results. If replacement is necessary*: Examine brake disc surfaces. 

Clean brake pad contact points in calipers. Grease wheel centering hubs. 

Check thickness of parking brake linings only when replacing rear pads. Record results. 

• 

• 

• 


Check parking brake actuation. Adjust if necessary. 

• 

• 

• 


Lubricate convertible top hinge covers. 


• 

• 


Reset Service Indicator. 

Note: Do not reset Service Indicator when additional oil changes 
(between the normal intervals) are requested by the customer. 

• 

• 

• 


BMW Inspection 1: Undercarriage 


Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. 

We recommend BMW High Performance 5W-30 Synthetic oil, p/n 07 51 0 017 866 

• 

• 



Change oil and oil filter while engine is at operating temperature. Use Castrol TWS 

Motorsport SAE 10W-60 Synthetic oil, or Castrol Formula RS 10W-60 Synthetic oil, BMW p/n 07 51 0 009 420 



• 


Check transmission for leaks. 

• 

• 

• 


Check rear axle for leaks. 

• 

• 

• 


Half shafts: Check for leaks at flexible boots. 

• 

• 

• 


Visually check fuel tank, lines and connections for leaks. 

• 

• 

• 


Check condition, position, and mounting of exhaust system. Examine for leaks. 

• 

• 

• 


Check power steering system for leaks. Check p/s fluid level; add fluid if necessary. 


• 

• 


Check overall thickness of front and rear disc brake pads using special tool. 

Record results. If replacement is necessary*: Examine brake disc surfaces. 

Clean brake pad contact points in calipers. Grease wheel centering hubs. 

Check thickness of parking brake linings only when replacing rear pads. Record results. 

• 

• 

• 


Check brake (and clutch) system connections and lines for leaks, damage, 
and incorrect positioning. 

• 

• 

• 


Check steering for absence of play, condition of suspension track rods, 
front axle joints, steering linkage and joint disc. 

• 

• 

• 


Check parking brake actuation. Adjust if necessary. 

• 

• 

• 


Check all tire pressures (including spare). Correct if necessary. Record results. 

Check condition of tires (outer surfaces [left/right]), tread wear and pattern; 
in case of uneven tread wear readjust wheels alightment if requested.* 

Note: If requested, rotate all four roads wheels as instructed and rebalance.* 

• 

• 

• 


Replace M-Mobility System sealant cartridge every 4 years. 



• 



BMW NA SD92-283 8/04 


‘Invoice separately 


12 

Service and Maintenance 


































































Sample 2005 BMW Service Maintenance Checklist (cont.) 


BMW Inspection 1 (cont’d) 

A 

^7 

7 



/# 

/ 9 



E85 

E46 

f 

Inspect entire body according to terms of rust perforation limited warranty 
(must be performed at least every two years). 

• 

• 

• 


BMW Inspection 1: Engine Compartment 


Read out diagnostic system. 

• 

• 

• 


Check and adjust valves. 



• 


Check engine cooling system/heater hose connections for leaks. 

Check coolant level and antifreeze protection level; add coolant if necessary. 

• 

• 

• 


Check level of brake and clutch fluid in reservoir. Add fluid if required. 

• 

• 

• 


Replace brake fluid every 2 years (time interval begins from vehicle’s production date).* 

• 

• 

• 


Check windshield washer fluid level and antifreeze protection. 

Fill up and/or correct if necessary. Record freeze point temperature. 

• 

• 

• 


Check air conditioner operation. 

• 

• 

• 


Replace microfilters. 

Note: reduce replacement interval in dusty operating conditions. 

• 

• 

• 


Reset Service Indicator. 

• 

• 

• 


BMW Inspection 1: Body/Electrical Equipment 


Check battery state-of-charge, and charge if required.* 

• 

• 

• 


Check lighting system, i.e., headlights, foglights, parking, back-up, license plate, interior (including 
map reading lights), glove box, flashlight, illuminated make-up mirrors, luggage compartment lights. 

• 

• 

• 


Check instrument panel and dashboard illumination. 

• 

• 

• 


Check all warning/indicator lights, check control. 

• 

• 

• 


Check turn signals, hazard warning flashers, brake lights, horns, headlight dimmer/flasher switch. 

• 

• 

• 


Check wipers and washer system(s); wiper blades, washer jet positions. 

• 

• 

• 


Check condition and function of safety belts. 

• 

• 

• 


Recharge or replace batteries for remote controls in all vehicle master keys. 

• 

• 

• 


Check central locking/double lock. 

• 

• 

• 


Check operation of all latches. 

• 

• 

• 


Check heater/air conditioner blower fan, rear window defogger. 

• 

• 

• 


Check rear view mirrors. 

• 

• 

• 


Visually examine the SRS airbag units for torn covers, obvious damage 
or attachment of decals, decorations or accessories. 

• 

• 

• 


Activate automatic roll-over protection system (if equipped) via diagnostic link. 

Note: First remove hardtop/lower top. 


• 

• 


Lubricate convertible top hinge covers. 


• 

• 


Final Inspection 


Road test with check of brakes, suspension, steering, clutch/manual transmission 
or automatic transmission, shock absorbers (external). 

• 

• 

• 


BMW Inspection II: Includes all items listed under Inspection 1, and the following checks and maintenance items: 

Engine Compartment 


Replace intake air cleaner element. 

Note: Reduce replacement interval in dusty operating conditions. 

• 

• 

• 


Replace spark plugs. 



• 


Undercarriage 


Replace transmission fluid. 



• 


Replace differential oil. 



• 



IT 

ifi 


Q) CD 


21 


'Invoice separately 


I 

ll 

II 


13 

Service and Maintenance 








































































Service Interval Indicator System 


The Service Interval Indicator System is designed to alert the driver when the vehicle is 
due for service. Recent advances in the materials used in engine construction along 
with low emission engine management systems and the use of high performance syn¬ 
thetic oils have increased distance between services to approximately 15,000 miles. 

The Service Interval Indicator System helps to reduce the confusion and inconvenience 
of computing maintenance intervals based only on mileage. Rather, the intervals are 
based on the owners specific driving style. 

When the SIA determines the time for a service that is necessary, it displays the service 
(Oil Service or Inspection) in the instrument cluster and remains displayed until the sys¬ 
tem is reset and a countdown for the next service is started. 


SIAM 


Models: All 


Production: 1986 up to 1996 
(E36 and E36/7 up to 1999) 



SIA II Components 

• Instrument Cluster with LCD display 

• DME 

• Vehicle Speed Input 

• Engine Temperature Sensor 

14 

Service and Maintenance 















Instrument Cluster with LED Display 

The Instrument Cluster is responsible for calculating the Service Interval and displaying 
the LED blocks used to represent time until next service. 

DME 

The DME control module provides the engine speed signal used in the SIA calculation. 

Vehicle Speed Input 

The vehicle speed input is provided directly by a reed switch in the differential 
(E32,E34,E31,E36), or from a processed signal sent by the Braking and Traction 
(ABS/ASC) control module (E38). 

Engine Temperature Sensor 

The engine temperature NTC sensor provides the engine temperature signal used in the 
SIA calculation. 

Principle of Operation 

The Service Interval Indicator consists of a row of 
LEDs and two text messages displaying: 

“OIL SERVICE” or “INSPECTION”. The LED’s 
show the length of time remaining until an Oil 
service or Inspection is due. The SIA II display 
uses 5 green LEDs, one yellow and one red LED. 

The Display LEDs are only illuminated when the ignition is first switched on. The display 
remains for approximately eight seconds before being switched off. The countdown to a 
service on a new or recently serviced vehicle starts out with all green LEDs illuminated. 
Over a period of time and mileage, the green LEDs will be turned off one by one . When 
a service is due, all green LEDs will be out and the yellow LED will be illuminated along 
with the text message “OIL SERVICE” or “INSPECTION”. 

If the service is not performed the red LED will illuminate after an additional 1000 miles 
has accumulated. 

The calculation that the instrument cluster or IKE(E38) uses to calculate service interval is 
based on three pieces of data: 

• Engine Speed (RPM) 

• Distance Traveled (miles accumulated) 

• Engine Temperature 

The use of Engine Temperature and RPM for the calculation allow for a more precise 
estimation of when a service is required by taking driving styles into account. A vehicle 
for example, that is driven aggressively or for short distances in stop and go traffic may 
require servicing more often than a vehicle that is driven longer distances on freeways. 



15 

Service and Maintenance 






Service 

When a service is performed the Service Interval Indicator must be reset. For vehicles 
equipped with SIA II there is only one method: 

• Reset using special tool 

The SIA is reset using the SIA reset function, the tool creates a pulse width modulated 
signal on the DIASIARE lead (diagnosis-service-interval-reset-lead), pin 7of the diagnostic 
connector. 

Reset Procedure using Special Tool 

• Insert special tool 62 1 110 into the diagnostic connector. If the vehicle uses a 15 
pin diagnosis connector use adapter 61 2 060. 

• Turn the ignition to position 2 

• Push and hold the the button to reset the applicable service: Oil Service or 
Inspection. Button 1 or 2 respectively. 

• The reset tool has three LEDs below the reset buttons. The green LED(4) in the 
center comes on whenever any service reset is selected to indicate that communi¬ 
cation is OK. The other two LEDs (3 and 5) indicate that the proper reset (Oil 
Service: yellow or Inspection: red) is being carried out. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Oil Service Reset button 

2 

Inspection Reset Button 

3 

Yellow LED for Oil service Reset 

4 

Green LED for communication acknowledgement 

5 

Red LED for Inspection Reset 


16 

Service and Maintenance 
















Instrument Cluster Replacement 

If the Instrument Cluster is replaced on early vehicles the SIAdata is lost. Redundant 
data storage is available for the following models: 

• E31 -Data stored in EKM and LKM 

• E38-Data stored in IKE and LCM 

• E36-(1997-1999), E36/7- Data stored in cluster EPROM and Coding plug. 

If a Cluster is replaced on a vehicle with redundant data storage, the transfer of the SIA 
data (along with total miles) is possible. 

Diagnosis 

Diagnosis using the Diagnosis program is possible on vehicles whose clusters are on the 
diagnostic link: E32, E34, E36 (except E36/5 ,17 up to 9/98) and E38. 

The tools available to diagnose the SIA system in the Diagnosis Program are: 


System Test: Also possible from 
the Instrument Cluster Self Test, the 
Display Test illuminates the Service 
Interval Display. 

To enter the test: 

Function Selection 
Complete Vehicle 
Body 

Displays and Information 
Instrument Cluster 
Test Schedule 
Special Functions 
System Test 


Read Fault Memory: Read fault 
memory allows the technician to 
view any defect codes that are 
detected by the instrument cluster. 
To enter: 

Function Selection 
Complete vehicle 
Body 

Displays and Information 
Instrument Cluster 
Test Schedule 
Read Fault Memory 



Read SIA Data: Displays 
Instrument cluster data as well as 
SIA data. SIA data allows the 
Technician to verify that the SIA 
system is using the proper calcula¬ 
tion as well as viewing the current 
status of the system. 

To enter 

• Function Selection 

• Complete Vehicle 

• Body 

• Displays and Information 

• Instrument Cluster 

• Test Schedule 

• Special Functions 

• Read SIA Data 


17 

Service and Maintenance 






















































SIA III 

Models: E38, E39, E53, E36/5, E36/7 
Production: 1996 onward excluding E36 
(except E36/5 and E36/7 from 9/98) 



SIA III Components: 


• Instrument Cluster with LED display 

• DME 


Instrument Cluster (IKE, KOMBI) with LED Display 

The Instrument cluster calculates the Service Interval. The cluster is also responsible for 
displaying the LED blocks used to represent time until next service. 

DME 

The DME provides the Fuel Consumption signal (ti) as the only signal used in the SIA cal¬ 
culation. 

Principle of Operation 

The sequence for displaying the necessary service is similar to SIA II. The calculation 
method however differs significantly. 

The Instrument Cluster calculates the Service Interval based only on the input of the “ti” 

signal (Fuel consumed) from the DME. This method gives an accurate indication of 
engine load and the need for service. 


18 

Service and Maintenance 







The SIA data for the specific model is coded into the instrument cluster. The data con¬ 
sists of a Stored quantity of fuel, referred to as the “Coded Inspection Limit”. The “Coded 
Inspection Limit” varies according to model and can be viewed using the Diagnosis 
Program. 


The processor of the Cluster receives the ti signal when 
the vehicle is used. As 20% of the stored volume is con¬ 
sumed one of the green LEDs will go out. Each succes¬ 
sive 20% of fuel consumed will cause the next LED to go 
out until 100% of the stored value has been consumed. 
At this point the yellow LED comes on indicating the 
service that is necessary. At 108% of the volume, the red 
LED will illuminate indicating a service which is overdue. 


When the Service Interval Indicator is 
reset, the total stored volume of fuel 
is restored in the cluster and the cal¬ 
culation starts over again. 



ruuui 

ti Signal 



Service 


Reset of the SIA III: 

• Use the Reset Tool as explained in SIA II Workshop Hints (up to MY 2001). 

• Use the Reset Mode in the Instrument Cluster (E39/E53 MY 2001 onwards). 

• Use the Reset Test Module in Service Functions 


Reset procedure using the Reset Mode: 

• Ignition key must be “off” 

• Press and hold the trip odometer reset button in the instrument cluster (left button), 
and turn the ignition key to the first position. 

• Keep the button pressed for approximately 5 seconds until one of the following 
words appear in the display: “OIL SERVICE, or “INSPECTION”, with “Reset”. 

• Release the reset button and press it again until “reset” begins to flash in the display. 


19 

Service and Maintenance 



















The service due, is shown with “reset”, if the coded minimum consumption limit has 
been reached and resetting is possible. If “reset” is not shown, the minimum limit has not 
been reached and resetting is not possible. 

• While “reset” is flashing, press the left button briefly to reset the service interval. 
After the display has shown the new interval, the following will appear: “END SI A” 

The system can only be reset again after 10 liters (2.5gal) of fuel have been consumed. 



PRESS AND HOLD 
LEFT BUTTON. 


KEEP PRESSED 
FOR 5 SECONDS 
AFTER KEY IS 
SWITCHED ON. 
TAP BUTTON TO 
RESET SI DIS¬ 
PLAY 



TURN THE KEY TO 
POSITION 1 (KLR). 


E39 Service Interval Reset (High Version) 

Instrument Cluster Replacement 

If the instrument cluster (IKE or Kombi) is replaced the SI data can be retrieved from the 
LCM on E38, E39, and E53 vehicles. 

Replacement of the Kombi or IKE is only possible with a new component. 

Leave the old cluster in the vehicle. Using the ZCS coding program, adopt the code from 
the old part. 

Install the cluster and transfer the saved code to the new part. This procedure will ensure 
that the correct total miles and SIA data are transferred. 

If the old part cannot be read, the LCM will provide a redundant location to allow the cod¬ 
ing program to restore the total mileage and SIA data. 


20 

Service and Maintenance 



LCM 


012345 


"miles. _ _ . 

km 4224 - 





































If the cluster is replaced in a vehicle equipped with a coding plug (E36/7 after 9/98) the 
procedure differs. 

• Code the cluster using ZCS coding. 

The cluster will display the correct mileage and SIAdata except that the “Manipulation” 
dot will be illuminated. 

• Use test step 16 to copy data from the coding plug. Refer to SIB 62 10 98 for com¬ 
plete instructions. 

Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the SIA System is carried out using the Diagnosis program from the DISplus 
or GT-1. 

The tools available to diagnose the SIA system in the diagnosis program are: 



System Test: Also possible from 
the Instrument Cluster Self Test, 
the Display Test illuminates the 
Service Interval Display 
To enter the test: 


Function Selection 


Complete Vehicle 


Body 

Displays and Information 
Instrument Cluster 


Test Schedule 


Service Functions 


System Test 


Read Fault Memory: Read fault memory allows the technician to 
view any defect codes that are detected by the instrument cluster. 
To access Fault Memory: 

• Function Selection 

• Complete vehicle 

• Body 

• Displays and Information 

• Instrument Cluster 

• Test Schedule 

• Read Fault Memory 


Read SIA Data: Displays Instrument 
cluster data as well as SIA data. SIA data 
allows the technician to verify that the SIA 
system is using the proper calculation as 
well as viewing the current status of the 
system. 

To enter 

• Function Selection 

• Complete Vehicle 

• Body 

• Displays and Information 

• Instrument Cluster 

• Test Schedule 

• Service Functions 

• Read SIA Data 


21 

Service and Maintenance 











Read SIA Data 

The SIA data coded into a vehicle (Coded Inspection Limit) can be printed and attached 
to the repair order. 

This is required in cases when the instrument cluster indicates that maintenance is 
required, but the vehicle has lower than expected mileage. 

In a small number of cases it may be that the instrument cluster was coded with the 
incorrect Coded Inspection Limit and will have to be re-coded. 

The display of SIA data on the DISplus or GT1 also shows “Stored Consumption”. 

Stored Consumption (in gallons) is the amount of fuel consumed towards the “Coded 
Inspection Limit” (in gallons also). When the two numbers become equal, the instrument 
cluster indicates that service is required. When a reset is performed the Stored 
Consumption is reset to zero. 

This feature is available in diagnosis for all vehicles using the SIA III method of calculating 
service intervals. 

Refer to S.l 62 06 99 for a chart of Coded Inspection Limits for each vehicle model type. 


BMW DIS 

Diagnosis Report 

Inspection code: Kom 

SIA DATA 

Series E38/E39/E53 
Instrument cluster 
Part number: 6 906 118 

Hardware number: 12 
Software number: 13 

Chassis number: LH 03708 

Total mileage: 1063 miles 

SIA data: 

Inspection limit coded: 918 gal 
Stored consumption: 69 gal 


SIA Data Printout 


22 

Service and Maintenance 









SIAIV 

Models: E46 and E52 
Production: From start of production 

SIA IV Components: 

• Instrument Cluster with LED display 

• DME 

• Vehicle Speed Signal 



E46 Service Interval Display 

Instrument Cluster (IKE, KOMBI)with LED Display 

The Instrument cluster calculates the Service Interval. The cluster is also responsible 
for displaying the mileage reading for the next service. 

DME 

The DME provides the Fuel Consumption (ti) signal. 

ASC/DSC Control Module 

The vehicle speed signal is provided by the ASC or DSC control module. 




23 

Service and Maintenance 













Principle of Operation 

Starting with the E46 a new method for display¬ 
ing the Service Interval is used. Colored LEDs 
are no longer used to display the amount of time 
until the next service or inspection is due. 

With the SIA IV system, the actual mileage remaining until the next service will be dis¬ 
played for five seconds when the ignition is first switched on. 

The text “OIL SERVICE” or “INSPECTION” will also illuminate to show which service is 
due. A minus symbol( -) before the mileage display indicates that a service is past due. 

The calculation process for determining the service interval is similar to SIA III. A set 
volume is stored in the Cluster. The processor receives the ti signal from DME as the 
vehicle is driven. The Cluster also receives the vehicle speed signal from the ASC/DSC 
control module. 

Based on the amount of fuel consumed and the distance traveled, the processor calcu¬ 
lates the distance remaining to the next service. 

Service 

Reset of the SIA can be done using special tool 62 1 110 if the vehicle is eguipped with 
the 20 pin under-hood diagnosis connector. 

On 2001 MY vehicles onward without the diagnostic connector in the engine compart¬ 
ment, the use of the S.l reset tool is not possible. The Service Indicator may be reset 
using the Reset Mode in the Instrument Cluster or with Diagnosis. 


OILSERVICE 

15000 Miles 


24 

Service and Maintenance 



Reset Procedure using the Reset Mode 
(possible from 9/99 onward for E46, MY2001 E52) 

• Ignition key must be “off”. 

• Press and hold the trip odometer button in the instrument cluster (left button), and 
turn the ignition key to the first position (KLR). 

• Keep the button pressed for approximately 5 seconds until one of the following 
words appear in the display: “OIL SERVICE, or “INSPECTION”, with “reset”. 

• Release the reset button and press and hold it again until “reset” begins to flash. 

• While the display is flashing, press the left button briefly to reset the service interval. 
After the display has shown the new interval, the following will appear: “END SIA”. 


The system can only be reset again after 10 liters (2.5gal) of fuel have been consumed. 



PRESS AND 
HOLD LEFT 
BUTTON 



TURN KEY TO POSI¬ 
TION 1 (KLR) 


Veset 

OILSERVICE 

SIR 

15000 

Miles 

_ A 



KEEP PRESSED FOR 5 SECONDS 
AFTER KEY IS SWITCHED ON. 

TAP BUTTON TO RESET SI DISPLAY 


E46 Service Interval Reset 


25 

Service and Maintenance 









Reset Procedure using Diagnosis Program 

• Connect the Diagnosis head to the diagnostic connector of the vehicle. 

• Identify the vehicle and perform the Short Test. 

• Select Function Selection and then Service Functions. 

• Highlight Reset Service Interval Indicator (Test module S6211 -00001). 

• Select with tester. 

• Follow the directions from the help information in the test module (upper right corer). 

• Select which service is to be reset and press the continue key. 

• An acknowledgement is displayed on the screen that the reset has been carried out. 

Instrument Cluster Replacement 

If the instrument cluster (Kombi) is replaced the SI data can be retrieved from the LSZ on 
E46 vehicles and from the LCM III on the E52. Coding procedures are the same as SIAII. 

Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the SIA System is carried out using the Diagnosis program of the DISplus or 
GT1. 

The tools available to diagnose the SIA system in the diagnosis program are: 


System Test: Also possible 
from the Instrument Cluster Self 
Test, the Display Test illuminates 
the Service Interval Display. 

To enter the test: 

• Function Selection 

• Service Functions 

• Body 

• Instrument Cluster 

• System Test 

• Test Schedule 


26 



Read SIA Data: Displays 
Instrument cluster data as well as 
SIA data. SIA data allows the techni¬ 
cian to verify that the SIA system is 
using the proper calculation as well 
as viewing the current status of the 
system. 

To enter 

• Function Selection 

• Service Functions 

• Body 

• Instrument Cluster 

• Service Interval Indicator Data 

• Test Schedule 


Test Modules: Problems with the SIA System can 
be diagnosed using fault or Symptom driven test 
modules. 

To begin diagnosis: 

• Short Test 

• Select Symptom from Symptom selection page 

• Select Test module from Test Plan Page 

• Test Schedule 


Service and Maintenance 















































Connected Service 

The term "Connected Service" refers to "Networked service." Modern vehicles are 
already heavily networked internally by the single bus systems. Communication of vehicle 
occupants with the vehicle occurs via several control and display systems like the instru¬ 
ment cluster, on-board monitor with navigation system and on the E65 with the central 
Control Display. 

This networking in constant progress is also revolutionizing the service process. It is 
called "Connected Service" and allows increasing communication and networking 
between the vehicle and the Retail Service Departments. 

Customers can expect the following from the BMW Service in the future: 

• Exactly planned appointments, no loss of information, early problem detection and 
flexible service. 

• Fast handling of the service process without long waiting times for the service advi¬ 
sor, spare parts or vehicle. 

• Departure from fixed items of inspection/repair, same high service quality, personal 
and individual advice. 

Connected Service offers new possibilities. Vehicle specific service requirements are 
automatically assessed. Fixed inspection/maintenance schedules will be replaced by 
more flexible maintenance services. 

The existing process will be further optimized, the appointment process will be faster and 
more effective and service advisors will have more time for individual consultation. 

Connected Service is made up of several modules some of which are already available or 
are introduced starting with the E65. 

The modules are: 

• Condition Based Service (CBS) 

• Coded Keys 

• Key Reader 

• Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM) 


27 

Service and Maintenance 


Condition Based Service (CBS) 

BS defines vehicle specific maintenance requirements by sensor based monitoring of 
engine oil, air conditioning micro-filters and the front and rear brake linings. In addition, 
time dependent monitoring of the engine oil, brake fluid and coolant. 

CBS also provides distance dependent monitoring of spark plugs as well as visual and 
functional checks. The service need display (SBA) is located in the instrument cluster 
and the details are displayed in the Control Display. 

Coded Keys 

The BMW keys have already been storing information for approximately 3 years. Since 
1998 the chassis number and since 1999 the chassis number, mileage and status of the 
Service Interval Display (SIA) is stored. 

The E65 keys (FBD keys or remote control service keys) store more information, such as 
check control messages and all CBS relevant data like: mileage, oil condition, brake pad 
wear and microfilter condition. The key is the “business card” of the vehicle. 

Key Reader 

The Key Reader allows readout of the data stored in the key when the vehicle is checked 
in for service. The required basic data of the vehicle and the data concerning all service 
requirements are automatically available. 

Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM) 

SAM is the software running at the service advisor’s work station. The software interprets 
and displays (processes) the vehicle data stored in the key. 

SAM includes two future extension levels: 

• SAM 2 (Extension of SAM 1 - Future) Associated with TeleService 1, it allows the 

remote transmission of vehicle data stored in the keys and access to the 
central service databases (central repair history). 

• SAM 3 (Extension of SAM 2 - Future) Associated with TeleService 2, it allows the 

dealer to communicate with the vehicle for troubleshooting complex elec¬ 
tronic problems. 

TeleService 

TeleService will be offered at two levels: 

TeleService 1 allows automatic or manual data transfer by cellular phone from 
the vehicle to a TeleService center. The Service Call transmits wear and fault infor¬ 
mation. Emergency service calls may be placed to an assistance service center. 

The transmission of information via SMS (Short Message Service) will allow collec¬ 
tion of data from customers. 

TeleService 2, will allow remote diagnosis of the vehicle electronics. Finally, 
Telediagnosis/programming will allow the removal of faults, encoding and flash pro¬ 
gramming select control modules via the telephone interface. 


28 

Service and Maintenance 


Transfer and Analysis of Vehicle Operation and Service Data (FASTA) 

FASTA increases product quality, gives input to Research and Development and is the 
basis for developing more accurate diagnostic tools and optimizing processes aimed at 
solving problems. In the workshop, the vehicle data is read with the diagnostic equipment 
and transferred via network to the central FASTA vehicle related database at BMW. 

Starting with the E46, FASTA was implemented for the first time for a select number of 
dealers in Europe and in the USA. This pilot phase now is over and FASTA is now being 
used for the launch of all new models and as an integral part of quality control. For more 
information refer to bulletin SI B07 08 01 and 07 07 01. 


29 

Service and Maintenance 






























Condition Based Service (CBS) 

Service Interval Indicator systems (SIA3 and SIA4) determine maintenance intervals 
based on fuel consumption, which is done to assess the need to change the engine oil. 
The main determining factor for the maintenance interval currently is the condition of the 
engine oil. Other maintenance needs, including the replacement of wear and tear items, 
are arranged to coincide with due engine oil changes. 

BMW is now measuring the need for maintenance of several critical components besides 
the engine oil, and independently of the engine oil. This affords us the ability to bring a 
vehicle in for service whenever one of the measured components reguires maintenance 
or replacement. 

Condition Based Service (CBS - further development of SIA) will strike a compromise 
between too freguent maintenance and too rigid intervals which call for the replacement 
of maintenance items that may still have substantial useful life left. The objective is to 
furnish economical maintenance by providing the ideal service for individual vehicles. 

Principle of Operation 

Sensor Based (CBS) Schedules 

The trend in the vehicle service business is to lengthen service intervals and reduce 
replacement of maintenance items. Additional measures have been taken to keep the 
vehicles in a roadworthy and comfortable condition. 

Usage dependent maintenance of select wear and tear items is detected by physical and 
virtual sensors. This means that, in cases where the wear is not measured directly, the 
service due date will be determined by using auxiliary variables such as mileage, vehicle 
performance, temperature, etc. 

Sensors built into certain components and control module algorithms take even more 
detailed account of the various conditions of vehicle use. The remaining times for select¬ 
ed maintenance tasks as well as any dates for State and/or Emissions Inspections (deter¬ 
mined by the state in which the vehicle is registered) are individually displayed. 

CBS determines the current and future maintenance reguirements. The current status of 
Service items determined by CBS are shown in the Control Display. This data can also 
be read from the vehicle key by using the Key Reader, as the vehicle’s current service sta¬ 
tus is automatically saved in the ignition key every time the key is used. 

Three sensors detect the following wear conditions: 

• Engine oil (sensor) 

• Microfilter (virtual sensor) 

• Front and rear brake linings (sensor as reference point) 

The instrument cluster collects the values from the wear detection control modules and 
manages the internally defined service repair schedule. Data exchange is carried out on the 
bus systems. 

30 

Service and Maintenance 


Engine Oil Condition 

The condition of the engine oil is detected by the oil condition sensor. Simultaneously, it 
also detects the engine oil level and the oil temperature. 

The engine oil condition sensor is monitored by the ECM and is mounted in the oil pan. 

The ECM contains an algorithm for evaluating the service due date. The following param¬ 
eters are considered in the calculation: 

• The correct oil grade is installed 

• Oil level 

• Oil temperature 

• Engine load 

• Fuel consumption (ti signal) 

• Mileage 

• Date (time elapsed since last oil change) 

The remaining life to the next service is forwarded from the ECM to the instrument clus¬ 
ter by a bus message when the ignition is switched "ON." When the "engine oil" service 
is due, it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 

Microfilter State of Wear 

The air intake section of the air conditioning system includes a microfilter on the right and 
on the left. The Microfilter includes an additional active carbon filter. 

The condition of the microfilter is detected by the IHKA control module. It does not 
include a physical sensor to measure the level of contamination in the microfilter. 

The IHKA uses an algorithm to calculate this from the following parameters: 

• Ambient air temperature 

• Rain sensor signal 

• Heating use 

• Air recirculation settings 

• Driving speed 

• Fan speed 

• Mileage 

• Date (time elapsed since the last oil change) 

The remaining life to the next service is forwarded by the IHKA control module to the instru¬ 
ment cluster by a bus message when the ignition is switched "ON." When the "microfilter" 
service due date occurs, it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 


31 

Service and Maintenance 




Front and Rear Brake Linings State of Wear 

The brake lining state of wear on the front and rear axle is confirmed and detected by 
2-stage brake lining wear sensors. These are located on the left front and right rear brake 
pads. The first stage (reference point for the calculation) of the wear indicator is activated 
when the thickness of the lining is 6 mm, and the second when it is down to 4 mm. 

The brake lining wear sensors voltage signals are monitored by the DSC control module. 
The brake lining wear sensor operates in the first stage as on current models and a resis¬ 
tor was added for the second stage. 

The algorithm is controlled by these two different voltages in the control module and 
determines the residual thickness of the brake lining. The residual wear of the brake lining 
is calculated from the following input parameters: 

• Wheel speed 

• Brake pressure 

• Braking freguency 

• Brake disc temperature 

• Braking time 

• Mileage (travel distance) 

The residual wear of the brake lining on the front and rear axles is stored in the DSC 
control module when the ignition is switched “OFF” and is used as the starting value 
the next time the vehicle is started. 

The residual distance to the next service is forwarded by the DSC control module to the 
instrument cluster by a bus message when the ignition is switched "ON." The "Front or 
Rear brake linings" service due date is displayed in the instrument cluster or the Control 
Display. 


Note: Simultaneous replacement of the instrument cluster and ECM must be 
avoided whenever possible, otherwise all current oil maintenance 
schedule data will be lost. The values will then have to be inserted 
manually in each control module. 


32 

Service and Maintenance 


Internal Calculation of CBS Service Items 

For certain wear and tear items, sensors are not needed by the Condition Based Service. 
The wear items that are calculated and managed internally by the instrument cluster are: 

• Brake fluid 

• Visual and functional checks (vehicle check) 

• Coolant 

• Official State Safety and/or Emissions Inspections 

• Spark plugs 

The maintenance of these items is performed affixed intervals. The residual wear or the 
remaining time to next service is calculated by the instrument cluster using the travel/time 
parameters of: mileage, current date and internal distance counter. When a service item 
is due, it is shown in the instrument cluster or the Control Display. 

Battery down times (battery cut off by the distribution switch) also stop the trip distance 
counter which leads to longer time based service intervals. This will disrupt the CBS vol¬ 
umes for engine oil, microfilter, brake fluid and coolant. 

To correct this, the internal counter status must be reset by the DISplus/GT 1. The wear 
dependent items internally calculated by the instrument cluster are stored in the instru¬ 
ment cluster and in the CAS control module (redundancy). 

Note: The internal distance counter plays a particular role. Unlike the 
Time/Date, this counter cannot be set by the driver. 


33 

Service and Maintenance 


Service Indications 

Regarding CBS, there are different service indicators: 

• Service need display (SBA) in the cluster (base of speedometer) E65 only 

• Check Control display in the instrument cluster 

• CBS indicator in the Control Display 

Service Need Display (SBA) 

The Service Need Display is the evolution of the SIA4 
Service Interval display. When KL15 is "ON," the 
Service Need Display appears under the speedometer 
in the instrument cluster for 10 seconds in the place 
where the fuel tank level is normally displayed. 

The first line corresponds to the mileage dependent service items. It specifies the 
mileage when the next service is due. If the mileage is exceeded (service overdue), it 
appears with a minus sign. 

The second line corresponds to the time dependent service items and is displayed by a 
clock symbol. It specifies the weeks/months/years when the next service is due. If the 
service is overdue, it appears with a minus sign. 

The actual service item (with additional information) can be viewed in the Control Display. 

Check Control Message 

The CBS produces a Check Control message that 
indicates a service is needed. 

The icon in the picture to the left is taken from an E65 
instrument cluster that has a brake lining wear at the 
front or rear axle. 

A brief Check Control message appears: "Service, see Vehicle menu." For more detailed 
information, the user can access the Control Display. 




Note: For vehicles without a Central Information Display (such as an E90 
without NAV) the customer only receives an icon as a warning that a 
particular service is due. The owner’s manual should be referenced 
to look up the icon. 


34 

Service and Maintenance 





CBS Indicator in the Control Display 

The Control Display provides additional information on service and maintenance proce¬ 
dures by selecting: 

• “OB data” menu, for E65 

• “Settings menu => Service menu” for others models 
The CBS menu appears with the service items. 

The Control Display shows a list of selected service and maintenance procedures, as well 
as legally-mandated official inspections. 

The service and maintenance procedures are displayed in different colors: 

• Green: No service is currently reguired 

• Yellow: Service deadline is approaching 

• Red: Service deadline has already passed 

The service items highlighted in red with the highest priority appear in the bottom part 
of the display. 

You can scroll through the list of service and maintenance procedures from top to bottom 
by turning the Controller from right to left. You can leave the list of service items by press¬ 
ing the button with the Up arrow symbol. 

The service and maintenance items are: 


Engine oil 

• Front brake pads 

• Rear brake pads 

Microfilter 

• Brake fluid 

• Coolant 

Spark plugs 

• Vehicle check 

• State Inspection 

Emissions Inspection 




To display the service and maintenance item information in the Control Display, turn the 
Controller to select the item and confirm your selection by pressing the Controller. 


35 

Service and Maintenance 


CBS Reset 

The CBS Reset procedure provides resetting of the individual Condition Based Service 
items. The items that require a reset depend on the individual vehicle usage. When one 
or more service and maintenance items has been performed, these items must be reset 
The reset procedure can be carried out via the instrument cluster or the DISplus/GT 1. 


DISPIus/GTI 

Using the DISplus/GT 1, the CBS Reset sets the service and maintenance items to 100% 
(full service interval) and displays a service counter to indicate how many times these 
items have been reset. 


The procedure is found under: 

Service Functions => Maintenance => 
CBS reset. 

Select the CBS Reset => Test Plan => 
CBS reset => Right arrow 


Select the specific item that needs to be reset. 

The selection list is divided in two parts: 

Group 1: Engine oil 

Spark plugs 
Front/Rear brakes 

Group 2: Brake fluid 

Microfilter 

Vehicle - exhaust emission 
Vehicle check 



I_1 


SCBS_6003 / CBS selection 


Selection, scope of CBS reset 

m 

- Fngino oil - Spark plugs 

- Front brake - Rear brake 

PI 

- Brake fliNd - Microtiller 

- Vehicle - exhaust emission 

- Vehicle check 




With the Group 1 option chosen, the items are dis¬ 
played for further selection. 

The selections are displayed with the remaining period 
left until the rest should be performed. 

In this example, the engine oil has only achieved 16% 
of its scheduled usage; 84%of its “life” remaining. 




1 \ 


Scops ol CBS reset, selection 1 
(availability) [%] / (service counter) 

(1) Engine od (84) [%]/(2 ) 

[2] Spark plugs (99 ) [%) / (1 ) 
p] Front brake (99)[%J/(1 ) 

[4] Rear brake (99) [%] .'(1) 

[5] ~(0)[*)/(0) 

[6] Back to selection CBS items 

ILOLJlL 

d-d 1 ICZ 



36 

Service and Maintenance 







































SCBS_6003 / Reset erigine oil 


After the specific maintenance item to be reset is 
selected from the options, a warning will be displayed 
and prompt you if the reset is really the intended action 
to be performed. 

Select: “Yes” to reset 

“No” to cancel and back out 


I 'I 


2 


ATTENTION 
Availability > 80 \ 

Do you really wish to perform reset? 


.J. 


1 

1 

1 


Instrument Cluster 

Resetting the maintenance item using the instrument cluster is different depending on 
the model of the vehicle. 


E65 

To reset a service item using the instrument cluster, press the reset button on the top left 
side of the instrument cluster for greater that 10 seconds. 

A 4-line menu appears in the speedometer. At the top is the Back function, then the first 
three service and maintenance items sorted by priority. In addition, the residual wear or 
the remaining time are specified (possibly with a minus sign). 

The "!" symbol means that you can reset this service and maintenance item, while a "0" 
indicates it is not able to be reset (the first 20% of the service interval is protected against 
premature/accidental reset). 



1. Service items (in the speedometer) 

2. Resetable service item (in the tachometer) 

a. Back 

b. Vehicle Check 

c. Microfilter 

d. Brake fluid 

e. Back 

f. RESET Vehicle Check 


You can scroll through the service and maintenance items by pressing the reset button or 
the lower axial (FAS) button on the turn signal/high beam switch. When you have selected 
a service item, press the reset button for a few seconds to display a 2-line menu in the 
tachometer. 

The Back function is at the top and the Resetable service and maintenance item is below 
it. Now select the service and maintenance item with the reset button (or the axial button) 
and press the reset button again for a few seconds. 

In a third menu line, the system confirms that the reset was successful. The whole inter¬ 
val for the service operation is highlighted in the Service Need Display. 

37 

Service and Maintenance 















E60/61/63/64 


When one or more operations have been carried out, e.g. front pads have been changed, 
these operations must be reset to their full service interval. 


There are two options for resetting the service operations: 

• Legally required service operations Legally required service operations such as the 
Statutory vehicle inspection (HU) and the Statutory exhaust test (AU), can only be 
reset in the "Service" menu. 


• Maintenance service operations All service operations for the purpose of mainte¬ 
nance are reset by means of the reset button of the trip distance counter in the 
instrument cluster. If the reset button is pressed for longer than ten seconds, the 
reset mode opens automatically. "Reset?" is displayed in the lower display window. 

In the upper display window, the CBS symbol, e.g. for "engine oil service overdue" will 
displayed. Press the reset button until the time/distance-dependent displays in the lower 
display window are replaced with dashes. Reset is no longer possible once more than 
percent of the interval has expired. A reset lock will be shown in the display with "OK". 



1. Reset button for trip counter 

2. Upper Display Window 

- CBS Symbol 

3. Lower Display Window 

- Gear Indicator 

- Reset Mode 


E90/91 

To reset the service information data using the cluster: 

• KL-15 on and all Variable displays in cluster off (clock should be displayed) 

• Press and hold odometer reset button until CBS pictures display in cluster for about 
5 seconds then release 

• Use the BC button to scroll through till desired resetable picture is displayed. 

• “Reset?” is displayed, Press and hold BC button a picture of a small analog clock 
runs through its display. When complete, the CBS reset that you chose is reset. 

• If you want to insure that the reset was done, you can press the BC button while still 
looking at the CBS reset pictogram and the acknowledgment of reset will be shown 
with a check mark in a box. 


38 

Service and Maintenance 




CBS Data Correction 

The CBS correction vehicle data allows “quick access” to create or change the CBS 
data stored in the vehicle. Sometimes the vehicle’s maintenance data will not be plausible 
(usually due to coding/programming issues). The correction includes decreasing the use 
percentage and number of resets when a reset was mistakenly performed. When the 
CBS reset is carried out, the changed data in the tester is automatically transferred to 
the vehicle. 

Example: A vehicle with only 3,000 miles on the odometer enters the service drive 
with the oil service light illuminated. The vehicle obviously does not need 
an oil service until roughly 15,000 miles. 

The oil service should not be performed and the service maintenance light 
should not be reset either. This would make the vehicle undergo a 
roughly 18,000 mile service interval. Instead, the CBS data has to be 
manipulated or corrected to compensate for the miles already driven. 


The procedure for CBS correction is found via: 

Service Functions => Maintenance => 

CBS correction, Vehicle data. 


The first step is vital to synchronize the correct time and 
date from the DISplus/GT 1 with the vehicle. 

This is important for time/distance based service items 
that are managed by the instrument cluster. 

After accepting by pressing <Yes> or <No> and entering 
corrections to the date and time, select the <Green 
Arrow> to the right. 



f. (•(■»•«* »•! iya rfknMn 


'imp®* i»wy a 

Tttte Ml* 

Bmt CBS Can—f 6—» S< 


w'*Q Ihmmm carml 
CAS 



CBS anrtcn utck a 


SCBS 6004 / Tester time 


Settings on DIS tester 
Date: 19 12006 
Time: 12*3:01 

Are current date and time correct? 


_ 

1 

1 

1 


Note: If this is found to be incorrect, go back to the Administration page of 
DISplus/GTI (main menu) and reset the current date and time. 


39 

Service and Maintenance 



















[Clung* 


a _m 


Diagnosis Test Information 

CBS correction ot vehicle data 


FinettnildNRVMn, m buw TBctratanr: 

H6 - «0«v»C"1 - -Si rrondOty -• 6 t 1«» 8BT Minftc* 

SBT fenlfir 0001 WO^O 

Sequence of the test module 

- vencte Me indtiteae ki miptnttr esif sni in? e t< 
tietwi relit? 

1. CBS cutbciicri ver»:ia<iafa m«oini 
1. unttltn irqra j» 

2 Carticticn (fipaii pU)s/ptrtKut*a ttfc 

I. ConclBi itftirtbMi 

4 Cttracfion n roai natfti 

5 Carraetion c oo arrt 

t CB5 ewreetton. veterte d^a. rHtthin 2 

1 Crortim tntpfUri 

2 COffQCllon icntltr 

1 CcnwtWi ealrtcrr vjWc* mjpecier 

« C^neclkm tfalitc«y edieujt'B^test 

S Conaclw »fv»Mte the:* 

a CB6cc«t<ecA. ver*:edef6. inertia 3 

i. Mtiataiaprctii ruiwri 

2 Correction tst« offrei ra|Ktraftin 
Correction n airuit aiUftCi cthfin 


CBS correction Tester data 




I I I IT 


CBS cetwctwn v*Ncle dela tervei te i^uii tie r®s icopii r» the evarl n 
an morrvclly prrtmed CBS tetri 

The «»vic« iCMiie tithe c«>T<stieo CBS <to»e *» by i 

*rrv*rurri: 

Tneo*0*at •etitr-r t/tteCBS itcpi Mint itr»rgthecen«<nor< 

Mala: 

The IrtMTitl Mhcb tni ndaraT mr aid the rehrte rt« a at* randided «th 
tha n terra! Tartar data Tta Tartar lata can ba rerractad la tta I tan 
'Adimlilur' n ha MS Tealar nun naau 

Rcpnnnalataa «4 (tMt egrretha 

<Mntir> <CBS •<•«> .Avattdtltv- <5»tMra tairtar. 


-W *> ■? «.,!» ? 


«g 



Selector! scope otCSS correction 

Ml 

- Engine oil -Spirt plugs 

- Front brake - Rear brake 

PI 

- Brake fluid - Microlilter 

- Vehicle - exhaust emission 

- Vehicle check 

PI 

- Phone numbers -Dale of first registration 

- Annual kilometer reading 

HI 


J I I- 


_l 


i 


This screen displays the following service and maintenance items by groups: 


1. CBS reset selection for: 

- Engine oil 

- Spark plugs 

- Front brakes 

- Rear brakes 

- Coolant 


2. CBS reset selection for: 

- Brake fluid 

- Microfilter 

- Vehicle State Inspection 

- Emission Inspection 

- Vehicle check 


3. CBS reset selection for: 

- Write telephone numbers 

- Correction data of first registration 

- Correction of annual distance driven (average used for CBS3) 

4. End 


Usage dependent wear and tear items are monitored by physical and virtual sensors. In 
cases where the wear is not measured directly, the service due date will be determined 
by using auxiliary variables such as mileage, vehicle performance, temperature, etc. 

Certain wear and tear items are calculated and managed internally by the instrument 
cluster (time and mileage) for Condition Based Service. 

40 

Service and Maintenance 























Select the specific item that needs the service interval 
information corrected. 

(for this example e “Engine oil” was selected) 


SCBS 6004 ’ CBS 1 


Scope ol CBS correction, selection 1 

CBS value availability : service counter ! 
forecast 

[1] Engine oil (84) [%J / (2) / (25000) [miles] 

[2] Spark, plugs (99) (%)/(1)/(1610O0) [miles] 

[3] Front brakes (99) [*4] /(I) (40000) [miles] 

[4] Rear brakes (99) [%]/(1) / (bOOOO) [miles] 
p]~(0)[%l/(0)/(-)[days] 

[6] Back to selection CBS items 


|/I 


~ I I I 




Select “Yes” to reenter values for servicing. 


|| 


SCBS_6004/Configuration 


CBS values for servicing: Fngino oil 
Service counter 2 [-] 

Availability: 84 [%] 

Remaining distance before due date 24630 [km] 
Due month: 9 [ ] 

Due year: 2007 [-] 

Distance forecast 2 b 000 [km] 

Time forecast: 24 [months] 

Reenter values for servicing? 


J I I * 



Follow the prompts from the green 
screens to adjust the 
correction values. 


Ul 



41 

Service and Maintenance 


























CBS Handover Inspection 

The CBS handover inspection is for the deletion of past data in the vehicle and reconfig¬ 
uring the vehicle for latest data (updating after a service). 


To perform a handover inspection select option three from 
the CBS correction, vehicle data page. 

Option 3 includes: 

1. Check status, telephone numbers 

2. Enter date of first registration 

3. Drover Adaptation reset 

4. Back to selection CBS items 


II 


SCBS 6004 1 CBS_3 


Scope of CBS correction 3 

[1] Change telephone numbers 

[2] Change date of first registration 

[3] Driver Adaptation Reset 

[4] Back to selection CBS items 




It is important that the correct telephone 
numbers are entered. These numbers are used by the 
TCU to make service calls for teleservice and for the cus¬ 
tomer to speak to a customer service representative. 


II 


SCBS_6004 / Telephonestatus 


u 


What phone number do you wish to change? 
[1J Dealer: 1866239S57S 

[2] Technical Support: 18008311117 

[3] Mobil* service: 12015732047 

[4] Return to selection 



A 

1 1 


C^J 



Note: A list of the telephone numbers that should be entered can be found in 
SI B8414 01. 


42 

Service and Maintenance 

























Key Reader 


Starting with the E65, BMW opened a new dimension in customer service. Using the 
Key Reader, Service Reception uses the data stored in the vehicle key to provide the 
following benefits: 

• Accelerate and facilitate service consultation. 

• Routine tasks, such as collecting vehicle 
data, will be minimized. 

• After accessing the data stored in the 
vehicle’s key, service and maintenance 
reguirements are determined for the 
individual vehicle (CBS). 

• A customized service maintenance list will 
be printed out for specific operations (E6x 
and E9x vehicles no longer utilize a conven¬ 
tional Service Maintenance Checklist). 

The Key Reader facilitates and accelerates service reception. As soon as the key is 
inserted, the vehicle’s maintenance data, VIN, and mileage are displayed at the client 
advisor's desk. It obtains this information by reading the vehicle data from the vehicle 
keys. 

The Service Acceptance Module (SAM) software displays and prints this vehicle data via 
a Personal Computer with installed Key Reader.the reader accesses the stored vehicle 
data and the information is displayed on screen depending on the vehicle and model. 

Key - Vehicle Data Holder and Business Card 

The Key Reader automatically collects service relevant data from the vehicle key. The 
data is transmitted from the CAS module to the key or from the EWS module to the key 
(if not eguipped with a CAS). 

The key reader works with all current E38, E39, E46, E52, E53, and E85 vehicles with a 
vehicle key that has a colored BMW logo in the center and all E6x and E9x vehicles. 

On early vehicles, the software only provides current vehicle mileage and VIN to the 
Service Advisor. On newer vehicles, E6x & E9x onward, the software supplies through 
detailed condition based service information and produces a “Vehicle Inspection Check 
List” customized to the specific needs of each vehicle. 

There are circumstances under which the current vehicle data is not stored in the key, for 
example: the customer has provided the spare key, which has not been used recently. 

For this reason, a service function is provided to store data in the key: 

• With the driver’s door closed, push/hold the central lock switch in the unlock 
position and push/hold the start/stop button for approximately 5 seconds 
(without pressing the brake pedal) = Vehicle data is transferred to the spare key. 

43 

Service and Maintenance 



Service Acceptance Module Software (SAM) 

SAM is the software running at the service advisor’s work station. As soon as the key is 
inserted into the Key Reader, the software interprets the vehicle data stored in the key 
and the service and maintenance requirements determined for the individual vehicle 
(CBS) are displayed on screen (E65 example shown below). 



This on screen information provides the service advisor more specific information about 
the individual vehicle requirements when consulting with the customer. As shown above, 
the on screen information indicates that the engine oil and brake fluid is due to be 
changed. In addition, future service and maintenance requirements (based on mileage or 
time) can be planned. 

After accessing the data stored in the vehicle’s key, a customized service maintenance 
list can be printed out for specific operations (as shown on the next page). The E65 and 
E66 no longer utilize a conventional Service Maintenance Checklist. 


44 

Service and Maintenance 



















































BMW Group Technical Hotline 


The Technical Hotline was established to assist dealer technicians who are faced with 
difficult to diagnose technical problems. In our efforts to ensure that we provide the ulti¬ 
mate service, please conform to the following before calling the Technical Hotline: 

• The technician assigned to the vehicle must have the training directly related to the 
specific vehicle or system 

• All available resources are reviewed, these may include but not limited to: SIBs, TIS, 
DCS messages, Service Round Table, etc. 

• The Shop Foreman / Lead Technician is consulted 

• The attached Check Sheet is completely filled out (please photocopy as needed) 

If at this point a solution has not been reached, please contact the Technical Hotline 
through the use of the Product and Measures Management Aftersales (PuMA) interface. 

A contact number can be provided in the following cases: 

• Abnormal troubleshooting which does not resolve the problem, and the Technical 
Hotline offers a recommendation to replace a component or a system (very rare). 

• All automatic transmission replacements. 

More information on PuMA can be obtained via the PuMA section of this book on a 
separate tab. 


Note: The Quality and Service Engineering Department should only be 
contacted if you need technical assistance or you are following up 
on a previous Technical Hotline discussion. 


45 

Service and Maintenance 




Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. Name the bulletin numbers which contains information concerning Quality 
Certification. 


2. Transmission fluid for the CVT should be changed every 


3. At what approximate mileage will the SIA indicator show the first scheduled oil 
change is due? 


4. During which BMW Inspection is the poly V-belt changed? 


5. Name the four things a technician should do BEFORE calling the Technical 
Hotline. 


6. What is the factory default setting for Pathway Lighting? 

7. What three steps make up the approved method of documenting repair orders? 


46 

Service and Maintenance 















