Table of Contents 

Software Service Station (SSS) 

Subject Page 

Software Service Station .3 

Purpose of the Unit.3 

System Components .4 

Service.4 

Connections to the SSS.5 

Power Supply.5 

Keyboard and Mouse.5 

Monitor.5 

Front View of SSS .6 

RearView of SSS.7 


Initial Print Date:2/06 Revision Date: 












Software Service Station 


Model: All 
Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Familiarize yourself with the Software Service Station. 

• Know what cables are needed for the operation of the SSS 

• Understand the purpose for the Software Service Station. 


2 

Software Service Station 










Software Service Station 


Purpose of the Unit 

The Software Service Station (SSS) was released to all centers for the sole purpose of 
Coding and Programming vehicles that can only be Coded/Programmed using CIR The 
SSS is a dedicated desktop PC, that supplements the DISplus and GT1 diagnostic sys¬ 
tems, since the SSS is only capable of performing Coding and Programming it frees up 
the DISplus and GT1 for diagnostic functions. 

With the release of CIP 14.0 and the implementation of Progman, the SSS replaces the 
DISplus and GT1 (Group Tester One) diagnosis systems as the primary programming 
system. The DISplus and GT1 will only be able to send a request to Program or Code a 
vehicle directly through the SSS. The SSS performs the actual programming and cod¬ 
ing process. In this configuration the SSS is able to program up to five vehicles at a time 
and the DISplus and GT1 are free to be used for other tasks, provided that all devices 
are connected to the workshop network and have been assigned specific IP 
addresses. 

As with the DISplus and GT1, data is supplied to the Software Service Station by means 
of a CIP DVD-ROM or CD-ROM, additional data can also be provided by online updates 
via JETStream. 



3 

Software Service Station 
























System Components 

The SSS will program/code all BMW models from start of production. The Software 
Service Station does not have a radio card and must be hardwired into the network. 

The Software Service Station consists of the following: 

• Standard Desktop PC 

• Pentium 4, 2GHz processor 

• 512 MB RAM 

• 80 GB hard drive 

• 3 year service contract 

• Full network capability 

• Central Processing Unit 

• Matrox Graphics board 

• DVD drive 

• Floppy drive 

• Local Area Network connection -Online Updates 

• Connections-USB, VGA, Parallel, Serial and Audio in-out 

• Optical Mouse 

• Keyboard with smartcard 

• 17" Monitor 1024X768 pixels 

Initial and major software installation is performed by inserting CD/DVD’s into the 
computer drive. Software updating can be performed via online update. 

Service 

Siemens handles warranty and non-warranty Hotline support for the Software Service 
Station. Siemens will troubleshoot the SSS over the phone and if necessary elevate the 
process for repair to the closest repair center. Call 1 800 215 1646 for the Siemens 
Hotline. 

All network related issues should be directed to API International 
@ 1 -800-527-4872 x232. 


4 

Software Service Station 



Connections to the SSS 



Power Supply 

The SSS comes shipped with the power 
supply set to 220 volts. The switch on the 
back of the computer should be switched 
to 115 volts before starting up. 


The computer has its own power supply 
cable that need to be plugged into a surge 
protected outlet. 


Keyboard and Mouse 

The keyboard and optical mouse connect 
to the into the USB ports in the back of 
the computer. 



Monitor 

The monitor has its own power supply 
cable that need to be plugged into a surge 
protected outlet. 

The RGB cable is connected to the back 
of the computer. The SSS has two video 
connectors on the rear panel. The RGB 
connection on the left is disabled several 
second after the computer is on. Use only 
the right side plug for video output. 




Rear RGB Connectors 


5 

Software Service Station 














































Front View of SSS 



1. DVD drive. 

2. 3.5” floppy disk drive. 

3. Power status LED. 

4. Power ON/OFF button. 

5. Hard drive status LED. 


6 

Software Service Station 








Rear View of SSS 

(all connection made) 



1. Power supply switch set to 115v. 

2. Computer power cable (to protected outlet). 

3. Keyboard or mouse USB connection. 

4. Keyboard or mouse USB connection. 

5. LAN connection to network. 

6. RGB connector (not used). 

7. RGB connection to monitor. 


7 

Software Service Station 


























