Table of Contents 

Workshop Network 

Subject Page 

Workshop Network.3 

Vehicle Bus Systems.3 

Workshop Local Area Network (LAN) .4 

Network Structure.5 

Network Connections .6 

Accessing Configuration Information .8 

Workshop Layout.10 

Workshop Network Components.12 

Access Point .12 

Wall Jack .12 

CAT 5 Ethernet Cable .12 

Switched Hub.12 

Server.12 

Common Terminology .13 

Network .13 

Local Area Network (LAN) .13 

Ethernet .13 

Ethernet Cable (CAT 5).13 

RJ-45 Connectors.13 

Wall Jack .13 

Switched HUB.14 

Network Server.14 

Automatic/Online Updates .14 

Access Point.14 

Interface Name .15 

IP Address .15 

IP Subnet Mask.15 

Gateway .16 


Initial Print Date: 2/06 


Revision Date: 






























Workshop Network 


Model: All 

Production: All 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the equipment used in the workshop network 

• Determine what components make up a workshop network 

• Understand the terminology used with regard to networks and configurations 


2 

Workshop Network 










Workshop Network 


As the level of technology in our vehicles continues to increase so does the level of tech¬ 
nology that we use in our diagnostic and programming equipment within the workshop. 

In order to meet the ever growing demand for more rapid transfer of information we can 
no longer have multiple “stand alone” systems, therefore various infrastructures have 
been created to allow multiple “stand alone” devices/systems to interact with each other 
to share information. 

The sharing of information with various control modules in our vehicles has been occur¬ 
ring for quite some time, now we will also be doing this with the diagnostic equipment in 
the workshop as well. 

Vehicle Bus Systems 

In order to make the components used in our vehicles more efficient we utilize bus 
structures (commonly referred to as 1-Bus, K-Bus, D-Bus, DS2-Bus Byteflight, PT-CAN, 
etc.). By using bus structures in vehicles, we can accelerate communication between 
several different control modules. 

Many common vehicle systems (such as entertainment, safety, powertrain, etc.) are 
“stand alone” systems but also require information from other modules/systems in order 
to be more efficient. In order to obtain the required information the systems must also 
be able to simultaneously communicate without interfering with each other, which is 
accomplished by using various bus structures. 

Example: 

The PDC receives information on vehicle 
speed from the ABS/ASC/DSC control 
unit. 

To receive this signal, it is transmitted from: 

• ABS/ASC/DSC control unit to the IKE 
via the CAN-Bus, 

• IKE control unit to the PDC control 
unit via the K-Bus splice (inside the 
BC1) control unit. 

The workshop network operates in a 
similar fashion. 


FDC 




AIC 


Ffe-ifc- 


l \ l 




MFL 

i 

■ 


i 

LAV PI 


HCw 


DSP 


z 


Bt 1 

^4 




IHKA 



V =: =5 4 


K-Bum 
Ctin-EkJt 
□ingpo^fc 0JJ3- 

GS2 Pro i«?i 




£U ED 


■V5 C-EEC 





3 

Workshop Network 














































































Workshop Local Area Network (LAN) 

A network is nothing more than a group of devices interconnected so that they can com¬ 
municate with each other. A LAN is a network that is localized to a specific area, such as 
a workshop or office. 

The bus systems (1-Bus, K-Bus, PT-CAN, D-Bus,...) that we have been using in our vehi¬ 
cles for quite sometime, are nothing more than networks with different configurations. 




Workshop Network 

All workshops are currently equipped with a GT1, DISplus, SSS, Diagnostic Head, 
Access Point, desktop computer(s) and printer(s) which can be considered as satellite 
components (control modules/sensors). 

In order for these components to communicate with each other, either directly or 
indirectly, they must be interconnected via a cable/wire to a common point or switching 
device. Consider the switching device/hub to be similar to the IKE, which monitors all 
devices connected to it and allows the devices to communicate with each other. The 
interconnection of these devices results in the establishment of a network localized to 
the workshop area thereby establishing a Local Area Network (LAN) in the workshop. 


4 

Workshop Network 



























































Network Structure 

By having the workshop configured to allow the various devices used on a daily basis to 
be interconnected/networked with each other, as indicated in the illustration, additional 
components can easily be added and online updates can automatically be installed on all 
connected devices, as long as they have an approved IP address. 

The network that exist in the workshop is not much different than the network structure 
that is used in our vehicles. In order for control modules to communicate with each other 
they must be correctly identified. 

The identification process can be considered to occur as part of the coding procedure 
which is done at the end of the assembly process or at anytime a new component/mod¬ 
ule/system is added to the vehicle. By not recoding the vehicle after adding or removing 
a module/system, the communication on a particular bus can be hampered. 

This is especially true: 

• If a response form a module that is no longer installed is expected 

• If a new module transmits data that is not expected by anyone else on the bus 
because it is not correctly identified 

The VO for a vehicle can be considered to contain the IP addresses of the modules 
installed in the vehicle. 

If the devices on the workshop network do not have a rigidly assigned IP address, online 
updates to specific devices can not occur. The operation/performance of a network can 
be greatly hampered if multiple devices share an address, since the transmitted data is not 
able to reach the correct device, it can result in jamming up the operation of the network. 



5 

Workshop Network 






























































































































Network Connections 

When establishing a network which will utilize multiple access terminals/jacks it is 
recommended that the jacks and cables attached to the specific jacks are numbered 
and that the corresponding end of the cable that connects to the router/switched hub 
should be numbered as well. 

Example: The illustration below shows a basic network structure with no miscella¬ 

neous devices connected, other than a Server and Switched Hub. 

The cables running to/from the Switched Hub are all numbered on both 
ends to make troubleshooting the network easier in the event of a problem 
with the cabling, wall jack or Switched Hub connections. 

Not having the cable and wall jacks number would be like trying to 
troubleshoot a problem with an electrical circuit in the vehicle where all 
the wires are the same color and the components connected have no 
pin assignments. 



Network Connections 


6 

Workshop Network 











Once additional devices are connected it becomes very important that the configuration 
information (IP Address, Gateway Address, Subnet Mask and Device Name) is entered 
correctly for each device that is connected to the network. Each device must be assigned 
a specific/unique IP Address. 

It is very important that the IP address not be shared by multiple devices located on the 
network, as this can result in “Locking-up” the network, which can have a detrimental 
effect on any control module(s) being programmed or coded. 



7 

Workshop Network 














































Accessing Configuration Information 

-DISplus&GTI 






Administration System configuration 

Opinling uric 


Ht-vl Millie 



The screen now displays the network config¬ 
uration information for the device being used 
DISplus/GTI. 


8 

Workshop Network 



















































Select “Diagnostic Head” 




Select “Free diagnostic heads” 

NOTE: In order for an interface to be 

displayed it must be connected 
to a vehicle and the ignition 
turned on. 



Network configuration information for the 
selected interface is displayed. 

Example: A red color band will be assigned 
to this interface once “OK” is selected 


9 

Workshop Network 

















































































Workshop Layout 








l 





! 




1 






_!_J_ 





T7T 

i i i 

1 

i 1 1 1 


i i i i r 


.1 - -L., 1 


10 

Workshop Network 




































































































































































































































































Workshop Layout Legend 


Device # 

Device Name/Description 

1 

Software Service Station (SSS) 

2 

Network Printer 

3 

Switched Hub (Cisco Switch WS C2950-24) 

4 

BMW Network 

5 

GT1 

6 

Wall Jack/Ethernet Connection point to workshop Network 

7 

Access Point 

8 

Deutronic Automatic Battery Charger 

9 

OPS 

10 

Workshop PC 

11 

DISplus 

12 

OPS Head 

13 

Diagnostic Head 

14 

Network Server 


11 

Workshop Network 


















Workshop Network Components 


A LAN currently exists in all workshops to allow the diagnostic equipment (DISplus, GT1, 
SSS, OPPS, OPS & Diagnostic Head) to communicate with each other. In order to suc¬ 
cessfully diagnose, code and program a vehicle, it is required to have all equipment con¬ 
nected to the workshop network. 

Access Point 

Allows direct wireless access to LAN for GT1 and 
Diagnostic Head or Diagnostic head establishes 
connection to LAN via wireless communication and 
thereby can be connected to DISplus or GT1, which 
are connected to LAN 

Access point is connected directly to LAN. Symbol - 
Model Spectrum 24/AP 3020-100 


Wall Jack 

Connection point for devices such as GT1, DISplus, 
Access Point, SSS, Diagnostic Head, OPPS/OPS 
Head, Printer and Network Server to Switched Router 
via RJ45 cable. 



CAT 5 Ethernet Cable 

Used to establish a connection between: 

• Wall jack and Switched Router/Hub 

• Wall jack and devices such as GT1, DISplus, 
Access Point, SSS, Diagnostic Head, OPPS/OPS 
Head and Network Server. 




Switched Hub 

LAN switched distribution hub for all devices connected 
to the network. Routes communication telegrams / 
messages to specific devices from specific devices. 
Allows multiple devices to communicate with each 
other without reducing data transfer rate. 



Cisco Switch WS-C2950-24 


Server 

Central computer which controls interface/communi¬ 
cation between all devices on the Workshop LAN and 
communication to external networks and internet. 
Keystone device for network operation along with 
switch/router. 

12 

Workshop Network 



















Common Terminology 

Network 

A group of computers that are interconnected with each other and able to communicate 
with each other either by transferring data via a wired or wireless connection. 

Local Area Network (LAN) 

A network that exists within a specific area. 

Example: By having all computers, testers and printers in the workshop 

interconnected results in a Workshop LAN. 

Ethernet 

The term Ethernet is a communications protocol used to define a method & speed by 
which interconnected devices are able to communicate with each other by either a wired 
(twisted pair) or fiberoptic connection. 

Common Ethernet communication protocol terms: 

lOBaseT - Able to transmit data at a rate of 10Mbps for a maximum distance 

of 100 meters per segment. 

100BaseT - Able to transmit data at a rate of 100Mbps for a maximum distance 

of 1000 meters per segment. 

The speed differences are obtained by modifying the method of encoding the data to be 
transferred. The maximum distance consist of the distance from switched hub to wall jack 
plus length of cable used to connect a particular device. The greater the distance the 
greater the chance of signal loss/disturbance. 

Ethernet Cable (CAT 5) 

A standard used to define an 8 wire cable (4 twisted pair) that is commonly used to inter¬ 
connect various computers in the establishment of an ethernet network. Certified to 
transmit data at a maximum rate of 100Mbps. 

RJ-45 Connectors 

The plastic connectors at the end of a CAT 5 cable, used to connect the cable to 
device/computer, wall jack and hub. 

Wall Jack 

Accepts RJ-45 connectors when connecting devices to the network. Connection point 
for devices like DISplus, GT1, SSS, Diagnostic Head, workshop computers and printer. 

Recommendation is that outlet/jack is numbered and the corresponding end of the ether- 
net cable connected to the switched hub is numbered as well, to assist in troubleshoot¬ 
ing in the event of a problem. 

Example: A wall jack outlet is labeled as #1 the other end of the cable at the hub 

should also be labeled #1. 


13 

Workshop Network 


Switched HUB 

Allows multiple devices to send information over the network at the same time without 
slowing down the communication process. A switched hub essentially isolates the two 
devices that are communicating, thereby providing each component on the network a 
separate connection at the maximum data transfer rate of the network. 

Example: A switched HUB is similar to the use of cloverleafs on the highway ; traffic 

does not need to stop if a change in direction needs to be made, plus 
traffic flows smoothly from point to point. 

A regular HUB does not provide each component with a separate connection point to 
the network but rather a shared connection point. By sharing a connection point the 
data transfer rate of the network is reduced when multiple devices try to communicate. 

Example: A regular HUB is similar to the use of a 4 way intersection, the smaller the 

amount of traffic using the intersection the quicker a car can go through 
the intersection and reach its desired destination. The greater the traffic 
the longer it will take for a car to reach its desired destination. 

The switched hub installed as part of the workshop wiring project is a Cisco WS-C2950-24. 

Network Server 

A computer that provides information/data to other computers located on the network. 

A server allows computers on its network to access information on another network, 
such as the internet. The server is the keystone device that allows computers on its 
specific network to access information on another network. 

As an example a server can obtain and distribute software updates to all computers 
located on its network, instead of having to physically install the updates to each 
computer individually. 

Automatic/Online Updates 

The ability to connect the network server to the BMW server and check for new software 
updates (Diagnostic, Coding & Programming data) then downloads the information to all 
computers/equipment located on the network automatically at a specific time. 

Example: New updates can be installed on SSS, GT1 and DISplus overnight in 

order to have latest data available the next morning. 

The application that performs online updates is referred to as JETstream. 

Access Point 

The access point is a wireless communication device that is able to establish a wireless 
connection with a GT1 and/or a diagnostic head and allows them to communicate with 
other devices on the network. 

Manufactured by Symbol - Model Spectrum 24 /AP 3020-100 


14 

Workshop Network 



Interface Name 

The specific name assigned to the device (Ex. Diagnostic Head Blue A) 

IP Address 

It is a unique four segment number used to identify a specific device located on a specific 
network. The number represents the address of the device on the network and is neces¬ 
sary when communicating with other devices located on the network. 

Example: 92.168.100.10 

Usually the first three segments are used to identify the network and the 
last segment identifies the device. The IP Subnet Mask information gener¬ 
ally defines which segments are needed to identify the network and which 
identify the device. 

In order for a devices on the network to communicate with other devices on the network 
it must know the addresses of those devices. If a print command is sent from a computer 
to a printer on the network, the command must be addressed specifically to the desired 
printer. 

Example: An IP address is no different than your home address, in order to receive a 

letter specifically directed to you, your name and address must be correctly 
displayed on the letter. 

IP addresses are assigned by the network administrator/provider and are rigidly assigned 
to the device(s) located within the workshop network, by entering it into the device during 
the initial setup. 

IP Subnet Mask 

This information is used to define which segment(s) of the four segment IP address 
specifically identifies the device and which identify the specific network. 

Example: 255.255.255.0 

Indicates that the first three segments (255.255.255) identify the specific 
network that the device is located on. The last segment (0) indicates that 
this is the segment that will identify the specific device. 


15 

Workshop Network 
















































Gateway 

This information identifies the four segment address of the component located on the 
network responsible for communicating from the current network to another network. 
If there is no address in this location then a connection to any devices outside of the 
current network can not be established. 

Note: The network and device address information must be entered exactly 
as defined by the network administrator for your facility, otherwise the 
devices can not be accessed. 


16 

Workshop Network 


