Technical training. 

Product information. 

G12 Navigation System 



BMW Service 


Edited for the U.S. market by: 

BMW Group University 

Technical Training 

ST1501 8/1/2015 

V_/ 









General information 


Symbols used 

The following symbol is used in this document to facilitate better comprehension or to draw attention 
to very important information: 

A 

Contains important safety information and information that needs to be observed strictly in order to 
guarantee the smooth operation of the system. 


Information status and national-market versions 

BMW Group vehicles meet the requirements of the highest safety and quality standards. Changes 
in requirements for environmental protection, customer benefits and design render necessary 
continuous development of systems and components. Consequently, there may be discrepancies 
between the contents of this document and the vehicles available in the training course. 

This document basically relates to the European version of left hand drive vehicles. Some operating 
elements or components are arranged differently in right-hand drive vehicles than shown in the 
graphics in this document. Further differences may arise as the result of the equipment specification in 
specific markets or countries. 

Additional sources of information 

Further information on the individual topics can be found in the following: 

• Owner's Handbook 

• Integrated Service Technical Application. 

Contact: conceptinfo@bmw.de 
©2015 BMW AG, Munich 

Reprints of this publication or its parts require the written approval of BMW AG, Munich 

The information contained in this document forms an integral part of the technical training of the 
BMW Group and is intended for the trainer and participants in the seminar. Refer to the latest relevant 
information systems of the BMW Group for any changes/additions to the technical data. 

Information status: June 2015 

BV-72/Technical Training 




G12 Navigation System 

Contents 


1. Introduction.1 

2. System Overview.2 

2.1. System network.2 

2.1.1. Bus overview.2 

2.1.2. Functional wiring diagram.5 

2.2. System wiring diagram.7 

2.2.1. Navigation system.7 

3. System Components.9 

3.1. Introduction.9 

3.2. Operation/display.10 

3.2.1. Controller.10 

3.2.2. Central information display (CID).11 

3.2.3. Voice processing system (SVS).12 

3.3. Extended displays for navigation system.12 

3.3.1. Instrument cluster and HUD.12 

3.4. Navigation computer/navigation software.14 

3.4.1. Navigation computer in the Head Unit High 2.14 

3.4.2. Hard disk drive HDD and map update.15 

3.5. Sensor system of the navigation system.17 

4. Navigation Functions.18 

4.1. Introduction.18 

4.2. Selection and settings.18 

4.2.1. Toolbar.18 

4.2.2. Map view settings.19 

4.2.3. Full-screen mode.22 

4.3. Destination input.23 

4.3.1. Destination input by means of controller and touch screen.24 

4.3.2. Direct input (interactive map and touch operation).25 

4.3.3. Voice processing system and ConnectedDrive.26 

4.4. Display (Guiding).27 

4.4.1. Split screen variants.27 

4.4.2. Guiding in the instrument cluster.29 

4.4.3. Guiding in the Head-Up Display.29 

4.5. Changing route (Routing).30 

4.5.1. Alternative routes.30 

4.5.2. Changing the route manually.30 

4.5.3. Route simulation.31 

4.5.4. Avoid route.32 









































G12 Navigation System 

Contents 


4.5.5. Learning navigation.32 

4.6. Special functions.34 

4.6.1. Activation points of camera system.34 

4.6.2. Journey planner.35 

4.6.3. Quick search.37 

5. Voice Processing System (SVS).38 

5.1. History.38 

5.2. New development/further development.39 

5.2.1. Introduction.39 

5.2.2. Natural language understanding applications.40 













G12 Navigation System 

1. Introduction 


A high-end navigation system the Navigation Professional system (SA 609) is offered for the G12 as 
standard equipment in the US market. The heart of the hardware is the next generation Head Unit 
High 2. All calculations of the navigation system are performed in this unit. The reception and sensor 
electronics components were distributed among several control units in the G12. 

The 3-year subscription introduced with the F23 for map data updates is also fully implemented for 
the G12. There are also new challenges for the service organization. 

In terms of navigation hardware, the navigation system consists of a fixed 12.3" central information 
display (CID) with touch screen with a resolution of 1440 x 540 pixels, the Head Unit High 2 HU-H2 
and the iDrive controller CON. 

With regards to operation, the iDrive controller with rotary and push-button function and the touch- 
sensitive surface with handwriting detection (iDrive Touch Controller) are standard options for the 
US market. The favorite buttons on the head unit have a new feature as well as the touch screen 
operation on the central information display (CID). 

There are also a host of new features for the navigation functions in the G12. These relate to the 
areas of map view, destination input, display (guiding), routing and the special functions for navigation. 
The highlights include the newly designed Micro City Map with a scale of up to 10 m, the learning 
navigation function, the route magnet and route visualization by means of an aerial view. 

In addition, control of the navigation system via the voice processing system (SVS) was significantly 
improved in the G12. The modified visual/acoustic feedback of the SVS in the vehicle facilitates 
operation. A new feature is an additional off-board version of the voice processing system via the 

SIM card permanently installed in the vehicle. Like with SIRI from Apple or the "Speech to 

(R) 

text" function (Message Dictation by Nuance ) introduced at BMW in 2012, the off-board SVS is 
processed by an external provider and transmitted back to the vehicle in seconds. You can find out 
about the differences between the individual embedded (onboard) and off-board SVS versions in this 
training manual. 

A main application area for the voice processing system (SVS) with its embedded (hard disk) and 
off-board (BMW backend) services is navigation. That is why the topic of SVS, which has hardware 
components distributed throughout the vehicle, is covered in this training manual. You can find 
out about the new and distinguishing features in the area of embedded/off-board SVS and natural 
language understanding here. 


1 



G12 Navigation System 

2. System Overview 

2.1. System network 

2.1.1. Bus overview 



mm 



I 




G12 bus overview 

2 


TE14.11B3.2 















































































G12 Navigation System 

2. System Overview 


Abbreviation 

Explanation 

ACC 

Active cruise control 

ACSM 

Crash Safety Module 

AMPT 

Amplifier Top (top high fidelity amplifier) 

ASD 

Active Sound Design 

BDC 

Body Domain Controller 

CON 

Controller 

DME 

Digital Motor Electronics 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

EARSH 

Electric active roll stabilization rear 

EARSV 

Electric active roll stabilization front 

EGS 

Electronic transmission control 

EPS 

Electromechanical Power Steering 

FLA 

High-beam assistant 

FLER 

Frontal Light Electronics Right 

FLEL 

Frontal Light Electronics Left 

FZD 

Roof function centre 

GWS 

Gear selector 

HEADUNIT 

Head Unit High 2 

HKA 

Automatic rear air-conditioning and heating 

HKFM 

Tailgate function module 

HSR 

Rear axle slip angle control 

IHKA 

Integrated automatic heating / air conditioning 

KAFAS 

Camera-based driver support systems 

KOMBI 

Instrument panel 

LEM 

Light Effect Manager 

NFC 

Near Field Communication 

NVE 

Night Vision Electronics 

PCU 

Power Control Unit 

PMA 

Parking maneuvering assistant 

RFK 

Reversing camera 

RSE 

Rear Seat Entertainment 

RSL 

Radar Sensor Left (avoidance assistant) 

RSR 

Radar Sensor Right (avoidance assistant) 

SAS 

Optional equipment system 

SMBF 

Seat module, passenger 


3 





















G12 Navigation System 

2. System Overview 


Abbreviation 

Explanation 

SMFA 

Seat module, driver 

SMFAH 

Seat module, driver, rear 

SPNMHL 

Seat pneumatics module back left 

SPNMHR 

Seat pneumatics module back right 

SPNMVL 

Seat pneumatics module front left 

SPNMVR 

Seat pneumatics module front right 

SWW 

Lane change warning (primary) 

SWW2 

Lane change warning (secondary) 

TCB2 

Telematic Communication Box 2; Telematic Control Unit 2 

TRSVC 

Control unit for rear view camera and SideView 

VDP 

Vertical Dynamic Platform 

VTG 

Transfer box 

WCA 

Wireless Charging tray 

1 

Start-up node control units for starting and synchronizing 
the FlexRay bus system 

2 

Control units with wake-up authorisation 

3 

Control units also connected at terminal 15WUP 


4 












G12 Navigation System 

2. System Overview 

2.1.2. Functional wiring diagram 





Functional wiring diagram for navigation system G12 


5 






































G12 Navigation System 

2. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central Information Display (CID) 

2 

Head Unit High 2 

3 

User interface 

4 

Application/software 

5 

Interfaces/tuner/hardware connections 


6 






G12 Navigation System 

2. System Overview 

2.2. System wiring diagram 


2.2.1. Navigation system 



Navigation and TV system G12 


7 


TE14-1712.2 



























































































G12 Navigation System 

2. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Electrochromatic mirror 

2 

Body Domain Controller (BDC) 

3 

Crash Safety Module (ACSM) 

4 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

5 

Remote control service receiver (FBD) (with K-CAN connection for first time) 

6 

Rear window diversity and antenna amplifier (FM/AM and FM2) 

7 

Rear window heating and antennas (FM/AM and FM2) 

8 

Additional brake light 

9 

E-filter against interference from additional brake light 

10 

Antenna system + control unit TCB2 for convenient telephone (SA 6NS) or 
Telephone with Wireless Charging (SA 6NW); snap-in roof-mounted antenna 
in the fin with SDARS (US), TEL1 (telephone), TEL2 (telematics) and GPS 

11 

Bluetooth antenna connected to the Head Unit High 2 

12 

Wi-Fi Direct antenna connected to the Head Unit High 2 

13 

Head Unit High 2 

14 

Integrated automatic heating / air conditioning (IHKA) 

15 

IHKA control panel 


8 











G12 Navigation System 

3. System Components 

3.1. Introduction 

The G12 has been extended by a number of functions with respect to operation of the navigation 
system in addition to the newly designed Touch Controller. The gesture recognition camera is not 
yet used for the navigation function at the series launch. However, a number of gestures for navigation 
are planned for the near future. The Central Information Display (CID) will already be equipped with a 
touch display at the series launch. All functions of the navigation system can be operated with this. 

Input via the voice processing system promises a quantum leap forward. Here, embedded SVS 
(hard disk) or off-board SVS (BMW backend) is offered in combination (which is standard on US 
market G12 versions). 

The GPS tuner for the navigation system was relocated to the TelematicCommunication Box TCB2. 
This was possible for the G12 since the TCB2 is included in the standard equipment in all vehicles of 
the BMW 7 Series. 

The TCB2 is connected directly with the roof fin as a hardware component. You can find details on 
the TCB2 in the “G12 Telephone and telematic systems” training manual. The yaw rate sensor and 
longitudinal acceleration sensor have also been relocated and their signals are transmitted to the 
Head Unit High 2 via the bus system. An FM triple tuner is available for traffic information. This 
supplies RDS/TMC information to the head unit at regular intervals. If the customer has ordered 
the optional equipment Real Time Traffic Info RTTI (OE 6AM) via the ConnectedDrive Store or ex- 
works, this information is displayed in the G12 navigation system as additional traffic information with 
coloured messages and diversion recommendations. 

The navigation software with application and navigation map data is again installed on a partition 
of the 200 GB hard disk in the Head Unit High. A new feature here above all is the automatic map 
update process in combination with a 3-year subscription for the customer. 


Function 

Components 

Operation/display 

Gestures (not yet available for 
navigation at series launch) 

Gesture recognition camera (OE 6U8) 

Touch 

Touch screen (OE 609; 601) 

Touch 

Touch Controller (standard equipment) 

Rotate/press/slide 

Touch Controller (standard equipment) 

Language 

Voice processing system (standard equipment) 

Language 

ConnectedDrive Concierge Services 
(OE 6AN) via the ConnectedDrive 

Telematic System TCB2 

Extended displays 

Display, centre of vehicle 

Central information display with touch 
screen (OE 609) 

Display, driver's position 

Instrument cluster standard equipment or 
multifunctional instrument display (OE 6WB) 

Display, driver's position, raised 

Head-up Display (SA 610) 


9 









G12 Navigation System 

3. System Components 


Function 

Components 

Navigation computer/navigation software 

Navigation application 

Head Unit High 2 hard disk drive (HDD) 

Navigation map data 

Head Unit High 2 hard disk drive (HDD) 

Sensor system/evaluation electronics 

GPS reception 

GPS antenna in the roof fin 

GPS tuner 

GPS tuner in the TCB2 

Yaw sensor 

ACSM 

Longitudinal acceleration 

DSC sensor system 


3.2. Operation/display 

3.2.1. Controller 

The controller (CON) in the G12 has a touch control panel and 7 direct access keys. A new feature 
is that the menus on the left side CD/Multimedia and have now been combined into Media . The 
telephone menu has moved from the right to the left side and is now called COM for communication. 

By combining CD/Multimedia and Radio, space was created on the right side of the controller for 
another direct access key. There are now 2 buttons on the right that can be used to access 
the navigation system: 

• “MAP” to access the previous Map submenu of the navigation system. 

• “NAV” to access destination input of the navigation system. 



Controller G12 with installation location 


10 













G12 Navigation System 

3. System Components 



The two direct access keys for the navigation system on the controller 


3.2.2. Central information display (CID) 

With Navigation Professional (SA 609), a fixed 12.3" touch screen with a resolution of 1440 x 540 
pixels has now been integrated on the central information display (CID). 

Further information on the touch display is available in the “G12 Displays and Controls” training 
manual. 



Touch display in the G12 

The touch screen allows selection of all functions in the navigation system that can also be selected 
via the controller. 


11 






G12 Navigation System 

3. System Components 

3.2.3. Voice processing system (SVS) 

The voice processing system (SVS) has been introduced for the first time in the G12. Using an 
off-board SVS database managed by an external provider, voice commands can now be processed 
directly by the system that were previously not understood. The language dialogue takes place as 
if you are having a conversation with a chauffeur and not with an electronic system. 

The new feature is known as "natural language understanding" and the basic functions are already 
present on the hard disk drive in the head unit. Additional functions such as the recognition of Points 
of Interest (POIs), e.g. the Allianz Arena in Munich, Wembley Stadium in London or the Fontana di Trevi 
in Rome are recognized without problems by the system. However, the data connection to the provider 
mentioned above is necessary for this. 

The voice processing system for the G12 will be offered in different quality levels. You can find out 
more details about this in Chapter 6. 



Zielfiihrung starten 

Als Zwischenziel hinzufiigen 

4 Megastore in der Allianz Are 

Munchen. Esplanade 5.0 Km 


1 Allianz Arena 

Mijnchen, Werni 


Input destination POI Allianz Arena 


3.3. Extended displays for navigation system 


3.3.1. Instrument cluster and HUD 

The Central Information Display (CID) as the only display element for navigation has long since been 
history. Today, additional display of navigation commands in the instrument cluster is part of the 
standard equipment. Extended functions can be found in the multifunctional instrument cluster 
(OE 6WB) and in the Head-Up Display (OE 610). 

As the basic version, the navigation message field is shown in the standard instrument cluster 
on a TFT display inside the fixed engine speed display dial (TFT 8.8”; 1280 x 480 pixels). 


12 


G12 Navigation System 

3. System Components 



mv 


Instrument cluster G12 

The different sizes of the two TFT displays are evident in the direct comparison with the 
multifunctional instrument cluster. 



Comparison of the navigation display on the two instrument cluster versions G12 


13 


TE14-1794 









G12 Navigation System 

3. System Components 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Instrument cluster with fixed engine speed display dial (Not for US) 

2 

Multifunctional instrument cluster with larger TFT display 
(SA 6WB - Dynamic Digital instrument Cluster) 


With the multifunctional instrument cluster (SA 6WB - Dynamic Digital instrument Cluster), the 
instrument dials for speed reading, engine speed display as well as fuel and engine temperature 
display are displayed fully electronically. This is made possible by a 12.3" TFT display with a resolution 
of 1920 x 720 pixels. 

Due to the size of the TFT display, it is possible here to hide the electronic pointers with rpm digits 
if required and to display the High Guiding (auxiliary route arrows) on the complete right half of the 
instrument cluster. 

If you wish to find out more about the two instrument clusters and modes, please refer to the 
“G12 Displays and Controls” training manual. 


3.4. Navigation computer/navigation software 


3.4.1. Navigation computer in the Head Unit High 2 

The navigation software is stored on the hard disk drive of the Head Unit High. This means that the 
head unit is the navigation computer of the vehicle. The map material is also stored on the hard disk 
drive in the Head Unit High 2 (HU-H2). 

A new feature is the fact that the complete sensor system of the navigation system has been 
decentralized and is now located in different control units of the G12. The processed navigation data 
from the GPS antenna and GPS tuner is sent by the Telematic Communication Box 2 to the Head Unit 
High 2 via the new OABR Ethernet bus system. 

The data of the yaw rate sensor for the navigation system is provided by the Crash Safety 
Module (ACSM). In combination with the longitudinal acceleration data from the Dynamic 
Stability Control (DSC), this data is also transmitted to the Head Unit High 2 via FlexRay 
and BDC. 



Installation location of the HU-H2 


14 










G12 Navigation System 

3. System Components 

3.4.2. Hard disk drive HDD and map update 

The navigation application (navigation software) is integrated in the operating system of the HU-H2, 
which has a specified size of 4 GB. The hard disk partition for the navigation map material remains 
unchanged at 100 GB. 

Since the map data is part of the head unit and its hard disk drive, the topic of map update is covered 
together with the complete description of the Head Unit High 2 in the “G12 Audio system” 
training manual. The procedures for a FULL map update or partial update (automatic map update) 
are described there. 


Navigation Map Update 


Full Map Update I Automatic Map Update 



A 

With the automatic update function introduced for the first time in a BMW 7 Series, the complete 
data is not updated in the update process (example about 30 GB are needed for the of a Europe map); 
instead, only the current changes for each defined update area (a maximum of 350 MB) are updated. 

For example: Germany cluster or Spain cluster, Italy cluster, etc. 


15 







G12 Navigation System 

3. System Components 



Partitioning of Head Unit High 2 example 


1 

Navigation area of the hard disk drive (partition with 106 GB) 

2 

Map data (example Europe: about 30 GB) 

3 

Streaming updates maximum of 350 MB every three months via "Automatic 

Map update"; according to the state, region of the customer (e.g. Germany) 

4 

Remaining map of Europe = (29.5 GB) which is not automatically updated 


16 










G12 Navigation System 

3. System Components 

3.5. Sensor system of the navigation system 


Description 


Sensor system/control unit 


The data of the yaw rate sensor for the 
navigation system is provided by the 
Advanced Crash Safety Module (ACSM). 



The GPS antenna is located in the roof 
antenna (fin); the GPS receiver (GPS 
tuner) is accommodated in the Telematic 
Communication Box 2 and transmits the data 
to the Head Unit High 2 with the new OABR 
Ethernet. 



The DSC as the control unit for longitudinal 
dynamics determines the vehicle speed in 
combination with the speed sensors of the 
DSC system and transmits this to the BDC 
via FlexRay. From here, the information on the 
vehicle speed is distributed in the vehicle. 



17 















G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 

4.1. Introduction 

There are a host of new features for the navigation system in the G12. These relate to the areas 
of map view, destination input, display (guiding), routing and the special functions for navigation. 
The new features in particular for the navigation system in the G12 will be described below. 

A 

The following is an overview the navigation system functions of the G12. You can find details of all 
functions, adjustment options and national-market versions in the Owner's Manual of the vehicle. 


4.2. Selection and settings 


4.2.1. Toolbar 

The navigation map is displayed after selection of "MAP" by pressing the controller button. The 
toolbar is the central control element here. All settings can be activated from here. The individual 
submenus can be accessed via the controller or, as a new feature, via the touch screen. In addition, 
the split screen can be activated by pushing the controller to the right and pressing. You can find out 
more details about the split screen in Chapter. 



Navigation map with toolbar and with activated split screen 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Toolbar 

B 

Reduced-size main screen 

C 

Split screen 

Toolbar 


1 

2 


18 


HOME button; return to main menu 
Start/end route guidance 

















G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


Index 

Explanation 

3 

Change current route 

4 

Switch spoken instructions on and off 

5 

Traffic information (including RTTI or TMC activity display) 

6 

Display additional information on map 

7 

Select map view 

Interactive map (not visible on illustration, customer must scroll down for this) 


4.2.2. Map view settings 

There are several options available in the Map views submenu for setting the map view. 

With the "Auto zoom" function, for example, the next maneuver is focussed. In other words, the scale 
is chosen so that the next maneuver is displayed in the smallest possible scale. The maximum zoom 
factor is then 50 m. 

The highlight is the "Auto zoom with info" function. Here, lane and turn information is integrated 
directly into the navigation map. 

Overview of the individual setting options for map display: 



Navigation submenu Map views 


19 



















G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Perspective 

2 

Heading up 

3 

North up 

4 

Auto zoom 

5 

NEW: Auto zoom with info 

6 

Manual zoom 

7 

"Map views" icon in the toolbar 


In addition, the following map views can be selected in the toolbar under the "Additional information" 
icon. 





an der Donau. 


Display additional information on map 


Satellite images 


Points of interest (POIs) 


Traffic events 


Index Explanation 


Navigation submenu Additional information 


v p Points of interest 
v ^ Traffic flow «= 
v A Traffic events = 
v W eather = 
v &> Satellite images = 


i ii . 


nfeldbruck 


Selection of 

additional 

information 


Toolbar 


Traffic flow 


Weather in map 


20 


















G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


In the option menu, it is additionally possible to select the following menu items in the "Settings" 
menu and "Map view settings" submenu: 

• Map elements 

• Map view 

• Day mode/Night mode/Automatic mode 



IxlI Settings 

v Receive traffic infor 

I Day/ Night 

Da y mode 

<1 

^ r Night mode 
* Automatic = 

Set home address 


®®® 


Additional map view option for map display in Day mode, Night mode and Automatic mode 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Activation of Day mode 

2 

Activation of Night mode 

3 

Activation of Automatic mode 


21 












G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


4.2.3. Full-screen mode 


The complete 12.3" screen diagonal is used in full-screen mode. A few examples of the display in 
full-screen mode of the navigation system are shown below. 



Different map variants in the G12 in full-screen mode 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Direction of travel map. Zoom: 10 miles 

2 

Direction of travel map. Zoom: 5 miles; satellite image active 

3 

Perspective map: Zoom 50 m, POIs shown 


One of the highlights of the navigation system in the G12 is the so-called Micro City Model. Here, it 
is possible for the first time to reproduce the urban map view in a very detailed map image. The urban 
zoom function permits representation down to 10 m. 


22 

















G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 



Micro City Map view 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Zoom at 50 m (164 ft) 

2 

Zoom at 25 m (82 ft) 

3 

Zoom at 10 m (32 ft) 


4.3. Destination input 

The destination input has also been improved once more for the G12. The customer can choose 
whether he wishes to enter the destination by means of the controller or, by means of the (new) touch 
screen and input keyboard. 

In addition, it is also possible to "drive" directly to the destination and select it in the "interactive map". 
This is also possible by means of the controller and touch screen. 

Destination inputs are also possible via the voice processing system (SVS) and ConnectedDrive. 


23 



















G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


4.3.1. Destination input by means of controller and touch screen 



Town/Postcode: MU 


Results 


MUNCHEN 


MUCHELN 


MUCHELN (GEISELTAL 


MUCKA 


MUCKE 

Results 


town/Postcode: M 


MUNCHEN 


MARXEN 


MAAD 


MAAGDENBURG 


MAAR 


MAARACKER 



ASC • UK 


Input screens for destination input in G12 


Results 17:07 

MUNCHEN 

MUCHELN 

MUCHELN (GEISELTAL; 

MUCKA 

MUCKE 

MUCKELN 


24 


4-17 




G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Touch Controller 

la 

Input by means of the speller displayed in the CID in combination 
with the controller by turning, pressing and pushing 

1b 

Input by means of the speller displayed on the CID in combination 
with writing on the Touch Controller 

2 

Central Information Display (CID) with touch function 

2a 

CID - Touch input by means of keypad on the screen 


4.3.2. Direct input (interactive map and touch operation) 



* | t] Spoken instructions 
Traffic information 
00J Additional information 
G) Map views 

•Q- Interad 


SCHRAMBERG, MAX-PLANCK-STRASSE 


A 2 No signal 1709 

^ Start new route guidance 
t** Add as intermediate dest. 

'}) Leave interactive map 
$ Show destination 
'; l*i Save pos ition 
an Change map view 


Touch operation on the interactive map 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Activate interactive map in the toolbar 

2 

Select a destination by touch 

3 

Save the desired destination 


25 












G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 

4.3.3. Voice processing system and ConnectedDrive 

Voice processing system 

The destination input function of the navigation system in the G12 was significantly improved by 
means of the voice processing system (SVS). The voice processing system supports the customer 
by visual/acoustic feedback in the vehicle. After activation of the system at the "Push-to-talk" button 
on the multifunction steering wheel and a corresponding voice command by the customer, a new 
microphone symbol is displayed in the CID and instrument cluster. 



Push-to-talk button on the multifunction steering wheel 


A further innovation is the off-board version of the voice processing system via the SIM card 

(r) (r) 

permanently installed in the vehicle. Like with SIRI from Apple or the "Speech to text" function 

(Message Dictation by Nuance ) familiar at BMW since 2012, the off-board SVS is processed by 
an external provider and transmitted back to the vehicle in seconds. You can find out about the 
differences between the individual embedded and off-board SVS versions in Chapter 5. 

ConnectedDrive Concierge Services 

Since the number of ConnectedDrive markets is constantly growing, an increasing number of 
functions can use these functions. After connection setup with an employee at Concierge Services 
(SA 6AN in the US), this employee can send the destination requested by the customer directly to 
the vehicle. 

A 

Transmission of the address data to the vehicle takes place after the conversation with the service 
employee of the Concierge Service. If the customer disconnects immediately after the conversation, 
the address data cannot be transmitted to the vehicle! 


26 






G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 



1 Allianz Arena 


Zielfuhrung starten 
Als Zwtschenztel hmzufugen 

4 Megastore in der Allianz Art 1 

' 9 

j £Coooerge Service* 

\ Whether you need on ATM or a 

l table reservation a BMW Call 

Centre agent it there to support 
[ " * ) you around the clock, whenever 

^ req uired _ 

I Read more 

Please select an offer. 


Microphone symbol after activation of SVS/ Concierge Services in the G12 


4.4. Display (Guiding) 

4.4.1. Split screen variants 

The split screen was provided with 2 new and many familiar functions for navigation in the G12. 
As a highlight among the new functions, additional information is shown as a staggered roadbook 

in the arrow display. 


27 



G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Turn instructions 

2 

Route with additional road works information 

3 

Turn-off information and additional lane recommendation 

The following are possible as additional displays in the arrow display: 


• Turn instructions 

• Traffic flow and traffic events 

• Status information 

• Next road 

• Distance to next manoeuvre 

• Driving lane information 

• Current road 


As a second innovation, a compass is displayed when the arrow display is active but no route guidance 
is active. 


28 











G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 

4.4.2. Guiding in the instrument cluster 

As described in Chapter 3, the inner display information of the engine speed display is hidden on both 
versions of the instrument cluster and the navigation content displayed here when route guidance 
is active. Turn recommendations, lane recommendations (Lane Guiding) and forward-looking route 
guidance (High Guiding) are then displayed on the right side of the TFT display. 


© 



Navigation display variants on the multifunctional instrument cluster in the G12 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Turn instructions 

2 

Turn information with additional motorway information and Lane Guiding 

3 

Lane Guiding (driving lane recommendation) and High Guiding (forward- 
looking route guidance) 


4.4.3. Guiding in the Head-Up Display 

Guiding information is also shown on the Head-Up Display. The setting for this can be activated in the 
Vehicle settings menu under Head-Up Display. Details relating to the guiding information structure and 
the display shown on the Head-Up Display are provided in the "G12 Displays and Controls" training 
manual. 


29 





G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 

4.5. Changing route (Routing) 

4.5.1. Alternative routes 

Online alternative routes 

In addition to the familiar possibility of calculating "alternative routes" in the vehicle which are already 
stored in the vehicle, a new option has now been realized in the vehicle with the permanently installed 
SIM card, the online alternative route. The advantage of this is above all the coverage of the off- 
board solution or online alternative route: this is much greater than the embedded solution with 
navigation data from the hard disk drive. 

The online alternative route function is coupled to ConnectedDrive services (SA 6AK) and not to the 
RTTI (SA 6AM). 

With the online alternative route function, the route alternatives are already made available before the 
RTTI information is received since the BMW backend can access current provider data. This additional 
information for the online alternative routes is supplied after selection of the route in the vehicle. It is 
transmitted directly from the BMW backend to the TCB2 in the vehicle and then to the head unit. 

This may lead to a situation where calculation of online alternative routes is faster than updating of 
RTTI in the vehicle. 

The calculation of the optimum route is based on traffic forecasts. In other words, the further the route 
planning is from the current vehicle position, the greater the extent to which the forecasts of the online 
alternative route are taken into account in the vehicle instead of the Real Time Traffic Information. 
Online alternative routes are available for the entire map material, whereas RTTI is displayed above 
all locally in a radius of 50-100 km (30 - 60 mis) around the vehicle. 


A 1 Online r oute 

© New route available due to 
current traffic situation and 
online forecast 




» Current route 

f* 1:20 pm 132 mi 

+8 min +25 mi 


ImkjL, 

i - <>''« 


o 

W 


‘ • 


U ] 

0 

V 








25 mi ft 


W O' 

© © 0 m *jj 

«L 


Online route 


4.5.2. Changing the route manually 

Route magnet 

When route guidance is active, the route displayed on the map can be adapted manually. For this 
purpose, a route magnet is available for the first time in the G12. Using a marker point on the route, 
the customer can pull the route in the desired direction. Like on the interactive map, the corresponding 
point is displayed by means of cross-hairs. This cross-hairs can be moved via the controller or on the 
touch screen of the CID. After the customer has selected the desired route and confirmed this by 
pressing the controller, a corresponding "Accept magnet" message is displayed. 


30 




G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 

The route magnet can be selected in the submenu "Route" - "Change route" - "Add route magnet". 



4.5.3. Route simulation 


Aerial view 


Using the aerial view function, it is possible to virtually fly over the route when the vehicle is stationary 
and route guidance is active, i.e to simulate the complete journey to the entered destination. This 
function can be selection in the submenu "Route" - "Aerial view". If the controller is then tilted to the 
left, additional functions and settings become visible. 



Aerial view in the G12 


31 


E14-1791 













G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

"Start" and "Stop" aerial view 

2 

Speed 

3 

Next route section 

4 

Previous route section 

5 

Jump to current position 

6 

Jump to destination 


4.5.4. Avoid route 


Areas to avoid 


New, individual areas to avoid can be selected in the submenu "Settings” - Route settings"- "Areas 
to avoid". Areas to avoid can be places with a high crime rate, for example, or particularly poor roads 
which the customer wants to intentionally "avoid". 



Selection of areas to avoid and subsequent activation 


4.5.5. Learning navigation 

By means of sensor systems 

Using the sensor systems installed in the vehicle (KAFAS cameras, DSC sensor for longitudinal 
acceleration, yaw rate from the ACSM etc.), the saved navigation data is compared with the current 
road information. If the customer agrees, data relating to any detected deviations is sent back to the 
backend (BMW server) and all BMW customers can benefit from this measure. Transmission of this 
data is thus the further development of Floating Car Data, which has already been in use since 1999 


32 







G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 

in order to improve the traffic flow. The improved map information is passed on by BMW to the map 
supplier who can then correct his maps on the basis of this feedback. However, there is no direct 
improvement of the data on the hard disk drive in the vehicle. 


© 


Ijl) 

Position and version 

\GONG96.3 # 12:05 


Enter position 

When activated, sensor data 


Version information 

(road signs, speed, positions, 
unmapped roads) is 


v Help to improve the navigation 

transmitted to BMW (in 

<1 

* map 

anonymised form) in order to 



improve the digital map. It is 


technically impossible for the 

source to be identified. 


Improvement of map data by means of vehicle sensors 

Index 

Explanation 


1 

Agreement of the customer to participate in improvement 
of map data by means of vehicle sensor systems 



By means of customer interaction 

The customer can also intervene directly in the algorithm of his navigation system. The learning 
function of the navigation makes this possible. The customer can activate the function after selection 
in the submenu "Settings” - "Route settings" - "Learn route". If the customer intentionally deviates 
from the proposed route several times at the same place, this deviation is stored and taken into 
account in future route planning. 


© 


Cn) | Route settings 

I—a. 

3NG96.3 12:07 

Default criterion 

Fast Vehicle data is collected in 

Dynamic guidance 

order to personalise route 

Confirm ^ , . . .. 

^ calculation. 

v Online routes 

i( 


^ v Learn route —I 


v Avoid motorways 


v Avoid toll roads 



Activation of the "Learn route" function 


33 










G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Activation of "Learn route" 


4.6. Special functions 

4.6.1. Activation points of camera system 

With the introduction of the 180° Panorama View camera in the front of the G12. a new function was 
also defined for the navigation system. This new function permits targeted selection of activation 
points for automatically switching on the panorama camera. In this way, the customer can make 
hazardous points on his route safer by making road areas that are particularly difficult to see visible 
with the camera system. 

Activation 

The customer activates this function in the menu "Vehicle settings" and the submenu "Parking". 


£nl I Parki ng 2 ROCK ANT 14 11 

Automatic PDC activation 
Active PDC emergency interv. 

Park Assist 

Cross-traffic alert ) ■ Pmonmav.e*, 

Panorama View, GPS-based 

2 ROCK ANT 14:11 

Panorama View is displayed — 

automatically when set activation 

points are reached. . 

- ’ * Panorama View. GPS-based u , _^ 


Activation of Panorama View function 


Setting the activation points 

The customer can activate a selection menu after activation of the Panorama View camera. In this 
selection menu it is possible to add, display or delete activation points. 


34 






G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 



Adding an activation point for the Panorama View function 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Panorama View camera in the front of vehicle 

2 

Adding an activation point 


You can obtain further information on the Panorama View camera in the "G12 Assistance systems" 
training manual. 

4.6.2. Journey planner 

Like in the previous navigation system Professional, the G12 navigation system also includes a journey 
planner. The representation of the individual intermediate destinations has been improved here. 


35 













G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


ft 


fir lx v° n s 63 « 

I vunTrvafcmgL/ —- Vuhidotf *** .innq ^ 

1 *<**•* > npr ; 

ter»1ei<3brucK f ***~Zfy 



/Troatow 


*y ma 


X 


ij?-" ! ■ ' R i “ 

Ji ^ t V _r» *• J 


SVuw 

■ I 



A8, Dasmg.Bavaria 

ROSENHEIM (STADT) 
PRIENA. CHIEMSEE 
FELDKIRCHE..., KUGELMUH... 
Start route guidance 
Enter new destination 



It is possible to change the sorting of the individual intermediate destinations in the Options menu. 



Changing the sorting order 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Changing the sorting order of the journey planner 

2 

Selected town for changing the destination order in the journey planner 


36 














G12 Navigation System 

4. Navigation Functions 


4.6.3. Quick search 


The customer can find the new function "Quick search" under "Navigation" - "Other input options". 
The Quick search function allows the customer to enter a letter string to search for Points of Interest 
and addresses either online (with active ConnectedDrive contract) or in the navigation data stored on 
the hard disk drive in the vehicle. All entries are shown that contain this letter string. 

For Points of Interest, enter the name of the POI, e.g. "Allianz Arena". 

In the case of an address, it is possible to simultaneously search for a town and road. This is done 
by entering a letter string of the place name, then a space and a letter string of the road name. 

In addition, it is also possible to activate the voice processing system in the Quick search function. 



'Munchen 


nter destination 

Qy Quick search 
0 Home address 
Recent destinations 
life Address input 

a Iq uick search: j 


\LASSIK 12:38 


Search lor addresses and 
points ol interest 


p * 

0 XV \ Y , 

N A Z 

M Voice input* ** 


History 


HAMBU. 


In) I Quick search:! ALLIAN 


HERE.com results (45)V 12:2C 


£) | HERE.co m results (45) 

Allianz Arena 

Wemer-Heisenberg-A 

Alliancelles 

Mame Champagne-A- 


Alliancelles 

Mame Champagr 


Allianz Versicheru 

Knorrstr. 20 80807 Mu 


498 km 


Allianz Versicherung Martin Se 

Knorrstr. 20 80807 Mu 1.2 km 


Allianz Versicherung Gunther V 

Leopoklstr. 100 80002 3.1 km 


Quick search similar to Google® search 


37 










G12 Navigation System 

5. Voice Processing System (SVS) 

5.1. History 

A voice control system was offered for the first time in 1998 in the E38 (note that not all the dates 
sited here coincide with the function introduction dates in the US market). This allowed the 
driver to operate the telephone and navigation system without taking his eyes off the traffic conditions. 
As part of further development of the voice processing system, the number of spoken commands 
increased significantly in the following versions from the initial 30 commands. 

In 2003, the number of spoken commands grew to around 470. This increase took place with the 
introduction of the first head unit with the navigation system Professional, the CCC for E63/E64 and 
E60. 

For the interface box ULF-SBX-High in the year 2007 , the voice input system High, now already 
referred to as voice processing system (SVS), was consistently enhanced. At this time, it was 
already possible to control communication, navigation, assistance window, on-board information, 
entertainment, climate and setting by means of voice commands. When the voice processing system 
High with a ULF-SBX-High was installed, it was possible to switch between 2 languages. Only one 
language was available with the head unit CCC. 

With the introduction of the head unit with 2nd generation Professional navigation system, the CIC, 
in 2008, the voice processing system High was installed on a part of the internal hard disk drive (HDD). 
This meant that over 1000 voice commands and 8 languages were then available. The language 
settings could be changed in the "Settings" menu. 

In 2010 , the voice processing system SVS in the CIC was further enhanced. The so-called "One 
Shot" input was introduced in the navigation system. From now on, it was possible to enter the town, 
road and house number in the system in a coherent sentence. This data was then entered jointly in 
the system. 

The last major new development was in 2012 with the introduction of the Head Unit High (HU-H) 

(3rd generation head unit with Professional navigation). The function “Message Dictation - Speech 
to text” allowed voice commands to be sent to an external provider for the first time. The speech was 
converted by the provider into text and the text modules then sent back to the head unit for further 
processing. From here the text was sent to the CID for display. The text could then be sent as an SMS 
text message or e-mail via a Bluetooth-paired customer mobile phone (MAP profile). This function 
could be found under the menu item Office, submenu “Compose”. 


38 



G12 Navigation System 

5. Voice Processing System (SVS) 




IU- 

MAP 

Message Dictation from 2( 

® © ® 

_ //El * 

® 

(« m 

jj\ ^3 Hotmai 

o 

UJ 

H ^ /t . ■ 

Ntf 

)12 with the introduction of the F01 LCI 

Index 

Explanation 



1 

Central information display 



2 

Headunit High 



3 

TCB 



4 

Roof fin with telematic antenna 



5 

Providers in 2012 



6 

BMW backend 



7 

Nuance data provider 



8 

Customer's mobile phone 



9 

Mobile radio antenna in roof fin 



10 

Provider of the customer's mobile phone 



11 

Customer's e-mail provider 




5.2. New development/further development 


5.2.1. Introduction 

A main application area for the voice processing system (SVS) with its embedded (hard disks) 
and off-board (BMW cloud backend) services is navigation. That is why the topic of SVS, which has 
hardware components distributed throughout the vehicle, is covered in this training manual. You can 
find out about the new and distinguishing features in the area of embedded/off-board SVS and natural 
language understanding below. 


39 












G12 Navigation System 

5. Voice Processing System (SVS) 

The voice processing system SVS used in the G12 has enhanced quality. Due to a new off-board 
database, voice commands can now be processed which could not be processed before. The SVS 
interacts as if you are talking to a chauffeur and not to an electronic system. A new kind of natural 
language communication between man and machine has now arrived in the G12. 

The voice processing system is offered in different quality levels. 

An interesting highlight of the new SVS system is the "Barge-In function". "Barge in" in this context 
means to interrupt the dialogue. It allows the customer to intervene directly in the speech dialogue 
without waiting for the response from the SVS. The new voice command then cancels the old voice 
command and the new voice command/speech dialogue is processed immediately. 

Going forward, the system will also be able to evaluate and process whole sentences (like SIRI from 

Apple ). It is no longer designed purely for recognition based on syntax (sentence structure). This 
function is embedded on the hard disk partition for the SVS on the Head Unit High 2. In Marketing, this 
system is referred to as Intelligent Voice Assistant. 

5.2.2. Natural language understanding applications 


ConnectedDrive markets 

There are 2 functions using SVS off-board functionality for ConnectedDrive markets. 

1. Message Dictation: The first version includes only Message Dictation ("Speech to Text function"). 
There are improved functions for the customer here with a simpler procedure. Whereas the customer 

previously had to register separately with the provider Nuance for initial activation, this is now 
included in the ConnectedDrive Service (OE 6AK) and the customer can use the function in the 
vehicle as long as the ConnectedDrive function is active. He can then extend the function in the 
ConnectedDrive store. 



Input of an SMS text message via voice processing system 


The following languages are available as Message Dictation languages for the G12 at the series 
launch: 


40 





G12 Navigation System 

5. Voice Processing System (SVS) 

• German 

• US English 

• UK English 

• French 

• Italian 

• Spanish 

• Japanese 

• Korean 

• Chinese 

2. Offboard SVS version 2 (Off-board Voice Processing): 

As described for Message Dictation, the customer receives the functions via the ConnectedDrive 
Services (OE 6AK) in combination with the permanently installed, activated SIM card in the TCB2. 

In Marketing, this system is referred to as Off-board Voice Processing. The difference here is that 
in addition to Message Dictation (Off-board 1), the commands of the complete voice processing 
system are also processed via the Nuance server and it is now possible to work with natural 
language commands: 

The so-called NLU function (NLU = Natural Language Understanding). 

The advantage of this is that the search for points of interest (POIs) or entertainment sources can be 

narrowed down with the data processing performance of the Nuance server, thereby permitting faster 
recognition. For example, when carrying out a POI search, the voice command: "Drive me to Wembley 
Stadium" will be recognized with an active ConnectedDrive contract. 


41 



G12 Navigation System 

5. Voice Processing System (SVS) 



SVSG12 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Microphone, passenger's side (not used for SVS) 

2 

Microphone, driver's side 

3 

Telematic antenna and telephone antenna (telematics 2 for LTE) 

4 

BMW backend server 

5 

Nuance® language services 

6 

Reception electronics in the TCB2 

7 

Head Unit High 2 (HU-H2) 

8 

Connection to hi-fi system in G12 

9 

Body Domain Controller (BDC) 

10 

Push-to-talk button 


42 































Bayerische Motorenwerke Aktiengesellschaft 
Qualifizierung und Training 
RontgenstraBe 7 

85716 UnterschleiBheim, Germany 


