Technical training. 

Product information. 

G01 Climate Control 



BMW Service 


Edited for the U.S. market by: 
BMW Group University 

Technical Training 

ST1701 9/1/2017 

V_/ 








General information 


Symbols used 

The following symbol is used in this document to facilitate better comprehension or to draw attention 
to very important information: 

A 

Contains important safety information and information that needs to be observed strictly in order to 
guarantee the smooth operation of the system. 


Information status and national-market versions 

BMW Group vehicles meet the requirements of the highest safety and quality standards. Changes 
in requirements for environmental protection, customer benefits and design render necessary 
continuous development of systems and components. Consequently, there may be discrepancies 
between the contents of this document and the vehicles available in the training course. 

This document basically relates to the European version of left hand drive vehicles. Some operating 
elements or components are arranged differently in right-hand drive vehicles than shown in the 
graphics in this document. Further differences may arise as the result of the equipment specification in 
specific markets or countries. 

Additional sources of information 

Further information on the individual topics can be found in the following: 

• Owner's Handbook 

• Integrated Service Technical Application. 

Contact: conceptinfo@bmw.de 
©2017 BMW AG, Munich 

Reprints of this publication or its parts require the written approval of BMW AG, Munich. 

The information contained in this document forms an integral part of the BMW Group Technical 
Qualification and is intended for the trainer and participants in the seminar. Refer to the latest relevant 
information systems of the BMW Group for any changes/additions to the technical data. 

Information status: June 2017 

Technical training. 




G01 Climate Control 

Contents 


1. Introduction.1 

1.1. General information.1 

1.2. Overview.1 

2. System Overview.2 

2.1. IHKA, 3/1-zone.2 

2.1.1. Wiring diagram.3 

2.1.2. 3/1 -zone air conditioning control panel.5 

2.1.3. 3/1 -zone air conditioning control panel, rear passenger 

compartment.5 

2.1.4. 3/1-zone air conditioning air ducts.6 

3. Stratification.7 














G01 Climate Control 

1. Introduction 

1.1. General information 

The new BMW X3 with development code G01 features a more advanced and optimized air 
conditioning compared to its predecessor F25. The refrigerant R1234yf is used for the US models. 

A brushless blower motor integrated in the heating and air-conditioning unit provides the supply of 
fresh air to the vehicle interior via the microfilter. The microfilters can be replaced in the footwell on the 
passenger's side. 

The IHKA control unit is fastened to the side of the heating and air-conditioning unit. 


1.2. Overview 

Automatic climate control (IHKA) is standard for the G01. 

• 3/1-zone air conditioning. 

From a technical perspective the climate control is divided into zones (e.g. driver, front passenger, 
rear passenger compartment, temperature...). The first digit represents the individually adjustable 
temperature settings, whilst the second digit represents the zones in which the amount of air can be 
individually adjusted. 

The air conditioning in BMW X3 is based partially on the technology of G12 and G30. 

The topics listed below are described in the product information ST1604 G30 Climate Control 
orST1501 G12 Climate Control. 


Topic 

Product information 

Refrigerant line (inner heat exchanger IWT) 

ST1501 G12 Climate Control 

Coolant-cooled air conditioning condenser 

ST1501 G12 Climate Control 

Refrigerant R1234yf 

ST1501 G12 Climate Control 

Air treatment (air freshener, ioniser) 

ST1501 G12 Climate Control 

Refrigerant circuit 

ST1501 G12 Climate Control 

Cooling system 

ST1501 G12 Climate Control 

Layering 

ST1604 G30 Climate Control 


1 








G01 Climate Control 

2. System Overview 

2.1. IHKA, 3/1-zone 

In the G01, a 3/1 -zone air conditioning system is installed. Three different temperature zones can 
be set. The temperatures on the driver's and front passenger's side as well as in the rear passenger 
compartment can be set separately. The amount of air can only be regulated by the driver and front 
passenger. As of the 3/1 -zone air conditioning, an automatic air recirculation control sensor is installed 
for the automatic recirculated air flap control. The solar sensor is installed on the windshield behind 
the trim of the mirror base. Under strong sunlight it controls the temperature, amount of air and air 
distribution accordingly for the air conditioning so that the selected temperature for the vehicle interior 
is maintained. 



3/1-zone IHKA-overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Joint control of the amount of air for driver/front passenger/rear passenger 


compartment 

2 

Separate temperature control for driver/front passenger 

3 

Rear temperature control via an air conditioning control panel 


2 












G01 Climate Control 

2. System Overview 


2.1.1. Wiring diagram 



<§> £ § <J) ($> ($) (J) J) £ (J 
®@®©®®®®@(§) 


® ^ ^ ® 


□ Kltt 


G01 3/1-zone IHKA wiring diagram 


3 


TE17-0267 






























































G01 Climate Control 

2. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Refrigerant pressure sensor 

2 

Rain-light-solar-condensation sensor 

3 

Air conditioning compressor 

4 

Fuse in the power distribution box, engine compartment 

5 

Automatic air recirculation control sensor 

6 

Outside temperature sensor 

7 

Body Domain Controller (BDC) 

8 

Fuses in the power distribution box, front right 

9 

Fuses in the power distribution box of the luggage compartment 

10 

Lighting, rear ventilation outlet 

11 

Temperature sensor, middle ventilation outlet 

12 

Air conditioning control panel for rear passenger compartment 

13 

Electric auxiliary heater (diesel vehicles only) (Not for US) 

14 

Stepper motor, fresh air/air recirculation function 

15 

Stepper motor, defrost 

16 

Stepper motor, air distribution, right 

17 

Stepper motor for stratification, right 

18 

Stepper motor for mixed air, right 

19 

Stepper motor for temperature, rear passenger compartment 

20 

Stepper motor for mixed air, left 

21 

Stepper motor for stratification, left 

22 

Stepper motor for air distribution, left 

23 

Stepper motor for ventilation, rear passenger compartment 

24 

Temperature sensor for footwell, right 

25 

Temperature sensor for footwell, left 

26 

Temperature sensor for evaporator 

27 

Temperature sensor for footwell, rear passenger compartment 

28 

Blower motor, integrated automatic heating/air conditioning IHKA 

29 

IHKA control unit 

30 

Air conditioning control panel for driver/front passenger 

31 

Lighting for ventilation outlet, driver, left 

32 

Center grill temperature sensors with lighting 

33 

Lighting for ventilation outlet, front passenger, right 


4 




















G01 Climate Control 

2. System Overview 


2.1.2. 3/1-zone air conditioning control panel 

The operating concept of the 3/1 -zone air conditioning uses the familiar operating concept from the 
current BMW models. It provides the driver and front passenger with individual and separate left/right 
temperature control and individual selection of an automatic program. All functions on this control 
panel are controlled using buttons. Depending on the equipment installed, the amount of air and air 
distribution for the driver/front passenger, seat heating and active seat ventilation can be controlled 
using the IHKA control panel. In the 3/1 -zone air conditioning, the current settings of the driver for 
temperature, amount of air and air distribution can be transferred to the front passenger's side and the 
rear passenger compartment by pressing the SYNC button. The IHKA menu is opened in the Central 
Information Display via the menu button. Depending on the equipment, the stratification for driver/front 
passenger can be separately adjusted in this menu. A detailed explanation of this topic can be found in 
Product Information G30 Air Conditioning. 



GO! 3/1 -zone air conditioning control panel without touch operation 


2.1.3. 3/1-zone air conditioning control panel, rear passenger compartment 

With the 3/1 -zone air conditioning, the temperature in the rear passenger compartment is adjusted 
via a separate air conditioning control panel. The amount of air can only be regulated by the driver and 
front passenger. Warm or cold air is supplied by the air conditioning from the front and passed through 
the air ducts under the center console to the rear ventilation outlets and to the footwell. 

A seat heating for the rear passenger compartment can only be ordered in combination with the 3/1 - 
zone air conditioning. 



5 







G01 Climate Control 

2. System Overview 


2.1.4. 3/1-zone air conditioning air ducts 

The 3/1 -zone air conditioning continuously supplies the rear passenger compartment via air ducts 
that pass under the center console. It is only possible to set the temperature from the rear passenger 
compartment since there is no additional auxiliary blower under the center console. 



Air ducts, rear passenger compartment, 3/1 -zone air conditioning 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Ventilation outlet, right/left 

2 

Ventilation outlet, footwell, driver, right/left 

3 

Ventilation outlet, windshield 

4 

Blower 

5 

Ventilation outlet, rear passenger compartment, Center console 

6 

Ventilation outlet, footwell, rear passenger compartment 


6 
















G01 Climate Control 

3. Stratification 


In the G01, the stratification for the driver/front passenger is not adjusted in the usual manner via the 
knurled wheels in the instrument panel. There is now a MENU button on the IHKA control panel that 
when pressed, opens a menu in the CID to make the stratification air adjustments. 

For more information, refer to Product Information ST1604 G30 Climate Control. 


7 




Bayerische Motorenwerke Aktiengesellschaft 
Handlerqualifizierung und Training 
RontgenstraBe 7 

85716 UnterschleiBheim, Germany 


