Technical training. 

Product information. 

G30 Climate Control 



BMW Service 


Edited for the U.S. market by: 

BMW Group University 

Technical Training 

ST1604 11/1/2016 

\ _ / 







General information 


Symbols used 

The following symbol is used in this document to facilitate better comprehension or to draw attention 
to very important information: 

A 

Contains important safety information and information that needs to be observed strictly in order to 
guarantee the smooth operation of the system. 


Information status and national-market versions 

BMW Group vehicles meet the requirements of the highest safety and quality standards. Changes 
in requirements for environmental protection, customer benefits and design render necessary 
continuous development of systems and components. Consequently, there may be discrepancies 
between the contents of this document and the vehicles available in the training course. 

This document basically relates to the European version of left hand drive vehicles. Some operating 
elements or components are arranged differently in right-hand drive vehicles than shown in the 
graphics in this document. Further differences may arise as the result of the equipment specification in 
specific markets or countries. 

Additional sources of information 

Further information on the individual topics can be found in the following: 

• Owner's Handbook 

• Integrated Service Technical Application. 

Contact: conceptinfo@bmw.de 
©2016 BMW AG, Munich 

Reprints of this publication or its parts require the written approval of BMW AG, Munich. 

The information contained in this document forms an integral part of the BMW Group Technical 
Qualification and is intended for the trainer and participants in the seminar. Refer to the latest relevant 
information systems of the BMW Group for any changes/additions to the technical data. 

Information status: September 2016 

Technical training. 




G30 Climate Control 

Contents 


1. Introduction.1 

1.1. General information.1 

1.2. Overview.1 

2. System Overview.2 

2.1. IHKA, 3/2-zone.2 

2.1.1. Wiring diagram.3 

2.1.2. Air conditioning control panel.5 

2.1.3. Rear passenger compartment temperature control.5 

3. Stratification.6 













G30 Climate Control 

1. Introduction 

1.1. General information 

The new BMW 5 Series with the development code G30 will be equipped with a further developed and 
optimized heating and air conditioning system. The heating and air-conditioning system is similar to 
the BMW G12. The G30 uses the new R1234yf refrigerant. 

A brushless blower motor is installed in the heating and air-conditioning housing which provides the 
supply of fresh air to the vehicle interior via the fresh air microfilters. The microfilters can be replaced 
from an access point from the footwell area under the dashboard on the passenger's side. 

The IHKA control unit is separate from the IHKA control panel and is located behind the dashboard on 
the passenger side towards the center of the vehicle. 



IHKA control module location 


1.2. Overview 

Currently only one version of climate control is available for the G30. 

• 3/2-zone IHKA 

In terms of technology, the G30’s climate control system is based on the G12 system. For more 
detailed information on the topics listed below, please refer to the Training Reference Manual "ST 1501 
G12 Complete Vehicle" Climate Control section. 


Topic 

"ST1501 G12 Complete Vehicle" 

Refrigerant line (With, inner heat exchanger) 
(IWT) 

G12 Climate Control 

Coolant-cooled air conditioning condenser 

G12 Climate Control 

Refrigerant circuit 

G12 Climate Control 

Cooling system 

G12 Climate Control 

Evaporator 

G12 Climate Control 


1 











G30 Climate Control 

2. System Overview 

2.1. IHKA, 3/2-zone 

The climate control system is divided into two zones. The first digit “3” represents the individually 
adjustable temperature settings, the second digit “2” represents the zones in which the amount of air 
can be individually controlled. 

In the G30, a 3/2-zone IHKA system is installed as standard equipment. Three different temperature 
zones can be set by the driver/front passenger and in the rear passenger compartment. The amount 
of air can only be regulated from the front control panel by the driver or front passenger. An automatic 
air recirculation control sensor is installed for automatic recirculated air flap control. The solar sensor is 
mounted on the windshield underneath the trim of the mirror base. Under strong sunlight conditions, it 
controls the temperature, amount of air and air distribution accordingly for the air conditioning. This is 
so the selected temperature for the vehicles interior is properly maintained. 



3/2-zone IHKA-overview 


Index Explanation 

1 Air flow control for driver/front passenger 

2 Temperature control for driver/front passenger 

3 Temperature control for the rear passenger compartment via stratification 


2 

















G30 Climate Control 

2. System Overview 


2.1.1. Wiring diagram 



G30 3/2-zone IHKA wiring diagram 


3 


TE 16*0836.2 






























































G30 Climate Control 

2. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rain-light-solar-condensation sensor 

2 

Air conditioning compressor 

3 

Automatic air recirculation control sensor 

4 

Outside temperature sensor 

5 

Refrigerant pressure sensor 

6 

Body Domain Controller (BDC) 

7 

Fuses for Body Domain Controller (BDC) 

8 

Blower motor 

9 

Temperature sensor for evaporator 

10 

Temperature sensor, footwell, front right 

11 

Temperature sensor, footwell, front left 

12 

Stratification controller for rear passenger compartment with illumination 

13 

Stepper motor for driver footwell 

14 

Stepper motor for driver/front passenger stratification 

15 

Stepper motor for ventilation, rear passenger compartment 

16 

Stepper motor for front passenger footwell 

17 

Stepper motor, defrost 

18 

Stepper motor for front passenger ventilation 

19 

Stepper motor for stratification, front passenger 

20 

Stepper motor for ventilation, driver 

21 

Stepper motor for air recirculation function 

22 

Stepper motor for front blending flap, left 

23 

Stepper motor for front blending flap, right 

24 

Stepper motor for fresh air 

25 

Control unit, integrated automatic heating/air conditioning (IHKA) 

26 

Air conditioning control panel for driver/front passenger 

27 

Lighting for ventilation outlet, driver 

28 

Temperature sensor for center vent, driver/front passenger 

29 

Lighting for ventilation outlet, front passenger 


4 


















G30 Climate Control 

2. System Overview 


2.1.2. Air conditioning control panel 

The 3/2-zone IHKA uses the familiar operating concept from the G12. It provides the driver and front 
passenger with individual and separate left/right temperature control, blower control and individual 
selection of an automatic program. All functions on this control panel are controlled using buttons. 
Depending on the equipment installed, the amount of air and air distribution for the driver/front 
passenger, seat heating and active seat ventilation can be controlled using the IHKA control panel. 

On the 3/2-zone IHKA, the current settings of the driver for temperature, amount of air and air 
distribution can be transferred to the passenger's side by pressing the SYNC button on the right 
side of the IHKA control panel. The IHKA menu is opened in the Central Information Display (CID) by 
the menu button in the center of the IHKA control panel. The stratification for driver/front passenger 
can be adjusted separately in this menu along with setting the activation times for the parked car 
ventilation. More information on the adjustment of the air stratification can be found in next section 
“Stratification”. 



G30 3/2-zone air conditioning control panel 


2.1.3. Rear passenger compartment temperature control 

The temperature in the rear passenger compartment is adjusted by a conventional stratification wheel. 
The amount of air for the rear passenger compartment is supplied by the main blower motor installed 
in the passenger footwell under the dashboard. The air volume can only be adjusted by the front 
control panel by the driver or front passenger. The air flow can be turned off by the rear passengers by 
rotating the air control wheels on the rear panel. 



Control panel for the rear passenger compartment 


5 





G30 Climate Control 

3. Stratification 


On the G30 the stratification for the driver/front passenger is not adjusted in the usual manner by the 
knurled wheels on the front dash panel. Instead, there is a menu button located in the center of the 
IHKA control panel. Pressing this button opens the IHKA menu in the CID. Once the menu is displayed 
in the CID, you must select the temperature adjustment button as shown below. 


A 

Climate functions 

\1 £S 2:29 pm 


□ Automatic air recirculation 

Temperature adjustment 


1 Temperature adjustment 

Comfort ventilation 

Upper body, driver 

Adjustment ■ *■ 

Upper body, passenger 


Seat and steering wheel heating 

Adjustment • ■ 


G30 Climate control functions menu 


It is now possible to select the stratified air between driver and front passenger. Once the driver or 
passenger is selected, the stratification can be adjusted by turning the controller. The selected setting 
is saved by pressing the controller. 



remperature adjustment 
Upper body, driver 

Adjustment 

Upper body, passenger 

Adjustment ■ 


G30 IHKA stratification menu for driver/front passenger 


6 






Bayerische Motorenwerke Aktiengesellschaft 
Handlerqualifizierung und Training 
RontgenstraBe 7 

85716 UnterschleiBheim, Germany 


