Table of Contents 


Instrument Cluster Electronics 

Subject Page 

Purpose of the System .3 

Components.4 

Indicator Lamps .4 

LC Displays.4 

Analog Instruments.5 

Principle of Operation .8 

Dynamic Digital Inputs .8 

Distance Signal (Road Speed) .8 

Engine Speed Signal .9 

Injection Signal .9 

Transmission Interface.9 

Dimmer Signal.9 

Analog Input Signals.10 

Battery Voltage .10 

Fuel Tank Level.10 

Photo Transistor .10 

Coolant Temperature.10 

Outside Temperature Sensor.10 

Digital Input Signals.11 

Steering Column Switch.11 

Brake Pad Wear Sensors.11 

Oil Pressure Switch .11 

Parking Brake Switch.11 

Trip Odometer Reset.11 

Power Supply .11 

Output Signals.12 

Redundant Data Storage .13 

BCTest Functions (IKE E38, E39, E53).14 

Check Control.18 

Check Control Priority Groups .19 

CC Display Procedures .20 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 


































Instrument Cluster Electronics (IKE) 

Model: E38, E39, E53 


Production: All from start of production. 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand IKE operation 

• Recognize production changes to IKE 

• Understand IKE gateway function 

• Understand inputs and outputs of the IKE 

• Understand how redundant data is stored. 


2 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 




Purpose of the System 


The instrument cluster is the main driver information display unit. The instrument cluster 
is made up of the IKE and a display unit. This type of cluster is known as the 
“high version”. 

The “high version” cluster is used on the E38 as a standard feature and the E39 and E53 
as an option. 



The instrument cluster incorporates the five familiar analog gauges along with indicator 
lights, warning lights and Liquid Crystal Displays. 


When introduced, the IKE was mounted externally on the cluster and was replaced as a 
separate part. The IKE was connected to the cluster via a 46-pin ribbon cable. The 
external IKE was eliminated in vehicles from 9/97 and the IKE is now integrated into the 
cluster housing. If the early version requires replacement the integrated IKE will replace 
the earlier version. 


The IKE functions as a gateway between the 
D, I and K-Busses. The CAN bus was also 
added from 9/97. 

The IKE contains all of the processing elec¬ 
tronics for the Instrument Cluster and On- 
Board Computer. The Instrument Cluster is 
merely a display unit and performs no process¬ 
ing. On Board Computer data can be dis¬ 
played in the MID or the matrix display in the 
cluster. 


46-pin Ribbon Cable 



High Cluster Early Version to 9/97 


There is also an EEPROM in the IKE for stor¬ 
age of the Central Coding Key (ZCS). 


3 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 






























Components 

Although there a no serviceable parts in the instrument cluster (except bulbs), there are 
numerous features which make up the instrument cluster. Currently, the IKE is integrated 
into the cluster housing and none of the gauges or LCD displays are replaceable. When 
the cluster or IKE needs replacement, the entire cluster must be replaced. 

Indicator Lamps 


All the indicator/warning lights are LEDs and not replaceable. Critical warning indicators 
use two LEDs for a safety margin. There are five conventional bulbs for the back lighting 
of the LCD which can be replaced if necessary. 

LC Displays 

The LC displays are in the lower portion of the instrument cluster. They displays are used 
to make the driver aware of important information such as check control messages, service 
intervals, outside temperature, transmission range etc. 

The LCD provides: 


• 6 digit total mileage 

• 4 digit trip mileage 

• Manipulation DOT 

• Outside temperature display 


20 digit read-out with reminder arrows 
Service Interval Indicator 
Automatic transmission selector position 
Automatic transmission driving program 


(□□□□□ — ll 


OIL SERVICE 

L. 

INSPECTION 


12 3H56 ""'"222.H ‘I^O'F j|PRFIDS32 

► 20 DIGIT READOUT ◄ ! D 


When KLR is switched on, mileage and temperature are displayed. All displays are illumi¬ 
nated from KL15. The back lighting intensity of the LCD’s is dependent on available light 
and is controlled by a photo-transistor in the lower left corner of the cluster. When the park¬ 
ing lights are switched on, the dash mounted dimmer wheel controls the intensity of the 
back lighting. 

Service Interval Indicator (SIA) 

The Service Interval Indicator up to 96 models uses the SIA II processing as in the past 
models. The models from 96 uses the SIA III processing which uses the miles traveled 
and the “ti” signal to calculate service intervals. The reset of Service Indicator is carried 
out with the reset tool on early models up to 9/00. Later models (from 9/00) are reset 
through the instrument cluster test functions (reset mode). 

4 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 










Total Mileage/Trip Mileage 

Mileage can be displayed with the key off for 25 seconds if the trip meter button is pressed. 
Total mileage is stored in non-volatile memories of the IKE and LM to protect against loss. 

Automatic Transmission Selector Position/Driving Program 
Up to 9/97- The selector lever position and driving program are signaled to the IKE from 
the EGS control module over a single wire circuit. The only driving program indicator in the 
cluster on US/CDN cars will be the “M”. 

From 9/97- The selector lever position and driving program are sent from the EGS control 
module to the IKE via the CAN-Bus. 




I 


ONE WAY DATA SIGNAL 

- Selector Position 

- Program Indication 

- Fault Lamp/Matrix display 


Analog Instruments 


Analog instruments are controlled by the IKE from signals it receives over separate inputs 
or by data received on the CAN-Bus. 

The needle of the coolant temperature gauge is centered if coolant temperature is 
between 75°C-110°C. Early models received temperature signals from a dual NTC 
sensor. Later models obtained coolant temperature from CAN. 

The fuel economy indicator returns to its starting point when road speed is reduced to 
5 mph and doesn’t move again until road speed is above 8 mph. 

Certain indicator/warning lights are illuminated momentarily when KL15 is switched on as 
a pre-drive check. The indicators will switch off after 2 seconds or within 1 second after 
the engine starts. 


5 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 



























































E38 IKE l-P-0 Chart (as introduced to 9/97) 



KLR 


KL 15 


KL 50 


FUEL LEVEL SENSOR 1 
+ 




ENGINE COOLANT 
TEMP 

ENGINE OIL TEMP 


S.l. RESET 


AIR 



AMBIENT AIR TEMP 
INSTRUMENT PANEL BUTTON 



CHECK CONTROL 
BUTTON 


PHOTO TRANSISTOR VARIED DC SIG. 



BC STALK CONTROL 


LM KL 58g 


Ti 


TD 


ONE WAY DATA SIG. 

BRAKE PAD 






WEAR 

SENSORS 




LEFT REAR 
WHEEL SPEED 
SENSOR 



ABS 



ASC 


MRS 


CHECK ENGINE (DME) 


CHARGING (FROM ALTERNATOR) 


ENGINE OIL PRESSURE 


GR II (Cruise Control) ON 


PARKING BRAKE ON 


BRAKE FLUID LEVEL 


46 PIN 

RIBBON 

CONNECTOR 


S2 - SEPARATE 
CONNECTOR FOR 
INDICATOR 
CONTROL 




(AE) Instrument Cluster 

- Gauge Drivers 

- LED Drivers 

- LCD Drivers 


6 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 





















































































































































































































































































E38 IKE l-P-0 Chart (from to 9/97) 


KLR 




KL15 


KL 50 


FUELLEVELSENSOR 1 
+ 


SENSOR2 




ENGINE OIL PRESSURE 


S.l. RESET 


AIR 



AMBIENTAIR TEMP 
INSTRUMENTPANEL BUTTON 



CHECKCONTROL 
BUTTON 


PHOTOTRANSISTORVARIED DC SIG. 



BC STALK CONTROL 


PARKING BRAKE ON 







BRAKE PAD 


nruiTL^ 


WEAR 

SENSORS 


ruum*. 


LEFTREAR 

WHEELSPEED 

SENSOR 



DIAGNOSIS BUS 
(RXD & TXD) 



BUS 




K BUS 


K 


CAN BUS 


rmnn*. 


SPEED SIGNAL "A" 


GONG 



CAN TERMINALEND 


7 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 


















































































































































































































Principle of Operation 


Information is received and processed by the IKE. This information (data) is sent to the 
cluster via the following types of inputs: 


• Dynamic digital inputs - which consist of signals with a variable duty cycle or fre¬ 
quency. 

• Digital inputs - which are on/off type signals. These are usually ground inputs from 
control units used to activate warning lamps. 

• Analog inputs - which are variable voltage signals. Examples of analog signals bat¬ 
tery voltage, fuel tank sending units and temperature sensors. 


Bus signals - Such as I, K, D and CAN-Bus. The CAN-Bus replaced some of the 
above signal inputs from 9/97. 


Example of Dynamic Digital Inputs 

(before 9/97) 




rmrui 


LEFT REAR 
WHEEL SPEED 
SENSOR 


r~ u ~ 




I n 





Ti 


td 



ONE WAY DATA SIGNAL 

- Selector position 

- Program 

- Fault Lamp 


< 

z 

0 

CO 

0 


Q 

I- 

I 

0 

l 

z 

0 

< 

m 


A 


t 


CO 

3 

CO 

z 


- LCM 


Dynamic Digital Inputs 


Distance Signal (Road Speed) 

Up to 9/97 - This information is supplied to the IKE by the ABS/ASC+T or DSC control 
module with a square-wave signal. Pulses from the left-rear wheel speed hall sensor are 
used to produce this dynamic digital signal. The IKE processes this for the cluster display 
and provides a speed signal output on the I / K-Busses. 

From 9/97 - The left rear wheel speed signal is sent by the DSC module to the IKE via 
the CAN-Bus. 

8 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 








































































































































Engine Speed Signal 

Up to 9/97 - The TD signal is produced by the DME and sent to the IKE. Excessive 
engine speed events are stored in the IKE and can be read out through DIS. Engine 
speed is transmitted over the l/K-Buses. 

From 9/97 - The TD signal is produced by the DME and sent to the IKE via the CAN-Bus. 

Injection Signal 

Up to 9/97 - The DME supplies the signal (ti) via a dedicated signal line. The IKE 
processes this signal for for fuel consumption evaluation. 

From 9/97 - The DME send the ti signal to the IKE via the CAN-Bus. 

Note: On vehicles from 9/97 the wiring for the ti and TD signal may still be pre¬ 
sent in the wiring harness but the IKE is programmed to only accept the 
signals from the CAN-Bus. 

Transmission Interface 

Up to 9/97 - This single-wire is a serial one-way interface that provides the IKE with 
selector lever position, driving program and the fault message. This information is also 
sent to other control units over the l/K-Buses. 




ONE WAY DATA SIGNAL 

- Selector Position 

- Program Indication 

- Fault Lamp/Matrix display 




From 9/97 - The IKE receives the selector lever position, driving program and the fault 
message from the CAN-Bus. 

Dimmer Signal 

This is a pulse-width modulated signal from terminal 58, of the Lamp Control Module. It 
is used to control back lighting of instruments and the LCD and is also transmitted to the 
l/K-Buses. 


9 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 



























Analog Input Signals 



i n i i 



Battery Voltage 

The system voltage is also monitored by the IKE and sets a fault if it exceeds 16 volts. 

Fuel Tank Level 

Two lever action sensors are wired in parallel to the IKE. The two variable resistor inputs 
are processed by the IKE and used to operate the fuel gauge. The low level contact has 
been eliminated. Therefore, the reserve light is controlled by the IKE from the sensor 
inputs. 

Photo Transistor 

A variable voltage signal, that is dependent on ambient light, is used for back lighting of 
the LC display. 

Coolant Temperature 

A NTC sensor is used by the IKE to measure coolant temperature. The CCM also 
receives this information over the l-BUS. 

Outside Temperature Sensor 

A NTC sensor is used by the IKE to measure outside temperature for display in the clus¬ 
ter. Other systems that require outside temperature receive this information on the l/K 
Buses. 

10 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 






































Digital Input Signals 



Steering Column Switch 

As in previous systems, this switch is used to call up BC functions into the cluster matrix. 

Brake Pad Wear Sensors 

The same system that has been used in earlier models is carried over into the E38. 

Oil Pressure Switch 

This status is transmitted to the CCM over the l-BUS. The CCM compares the switch 
status with engine speed to evaluate oil pressure. IKE can store faults with the oil pres¬ 
sure switch and circuit. 

Parking Brake Switch 

Switch status is transmitted to the CCM for evaluation. 

Trip Odometer Reset 

The left button on the cluster is used to reset the trip mileage if the key is on and display 
mileage if the key is off. 

Power Supply 

The normal power-up and KL 50 inputs to the IKE processor: 

• Terminal R 

• Terminal 15 

• Terminal 50 

Various functions are dependent on the ignition switch positions. 

11 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 


















































Output Signals 



K-BUS: 

LCM 

IHKA 

GM 


SPEED SIGNAL "A" 

GONG 



LOW FUEL LEVEL 
(MISFIRE DETECTION) 




Speed Signal “A” - The vehicle speed is made available to control modules that require 
a precise speed value. The ABS/ASC+T wheel speed input is reduced by a factor of 5:1 
to produce a speed signal “A” that these control modules can process as an input. 

Gong Outputs T1, T2, T3 - the gong outputs are the same as E32. 

• T1 - Activates memo (hourly reminder). 


• T2 - Activates the tone for the freeze warning. 


• T3 - Activates the tone for check control functions. 


• T1-T2 - Activated simultaneously produces the tone for code and limit functions. 


12 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 



















































Redundant Data Storage 


In previous models, total odometer mileage 
ad service interval data was stored on on a 
coding plug. With the introduction of the 
E38, electronic data is now stored redun¬ 
dantly in the IKE and LM (LCM). A coding 
plug is no longer necessary, due to the 
redundant storage. 

This specific information is: 

• Vehicle ID number 

• Total mileage 

• Service Interval information 



To guard against the loss of specific vehicle information, it is stored in both the IKE and 
the lamp module (LCM). 

This data is compared each time KL15 is switched on. If the data check reveals a mis¬ 
match, the manipulation DOT is illuminated. 

Because of this redundant storage feature, the following points must be noted: 

1. If the vehicle ID number is not the same in both modules, the manipulation DOT is 
activated and there is no data exchange between the IKE and LCM. All functions of 
both modules will continue to work (car can be test driven). 

2. Data is only accepted from the LCM by the IKE if the ID number is the same and the 
IKE is at 0 miles. 

3. The vehicle ID number is input into a module by way of the DIS tester and only 
accepted if the mileage recorder in the module is at 0 miles. 

4. The LCM mileage data can only be over written with a higher mileage and is updat¬ 
ed every 60 miles (100 km). 

5. If the distance differs by more than 120 miles (200 km) and the ID numbers are the 
same, the IKE stores a data transfer fault. 

6. If the 1-Bus link to the LCM faults, the IKE stores this fault and continues to record 
the mileage driven.The condition that controls the redundant date exchange and 
allows only new components to be used as replacement. 

If the IKE from another car is used fortesting purposes, test driving the car should be avoid¬ 
ed if possible. If the vehicle is test driven, the IKE will record mileage and this mileage will 
be added to total mileage of the original car. 

Note: When the IKE and LCM require replacement, do not replace at the same 
time. Perform coding and data transfer procedures after replacing each 
of the components individually. Failure to do this will result in an odome¬ 
ter reading of 0 miles. 

13 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 
































BC Test Functions (IKE E38, E39, E53) 

The BC test functions are used to check inputs, outputs and functions of the IKE. There 
are 21 possible test steps. With the exception ofTest #1„ #2, and #19, all other tests 
are locked but can be released through test #19. 

The test functions are displayed in the instrument cluster. Test number 01 is called up by 
pressing the CC button for 10 sec. The same activation can be initiated by pressing and 
holding the CC button while switching on the ignition. 




123HS6 




♦12.0'F 


^ TEST NUMBER 01 4 


Each time the CC button is pressed, the next test number is displayed. 

After selecting a test number, the information from the test is posted by pressing the trip 
odometer reset button. Several tests have sub-functions which are called up by pressing 
the reset button while in the test. 

Unlocking test functions: 

• Call up test #19 - This is automatically done if attempting to enter a locked test 

• Using the trip meter reset button enter by pressing the sum of the last 5 digits of the 
chassis number, example: VIN GB11111,-1+1+1+1+1 =5, press the reset button 5 
times. 

• Confirm entry by pressing the CC button. 

The test function can be cancelled by switching the ignition off or pressing the CC button 
for approximately 2 seconds. 

14 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 


















































Test No. 01 

The IKE supplies the following data, which appears on the 20 digit cluster matrix display: 

• Vehicle Identification number = FGSTNR: GB11111 

• K value = K: 4739 

• BMW part number: Bmwtnr. 13809873 

• Encoding, diagnosis and bus index: Cl: 01 Di: 01 bi:01 

• IKE production date: dat: 52/94 

• HW/SW number: hw: 40sw:80 

• Motor: zyl:8 m:6 s:400 

• ROM Date: ROM; 23.08.96 

Test No. 02 

The following displays and instruments are activated (system test): 

• Speedometer, tachometer, coolant temp gauge, fuel gauge. 

• LC displays (segment test) 

• Indicators and Warning Lights 

This test can only be called up with the vehicle at a standstill, 
engine turned off, with KL R or 15 switched on. 

Test No. 03 

The following SI data can be displayed: 

• SI km since last reset: si km: 1250 

• SI automatic transmission kilometers: SI-GETR - km 23300 

Test No. 04 

Momentary Fuel Consumption is displayed: 

• VBR: 0.0 LI 00km 
VBR: 0.0 l/h 

Test No. 05 

This function shows the range calculation data: 

• Range at measured fuel consumption: RW-vbr: 19.5 1/100 km 


15 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 




Test No. 06 

In this function, the fuel tank volume for the right and left half of the fuel tank and the cur¬ 
rent total tank volume are shown in the Instrument Cluster matrix display. 

This enables the function of the float level sensors to be checked. 

Display: tnk 29.5/34.2/63.7L 

TNKANZ 60.2L PHASE 1 

The first numerical value in line 1 shows the contents of the left half of the fuel tank, the 
second, the volume of the right half of the tank. The third value is the current total value. 
If a level sensor is defective, it’s value reverts to 0. 

Line 2 shows the current average value (displayed value) for the contents of the fuel tank. 
The numerical value after the word phase refers to the valid computed number. 

Phase 1 : Regular computing method by way of sensors (both sensors OK). 

Phase 2: Calculation in progress from TKVA signal (sensor faulted) 

Phase 3: Fuel tank contents cannot be computed, fuel gauge reads 0 (at least one 

sensor is faulted). 

Test No. 07 

Momentary coolant temperature, ktmp: 076°C 
Momentary engine speed: N:5238 u/min 

Test No. 08 

Momentary Road Speed V: 085 KM/H 

Test No. 09 

Battery voltage (terminal 30) Ub: 12.5 v 

Test No. 10 

Preset national market codes list. The number is encoded in the IKE with the central 
code key 

Display: usa 02 

Test No. 11 

The unit code is entered in the EEPROM by the DIS after IKE has been installed and 
can be read out by means of test function 11. 

Test No. 12 

This test function shows the data for computing the vehicle’s estimated time of arrival. 

• Average speed for calculating arrival time: vank: 029.7 km/h 

• Current arrival time: ank: 13.04 
16 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 



Test No. 13 

This test function enables the gong to be tested, Display: gong? 

• After confirming by pressing the trip odometer reset button, the four audible 
warning signals are triggered off once in succession. 

• GongTI (Memo signal) 2.0s 

• Gong T2 (Outside temperature) 1.5 s. 

• Gongs T1 and T2 (LIMIT/CODE warning) 1.5 s 

• Gong T3 (Check Control Gong) 

Test No. 14 

This function shows the contents of the fault memory in a hexadecimal code. 

Display: DIAG: D7 81 033 

Test No. 15 

Not assigned to any test function. 

Test No. 19 

Procedure for unlocking the BC test functions. 

Test No. 20 

BC consumption value correction factor. This test adjusts the correction factor for the 
consumption value displayed in the MID. The production line installed value is 1000. 

The value ranges from 750 to 1250. 

To adjust the correction factor press the trip meter reset button once for a reduction of 1. 
For each press of the reset button the value decreases by 1 until it reaches 750. After 
750 the number will reset to 1250 and begin to count down again. 

To accept the set correction factor press the CC button. 

The consumption correction factor (VK) is calculated from the actual amount of con¬ 
sumed fuel (VBR 1ST) and the displayed value (VBR ANZ): 

VK = (Actual MPG / Displayed MPG) X 1000. 

Test No. 21 

This function resets the software at the IKE. This reset is necessary after replacing for 
example one of the fuel tank level sensors. Otherwise the damping function in the soft¬ 
ware will prevent the actual value from being shown only after a long time duration. 

Display: reset ? 

If the test is terminated without a software reset, the ignition switch must be turned back 
to “0” or the CC button pressed. 

17 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 



Check Control 


When the check control system was introduced on the E38, the Check Control Module 
(CCM) was a self-contained unit up until 9/95 production. E38 models from 9/95 
production used a check control module which was integrated in the LCM. 


The E39 and E53 vehicles used the integrated 
CCM from the start of production. 

The early version CCM is located in the electri¬ 
cal carrier in front of the glove box. 

This module collects and evaluates all check 
control data, including messages from the 
Lamp Control Module (LM or LCM). 

When the driver needs to be informed of a 
problem, the CCM signals the IKE over the 
l-BUS. The IKE will then post the message in 
the instrument cluster matrix display. 


ABS/ASC+T 



SPLICE BLOCK 

CCM 
RELAYS 




/•p 

jV A - 

=N A N 

1# 


1 

1 1 

itv M 

1 1 

SLMI 



GM III 


CCM 







► 


)UCC 
J I J u 


u c 

I I L 


miles! “| ”| 

• ICC 


1/ 
11 


CO MTRO 



OK 


◄ 


The text and operation of the E38 check control has been changed to improve message 
interpretation and reliability, for example: 

• Gong Operation Pre-E38 - Gong with every new display 

E38 - Only activated for first display in group 
Advantage: Reduce driver’s irritation. 

• Display Pre-E38 - “Owner’s Handbook” used repeatedly 

E38 - “Owner’s Handbook” phrase deleted. Actual text for 
situation with recommended action. 

Advantage: Driver can assess situation without having to 
refer to the Owner’s Manual. 

18 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 
























































































































































Check Control Priority Groups 

All the warning messages fall into one of four priority groups. 

Priority Group PI 

Faults that directly affect the safety or operation of the car and the drive should be 
addressed immediately. The text is displayed with a flashing arrow on the right and left 
sides. 



Priority Group P2 

Faults that do not affect vehicle’s safety or operation directly and the driver need not 
respond to immediately. These messages are displayed only once when the fault occurs 
and have to be called up again with the CC button. 



Priority Group P3 

These faults are shown when the key is turned on before a trip. The faults in P3 are 
mainly fluid levels which are not assigned to P2. The lights on reminder is a Priority 3 
item. With the key in position 0 with the light switch On initiates this reminder. 



► ■ ■ ■■■■■ ■■■ ■■■ ■ ■■■ ■■■ ■ ■ ■■■■■ ■■■ ■■■ ■ ■ A 

m m u ■■■■■ ■■■■■■■■ ■■■■ ^ 

b a « ■ h n ■ ■ ■■■■■■■■ ■ ■ ■ ■ 

■ ■ ■■■■■ ■ ■ ■■■ ■■■■■ ■■■ ■■■ ■ ■ ■ ■■■ ■■■ ■ ■ ^ 


Special Warnings 

These are top priority messages and won’t be overridden when displayed. Seat belt/igni¬ 
tion key in lock with door open are some of these messages. 



When the key is switched off, all registered check control faults are displayed.The lan¬ 
guage of the check control messages is set with the central coding key.. 


19 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 






















































CC Display Procedures 


Special Displays 

These messages will overwrite all other displays. If more than one special display request 
is received by the CCM, the one with the highest priority will be delivered. 

PI Group 

PI displays remain posted as long as the fault is present. If several PI warnings have 
been received by the CCM, they are displayed one after another in 3 second intervals. 

P2 and P3 Groups 

The messages in both groups are displayed when KL15 is switched on for a maximum of 
twenty three (23) seconds and P3 messages are not displayed after the trip is started. 

P2 and P3 warning that have been registered by the CCM can be recalled during the trip 
by pressing the CC button. 

Reminder Symbol “> < “ 

The “+” symbol is no longer used. If more than one PI check control message is pre¬ 
sent, the reminder symbol “> < “ is illuminated permanently. If a P2 or P3 message is 
extinguished, the reminder symbol informs the driver that a CC message has been post¬ 
ed. The symbol will flash when a new PI warning is recognized. 

CC Button 

Check control messages can be recalled, for up to 3 minutes, after the ignition is 
switched off using the CC button. 

The highest priority message is displayed first with following messages in a priority 
descending order. After the lowest message has been displayed, pressing the CC button 
will clear the matrix. 

“Check Control OK” is posted when the CC button is pressed and there are no warning 
message present. 

Steering Column Switch (LSS) 

Pressing the steering column switch will clear 
the matrix display if low priority messages are 
being posted. This will allow the display to be 
utilized for other information. 

Gong 

The warning gong is activated by the IKE 
when the CCM sends the proper data over 
the I Bus. The gong is activated only when 
higher priority warnings are posted. 



20 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 



Check Control Priority Chart 


CCM DISPLAY 

GONG 

PRTY 

SCOPE OF MONITOR 

OPERATING CONDITIONS 




Release Parking Brake 

©V 

Pi 

Warning displayed above 3 MPH 

Door open with ignition 
key in position KL 15 


P2 

Warning displayed when a door is open or opened above 3 MPH. 

Trunk Open 

©V 

P2 

Warning displayed above 3 MPH when trunk opens or was left open prior to 
pulling away. Displayed once only. 

Stop! Engine oil pressure 

©V 

PI 

Warning displayed oil pressure has fallen below safe level. 

Coolant Temperature 

©V 

PI 

Warning displayed when coolant rises above maximum temperature 

Check Brake Lights 

Check low-beam headlights 
Check high-beam headlights 
Check parking lights 

Check front fog lights 

Check license plate lights 

©V 

P2 

The LM monitors certain vehicle lights and circuits. When a fault is detected 
the CCM is notified to post a display. 

Check brake pads 


P2 

Warning issued when brake pad wear limit is reached. 

Lights on? 

©Y 

P3 

Warning displayed when key is in position 0 if driver's door is opened with 
light switch on. 

Ignition key in lock 

©Yr 

S 

Warning is displayed when key is left in ignition switch in position R or 0. 

Please Fasten Seatbelt 

©Y 

S 

Warning is displayed for a 6 second period after "Ignition on" with seatbelt 
fastened or not. If seatbelt is fastened the intermittent gong is switched off. 

Remote Battery 


S 

When remote key battery voltage drops below 4.5 volts 

FLUID LEVELS 




Check Brake Fluid 

©Yr 

PI 

Warning is displayed when brake fluid is too low. 

Check engine oil level 


P2 

Warning is displayed when the engine oil level is too low. The E38 is equipped 
with a new electronic oil level sensor. (see E38 Complete Vehicle for function 
and operational description). 

Check coolant level 


P2 

Warning is displayed when coolant level is too low. The warning is only posted 
when the ignition key is first turned on. 

Add washer fluid 

©Yr 

P2 

Warning is displayed when washer fluid level is low. This warning is displayed 
at any time the level becomes low to provide an early warning 

NOTE: The fluid level warnings are monitored in 25 second intervals. 

This time interval prevents false displays from occuring due to bumpy roads, fluid sloshing, etc. 

CONTROL SYSTEM FAULT DISPLAYS 


Emergency transmission 
operating program 

©Y 

P2 

If a fault occurs in the AGS control system Check control displays the 
message. The message is orriginated from the AGS CM to IKE over a one 
way serial data line. From there IKE notifies the CCM over the 1 Bus. 

EEPROM IKE 


S 

When IKE and LM data differ (for testing purposes). 


21 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 






1 . 


Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

The IKE provides a “Gateway” between which bus systems? 



2. What is meant by the integrated IKE? 


3. What is the “one way” data signal? 


4. How are the fuel tank sensors connected to the instrument cluster? How does this 
differ from previous models (E36,E34 etc.) 


22 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 


























Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

What is the difference between the CCM and LCM? 


What type of check control messages are considered priority 1 ? 


Why should the IKE and LCM NOT be replaced at the same time? 


What is the “correction factor” used for? 


23 

Instrument Cluster Electronics 


























