Table of Contents 

Base Instrument Cluster 

Subject Page 

Base Instrument Cluster.3 

Dynamic Digital Inputs .6 

Distance Signal .6 

Engine Control Module Signals.6 

Transmission One Way Data Signal.6 

Dimmer Signal.6 

K-Bus Signalling .6 

Analog Input Signals.7 

Battery Voltage .7 

Fuel Tank Level .7 

Coolant Temperature .7 

Outside Temperature Sensor.7 

Digital Input Signals.8 

Steering Column Switch (LSS) .8 

Brake Pad Wear Sensors.8 

Instrument Panel Button .8 

Inputs for Warning Lamps.8 

Output Signals .9 

Speed Signal “A”.9 

“K” Bus Interface.9 

Low Fuel.9 

Gong Output .9 

Base Cluster Overview IPO (as introduced to 9/98).10 

Redundant Data Storage .11 

On Board Computer (Base Cluster).12 

Base BC/lnstrument Cluster Test Functions .13 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 Revision Date: 





























Base Instrument Cluster (Kombi) 

Model: E39 and E53 with base cluster 
Production: Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Compare the base instrument cluster with the IKE 

• Understand the functions of the base instrument cluster 

• Diagnose concerns with the base instrument cluster 


2 

Base Instrument Cluster 




Base Instrument Cluster 


The base instrument cluster differs from the high version cluster by lack of the IKE. All 
processing is performed internally in the cluster. Also, there is no Check Control display 
matrix, but rather a check control pictogram. 

The cluster consists of five analog gauges. The processing electronics and drivers for the 
gauges are contained in the cluster. The five gauges include: 

• Fuel Gauge 

• Speedometer 

• Tachometer 


• Fuel Economy Gauge 

• Coolant Temperature 



Three Liquid Crystal Display blocks are provided for the: 

• Check Control Display - pictogram 

• Mileage, Outside Temperature and BC Display 

• Transmission Range and SI Display 

Warning lamps and indicators are positioned to the left and right of the display blocks. 
The number of warning lamps is greater on the base cluster for the display of several 
check control warnings. All of the warning lamps and indicators are LEDs and not 
replaceable. 

Critical warning lamps use two LEDs for a safety margin. 

There are replaceable lamps for the back lighting on the liquid crystal display units. 


3 

Base Instrument Cluster 













































The Left Display Block contains a pictogram for various check control warnings. LED’s 
within the display will illuminate for: 

• Lighting failures for headlight (low beam),taillight and brake lights. 

• Open doors or trunk 

• Low washer fluid 



Additional circuits monitored by check control include the oil level and transmission 
emergency program. These warnings are indicated by lamps positioned in both indicator 
display areas on the left and right sides on the bottom of the instrument cluster. 

Due to the ability to illuminate multiple warning LEDs, there is no priority displays for the 
pictogram check control. If multiple faults exist, each corresponding LED wil illuminate. 

The LED will remain illuminated as long as the fault exists. The only exception is the 
washer fluid which will go out 60 seconds after KL 15 is switched ON. 

All check control and lamp control circuits are monitored by the Light Check Module 
(LCM). When failures or faults exist, the messages are passed to the cluster for display 
over the K-Bus. 

The Middle Block contains the displays for the Total Mileage, Trip Mileage and Board 
Computer. 

The total mileage is stored in non-volatile memories in the cluster EEPROM and the 
LCM. 

The mileage can be displayed with the key off for 25 seconds if the mileage reset button 
is pressed. 

Board Computer information can be displayed by pressing the turn signal lever. 

NOTE: The outside temperature is displayed automatically every time the 
key is switched ON. 



4 

Base Instrument Cluster 








The Right Block contains the displays for 
the automatic transmission driving range and 
the Service Interval Indicator III. 

The display of the Service Indicator on the 
E39 is the same as previous systems. The 
processor for the intervals is located in the 
cluster electronics. However, the processing 
method for determining interval times has 
changed. The E39 uses the new Service Interval III system. Interval times are based on 
fuel consumption instead of mileage and starts. This system was introduced on the 
1996 E38 750il_ was subsequently phased into the other models. 

Using fuel consumption offers several advantages over the previous method for determin¬ 
ing oil service. 

• First, the processing electronics are less involved in that only one value is needed for 
the processing. 

• Second, the use of fuel consumption is a more accurate method of determining 
engine load and the need for service. 

• Third, resetting of the indicator before the scheduled time will not effect the time to 
the next service. 



A set volume of fuel (in liters) is stored in the EEPROM of the SI. The volume of fuel is 
dependent on the vehicle and engine size. The processor receives the “ti” signal as the 
vehicle is used. As 20% of the stored volume is consumed, one of the green LEDs will 
go out. Each successive 20% of fuel consumption will cause the next LED to go out 
until 100% of the stored volume has been consumed. At this point the yellow LED will 
come on indicating the service is due. At 108% of the volume, the RED LED will 
illuminate indicating an overdue service. 


With every reset, the total volume of fuel is restored in the EEPROM and the calculation 
starts over again. 



TI SIGNAL 

fTJTJTJTJTJi 



o 


Sp 

CP 

O 

CM 


O 


vP 

cp 

O 

■sT 


vP 

cN 

o 

CO 


o 


nP 

cp 

o 

00 


o 


o'* 

O 

O 


o 


vp 

cp 

o 

o 


o 


vP 

CP 

CO 

o 






SI LAMP 
CONTROL 






CONSUMPTION 

CALCULATION 

IKE 



5 

Base Instrument Cluster 





























Dynamic Digital Inputs 


Distance Signal 

This input is supplied to the cluster by the ABS/ASC+T (or DSC) control module as a 
square wave signal. Pulses from the left rear wheel speed sensor are processed by the 
ASC/DSC module to produce this signal. The cluster electronics process the input for 
the cluster display and pass the signal along, on the K-Bus, as speed signal “A” for other 
control modules requiring the vehicle speed signal. 


Engine Control Module Signals 

The “Ti” & “TD” signals are produced by the engine control module (DME) and sent to 
the cluster. On models produced before 9/98, the “Ti” and “TD” signals were sent to the 
cluster via a dedicated signal line. 

From 9/98, these signals are sent to the cluster via the CAN-Bus. 


The cluster processes the signals for the tachometer and fuel economy indicator displays. 
The Ti signal is used by the cluster for the SI indicator. The cluster also passes the TD 
signal out over the K Bus. 




nrum 


LEFT REAR 
WHEEL SPEED 
SENSOR 





vL 


0 


Ti njmnmnjimiinjLnjirL 


td nruimjuTmjmmjinjT 



ONE WAY DATA SIGNAL 

- Selector position 

- Program 

- Fault Lamp 


CD 

CO 

CD 


X 

o 

i 

o 

< 

m 


A 


CO 

X) 

CO 


t 


LCM 


Transmission One Way Data Signal 

The transmission control module (EGS/AGS), provides a one way data signal to the 
instrument cluster for signalling of the range selector position, driving program and for 
fault lamp activation. 


From 9/98, the transmission information is sent to the cluster via the CAN-Bus. 


Dimmer Signal 

This is a pulse-width modulated signal from the LCM. It is used to control the intensity of 
the back lighting of the instruments and the LCDs when the lights are switched ON. This 
signal is also output over the “K” Bus. 


K-Bus Signalling 

The Cluster receives signals for the Check Control Pictogram over the K-Bus. 


6 

Base Instrument Cluster 






















































































































Analog Input Signals 
Battery Voltage 

Battery voltage is monitored by the cluster and a fault is stored if the voltage exceeds 
16 volts 

Fuel Tank Level 

Two lever action sensors are wired in parallel to the cluster. The two varying voltage 
signals are processed by the cluster for fuel gauge and low fuel warning display. 



Coolant Temperature 

A NTC sensor is used to measure coolant temperature the cluster uses this input for 
temperature gauge display. The NTC sensor is a dual NTC, one of the NTC circuits is an 
input to DME, the other NTC is an input to the cluster. 

From 9/98, the coolant temperature sensor in an input to the DME only, the cluster 
receives the temperature information via the CAN-Bus. The dual NTC is eliminated. 

Outside Temperature Sensor 

A NTC sensor is used to measure the ambient temperature. The signal is processed by 
the cluster and passed out over the K Bus to modules requiring this input for processing. 


7 

Base Instrument Cluster 












































Digital Input Signals 

The normal ignition switch terminals (KL R, KL 15 & KL 50) are input to the cluster. 
Various functions are dependent on ignition switch position. 

Steering Column Switch (LSS) 

As with previous systems the turn signal stalk is used to call up BC functions. The LSS is 
also referred to as the BC stalk control switch. It provides a ground input to the cluster. 

Brake Pad Wear Sensors 

The pad sensor inputs are used to illuminate the brake pad warning indicator as in the 
past. 



Instrument Panel Button 

The reset button is used to reset the trip odometer as in the past. It will also display the 
mileage, if pressed with the key switched OFF. This button is also used for the Base 
BC/instrument cluster test functions. 

Inputs for Warning Lamps 

Various switches are used to signal the cluster for warning and indicator lamp illumination 
including: 

• Engine Oil Pressure 

• Check Engine Lamp (MIL) from the ECM (DME) 

• ASC/DSC/ABS warning lamps 

• Parking Brake indicator 

Some of these inputs are now provided via bus systems such as the CAN or K-Bus. 

8 

Base Instrument Cluster 









































Output Signals 
Speed Signal “A” 

The vehicle speed signal is available as an output for control modules that require precise 
vehicle speed information. 

“K” Bus Interface 

The K Bus is used to transfer data between the cluster and other modules on the link. 
The diagnostic interface also passes over the K Bus fortroubleshooting with the 
DISplus/GT-1. 

Low Fuel 

Based on the processing for the low fuel indicator lamp, this output is also sent to the 
engine control module (ECM). The signal is stored along with a misfire detection fault for 
troubleshooting purposes. 

Gong Output 

T3, The T3 tone is used for check control warnings. 



K-BUS: 

LCM 

IHKA 

GM 


^rmn+ 

SPEED SIGNAL "A" 

GONG 



LOW FUEL LEVEL 
(MISFIRE DETECTION) 



LJ —l 



n_I 



9 

Base Instrument Cluster 
























































Base Cluster Overview IPO (as introduced to 9/98) 



10 

Base Instrument Cluster 













































































































































































































Redundant Data Storage 

The specific information stored redundantly includes: 

• Vehicle ID number 

• Total mileage 

• Service Interval data 

The data is stored in the cluster and in the Light Check Module (LCM). The storage of 
this data follows the redundant storage of the E38. It prevents the loss of total mileage or 
SI data in the event of a cluster processor failure. 



The data is compared each time KL 15 is switched ON. If the data does not match, the 
manipulation DOT in the mileage display is illuminated. 

Because of this redundant storage feature, the following points must be noted: 

1. If the vehicle ID number is not the same in both modules, the manipulation DOT is 
illuminated and no data transfer takes place. All functions of both modules will 
continue to operate. 

2. Data will only be accepted by the cluster from the LCM if the ID numbers match and 
the cluster mileage is zero. 

3. The vehicle ID number is input into the cluster through coding and will only be 
accepted when the cluster is at zero mileage. 

4. The LCM stored mileage can only be overwritten with a higher mileage and is 
updated every 60 miles. 

5. If the mileage differs by more than 120, and the ID numbers are the same, the 
cluster will continue recording the mileage and set a fault for data transfer. 

6. If the K Bus link to the LCM fails, the cluster will continue to record mileage and store 
a fault for the data link. 

These conditions will only allow new components to be installed for replacement 
purposes. However, a used component can be installed fortesting purposes. If a cluster 
from another vehicle is used fortesting purposes, road testing of the vehicle should be 
avoided, because the cluster will accumulate mileage. 


11 

Base Instrument Cluster 


































On Board Computer (Base Cluster) 

The On Board computer information on the base variant cluster can only be displayed in 
the center matrix. The following information can be displayed: 


• OUTSIDE TEMPERATURE 


• FUEL CONSUMPTION 



• AVERAGE SPEED 




• ESTIMATED DRIVING RANGE 
ON REMAINING FUEL 



On vehicles up to the 98 model year, when KL R is switched ON, the outside tempera¬ 
ture will be displayed. To call up any other function, the turn signal lever must be pressed 
and released. The other functions are than displayed one after the other. A blank field is 
provided after the average speed display to allow the driver to switch off the display. 

On vehicle from 98, the display which was last called up will be retained when KLR is 
switched back on. 

A freeze warning is incorporated in the BC. If the temperature drops below 370F, the 
gong will sound and the temperature display will flash in the BC. Pressing the turn signal 
lever will cancel the display. 

Two of the displays “Average Fuel Consumption” and “Average Speed” can be reset to 
start new calculations. To reset the displays, press and hold the turn signal lever, for 
longer than one second, when the function is called up. The BC will than start to com¬ 
pute a new average value. 


12 

Base Instrument Cluster 



























































Base BC/lnstrument Cluster Test Functions 

In addition to the fault memory and diagnostic link, the base instrument cluster contains a 
series of test functions that can be accessed to check various functions and values. The 
test functions are displayed in the mileage LCD block. There are a total of 21 test 
functions. 

The test functions are similar to those of previous Board computers and contain similar 
tests. 

• Tests 1 & 2 are always unlocked. 

• Tests 3 -21 are only accessible after unlocking the test function. Test 19 is the 
unlock function for accessing the displays. 


1. Switch Off 


2. Press and Hold 



3. Switch to KL R 



Test 01. main menu is displayed 


4a. Do nothing and display will 
automatically go into sub tests 
of main menu 0.1 






4b. Press and release immediately 
(< 1 second) to advance to 
next main test menu. 


Scrolling through the 
numbered test functions is 
achieved by pressing the 
instrument cluster button 
when the number is displayed. 


f 


PRESS 
> 1 SEC 



The button is either pressed 
momentarily (tapped) < 1 
second or pressed and held 
for > 1 second. 

This signals the BC to display 
the sub-tests of the displayed 
main test menu or continue on 
to the next main test menu. 


t 


13 

Base Instrument Cluster 


























































































Test No. 1 

Vehicle specific data including: 

Sub-Tests: 

123451.0 = VIN 

48121.1 = Body number 

834762 6_1.2 = Part number of cluster 

010203 1.3 = Coding/Diagnosis/Bus index 

3495 1.4 = Manufacturing date (calendar week/year) 

04_600 1.5 = Hardware/software # of cluster (HW:04, SW:6.00) 

415_06 3_1.6 = Injection status, number of cylinders, engine factor 

Test No. 2 

Cluster System Test - activates the gauge drivers, indicators and LEDs to confirm 
function. 

Test No. 3 

SI data 

Sub Tests: 

1500 3.0 = Liters 

0 3.1 = Periodic inspection days (not applicable for US). 

Test No. 4 

Momentary Consumption 

Sub Tests: 

0267 4.0 =26.7 liters/1000km 

0073 4.1 = 7.3 liters per hour 

Test No. 5 

Distance Gone Consumption 

Sub Tests: 

0195 5.0 = 19.5 liters/100 km 

226 5.1 = momentary distance to go (226km) 


14 

Base Instrument Cluster 



Test No. 6 

Fuel level sensor inputs in liters 

Sub Tests: 

237415 6.0 = Fuel level averaged 

• LH sensor input = 23.7 liters 

• RH sensor Input = 41.5 liters 

0652 6.1 = Total tank level averaged = 65.2 liters 

0667 1_6.2 = Indicated value and tank phase 

• 1 = both sensors OK 

• 2 = one sensor fault 

• 3 = implausible input 

Test No. 7 

Temperature and Speed 

Sub Tests: 

032 7.0 = Coolant temp input 320C 

245 7.1 = Outside temp input 24.500 

5283 7.2 = Engine speed 5,283 RPM 

058 7.3 = Vehicle speed 58km/H 

Test No. 8 

Input values in HEX form 

Sub Tests: 

XXX 8.0 - 8.3 = Hex code, Instrument cluster inputs 

Test No. 9 

Battery voltage 

Sub Test: 

125 9.0 = 12.5 volts 

Test No. 10 

Country Coding 

Sub Test: 

02 10.0 = US 02 

15 

Base Instrument Cluster 



Test No. 11 

Cluster code 

Sub Test: 

000003 11.0 = Cluster code 

Test No. 12 

Not used 

Test No. 13 

GONG test 

Sub Test: 

Gong 13.0 = Activate gong by pressing button (gong response is delayed). 

Test No. 14 

Fault memory (not for diagnosis) 

Test No. 15-18 

Not used 


Test No. 19 

LOCK/UNLOCK 

Sub-Tests 


L-ON... 

L-OFF 19.0 = 


Display changes from “L-ON” to “L-OFF” every second. To unlock test functions, press 
the cluster button immediately when it changes to “L-OFF”. Tests are automatically 
locked when exiting test functions. 



16 

Base Instrument Cluster 

















Test No. 20 

Average fuel consumption - correction factor 

The factor follows previous systems, with adjustment range of 750 to 1250. The adjust¬ 
ment method is new for the base cluster. If adjustment is necessary, enter into test 20 
using the cluster button. The correction factor number is changed by using the sub-tests 
for the “ones, tenths and hundreds of the factor number. The digits will automatically 
scroll through 0-9 within each group (ones, tenths, hundreds). 

Sub-Tests: 

XXX9 20.0 = Press the button when the correct “ones” position is attained. 

XX5X20.1 = Press the button when the correct “tenths” position is attained. 
12XX20.2 = Press the button when the correct “hundreds” position is attained. 


Test No. 21 

Software reset 

Sub-Test: 

reset 21.0 = Reset software 


17 

Base Instrument Cluster 




Workshop Exercise 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, enter the instrument cluster test functions 
using the proper procedure. Access all test steps and complete worksheet. 

Explain the proper procedure to unlock the instrument cluster: 


Perform Test 02 

How is this test useful in diagnosis? 


Perform Test 20 

How is this test useful in diagnosis? 


How is Test Step 21 useful in diagnosis? 


18 

Base Instrument Cluster 








Workshop Exercise 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, connector the appropriate test cables to the 
instrument cluster. Access the correct ETM and complete worksheet below. 


What is the KL30H signal used for? 


Using the oscilloscope measure the KL58g signal. Record observations below. 
Operate the dimmer switch from low to high and observe oscilloscope. 

What are the readings obtained from the KL58g signal? 


Monitor CAN-Bus using oscilloscope and record observations below? 
Disconnect CAN-Bus from instrument cluster and observe (faults/functions etc.) 

What was observed on the cluster with the CAN-Bus disconnected? 


Disconnect the ambient temperature sensor input to the instrument cluster (or 
unplug sensor). 

What happens to the temperature display? What other system are affected? 


19 

Base Instrument Cluster 




1 . 


Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

What vehicles use the base instrument cluster? 



2. How are lamp failures and low fluid levels displayed on the base instrument 
cluster? 


3. What is displayed in the “middle display block” on the base cluster? 


4. Explain SIA III processing as compared to SIAII? 


5. How can the instrument cluster test functions be used to diagnose fuel gauge 
complaints? 


20 

Base Instrument Cluster 




























Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


What is the difference between coolant temperature input in vehicles before and 
after 9/98 production? 


What is the “low fuel” output signal used for? 


What information is stored redundantly between the cluster and LCM? 


Why should the cluster and LCM not be replaced simultaneously? 


What instrument cluster test functions are always unlocked? 


21 

Base Instrument Cluster 




























