Table of Contents 


Lighting Systems 

Subject Page 

Light Check Module (LCM).3 

Lamp Control and Monitoring.5 

Bulb Ratings .6 

LCM Input Signals.6 

Brake Light Switch.7 

Dimmer .7 

Light Switch Illumination.7 

Emergency Operation.8 

LCM III .8 

Replacement Lighting .9 

Output Voltage Limiting Function .9 

Follow Me Home Lighting.9 

Xenon Headlight Systems.10 

LWR .11 

Version Identification.11 

Headlight Replacement Parts.11 

Xenon High Intensity Discharge Bulbs .12 

Phases of Bulb Operation .12 

Functional Description.12 

Xenon Bulb Monitoring.13 

Headlight Beam Throw Control (LWR).14 

LWR Components.15 

LWR Control Module - E38, E39 and E53 Vehicles.15 

Level Sensors .15 

Headlight Adjustment Stepper Motors .16 

Functional Description .16 

Headlight Alignment .16 

LWR Diagnosis.16 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 































Lighting Systems 


Model: E38, E39 and E53 

Production: Start of Production MY 2004 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the operation of LCM. 

• Locate and Identify components of the lighting system. 

• Diagnose lighting system concerns. 

• Understand Xenon lighting systems. 


2 

Lighting Systems 




Light Check Module (LCM) 

Upon the initial introduction of the E38 in 1995, the lighting system was controlled by the 
Lamp Module (LM). The LM worked in conjunction with the Check Control Module 
(CCM) to control and monitor exterior lights. 

From 9/95 production, the LM and CCM were combined to form the Light Check Module 
(LCM). The new LCM provides a cost savings by combining the two functions into one 
processor. 

It is installed in the right kick panel where the LM of the 95 E38 was installed. Both ver¬ 
sions of instrument clusters use the LCM for processing Check Control data and control¬ 
ling the exterior lighting functions of the vehicle. The LCM communicates with other 
modules over the “I” and “K” busses. 

Functions of the LCM include: 

• Monitoring of all check control inputs 

• Formation and output of check control messages or signals 

• Control of all vehicle external lighting 

• Monitoring of all external lighting for operation 

• Instrument panel illumination dimming (KL 58g) signal 

• Control of instrument cluster indicator lights - for high beam, turn signal and fog light 
indicators. 

For proper operation of the check control and lamp control functions, the LCM must be 
coded with the Central Coding Key (ZCS) if replacement is required. 

LCM 



3 

Lighting Systems 






The LM/LCM reduces a number of components that were used in the past. 

The LM/LCM replaces: 

• Numerous relays 

• Flasher unit 

• Crash control unit (relay) 

• Cold check relay 

• Dimmer 

The LCM transmits and receives status information concerning light operation. It also 
communicates to the IKE when turn signal, high beam, and fog light indicators need to 
be activated. 

The LCM is informed by ZKE when a crash has occurred or the alarm was tripped for 
headlight / flasher activation. 

When reverse is selected, the LCM is signaled to turn on the back-up lights. All of this 
communication takes place over the Bus system. 







HIGH CLUSTER CONFIGURATION 


BASE CLUSTER CONFIGURATION 


4 

Lighting Systems 






















































Lamp Control and Monitoring 

Lamp control and monitoring on the E39 and E53 follow the E38 in design and function. 
All exterior lighting is controlled by the LCM. It contains transistor power output stages for 
activating the lights. This eliminates the need for fuses and relays previously used for this 
purpose. 

The LCM receives the input reguest for light illumination from the various switches and 
data inputs from other control modules. The LCM then switches the power output 
stages ON for lamp activation. 

Other control modules that communicate with the LCM include: 

• IKE over the l/K bus for turn signal, high beam and fog lamp indicator illumination. 

• The ZKE for crash alarm indication. 

• The AGS (EGS) control module for back up lamp activation. 

All exterior lighting is monitored (both hot and cold) by the LCM. When the monitored 
value exceeds an acceptable level (high or low) the LCM generates and sends the signal 
to the IKE or base instrument cluster for check control display. This monitoring takes 
place in timed cycles. 

• Hot monitoring takes place from the LCM by monitoring the current flow through the 
output stages. The current flow is determined by looking at the voltage drop of the 
circuit. 

• Cold monitoring takes place by the LCM by briefly switching the lights ON using a 
small amount of current. The LCM uses this to measure the voltage drop of the 
circuit. The small amount of current is not enough to cause the lights to illuminate. 

Note: Due to the hot and cold monitoring of the lamp circuits, it is important 
that the lamps used are of the correct wattage. Incorrect or substandard 
bulbs can affect voltage drop and therefore possibly set erroneous check 
control messages. 

HOT MONITORING COLD MONITORING 




5 

Lighting Systems 
























Bulb Ratings 

The chart below shows the wattage rating of some of the exterior lamps. In order for the 
bulb monitoring circuits to function correctly, the proper wattage ratings must be 
considered. The chart should only be used for reference. The proper rating can be found 
in technical data Group 63. 

The Low beam Xenon headlight systems are not cold monitored, however current can be 
measured when switched on to allow for Hot monitoring to be functional. 


Bulb 

Wattage Rating 

Hot monitored 

Cold monitored 

Low Beam (non Xenon 

65 

X 

X 

High Beam 

55 

X 

X 

Foglight 

55 

X 

X 

Front side marker 

5 

X 

X 

Blinkers 

21 

X 


Blinker indicators 

5 



Tail lights 

5 

X 

X 

License plate lights 

10 

X 

X 

Brake lights 

21 

X 

X 

Backup lights 

21 

X 

X 


LCM Input Signals 

Input signals to the lighting module are from the following switches: 

• Park / low-beam light switch 

• High-beam/headlight flash switch 

• Turn signal switch 

• Fog light switch 

• Hazard switch 

• Brake light switch 

• Dimmer control 

These inputs are ground switched except for the brake light switch. 


6 

Lighting Systems 



Brake Light Switch 

Brake light switch is now a hall-effect transmitter with three connections. The first con¬ 
nection is power, supplied from KL R, with the second being ground. The third connec¬ 
tion is the signal wire to the LCM. 

The electronic brake light switch eliminates the need for the brake test switch. If the 
brake switch or it’s circuits fail, the brake lights will be permanently on from KL R. 

The signal wire from the electronic brake light switch is active when the brakes are 
applied sending a 12 volt signal to the LCM. When the brake light switch is in the rest 
position, there is a small digital signal of approximately lOOmv present on the signal line. 
If this signal is interrupted, the LCM will switch the brakes lights on as a safety measure. 


+ ELECTRONIC 



Brake pedal down - Brake pedal up = Signal Low 

Signal High y* 

◄- 

Dimmer 

The LCM controls the KL 58g circuit (instrument cluster, LCD, and switch back lighting). 
The KL58g signal is a pulse width modulated signal which is an output of the LCM as 
well as a signal output over the bus line. 

The dimmer input to the LCM on early models is via a potentiometer. Later models use 
an electronic dimmer which uses a pulse-width modulated signal to the LCM. 

Light Switch Illumination 

A separate circuit is used to back light the symbol of the light switch. The symbols are 
fully illuminated when KL R is switched on and the lights are off. After the lights have 
been turned on, the switch back lighting is reduced to the same intensity as KL 58g. 


7 

Lighting Systems 
















Emergency Operation 

If there is a failure of the LCM processor, an emergency circuit is activated within the 
LCM. This will allow the following lights to function for driving safety: 

• Side marker/tail lights 

• Low-beam lights 

• Brake lights 

• Turn signals 

In emergency operation the following lights will not operate: 

• Dimming control (full bright) 

• Hazard lights 

• High-beam lights 

• Headlight flash 

• Fog lights 

• Back-up lights 

The l-Bus/K-Bus communication to the LM will also be interrupted. 

LCM III 

From 9/98 production, the new LCM III was introduced with increased feature and 
functions. The module itself has been redesigned with new semi-conductor final stages 
that produce less heat in operation. This allows for the elimination of the protruding heat 
sink found on the previous LCM. 



8 

Lighting Systems 












The total scope of function and features has been expanded to improve comfort and 
safety for the driver and passengers. Features and functional changes include: 

• Replacement lighting for the parking lights 

• Limiting of output voltage to the lamps 

• Follow Me Home lighting (delayed exit) 

Replacement Lighting 

The LCM can use substitute bulbs for various lights if a failure should occur, for example: 

• Front parking lights - If one of the parking lamps should fail, the LCM will illumi¬ 
nate the turn signal bulb on the affected side. The lamp will be dimmed by the LCM 
so that the intensity is the same as the parking lamp. 

• Rear tail lights - If one of the rear tail lights should fail, the LCM will switch on the 
brake lamp on the affected side. The lamp will be dimmed to the intensity of the tail 
lamp. 

Output Voltage Limiting Function 

The output voltage applied to the parking and tail lamps is regulated to increase the life of 
the lamps. If the voltage at the LCM increases over 12.5 volts, the LCM will reduce the 
voltage to 12 volts. 

Follow Me Home Lighting 

This is a convenience feature which provides lighting for the driver and passengers to 
leave their vehicle and enter their home. 

This feature is switched on by pulling the headlight flasher switch after the headlights and 
ignition have been switched off. This feature is switched off after a coded time delay or 
by switching the ignition on. 


9 

Lighting Systems 



Xenon Headlight Systems 


In order to improve night time driving visibility, Xenon headlight systems were developed 
for the automotive industry. Xenon technology is also referred to as High Intensity 
Discharge lighting or HID. 

For BMW vehicle Xenon technology was first introduced to the US market in 1993 on the 
E32 750iL. Since this time Xenon technology has evolved and spread throughout the 
model lineup. 

The first thing noticed about Xenon lamps is the blue/white appearance of the headlights. 

There are numerous benefits to Xenon headlights and these include: 

• Longer bulb life - typically the xenon bulbs will last from 3 to 5 times longer than 
conventional halogen bulbs. 

• Increased light output - Xenon headlights produce 2.5 to 3 times more light (lumens) 
than halogen headlights. 

• Blue/white light - The blue/white light emitted from Xenon headlights simulates a 
natural daylight appearance as opposed to the yellowish light from halogen bulbs. 
The light color of a light source is measured in color temperature (do not confuse 
with thermal temperature). Color temperature is measured in Kelvins (K). The 
higher the number, the whiter the light appears to be. 

- Natural daylight = 4,500 to 5000 K 

- Xenon headlights = 4,000 to 4,500 K 

- Halogen headlights = 3,200 K (yellow) 

• Better driving visibility - the combination of higher lumens and color temperature 
provides a superior lighting source. The beam is wider and brighter in front of the 
vehicle than conventional halogen bulbs improving safety and driver comfort. 


XENON HALOGEN 



10 

Lighting Systems 




















































































































































































































































































































LWR 


On vehicles equipped with Xenon headlights systems, it is necessary to prevent the light 
beam from affecting oncoming traffic. The Headlight Beam Throw Control (LWR) system 
is used to adjust the headlights horizontally (on a vertical plane). The is accomplished by 
using stepper motors in the headlight assembly. 

The stepper motors are controlled by the LWR control module based on inputs from front 
and rear mounted ride level sensors. 

As the vehicle suspension is loaded by driving or by passengers and cargo, the LWR 
module corrects the headlight position. This ensures the optimum headlight adjustment. 

Version Identification 

Xenon systems on BMW vehicles are supplied by two manufacturers - Bosch and Hella. 
These systems vary between models. 

The first version system on the E38 is referred to as Generation 2.1 an can be identified 
by the flat bottom edge on the headlight housing. 

The Generation 3 system has been introduced on the 1999 model year E38 and can be 
identified by the rounded (scalloped) edge of the headlight assembly. 

Headlight Replacement Parts 

In previous model years, individual replacement parts were not available for headlight 
assemblies. This was due to the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) relat¬ 
ing to the pitting or corrosion of the reflector components in non-sealed beam headlight 
assemblies. 


BMW has submitted corrosion test data for headlight components which have passed the 
FMVSS providing the availability of headlight assembly spare parts. This approval has 
been given for all Bosch headlight assemblies (including halogen). 


Vehicle 

Model 

Model 

Year 

Manufacturer/Version 

LWR 

(Yes/No) 

Individual 
replacement 
parts availability 

E32 (750il_) 

93-94 

Hella (Light & Control module) 

Generation 1 

No 

No 

E38 (750il_) 

95-98 

Bosch (Light & Control module) 

Generation 2.1 

No 

Yes 

E38 (All) 

99-01 

Bosch (light) and Hella (control module) 
Generation 3 

Yes 

Yes 

E39 (All) 

99-02 

Hella 

Generation 3 

Yes 

No 

E46 

99- 

Bosch Light and Control Module 

Yes 

Yes 


11 

Lighting Systems 



































Xenon High Intensity Discharge Bulbs 

Xenon bulbs are identified as D2-S. Xenon bulbs 
illuminate when an arc of electrical current is 
established between two electrodes in the bulb. The 
xenon gas sealed in the bulb reacts to the electrical 
excitation and head generated by the current flow. 

The distinct blue/white light is the result of the xenon 
gas reacting to the controlled current flow. 

Phases of Bulb Operation 

• Starting phase - the bulb requires an initial high 
voltage pulse of 18-25kV to establish the arc. 

• Warm up phase - Once the arc is established, the power supply to the bulb is 
regulated to 2.6 amps generating a lamp output of 75 watts. This is the period of 
operation where the xenon gas begins to brightly illuminate. The warm up phase 
stabilizes the environment in the bulb ensuring continual current flow across the two 
electrodes. 

• Continual phase - once the warm up phase is completed, the system switches to a 
continuous mode of operation. The supply voltage for the bulb is reduced and the 
operation power required for continual bulb illumination is reduced to 35 watts which 
is less than a conventional halogen bulb. 

Functional Description 

To regulate the power supply to the bulbs, additional components are required. The 
xenon control modules (1 per light) receive operating power from the LCM when the 
headlights are switched on. 

The xenon control modules provide the regulated power supply to illuminate the bulbs 
through their phases of operation. The igniters establish the electric arcs. Integral coils 
generate the initial high voltage starting pulses from the control module provided starting 
voltage. Thereafter they provide a closed circuit for the regulated power output from the 




i 

i 




LEFT 

IGNITER 


RIGHT 

IGNITER 



12 

Lighting Systems 























































Xenon Bulb Monitoring 

Xenon bulb function is monitored by the LCM. The bulbs are only “hot” monitored. Cold 
monitoring is not possible since the lighting control module is not in direct control of the 
xenon bulb. For this reason cold monitoring for low beam headlights is encoded off in the 
lighting control module for Xenon headlight equipped vehicle. 

The lighting control module detects xenon bulb failure via a reduction in current flow to 
the xenon control module. When a bulb fails, the xenon control module’s current con¬ 
sumption drops to 60mA indicating unsuccessful xenon bulb illumination. The lighting 
control module then posts the appropriate matrix display message or LED illumination in 
the Check Control Pictogram display. 


Xenon Headlight Assembly Components 



13 

Lighting Systems 




Headlight Beam Throw Control (LWR) 

Overview 

LWR automatically adjusts the vertical positioning of the headlights to maintain optimum 
headlight beam positioning for maximum driving visibility and to prevent undue glare for 
oncoming motorists. The system compensates for vehicle load angle changes (ie: dimin¬ 
ishing reserve of gasoline in fuel tank during a long journey, overloaded cargo weight, 
etc.) 

LWR has been available on BMW vehicles in other markets for quite some time. Starting 
with the 1999 model year all US market vehicles with Xenon Lights incorporate LWR as 
standard equipment. LWR is not available with standard halogen headlights. 

LWR monitors the vehicle’s loaded angle via two hall effect sensors mounted to the front 
and rear suspension members. When an adjustment is necessary, LWR simultaneously 
activates two stepper motors (one in each headlight assembly). 

The stepper motors drive a threaded rod that moves the lower edge of the headlight 
carrier plate forward and backward (depending on driven direction). The upper edge of 
the headlight carrier plate is fixed on a pivot. The pivoting movement adjusts the vertical 
position of the headlight beam. 


NORMALLY LOADED VEHICLE 



OVERLOADED VEHICLE (EXAGGERATED) 



14 

Lighting Systems 




















































































LWR Components 

LWR Control Module - E38, E39 and E53 Vehicles 

The LWR control module is located in the electronics carrier forward of the glovebox. 
The control module connects to a single, 26 pin, yellow harness connector. The control 
module has diagnostic capabilities and communicates with the DISplus/GT-1 via the 
K-Bus - IKE gateway to the D-Bus. 



Level Sensors 

LWR monitors two hall effect level sensors to determine vehicle load angle. The sensors 
are mounted to a fixed point on the suspension carriers of the front and rear axles. 

A lever is connected to the moving suspension member which changes the sensors 
output linear voltage signal as the suspension moves up and down. 



Note: E39 sport wagon vehicles with EHC have a dual output sensor at the 
right rear location. This sensor shares the same housing as the EHC 
systems right rear level sensor. 


15 

Lighting Systems 












Headlight Adjustment Stepper Motors 

One stepper motor is located inside each headlight assembly. The 4 wire stepper motors 
are controlled by the LWR control electronics to change the vertical headlight position. 



Functional Description 

The E38/E39 LWR system comes on-line when the lights are switched on. The LWR 
control electronics then cycles the stepper motors through their full range of motion and 
stops at a default position. 

The control electronics monitors the level sensor input signals to determine the vehicles 
load angle and adjusts the beam position accordingly. As the vehicle is driven it continu¬ 
ally monitors the level sensor signals and if necessary updates the headlight beam posi¬ 
tions every 25 seconds on the E46 or momentarily on the E38/E39 system. 

Abrupt fluctuations of the sensor signals are filtered to prevent unnecessary adjustment 
as well as monitoring road speed and brake pedal application as correction factors. 

Headlight Alignment 

The procedure for aligning Xenon Headlights with LWR is the same as conventional halo¬ 
gen bulb systems with one additional step. Wait at least 30 seconds for the LWR to 
cycle and adjust to it’s calculated position. 

LWR Diagnosis 

The LWR control module of the E38/E39 is diagnosable using the DISplus/GT-1. 

The headlights must be switched on in order to start diagnosis. 


16 

Lighting Systems 




LWR IPO 



LEFT 

HEADLIGHT 

STEPPER 

MOTOR 


RIGHT 

HEADLIGHT 

STEPPER 

MOTOR 




FRONTAXLE LEVEL SENSOR 



REAR AXLE LEVEL SENSOR 



PROCESSED RIGHT FRONT 
WHEEL SPEED SIGNAL 







◄ 




LEFT 

HEADLIGHT 

STEPPER 

MOTOR 



RIGHT 

HEADLIGHT 

STEPPER 

MOTOR 


17 

Lighting Systems 




























































































n Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What components does the LCM replace as compared to previous models? 


2. What is the difference between the LM and LCM? 


3. Explain “Cold Monitoring” of the lamp circuits: 


4. How does the LCM detect brake light switch failure? 


5. Why are Xenon bulbs NOT cold monitored? 


18 

Lighting Systems 






























Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

What is the purpose of LWR? 


What is new about the LCM III? 


What functions does the LCM perform when a crash input is received? 


What are the differences between a Halogen Lamp and a Xenon Lamp? 

























