Table of Contents 


Vehicle Features 

Subject Page 

Park Distance Control .3 

Introduction.3 

Components.4 

PDC Control Module .4 

PDC Switch .4 

Ultra-Sonic Sensors .5 

Transmitting Mode.5 

Receiving Mode .5 

System Operation .6 

Diagnosis.7 

Cruise Control .8 

Introduction.8 

Components.9 

Main Switch.9 

Cruise Control Switches .9 

Multi-Function Steering Wheel.10 

Cruise Control Module .10 

Cruise Control Actuator (V-8 95-98).11 

Electronic Throttle Control .11 

Cruise Control Operation.12 

Early Models (pre-97) .12 

Vehicle with Electronic Throttle Control.12 

Cruise Control Switch Operation.13 

Cruise Control Module .13 

Plausibility/Safety Features .14 

Diagnosis/Coding.14 

BMW Universal Transmitter.16 

Programming .17 

Rolling Code UGDO.17 

Procedure .17 

Heated Steering Wheel.18 

Operation.18 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 



































Vehicle Features 


Model: E38, E39 and E53 
Production: Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand PDC Operation 

• Locate and Identify PDC Components 

• Understand Cruise Control Operation 

• Understand the Operation of the BMW Universal Transmitter 


2 

Vehicle Features 




Park Distance Control 


Introduction 

The Park Distance Control is a safety/convenience system that uses ultra-sonic sensors 
to detect the close proximity to other objects when maneuvering the vehicle in tight 
spaces (such as parallel parking or parking in a narrow garage). 

The PDC monitors both the front and rear of the vehicle. The driver is warned, through an 
audible gong system, when the vehicle comes close to another object. As the object gets 
closer, the audible gong increases in frequency until a steady tone is produced. 

As the distance to the object increase, the steady tone will return to a beep and stop 
when the vehicle moves away from the object. 

The PDC is automatically switched “ON” when the ignition is switched on. However it 
does not become active until the vehicle is shifted into reverse. 

The system can be manually switched “ON/OFF’ with the console mounted switch. 



3 

Vehicle Features 































Components 

The PDC system consists of the following components: 

• PDC Control Module 

• PDC Switch 

• Ultrasonic PDC Sensors 

• Gong/Speakers 

PDC Control Module 

Mounted in the right side of the trunk behind the trim cover. The PDC control module 
activates the ultrasonic sensors mounted in the bumper cover. After activation, the con¬ 
trol module monitors the signals coming back through the sensors. 

Through this signal, the PDC is able to determine the distance to any objects close to the 
bumpers of the vehicle. As the vehicle comes close to an object, the PDC control module 
will activate the respective gong (front/rear) at a specific frequency tone. 

The PDC control module is linked to the l/K-Bus for the following: 

• Vehicle speed 

• Transmission range selection 

• Diagnosis 

Gong/Speaker - The PDC control module activates a gong and a speaker to alert the 
driver of the detected object. The front mounted gong is the existing check control gong 
located under the glove box. The rear mounted speaker is located under the right side of 
the parcel shelf. 

PDC Switch 

Mounted in the center console below the heater control panel or in SZM (99 and up). 

The system can be switched “ONTOFF” at anytime using the switch. The LED in the 
switch will flash simultaneously with the gong/speaker tones when the system detects 
an object. 



4 

Vehicle Features 







Ultra-Sonic Sensors 

The number of PDC sensors depends upon vehicle application. Four sensors each front 
and rear, mounted in the bumpers. Some vehicle only use rear PDC. The PDC sensors 
are small transmitter/receiver modules. They are specifically designed for automotive use. 
The sensors are limited to the following angles of monitoring: 

• 90° on the horizontal plane 

• 60° on the vertical plane 

The vertical angle is reduced to avoid unintentional signalling on steep grades. 

Transmitting Mode 

The control module sends a 40 KHz signal to the sensor. The control module activates 
the sensors in a specific sequence (firing order). The ceramic element in the sensor 
vibrates and produces an ultra-sonic sound wave that is sent out from the bumper. 

Receiving Mode 

If the wave contacts an object, the wave is bounced back to the sensor. The returning 
wave causes the ceramic element to vibrate creating an electrical signal to be fed back to 
the control module. 

The control module determines the distance to the object by the time difference 
between the sent and received ultra-sonic wave signals. The complete send/receive 
cycle, for one sensor lasts approximately 30ms (milli-seconds). 



DIAPHRAGM 



ELEMENT 


5 

Vehicle Features 





















































System Operation 

When KL15 is switched “ON”, the PDC system is switched “ON”, in the standby mode. 
The system performs a self-check of the ultrasonic sensors and control electronics. 

When the transmission is shifted into reverse, the system is activated and the sensors are 
activated in the pre-determined order. 

The system stays active up to approximately 20 MPH. Above this, the system reverts to 
the standby mode. 

If an object is detected within the operating range of the sensors, the control module will 
activate the respective gong/speaker (front/rear). The sensor closest to the object will 
receive additional activations to determine if the object is getting closer. 

As the distance to the object decreases to approx. 1V 2 feet, the control module increases 
the activation frequency of the sensor. The output frequency of the gong will increase 
linearly up to a distance of approx. % of a foot. At this time the frequency will change to a 
constant tone. 

As the distance to the object increases, the frequency of the sensor and gong activation 
decreases until the object is out of the monitoring range of the sensor. 



4 ULTRA-SONIC SENSORS 
IN FRONT BUMPER TRIM 



IN REAR BUMPER TRIM 



6 

Vehicle Features 




































































































































































Diagnosis 

The PDC system is connected to the diagnostic link through the l/K-Bus using the clus- 
ter/IKE as a gateway. The DISplus/Gt-1 is used for diagnosis and troubleshooting 
procedures when faults occur with the system. 

Fault Symptom troubleshooting paths should be used to troubleshoot failures with the 
PDC system. 


7 

Vehicle Features 



Cruise Control 


Introduction 

A familiar feature on BMW vehicle, cruise control has been upgraded beginning with the 
introduction of the E38. The new cruise control system (GR II) is similar in operation to 
the former system (FGR) found on older models (E32/E34 etc.). It offers improved 
control electronics to ensure that the set speed is reached and maintained without the 
sensation of fast acceleration or deviations of more than 1 MPH from the set speed. 

The GR II continues to offer the following advantages: 

• Fatigue-free driving over long distances with a set speed. 

• The constant travel speed results in lower fuel consumption. 

• By setting a speed, speed limits are observed automatically. 

Like most of the other systems in modern BMW vehicles, the GR II utilizes digital signal 
processing. This eliminates the amount of wiring required to achieve system operation 
and improves the reliability of cruise control operation. 

The driver’s request for cruise control functions is now activated from a new function 
selector switch pad mounted on the steering wheel (MFL). 

The cruise control system also features an ON/OFF switch which ensures that the cruise 
control system is not inadvertently engaged while driving the vehicle. 

The cruise control indicator lamp illuminates when the system is active (switched on). 
The new graphic symbol denotes constant speed maintenance. 



Buttons for 
Cruise Control 


8 

Vehicle Features 



Components 

The GR II system consists of the following components: 

Main Switch 

From introduction, the cruise control main switch is mounted on the right side of the 
dash panel below the instrument cluster. It produces a momentary ground signal to the 
GR II control module. When pressed the GR II control module switches on and the cruise 
enable indicator lamp in the instrument cluster (green in color) is illuminated. 

From the 98 model year, the main switch is omitted and the MFL was updated with an 
ON/OFF button (I/O). 



Cruise Control Switches 

The cruise control switch pad is mounted on the right side of the steering wheel (MFL). 
All of the request functions ( SET, ACCEL, DECEL, RESUME AND OFF) are activated 
from the cruise switch pad. 

These request inputs are processed by the MFL switch pad and transmitted to the 
Steering Wheel Control Module (MFL-CM) on early E38 or directly to the l/K bus on later 
models. 

Depending upon model, year and engine, the data signals will go to the cruise control 
module (early V-8), EML module (V-12) or engine control module to regulate the engine 
speed via the throttle. 


9 

Vehicle Features 





Multi-Function Steering Wheel 

On the early E38, the MFL control switch pad on the steering wheel sent signals to the 
MFL-Control Module. The MFL-CM is mounted on the left side of the steering column 
behind the left side knee bolster. 

The cruise control requests are processed and transmitted to the GR II (or EML) cruise 
control module over a data link. 

From the 97 model year, the MFL-CM was omitted and the MFL switch pad controls 
contained the electronics to interface with the l/K-Bus. 



Cruise Control Module 

The cruise control module is mounted in the E-box between the the DME and AGS 
control modules. It has one blue 26 pin ELO type connector. 

The cruise control module is only used on the E38/E39 until the 99 model year. The 
cruise control electronics are integrated into the Engine Control Module (DME) on vehicle 
which use electronic throttle control. Also, the E38 750iL uses the EML control module 
for cruise control operation. 


10 

Vehicle Features 
























































































Cruise Control Actuator (V-8 95-98) 

The cruise control actuator is mounted on the 
left fender well and contains the actuator 
motor, feedback potentiometer and actuator 
clutch. 

The actuator is connected to the throttle valve 
with a bowden cable parallel to the accelerator 
cable. 

The actuator is omitted on vehicle which use 
electronic throttle control (EML). The throttles 
on EML equipped vehicles are regulated by 
the EML control module (VI2) or the engine 
control module (DME on V8 and six cylinder. 

Electronic Throttle Control 

Beginning with the E38 750iL, the cruise control actuator and cruise control module are 
omitted. The cruise control electronics have been integrated into the EML control 
module (VI2) or the DME (V8 and six cylinder). 

The E38 750iL was introduced in 1996 with the M73 V-12 engine. All vehicles from the 
99 model year have electronic throttle control. 




11 

Vehicle Features 










































































Cruise Control Operation 


Early Models (pre-97) 

The cruise control switch pad provides momentary ground signals and converts them 
into a dynamic digital signal. The signal is sent to the steering wheel control module and 
passed through a gateway to the GR II control module . 

The GR II carries out the systems functions based on this dynamic digital signal and 
other input signals. The actuator is controlled by final stage activation at both sides of the 
motor. 



Vehicle with Electronic Throttle Control 

The cruise control switches provide input to the MFL key pad which converts the 
requests into bus telegrams. These signals are sent via a bus link to the EML (VI2) or 
engine control module. The throttles are regulated by the EML or engine control module 
to regulate vehicle speed. 



12 

Vehicle Features 














































Cruise Control Switch Operation 

When the main switch is turned on and the vehicle speed is above 20 mph, the cruise 
control can be set or adjusted at the cruise control switch pad. 

Resume - Briefly pressing the resume button will cause the vehicle to accelerate/decel¬ 
erate to the stored speed value in the cruise control module. 

Set/Accelerate/Tip Up - Pressing the set button will engage the cruise system and 
maintain the vehicle’s current speed. Pressing and holding the set button will cause the 
vehicle to accelerate. When released, the vehicle’s current speed will be the set speed. 

Tapping the set button will cause the speed to increase by approx. 1 MPH. The number 
of times the tip feature will function is limited to 8. 

Decelerate/Tip-Down - Pressing and holding the decelerate button will cause the 
vehicle to slow down. When the button is released, the current speed is the new set 
speed. Tapping the button will cause the vehicle speed to decrease by approx 1 MPH. 
The number of times the tip feature will function is limited to 8. 

OFF - Pressing the off button will disengage the cruise control. The previous set speed is 
stored in memory until it is overwritten or the vehicle is switched off. In addition to 
switching off via the cruise control switch on the steering wheel, the system can also be 
switched off by: 

• Depressing the main switch on the instrument panel. 

• Applying the brakes. 

• Shifting the transmission into neutral. 

Cruise Control Module 

The cruise control module contains new control logic for smoother operation. The new 
control logic prevents the maximum acceleration/deceleration feel that was characteristic 
with the FGR system. 

The rate of acceleration in SET ACCELERATE and RESUME is based on the current 
road speed of the vehicle. The rate of acceleration is high at low vehicle speeds and 
gradually decreases as vehicle speed increases. This gives the feeling of steady smooth 
acceleration. 

The rate of deceleration when the DECELERATE button pressed is linear until the 
throttle valve closes. The decel rate is then dependent on the engine braking effect and 
road conditions. This results in a smooth speed reduction. 

If the set speed can not be maintained due to unusual operating conditions (severe up hill 
grades), the control module adopts a special resume mode. Once the unusual operating 
condition is overcome, the set speed will be resumed at a reduced acceleration rate. 

This feature is designed to prevent a sensation of rapid accelerating. 


13 

Vehicle Features 



The cruise control module is connected to the AGS control module through a data link. 
When cruise control functions are activated, the AGS shift program is adapted to match 
the requirements of the requested cruise control function. For example, when the GR II is 
set at a specific speed and a severe down hill grade causes the vehicle to overcome the 
set speed the GRII signals the AGS to downshift a gear. This will occur as needed to 
maintain the set speed as closely as possible. 

Plausibility/Safety Features 

To avoid malfunctions or unsafe conditions, the GR II continuously monitors the input and 
output signals. Redundant (or dual signal) processing ensures that the input signals are 
plausible and prevents unsafe cruise control operation from being carried out. 

The following safety measures are also included in the total scope of cruise 
control operation: 

• The minimum speed threshold for cruise control operation is 30 km/h (20 mph). 

If the speed drops below this value the cruise control will not operate. 

• Shut off priority - The brake pedal and transmission neutral switch have priority for 
switching the system off. If a malfunction caused several commands to be called up 
at the same time, the brake switch signal would disengage the system. 

• If the set speed is exceeded by more than 8km/h (approx. 5MPH), the system will 
disengage by the actuator clutch. When the speed drops below the threshold, the 
clutch will re-engage and the cruise will continue operation. 

• The data link from the cruise control switch is continuously checked for signal 
integrity. 

Diagnosis/Coding 

Diagnosis of the GR II system is carried out with the DISplus/GT-1. On vehicles which 
have a cruise control module, the control module stores faults that occur with the 
input/output signals for cruise control operation. 

Vehicle which use electronic throttle control will store system related faults in the EML or 
DME control module. 

The MFL or MFL-CM stores faults that occur with the cruise control switch. 


14 

Vehicle Features 



EMLIPO (M73/M73TU) 


ECM RELAY 
(DME MAIN 



OPERATING 

POWER 


PEDAL POSITION SIGNALS 


IDLE SIGNAL 
SAFTEY PATH 

TO DME 
TO DME 



CRUISE 

CONTROL 

INPUTS: 

E31 OR 


as 


H 

7 


E38 SYSTEMS 


GR II MAINi 
SWITCH 



CRUISE CONTROL 
SWITCHES 


MFL CONTROL 
_ .MODULE 

Early Model E-38 only 


Siemens 

EML Ills 

-88 PINS 

Throttle Motor Control 
Throttle Valve Optimum Position 
For Starting 
Idle Speed Control 
Throttle Valve Synchronization 
Cruise Control (FGR) 
Adjustment of Throttle(s) during 
Decelto reduce 
High Manifold Vacuum 
Engine Speed Limit 
Vehicle Speed Limit 
Drive Torque Reduction (ASC) 
Drag Torque Reduction (MSR) 
Safety Monitoring 
Fail Safe Functions 
Fault Monitoring With Memory 
Diagnostic Communication 
OBD II Compliant 


-Ttp 


POTENTIOMETER 1 
POWER & GROUND 


THROTTLE 
HOUSING 1 


(M)X 




STEPPER 
MOTOR 1 




POTENTIOMETER 2 
POWER & GROUND 


100000 ^ / 

Ivi 



JUtMiy 


STEPPER 
MOTOR 2 


-Yt 


POTENTIOMETER 1 
POWER & GROUND 


THROTTLE 
HOUSING 2 


Cmx 




STEPPER 
MOTOR 1 


-AH 


POTENTIOMETER 2 
POWER & GROUND 


Ivi 





STEPPER 
MOTOR 2 


FAULT 

DISPLAY 



CRUISE CONTROL 
INDICATOR 


CHECK CONTROL 
MODULE 


IDLE SIGNAL TO DME I 


SAFETY PATH ►- 
HIGH SIGNAL 
FROM PWG ►- 


IDLE SIGNAL TO DME II 
DIAGNOSIS 

-T-* 


CAN BUS 





15 

Vehicle Features 





























































































































































































BMW Universal Transmitter 


The BMW Universal Transmitter (UGDO), is used to provide convenience for customers 
that have various remote systems at their home. The UGDO can replace up to three 
remote transmitting devices. The UGDO is standard equipment on the 740il_ and 750iL 
and optional on the E38/E39. 

From 5/97 a new updated UGDO became available. Due to the new security technology 
regarding remote devices (garage door openers etc.), the UGDO was upgraded with the 
new “rolling code” technology. This allows compatibility with new devices. 

The transmitter is located in the overhead switch panel above the rearview mirror. 

PLACE SIGNAL EMITTING END 
OF HAND HELD TRANSMITTER 
HERE WHEN PROGRAMMING 



THREE CHANNEL BUTTONS 



The BMW Universal Transmitter replaces up to three remote transmitters such as: 

• Garage Door Openers 

• Home / office lighting and security systems 

• Entrance Gate systems 


16 

Vehicle Features 










Programming 

1. Press the two outer buttons on the universal transmitter simultaneously until the red 
LED begins to flash. Release the buttons. This step initializes the memory and 
erases any previous settings on all three channels. 

2. Place the signal emitting end of the hand held remote transmitter against the BMW 
universal transmitter so that you can still see the red LED. 

3. Simultaneously press and hold the hand held remote transmitter button and the 
chosen button (1 -3) on the BMW universal transmitter. 

4. Continue to hold the buttons until you see the red LED begin to flash first slowly and 
then rapidly. It can take up to one minute before the LED begins to flash rapidly. 
Once it is flashing rapidly it indicates that the universal transmitter has been pro¬ 
grammed successfully. 

5. To program another button repeat steps 2-4 only. 

Rolling Code UGDO 

Starting from 5/97 the Universal Garage Door Opener-UGDO, (factory installed on E38, 
and retailer installed option on E39/E53) has been equipped with new circuitry for 
"rolling" access codes. This feature improves security by changing the digital, ultrasonic 
code every time the opener button is used. Operation and programming of the new door 
opener is described in the owner's manual. 

The garage door opener may have a "rolling code" feature and has to be "trained" to 
operate in conjunction with BMW Universal Transmitter. To determine the type of opener, 
the customer has to depress the button on the BMW Universal Transmitter that has been 
programmed. If the indicator light on the UGDO flashes rapidly for one to two seconds, 
then continuously, the garage door opener has a rolling code system. 

Procedure 

The following "training" procedure should be performed by the customer on the Garage 
Door Opener equipped with a "rolling code": 

1. Locate the training button on the garage door opener receiver. Exact location and 
color of the button may vary by the brand. In case of difficulty locating the button, 
refer to the garage door opener manual or call 800-355-3515 . 

2. Press the training button on the garage door opener receiver for one to two seconds. 

3. Press the programmed BMW Universal Transmitter button for the duration of the 
rapid flash until the training light turns solid (two seconds). Release the BMW 
Universal Transmitter button and press the button again to complete the training. 
Your garage door opener should now recognize your BMW Universal Transmitter. 

All E38 or E39 (with UGDO option) manufactured prior to 5/97 can be retrofitted with the 
"rolling code" type transmitter. However, this upgrade is not covered by the BMW New 
Car Limited Warranty. 


17 

Vehicle Features 



Heated Steering Wheel 

The heated steering wheel system consists of the following components: 

• A heating filament integrated into the steering wheel cover. 

• An NTC temperature sensor, in the filament circuit, to regulate the heating current. 

• A push button mounted in the right side MFL key pad. 

• The control module located behind the air bag assembly. 

• Slip ring assembly for the power and ground supply. 

Operation 

When KL 15 is switched ON, the heated wheel can be switched ON by pressing the but¬ 
ton. 

A green LED illuminates to indicate system operation. Maximum current is supplied and 
heats the filament to its operating temperature (surface temperature of approximately 
90°F). 

The NTC detects the temperature of the filament and causes the control module to cycle 
once the wheel is heated. Cycling is carried out with a pulse width modulated signal. 

The system is not connected to the diagnostic link, however the control module does 
monitor operation of the system. If a fault occurs during operation, the system and green 
LED will switch OFF. 



18 

Vehicle Features 





























Heated Steering Wheel Schematic 



19 

Vehicle Features 




