Table of Contents 


On Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 

Subject Page 

Navigation Systems.5 

DVD Navigation.7 

Components.8 

On Board Monitor/Display .8 

E46 On Board Monitor Display (Mk-ll) .9 

On Board Monitor Assembly.10 

Navigation Computer .11 

Mark I Navigation Computer .12 

Mark II Navigation Computer.12 

Mark III Navigation Computer.13 

Video Module (Mk-I Only) .13 

Magnetic Field Sensor (Mk-I only).14 

Sensor Operation.14 

GPS Antenna.15 

GPS Antenna Locations.16 

GPS Receiver Module .16 

Gyro Sensor (Mk-ll and III).17 

Gyro Sensor Operation .18 

Navigation System Interfaces.19 

GPS Input Signal .19 

Wheel Speed Sensor Input .20 

Reverse Gear Signal.21 

Rear Window “Defroster ON” Signal (Mark I Only) .21 

ARCNET(Markl Only) .22 

RGB .22 

Bus Network.22 

Mark I Navigation Bus Network Overview .23 

Mark II Navigation Bus Network Overview.24 

Mark II (E46) Navigation Bus Network Overview.25 

Navigation System Operation.26 

Graphical Map Scale.28 

Graphical Map Positioning.28 

GPS Indication.29 

Navigation System Information Screen.30 

Vehicle Position.30 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 






































Subject Page 

Workshop Hints.31 

Mark I Navigation System Calibration .31 

Vehicle Owner Calibration .31 

1. Resetting Vehicle Position .31 

2. Adjusting Tire Size.32 

Tire Circumference Measurement .33 

Precision Adjustment.34 

Dealership Calibration.35 

Tools Needed for Dealership Calibration .35 

Calibration Procedures.36 

1. Setting of Car Parameters.37 

Aftermarket Wheels or Suspension Modifications .37 

2. Sensor Test .38 

3. Wheel Sensor.39 

4. Compass (Magnetic Field Sensor Calibration) .41 

Compass Step 1.41 

Preferred Method- CIRCLE .42 

Alternate Method - BLOCK.42 

Compass Step 2.43 

Preferred Method - Digitized Address.43 

Compass Step 2.45 

Last Method - Angle .45 

Compass Step 3 - Rear Window Defroster Compensation.46 

Finish Calibration .46 

Mark I Diagnosis and Troubleshooting .47 

Navigation Computer Flash Codes .48 

Mark II Navigation System Diagnostic Mode Displays.49 

Mark II Navigation System Calibration.52 

E46 Mark II Board Monitor and Navigation Service Mode Displays . .53 

Replacing the Mk-3 Navigation Computer.58 

Service Mode.60 

Diagnosis.60 

Service Mode Menu Chart (Sensor Check) .61 

Service Mode Diagnostic Explanations .61 

Service Mode Diagnostic Explanations .62 

Navigation System Software.63 

Checking Software Version.63 

MKI Systems .63 

MKII Systems.63 

MK III Systems .63 

DVD Navigation System for l-Bus Vehicles.63 











































Subject Page 

On Board Monitor System.64 

On Board Monitor and Controls and Indicators.66 

Audio System .66 

On Board Monitor Functions.68 

On Board Computer .68 

GPS Navigation.68 

Telephone .69 

Code Function .69 

Set Screen.70 

Digital Sound Processor (DSP) .70 

Auxiliary Ventilation.70 

Emergency.71 

Monitor OFF .71 

Mark II On Board Functions.72 

Automatic Date/Time Display .72 

Navigation Computer Removal.73 



















On Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 


Model: All with Navigation 
Production: Start of Production MY 2004 

IBi 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand basic Navigation functions 

• Identify and locate navigation system components 

• Diagnose navigation system concerns 

• Perform Navigation Service Mode Functions 


4 

Navigation Systems 


Navigation Systems 

The navigation systems used on BMW vehicles have been in use since the E38 in 1997. 
There have been various versions which have been carried over into other models as 
well. These navigation systems are possible due to the available Global Positioning 
System technology. 

The BMW Navigation system operates in conjunction with the Global Positioning System 
(GPS). Utilization of the GPS improves the accuracy and provides redundancy for the 
Navigation system which also incorporates a dead reckoning system. The GPS was 
designed by the US Government in the 1970s for military purposes. In recent years it has 
been made available for civilian use. 



There are 24 satellites equally divided among six geosynchronous orbits that are 
positioned 11,000 miles out in space. Each satellite continuously emits a radio signal. 
The signals contain short information messages including: 

• The exact time the message was broadcast. 

• Gurrent latitude and longitude positions relative to the geosynchronous orbit. 


5 

Navigation Systems 












A GPS receiver device on earth receives these signals from the satellites and determines 
its own location by: 

• Comparing its internal clock signal with the satellites. This determines the distance 
from the satellites location. 

• Through triangulation computation, the receiver module calculates its own longitude 
and latitude position. This is only possible when it receives a minimum of three 
satellite signals. 



In a sense, GPS can be compared to navigation methods used by sailing ship navigators 
years ago. They used a sextant to plot the changing locations of known stars to 
determine their own position. This, in conjunction with compass navigation, proved an 
accurate method of sailing across the seas. 



6 

Navigation Systems 
















The BMW navigation system is based on the CARiN™ system developed by Philips 
Electronics. (CARiN™ - Car Information and Navigation System.) 

The BMW Navigation system is a CD driven, on board, active route mapping computer. 
The driver can enter a destination through the On Board monitor and the navigation 
system will select a mapped route, from the current location, to the destination. 

The route maps are stored digitally on a navigational database CD that is installed in a 
dedicated CD drive in the navigation computer. 



The U.S. is currently divided into 7 mapped CD database areas ranging from: 

• Area 1 - California and Nevada, through 

• Area 7 - Covering the South Eastern States. 

In addition to the digitized route maps, other information such as hotels, restaurants, ser¬ 
vice stations, dealerships, points of interest and local sight-seeing attractions along with 
their addresses are stored on the database CD. 

The map CDs are currently being updated twice a year. As the updates occur, more 
streets and roads will be added. In addition, more local information will be added with 
regards to businesses, hotels, motels, local attractions, etc. 

DVD Navigation 

For the 2003 model year, BMW introduced a DVD based navigation system. The DVD 
based navigation system uses 1 map DVD to cover the US and Canada rather than the 
previous 8 CDs needed to cover the same area. 

The vehicles included are the E39, E46, E52, E53 and E85. The DVD navigation system 
was introduced on E39, E46 and E52 vehicles from 9/02, and on E53 and E85 from 
10/02 production. 


7 


Navigation Systems 








Components 

This training module covers all BMW Navigation systems from Mark I through Mark III. 
These navigation systems are installed on the E38, E39, E53, E46 and the E52. Some 
components are system specific and not used on all versions of navigation systems. 
These differences will be pointed out as necessary. The DVD based navigation systems 
will be covered in their respective training modules (i.e. E83,E85 etc.) 


On Board Monitor/Display 

On vehicles equipped with navigation, the On Board Monitor (OBM) is used as a display 
unit. The OBM replaces the MID (or radio) and therefore provides controls for the audio 
systems and display functions for the On Board Computer. Depending upon the model, 
the OBM comes in several configurations. 



The abbreviation BMBT is also used to refer to the Board Monitor. BMBT is derived from 
the German words “Board Monitor Bedien Tiel”, translated into English these words 
mean On Board Monitor Control Panel. 

Depending upon vehicle application, the BMBT is connected to either the I or K-Bus. 

Later models also used a new version of BMBT referred to as the “wide screen” On 
Board Monitor. The wide screen BMBT which uses a larger display screen of 6.5 inches 
as compared to the E46/E53 of 5 inches and the E38/E39 at 5.25 inches. 

The wide screen BMBT is only used on the Mark III navigation systems. These include 
MK III systems installed on the E38, E39, E53 and E46. The E52 continues to use the 
MIR with the monochromatic screen. 


8 

Navigation Systems 






























MK II On Board Monitor Display 



E46 On Board Monitor Display (Mk-ll) 



9 

Navigation Systems 

























































On Board Monitor Assembly 

The BMBT is mounted in the center console and consists of the following components: 



BMBT with push 
button controls 



10 

Navigation Systems 








Navigation Computer 

The navigation contains a microprocessor and CD drive for navigation system operation. 
The computer collects data from various sensors to compute the vehicle location. 

The location information is used to calculate the correct route to destination. This infor¬ 
mation is ultimately displayed on the BMBT screen. 

There are several configurations of the navigation computer depending upon version. 
The navigation computer on most models is located on the left side of the luggage 
compartment (except E52 which is behind the seats). 

The Mark I and Mark II navigation computer can be identified by the “On” and “CD-IN” 
LED’s on the front face plate. 



The Mark III computer can be identified by the “Power” LED and the lack of the “CD-IN” 
LED. 


11 

Navigation Systems 










The navigation computer contains several components important to navigation system 
operation. Depending upon the version, the components/systems include: 

• CD Drive for Map CD and Navigation software 

• Hardware for Navigation functions 

• CPS Receiver 

• Cyro Sensor (Mark II and III Only) 

• Output for audio interface 

• Output for visual display 

• Cooling fan 

• Magnetic Field Sensor Connector (Mark I only) 

Mark I Navigation Computer 

The Mark I navigation computer uses blade type connections for inputs and outputs. 
There is an external 3 amp fuse and there also 2 additional connectors, 1 for the 
magnetic field sensor and 1 for the “ARCNET” interface. 

Mark II Navigation Computer 

The Mark II computer introduced on the E38 and E39 as of 9/97 production. There are 
considerable changes to the system. The connectors for the ARCNET and magnetic 
field sensor have been deleted as well as the 3 amp external fuse. The external blade 
type connections have been replaced by two 26-pin ELO type connectors. 

Internally, a Cyro Sensor has been added to measure the motion of the vehicle on its 
vertical axis. The gyro sensor is integral to the navigation computer and cannot be 
serviced separately. 

The internal gyro sensor eliminates the need for the magnetic field sensor from Mark I. 

The front faceplate of the Mark II computer appears identical to the Mark I system, how¬ 
ever they are not interchangeable. 

Mark I Navigation 
computer (rearview) 


ARCNET 

connector 


Mark II Navigation 
computer (rearview) 



12 

Navigation Systems 














Mark III Navigation Computer 

The Mark III navigation computer retains many of the features from the Mark II system but 
is physically different in appearance from the Mark I and II systems. Most noticeably is 
the lack of the “CD-IN” LED on the front faceplate. 

The GPS receiver module is now integrated into the housing of the Mk-3 computer. 

There is also an optimized memory capability for faster processing and improved naviga¬ 
tion operation. 

The same navigation computer is used for color systems as well as the monochrome 
display used on MIR navigation systems. 

There are also two 18-pin ELO connectors. 

Note: The Mark III navigation computer is also used as a retrofit 
for previous systems. 



Video Module (Mk-I Only) 

The video module is only used on the Mk-I system. It is used to create the RGB (Red, 
green, blue) signals which are sent to the BMBT screen via the RGB signal lines. 

The video module also serves as a data memory for the navigation system. As needed 
the video module instantly provides the RGB signals to change the on-board monitor 
display and sends the audio signals to the audio system amplifier (or radio). 

It is located below the navigation computer in the luggage compartment. The functions 
of the video module are integrated in the navigation computer on the Mark II and Mark III 
systems. Therefore, the video module is omitted on these systems. 


13 

Navigation Systems 














Magnetic Field Sensor (Mk-I only) 


In addition to the current position of the vehicle, the navigation computer also needs a 
direction of travel input. The magnetic field sensor is used for this purpose. 


The sensor consists of a ferromagnetic ring with two coils placed 90 degrees apart. 
Signals from the two coils become the vehicle’s directional input when the navigation 
system is in operation. 


BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 

a 


EARTHS 
MAGNETIC 
FIELD 


MAGNETIC 

FIELD 

SENSOR 


COMPARED WITH A TABLE 
IN THE NAV COMPUTER 



Sensor Operation 

The sensor receives its operating power and ground from the navigation computer. 

When the system is switched on, magnetic fields are introduced into the coils. The coils 
produce a voltage signal that is input into the navigation computer. 

As the vehicle turns left or right, the earth’s magnetic field influences the magnetic fields 
in the coils causing them to increase and decrease. 

The changing strength of the magnetic fields causes the voltage signal induced in the 
coils to increase linearly. This creates a changing voltage drop at the monitoring circuit in 
the navigation computer. 

The navigation computer determines the direction of travel of the vehicle by plotting the 
simultaneously changing voltage signals. 

When the rear defroster is switched on, the navigation computer is informed by the IHKA 
via a specified bus signal path. 

The magnetic field created by the rear window defroster is compensated for by the navi¬ 
gation computer. This compensation is derived from the calibration procedures (See 
workshop hints). 


14 

Navigation Systems 




















































































GPS Antenna 


The GPS antenna is used to receive input information from the satellites in orbit. The 
antenna receives time messages along with latitude and longitude information. This 
information is used by the navigation computer to calculate the exact position of the 
vehicle. 

The antenna is an input to the GPS receiver module on Mk-I and Mk-ll systems and a 
direct input to the navigation computer on Mk-lll systems. 



• EXACT TIME 

• CURRENT 

QPS SATELLITE 

COORDINATES 


REQUEST FOR 
VEHICLE POSITION RXD f 



RXD 
^RXDN 

4 WIRE, BI-DIRECTIONAL DATA INTERFACE 

njiJiJiJTnnj''LJLri^ 

Unjiirnmn-Tim TXDN 



KL31 


The antenna design differs slightly between systems. The location of the antenna also 
differs between vehicles as well. 


GPS Antenna 
Mark I 



GPS Antenna 
Mark II and III 


15 

Navigation Systems 
































GPS Antenna Locations 


Vehicle 

Antenna Locations 

E38 

Under rear parcel shelf 

E39 Sedan 

Under rear parcel shelf 

E39 Sport Wagon 

Behind the dashboard on the left hand side 

E46 Sedan/Coupe 

Under rear parcel shelf 

E46 Sport Wagon 

Above the rear glass under the spoiler 

E46 Convertible 

Behind the Instrument cluster 

E52 

Left front corner behind the dashboard 

E53 

Above the rear glass under the spoiler 


GPS Receiver Module 

The GPS receiver module is responsible for 
receiving the satellite signals from the GPS 
antenna and providing the position of the 
vehicle to the navigation computer. 
Information provided by the GPS receiver can 
be displayed in the “service mode” (refer to 
workshop hints). 

The GPS receiver on Mark I and II system is 
located near the navigation computer. On 
Mark III systems, the GPS receiver is integrat¬ 
ed into the Mark III navigation computer. 



16 

Navigation Systems 














Gyro Sensor (Mk-ll and III) 

The navigation computer now contains an electronic gyro sensor that detects changes in 
the vehicle’s driven direction (changes in vehicle yaw). Similar to the Rotation Rate 
Sensor of the DSC III system, the gyro sensor measures the motion of the vehicle on it’s 
vertical axis. 

This gyro sensor was introduced on the Mk-ll systems and is an internal component of 
the navigation Computer. It is not serviceable nor does it require calibration. 

The gyro sensor provides status of vehicle turning maneuvers in the form of a changing 
voltage signal that the navigation computer uses as an input signal. 

The navigation computer requires the gyro sensor’s input signal along with the digitized 
map CD, the vehicle speed signal, and the CPS signals together to calculate, continually 
update and display the exact vehicle position on the LCD. 



The gyro sensor eliminates the need for the magnetic field sensor uses on the Mk-I 
system, therefore the magnetic field sensor is not used on Mk-ll and Mk-lll systems. 


17 

Navigation Systems 







Gyro Sensor Operation 

• The internal control electronics of the sensor maintain a constant set frequency 
which is applied to the oscillation elements causing a calculated vibration to occur. 
The frequency is also simultaneously monitored by the phase detector. 

• The vibration passes up to the pick-up elements of the tuning fork causing them to 
vibrate and be suspended in a free floating state, easily influenced by rotational 
movement. 

• When the vehicle turns, the free-floating upper ends of the tuning fork flex. This 
generates a millivoltage signal proportional to the turn. 

• The signal amplifier receives the signal and passes it on to the phase detector which 
compares it to the original set frequency. 

• The phase detector determines what direction the vehicle has turned and passes 
the result on to the frequency filter. 

• Since the piezo gyro sensor is also picking up other vibrational movements in the 
vehicle, the frequency filter isolates the pertinent yaw signals and provides a DC volt¬ 
age signal proportional to the left/right turning movement of the vehicle. 



(turned/veered left, or 
turned/veered right) 


18 

Navigation Systems 





















Navigation System Interfaces 


GPS Input Signal 

On vehicle equipped with a GPS receiver, (Mk-I and II) the information from the receiver is 
transferred to and from the Navigation computer via a 4 wire bi-directional interface. The 
navigation computer will send a “request” to the GPS receiver for the current vehicle 
position. This request is sent over a two wire link. The two wires are referred to as RXD 
and RXDN. 

The navigation computer receives the current vehicle position over another 2 wire link 
referred to as TXD and TXDN. Each two wire link is similar to the GAN line but is 
unidirectional. When a “data burst” is transmitted, it is mirrored on the other wire as a 
self-check of data transmission. 


Do not confuse these signals with the diagnosis bus (TXD/RXD), the are only related in 
name, not in function. 




GPS SIGNALS 
INCLUDE: 

• EXACT TIME 

• CURRENT 
SATELLITE 
COORDINATES 


REQUEST FOR 
VEHICLE POSITION 



^ RXD ULiLJiJiriJTjmrLrl 

^ RXDN jinrTJTJunjnjxn^ 

4 WIRE, BI-DIRECTIONAL DATA INTERFACE 

njnjTnjnjinjn_JiJiJ^^ 
Unjijmjnjinj~im TXDN. 


RXDN 


CURRENT VEHICLE 
TXD POSITION (COORDINATES), 

TXDN 



KL31 


19 

Navigation Systems 























Wheel Speed Sensor Input 

Wheel speed sensor input is used to determine distanced traveled, vehicle speed as well 
as direction. 

Mark I navigation systems monitored both the left and right front wheel speed sensors. 
The left and right signals are used to determine direction in turns by comparing the 
speed difference between the signals. This was due to the fact the the Mark I system 
did NOT use a gyro sensor. 

Mark II and III systems only use one wheel speed signal. The wheel speed signal for the 
E46 comes from the left rear wheel. On all other vehicles, the left front wheel speed 
sensor is used. 

Wheel speed is needed by the navigation to determine distance traveled especially when 
the overhead view is obstructed to the satellites (i.e tunnels, trees etc.). This allows the 
navigation computer to have an uninterrupted measurement of distance. 

Note: The installation of aftermarket wheels of improper size can greatly affect 
the accuracy of the navigation system. When investigating complaints of 
navigation inaccuracy, always be sure to check for proper tire size. 


Wheel speed sensor signals 

(Example of Mark I) 



LEFT FRONT I- 
WHEEL SPEED 
SIGNAL 

RJITTL 


RIGHT FRONT 
WHEEL SPEED 
SIGNAL 

mriiJUT 








MORE 



SIGNAL 


\ 

PULSES 


\ 

FROM 

\ 

THAN \ 

RIGHT 

\ 

LEFT j 


LEFT 1 

I (1 

1 RIGHT 

FRONT 1 

IjIei 

FRONT 

WHEEL || 

P 111 

) WHEEL 



A 



20 

Navigation Systems 













































Reverse Gear Signal 

The navigation computer receives a reverse gear signal to determine direction of travel. 
Wheel speed signals are not directional, therefore an indication of the direction of travel is 
needed. 

On all vehicles except the E46, the reverse gear signal comes from the LCM. The E46 
reverse gear input signal comes from a splice connection to the reverse lights. 


NAV 



Rear Window “Defroster ON” Signal (Mark I Only) 

On Mark I navigation systems, the magnetic field sensor (compass) can be falsely 
influenced by magnetic fields which are not from the earth’s natural magnetic field. The 
magnetic field sensor is installed under the rear parcel shelf, which is in close proximity to 
the rear window defroster. This creates the need for a signal compensation when the 
rear defroster is switched on. 

The compensation is derived from the dealership calibration procedures (see workshop 
hints). 

When the rear defroster is ON, the navigation computer receives the ON signal via the 
bus network. As the illustration shows, the signal is sent via the following pathway: 

IHKA module > K-Bus > IKE > l-Bus > Video Module > ARCNET > Navigation 



NAVIGATION COMPUTER 


21 

Navigation Systems 






























ARCNET(MarklOnly) 

The Attached Resources Computing Network is a high speed (2Mb/sec) digital data link. 
ARCNET connects the Video module to the navigation computer. 

ARCNET is made up of two data wires and a shield similar to the early CAN-Bus network. 
The shielded ARCNET cable has its own tri-axial type connector ends that are pushed 
onto their mating connectors on the modules. 


¥ 00 ) 1 © 

[M1©M[LI 


• Navigation data for board 
monitor dispiay. 

• Request for navigation data 

• Nav voice output data 

• Rear Window Defroster ON 

• Diagnosis 

NAVIGATION 
COMPUTER 




RGB 

The RCB interface connects the navigation computer to the LCD screen in the BMBT 
RCB stands for Red, Creen, Blue and provides the video signals for monitor operation. 
They are low voltage video signals. RCB is used on all versions of navigation. 

Bus Network 

In order to provide all of the necessary signals for navigation operation, the navigation 
computer is connected to the bus network. Depending upon vehicle application, the 
navigation computer can be connected to either the l-Bus or K-bus. 


22 

Navigation Systems 






Mark I Navigation Bus Network Overview 







GPS 

RECEIVER 





NAVIGATION 

COMPUTER 


WHEEL SPEED SIGNALS 


23 

Navigation Systems 


















































































































Mark II Navigation Bus Network Overview 




AUDIO SIGNALS 
FOR AMPLIFICATION 



CD 

PLAYER 

AUDIO 

SIGNALS 


TAPE PLAYER 
AUDIO SIGNALS 






24 

Navigation Systems 


ABS/ASC 


















































































































Mark II (E46) Navigation Bus Network Overview 



GPS 




^ [• 


GPS 

RECEIVER 



BACK UP LIGHTS ON 
12 VOLT INPUT SIGNAL 


ASC/DSC 
(processed 
left rear wheel 
speed signal) 


25 

Navigation Systems 





































































































Navigation System Operation 

The following instructions are for basic navi¬ 
gation system operation. There have been 
numerous changes to navigation systems 
since introduction. Always refer to the latest 
owners manual and service bulletins when 
applicable. 

The following example uses the rotary knob to 
input a destination from the input 
destination screen. Enter the navigation sys¬ 
tem by pressing the GPS-Navigation button 
from the main menu. 

After acknowledging the system warning, any 
previously entered destination is displayed. 
This destination must be deleted or overwrit¬ 
ten in order to input a new destination. 

The rotary knob is used to enter a city/town 
from an Alpha-Numeric menu or the destina¬ 
tion can be selected from the index of listed 
locations that are mapped on the CD. 

Next the desired street is entered in the same 
fashion. The street number can also be 
entered at this time. If the street number is on 
the database CD, the navigation system will 
guide the driver directly to the house number. 

There are two choices for route preference 
available from this screen: 

• “most use of highways” 

• “least use of highways” 

With either selection, the system will pick the 
most direct route to the destination, based on 
the selection. Once the location has been 
entered, the navigation system is ready for 
guidance. Press the directions button. 


□■□fj 

m 

1 

Q 

1 

w 


BUJI 

1 


■ 


Please drive safely, wear your safety 
belt. The navigation system is no 
substitute for the observance of 
traffic laws and constant attention 
to actual traffic situations. 

For your safety do not enter data into 
the navigation system while driving. 
Please press the rotary knob to accept. 

I OK 


^7/24/9^/Vednesda^^^j05PIV^ 





26 

Navigation Systems 

























































The system will guide the driver via: 


• The graphical direction display - which consist of arrows and text that show the 
current location, the destination and direction of travel. When turns or intersections 
approach, a voice command will inform the driver when to turn. 


ENTERED DESTINATION 


MILEAGE TO DESTINATION 



GREER 
SC 101 


^00 YRDS 


Instruction 
Route map 
New route- 
Informatioi 


"GA 403 N. LAWRENCEV LLE 


07/24/96 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 


DISTANCE TO 
NE>CT 

INTERSECTION 

DIRECTION 
OF ROAD 

PRESENT 
LOCATION 
(ROAD, TOWN) 


"HEADING DIRECTION" 

TO DESTINATION 
INPUT SCREEN 

AUDIO INSTRUCTION 
("STRAIGHT ON") 

TO GRAPHICAL 
MAP DISPLVW 

CALCULATES 
ALTERNATE 
ROUTE TO ENTERED 
DESTINATION 

TO INFORMATION 
SCREEN 


• The graphical map display - which consists of a digital road map showing the 
entered route, destination and vehicle position. 



NORTH HEADING 


"HEADING DIRECTION" 


GRAPHICAL 

DESTINATION 


GRAPHICAL 
MAP DISPLAY 


UBU 


07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM 


GPS INDICATOR 


MILEAGE TO 
DESTINATION 


DISTANCE TO 
NEXT 

INTERSECTION 


VEHICLE 

CURSOR 


In either display mode a voice command will inform the driver when to turn when turns or 
intersections approach. 

The navigation screen display can be turned OFF (from main menu) and the system will 
remain in operation. The voice command will continue to inform the driver when to turn. 


27 

Navigation Systems 








































Graphical Map Scale 

The graphical map display can be scaled up 
or down from 400 feet to 50 miles depending 
on the distance to the destination. 

This function is activated by turning the knob 
one click, and a sub menu will display on 
screen. Choose “Scale” and adjust as it is 
needed. 





Graphical Map Positioning 

The graphical map can be displayed “North Pointing” or “Direction of travel”. This 
function is also accessed by turning the knob one “click” as described above. 




North Pointing 

Top of map is always facing north 


Direction of Travel 

Top of map is always facing direction of vehicle travel 


28 

Navigation Systems 



























































































































GPS Indication 

Satellite reception, by the navigation system, is indicated in the upper right corner of the 
display screen. The number of satellite signals being received by the system is indicated 
by small white dots in the display that surround the picture of the globe. In addition, the 
GPS logo is displayed at the bottom of the graphic. 


NO SATELLITE SIGNALS 


SATELLITE SIGNALS RECEIVED 
BUT NOT CONSISTANT ENOUGH 
TO CALCULATE ACCURATE 
VEHICLE POSITION 


SATELLITE SIGNALS RECEIVED 
AND CONSISTANT FOR 
CALCULATION OF ACCURATE 
VEHICLE POSITION 



The number of dots indicate the number of satellite signals that the navigation computer 
is receiving. 

If only the globe graphic is displayed, without the dots or logo, the vehicle is in a poor 
reception area or the signals are being blocked by some obstruction. The dead reckoning 
function of the compass and wheel sensors provide adequate navigation in this situation. 

If the dots and logo fail to display in a known good reception area, than a fault is indicated 
and troubleshooting should be carried out according to the fault symptom 
“GPS Problems”. 


29 

Navigation Systems 





Navigation System Information Screen 

The Information screen provides access to the balance of the navigation system features 
including: 



POINTS OF INTEREST AT 
ENTERED DESTINATION 


ROUTE 

PREFERENCE 

(SAME FUNCTION 

FROM 

ENTER 

DESTINATION 

SCREEN) 


NAVIGATION AUDIO 
VOLUME CONTROL 


POINTS OF INTEREST AT 
CURRENT LOCATION 


POINT TO DESTINATION 
(X / Y CURSOR POSITIONING 
FOR DESTINATION ENTRY) 


tnfo on destination / 


Info on current location 
Route preference 
Point to destination 
Addressbook 
Volume-Navigation 
Vehicle Position 


07/24/96 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 


ADDRESSBOOK 
(SAVE ENTERED 
DESTINATIONS FOR 
FUTURE USE) 

ACCESS TO SYSTEM 

CALIBRATION 

FUNCTION 

- OWNERS MENU 

- DEALERSHIP MENU 


Information on destination or current location 
provides a detailed list of stored points of 
interest such as: 

• Gas stations 

• Banks 

• Restaurants 

• Hotels, etc., 

This feature allows the user to enter the point 
of interest and change the route to guide the 
driver to the entered point. 



Vehicle Position 

The vehicle position selection from this 
screen provides access to the Calibration 
function of the navigation system. 



30 

Navigation Systems 











































Workshop Hints 


Mark I Navigation System Calibration 

The Mark I navigation system will require “calibration” at some point in it’s service life. 

The reasons that cause the necessity of a calibration procedure are as varied as 
inaccurate navigation display data, after the installation of a new set of tires, to the 
replacement of a shattered rear window. 

Calibration procedures are divided into two categories: 

• Vehicle Owner Calibration - Calibration that the vehicle owner can perform. 

• Dealership Calibration - Procedures only an authorized dealer can perform. 

This section is divided into these two categories. Always consider what the owner of the 
vehicle could have inadvertently changed when troubleshooting and/or calibrating the 
vehicle. 

Check these data inputs before you embark on a full dealership calibration procedure. 

Vehicle Owner Calibration 

The vehicle owner’s manual contains the information on how to set the vehicle position 
and adjust the tire calibration. Both of these adjustments are found on the vehicle 
position screen which is accessed from the information screen. 

“The Owner Calibration Procedures shown are for information purposes only. A full 
Dealership Calibration is the recommended method for accurate system calibration.” 

1. Resetting Vehicle Position 

A mis-located vehicle is caused by driving in and out of the digitized map areas or starting 
a vehicle after it has traveled on a flat bed or train. The system will eventually relocate 
itself automatically through CPS but it can be entered through the on-board monitor for 
immediate resetting. 

From the Vehicle Position Screen, rotate the knob to “city:” and push the knob. Enter the 
city and street information as you would enter a destination. Press the “Intersection” but¬ 
ton and select the closest intersecting street from the displayed index. 

Drive to the entered intersection and press the “Crossing the intersect” button when 
you cross. 

Drive the vehicle to see if it is positioned correctly. 


31 

Navigation Systems 




2. Adjusting Tire Size 

Tire calibration is a required input for the navigation computer to base, tire rotation: dis¬ 
tance covered ratio. It should be checked to determine that the entered tire size is the 
same as the tires equipped on the vehicle. 

Additionally, if the vehicle does not have factory equipped tires installed, the tire calibra¬ 
tion will need to be changed to match the new tire size. 

Press the “Tire Calibration” button from the vehicle position screen. The following 
message is displayed noting the overwrite of existing values once the procedure is 
completed. 



32 

Navigation Systems 










































Press continue to access the tire adjustment screen. 

Press the tire size and rotate the knob to see if the tire size is listed. Select the correct 
tire size and press the button once again. Note that the tire circumference size automati¬ 
cally changes to the set tire size. 



If the tire size is not listed the tire circumference value must be entered manually by rotat¬ 
ing the tire size button to the “???” position. Press and adjust the actual tire size dimen¬ 
sion in millimeters. 


This value is available from the tire manufacture or it can be measured as 
illustrated on the next page. 

Once the correct tire size or circumference has been entered, press the return button to 
return to the information screen or press the continue button to go on to the Precision 
Adjustment screen. 


Tire Circumference Measurement 


1. PLACE A STRAIGHT EDGE UP AGAINST 
THE TIRE DIRECTLY IN THE VERTICAL 
CENTERLINE OE THE TIRE 


4. PLACE STRAIGHT EDGE AGAINST TIRE. 
MOVE VEHICLE PRECISELY TO ALIGN 
THE MARK WITH THE STRAIGHT EDGE. 



2. MARK TIRE AND GROUND 
AT SAME POINT 


5. MARK GROUND. MEASURE DISTANCE. 


33 

Navigation Systems 


























Precision Adjustment 

This screen activates a “Regulator” function that “fine tunes” the tire adjustment with 
regard to the displayed distance to an intersection measurement. 

If the displayed measurement is consistently “0” before the intersection is reached slide 
the regulator bar towards the end of the scale. 



If the displayed measurement is consistently “0” after the vehicle has passed the 
intersection, slide the regulator bar towards the “+” end of the scale. When finished press 
the Ready button. 

It will require a little “trial and error” to achieve precision adjustment. 

Keep in mind that distance displays that are 30’ to 60’ out of intersection, in either direc¬ 
tion, are within the design tolerances of the system and are acceptable. Don’t expect 
major results from using the regulator function. 

If there is an unacceptable displayed distance (more than 150’), the most effective 
method to calibrate the system is to keep the regulator adjustment at “0” and perform a 
full dealership calibration procedure. 


34 

Navigation Systems 


















Dealership Calibration 

Calibration of the navigation system must be checked or performed when various com¬ 
ponents of the system are changed or when the troubleshooting procedures of the 
diagnostic module call for it. 

The calibration procedures are stored in the Navigation computer module and are called 
up for display on the LCD screen. 

Complete or partial calibration is required when the following components are changed: 

• Navigation Computer Module - Complete calibration automatically required. 

• Magnetic Field Sensor or rear window (defroster replacement) - Sensor Check and 
Compass Calibration 

• Tires/Wheels - Setting of tire size in tire calibration screen (from Owner Calibration 
Section) and wheel sensor calibration. 

Additionally, if the vehicle has had bodywork (new sheet metal or welding work) a sensor 
check and Compass calibration should be performed. 

The following preconditions must exist before a successful calibration can be carried out: 

• No faults stored in the Navigation system. 

• The correct tire size set in the tire calibration screen. Tires inflated to correct 
pressures. 

• Known location of a large flat parking lot with enough width to allow the vehicle to be 
driven in tight circles to the left and right and a “back street” (no traffic) with a 
minimum 100 meter (approximately 330 ft) straight path. 

• There should be no overhead power lines/transformers in the immediate vicinity of 
the parking lot to create any magnetic interference with the magnetic field sensor. 

• All electrical consumers should be switched off - Rear window heating, Radio, seat 
heating, air conditioning, etc. 

Tools Needed for Dealership Calibration 

The following tools are needed: 

• Metric tape measure (minimum 8 meters). 

• Piece of white chalk. 

• 2” X 2” angle iron (6’ long). 


35 

Navigation Systems 



Calibration Procedures 

The navigation system calibration screen menu is called up from the information menu 
screen. 

Select “Vehicle Position” from the information screen, then press and hold the menu 
button for a few seconds. The system will enter the calibration mode. 



Press “Continue” to proceed with the desired system calibration. 

The first Dealer calibration screen provides five selections. A full dealer calibration 
procedure consists of carrying out all five selections. 

Though they can be done individually with positive results, it is recommended to 
complete all five steps to achieve consistent positive results. 

Start at “Setting Car Parameters” and end with “Finish Calibration”. 

Note: If a new navigation computer is being calibrated for the first time, the 

individual buttons will not be selectable. The system will automatically 
go into a “fixed sequence calibration” requiring all steps be performed. 


36 

Navigation Systems 



















1. Setting of Car Parameters 

There are two settings in the parameters screen: 

• The vehicles wheel base which will be an E38 long/short wheel base or an E39. 

• The vehicle’s track which is as follows for the different vehicles: 

E38-long-1549 
E38 - short - 1549 
E39- 1512 

Changing these settings is not required unless a new Navigation computer is installed in 
the vehicle. If a new navigation computer is being calibrated for the first time, enter the 
vehicle type. 



Note: These settings should be checked as part of the troubleshooting proce¬ 
dures to verify that they are correct. If the displayed setting does not 
match the figures above, momentarily select another vehicle type and 
switch back to the correct vehicle. The track width value will change to 
the displayed values as shown above. 

Aftermarket Wheels or Suspension Modifications 

If the vehicle is equipped with aftermarket wheels or has modified suspension 
components, the track width may need to be manually adjusted. Do the following to 
obtain this figure: 

1. With the vehicle on the ground (suspension loaded), measure the distance between 
the two front rims (inner rim tire bead lips) in millimeters and note the measurement. 

2. Measure the thickness of one front rim (inside lip to outside lip) using calipers and 
note the measurement. 

3. Add these two figures together. The total is the measured track width. 

Turn the rotary knob to the vehicle type. Then turn the knob “one click” to the LEFT to 
access the track measurement. Turn the knob to enter the value manually. Press knob 
when finished. 


37 

Navigation Systems 


















2. Sensor Test 

The Sensor Test performs a functional check of the wheel speed sensors and magnetic 
field sensor inputs to the navigation computer. 

This test must be carried out if the navigation computer is replaced. The DIS will also call 
for this test to be carried out as part of the troubleshooting procedures. 

The test requires driving the vehicle in a tight circle at a speed of 6 MPH or less. 

If there are no faults with the inputs, the system will display “Calibration Successful”. At 
this point the calibration procedures can be continued or the vehicle can be returned to 
the workshop to continue the diagnostic procedures. 




38 

Navigation Systems 

















3. Wheel Sensor 

This procedure is necessary when the navigation computer or wheel/tires have been 
changed. The procedure calibrates the wheel circumference/speed sensor input to the 
navigation computer so that the distance traveled input is correct. 



Note: The screen instructions will indicate a 4 and 6 
meter distance in this procedure. Field testing 
has proven that a distance of 8 meters pro¬ 
vides a more precise wheel sensor calibration. 


The tire inflation pressure must be checked and correctly set prior to carrying out this 
test. 




8m 


5. MARK 
GROUND 
WITH 
CHALK 



4. MARK 
GROUND 
WITH 
CHALK 


4m 


3. STARTING AT 0, 
MEASURE OUT TO 
4 AND 8 METERS 


6'X2"X2" angle IRON 




2. MARK 
GROUND 
WITH 
CHALK 


0 


1. Make sure the front wheels are facing forward. Place the angle iron against the back 
side of the rear tires. 


2. Mark the road with the chalk where the angle iron contacts the road. This is your 
starting point. 

3. Using a metric tape measure, measure out 4 and 8 meters from the starting point 

4. Mark the distance on the road surface at four (4) meters. 

5. Mark the distance on the road surface at eight (8) meters. 

6. Press the start function on the On-board monitor. 


39 

Navigation Systems 






































7. Drive the vehicle slow and continuously forward (don’t stop) until the rear tires are 
between the 4 and 8 meter marks (go as close to the 8 meter mark as possible) and 
stop. 



^ MARK GROUND , ^ 

8m 4m 0 


8. Press the stop button on the monitor. Set the parking brake. 

9. Place the angle iron up against the rear of the back tires again and mark the ground 
with the chalk. 

10. Precisely measure the distance from the starting point to the end point 

(tolerance <1 cm) and input this value using the rotary knob. Then press continue. 

Drive the vehicle to the known minimum 100 meter street or area. 

Press the start button by driving the vehicle straight ahead for a distance of at least 100 
meters. 


• The vehicle speed must also be < 40 KMH and the steering wheel must be held 
straight. 

• Once you have travelled at least 100 meters stop the vehicle and press stop. 

• The monitor screen will display the calibration has successfully completed. 



40 

Navigation Systems 































4. Compass (Magnetic Field Sensor Calibration) 

The magnetic field sensor must be calibrated if: 

• The field sensor is replaced 

• The navigation computer is replaced 

• The rear window with the heating grid is replaced 

• Body work (welding, reconstruction) 

Calibration of the field sensor is a three step process that includes: 

Compass Step 1 

Allowing the sensor to read all directions of travel. This is carried out in one of 
two different methods: 

• Driving the vehicle in several tight “circles”, or 

• Driving several times around a “block” (“city block”, “block of houses”) 
One of these methods must be selected on the monitor before beginning. 



41 

Navigation Systems 


















Preferred Method- CIRCLE 

Driving the vehicle two complete circles - 
both counterclockwise and clockwise - will 
cover all directions. 

Press Start, the speed of the vehicle must not 
exceed 6 MPH during the calibration. 

Press Stop when you have completed. 

The monitor will indicate that the navigation 
computer has seen all directions of travel by 
displaying “Calibration Successful”. 




Alternate Method - BLOCK 

Driving the vehicle around a block several 
times will also allow the navigation computer 
to see all directions of travel. 

The monitor will automatically indicate when 
this section of the calibration is completed. 



42 

Navigation Systems 



























Compass Step 2 

Calibration of the magnetic field sensor input 
to the navigation computer. 

This procedure is only possible after STEP 1 
has been completed. Step 2 is carried out in 
one of three different methods; 

• Calibration using a digitized address. 

• Calibration using the CPS satellite 
signals. 

• Angular calibration using the direction of 
a long section of road. 



Preferred Method - Digitized Address 

This procedure can only be used within a fully 
digitized CD map area. 

The actual location is entered into the 
on-board monitor and the navigation system 
will display a route between two road 
intersections, along which the vehicle must be 
driven. 

1. If the town is not already displayed, enter 
it in the same method as entering a 
destination. 

2. Enter the street at which you want to 
start the calibration. 



3. Press the intersection button. 


4. Select the street from the list of inter¬ 
secting streets that is close to where the 
vehicle is at this point. 

5. Press the “In direction” button. This 
brings up a list of streets that are in the 
direction of your planned calibration drive. 

6. Select the street that is in your planned 
direction of travel. 

7. Press Start when you begin to drive. 



43 

Navigation Systems 













































The screen will automatically confirm that the calibration was successful. Press the 
continue button to go to Compass Step 3; Rear Window Defroster grid compensation 
calibration. 






44 

Navigation Systems 































































































Compass Step 2 

Alternate Method - GPS - This requires dri¬ 
ving the vehicle in all directions until the navi¬ 
gation computer fixes the field sensor inputs. 

This may require several minutes of driving to 
complete this step. The roads should be as 
straight as possible and free from any over¬ 
head obstructions that might block the 
upward view to the satellite signals. 

The screen will automatically confirm that the 
calibration was successful. 

Press the continue button to go to Compass 
Step 3; Rear Window Defroster grid 
compensation calibration. 

Last Method - Angle 

Angular calibration using the direction of a 
long section of road. To use this method, the 
geographical angle of the road must be 
known and input into the navigation computer 
to within -i-_1 then the vehicle must be dri¬ 
ven along this route. 

Any of these three described methods will 
perform the second step in the compass 
calibration. Once this step is complete, the 
last step can be carried out. 



m 

r 

DEALER CALIBRATION 


COMPASS CALIBRATION 

o 


After start, drive some some long, 



straight distances in several directions 

ppij 


Watch for clear sight to the sky 



wait for the result or select stop. 




45 

Navigation Systems 





















































Compass Step 3 - Rear Window Defroster Compensation 

This procedure is only possible after steps #1 
and #2 have been successfully completed. 


The navigation computer determines the 
magnetic field generated by the defogger grid 
so it can compensate for this when the rear 
defogger is switched on. 

• Switch the rear defogger ON and confirm 
the input on the Monitor screen. Wait for 
acknowledgment by the navigation 
system. 

• Switch the rear defogger OFF and 
confirm the input on the monitor screen. 
Wait for acknowledgment by the naviga¬ 
tion system 

Finish Calibration 

Once all of the required calibration procedures 
have been carried out, press the “finish 
calibration” button. 

This will display whether the calibration 
process was successful or if faults or 
problems have occurred that require 
troubleshooting with the DISplus/GT-1. 


m 


o 


BPI 


m 


o 


PWH 



DEALER CALIBRATION _ 

REAR WINDOW HEATING 
Stop Car. 

Switch ON rear 

screen heating and select ON, 

then switch OFF and Select OFF. 



DEALER calibration 
REAR WINDOW HEATING 
Please wait a moment. 



46 

Navigation Systems 











































Mark I Diagnosis and Troubleshooting 

There are three diagnostic programs for the On Board Monitor system with the 
navigation Computer. 

Based on the customer complaint, one or more of these systems will need to be 
accessed with the DIS Tester for diagnostic purposes. 

The On Board Monitor system must be fully functional before any visual displays, inputs 
or programming can be carried out. 

The Video Module must be fully functional before any graphical displays can be 
transmitted to the Monitor unit. 

The Navigation Computer must be fully functional before any programmed destinations 
can be called up for display and directions. 

In all cases fault troubleshooting should begin with the “Fault Symptom” troubleshooting 
paths provided by the DIS. 

In the case of positioning errors or faults with the Navigation System, the DIS will request 
a “Sensor Test” be performed prior to carrying out the diagnosis. This test procedure is 
outlined in the calibration procedures. 


BMW Diagnosis IDENTIFICATION 
On-board-monitor control block 

Part n\jmber: 4 392 669 

Hardware number: 41 
Software number 47 

Diagnosis index: 3 
Coding index: 0 
Bus index: 5 

Production date 21/96 
Supplier: Philips 

Note: 

During diagnosis, no key functions 
are executed! 


A 


V 


CTT]| 


BMW Diagnosis IDENTIFICATION 
Video Module (VM) 

Part number: 0 000 000 

Hardware number: 41 
Software number 47 

Diagnosis index: 3 
Coding index: 0 
Bus index: 5 

Production date 19/96 
Supplier: Philips 


A 


V 


BMW Diagnosis IDENTIFICATION 
Navigation system (NAV) 

Part n\jmber: 8 375 128 

Hardware number: 40 
Software number 47 

Diagnosis index: 01 
Coding index: 00 
Bus index: 05 

Production date 16/96 
Supplier: Philips 


A 



47 

Navigation Systems 






















































































The navigation system diagnostic software has a “SELECTION” screen that is unique to 
any previous system. 

• The choice, 1 - “Start diagnosis again”, means to start the diagnostic session (either 
the first time or restart a fresh diagnostic session.) 

• 2- “Sensor test has already been carried out, reassume diagnosis.”, means to 
resume the diagnostic session. This selection is used when you have first started a 
session and the instructions on the DIS screen request that you disconnect the vehi¬ 
cle and bring it outside for a sensor check or another “field test” of some type as 
described in the diagnostic pages. When you return to the DIS, Select #2 to 
resume the diagnostic session started previously. 


II™"' ||||“•"■• nil™- iiir"“ II 


H 

BMW Diagnosis SELECTION 




Q start diagnosis again 

A 



Q Sensor test has already been 




carried out, reass\iine diagnosis. 





V 



0 


0 



The Navigation Service Functions contains calibration data screens to review the vehicles 
present state of calibration (calibration status list). The calibration data (#2) is set up for 
E38 vehicles only at the time of navigation system introduction. 

Calibration data of wheel-sensor calibration provides a printout page of the vehicles actual 
distance to wheel sensor pulse. This screen will prove helpful when dealing with the tech¬ 
nical hotline if additional data is requested from them on wheel sensor calibration data 
values. 


Navigation Computer Flash Codes 


The “ON LED” of the navigation computer automatically provides flash codes for when a 


fault is present. 

• Single Flash - Internal control module fault. 

• Triple Flash - ARCNET data link problem 
(open, short). 

Rely on fault symptom troubleshooting in conjunc¬ 
tion with the flash codes during 
diagnosis procedures. 



48 

Navigation Systems 


























































Mark II Navigation System Diagnostic 
Mode Displays 

The Mark II system does not communicate 
with the DIS. It does however provide an on 
board diagnostic mode on screen display 
function. 

These screens provide system hardware/soft¬ 
ware identification numbers and status of 
Navigation specific functions for use as a 
diagnostic tool. The screens are accessed as 
follows: 

• From the main menu select “Set”. 

• Once in the Set function, press and hold 
the menu button for 8 seconds. 

• The first screen to appear is the 
SERVICE MODE menu. 

The On-board monitor and Video module 
selections are not functional even though they 
are displayed. 

The first accessible function is the 
NAVI/GRAPHIC ELEMENT. This screen is for 
identification of hardware/ software specific 
index versions for the installed system. 




The next available selection from the service 
mode menu is GPS. Pressing GPS brings up 
the GPS version display. This display provides 
the GPS receiver module hardware version 
number and date of programmed software. 

Pressing the functions button in the lower 
right corner of this screen provides a 
sub-selection menu of additional GPS 
system status. 


m 

Q 

H 




l-OPS VERSION 


Receiver Version 
Receiver SW Date: 


m 


08/24/97 Sunday 


I 7.51 1 


■Functions 


7:05 I 


49 

Navigation Systems 




















































The sub-selection menu additionally includes 
GPS “Status” and “Tracking” choices. 

• GPS Status provides information on the 
exact coordinates of the vehicle based on 
the calculations of the GPS receiver 
module. 

• GPS Tracking provides information about 
the individual satellites currently sending 
signals to the GPS receiver module. 




The next selection available from the 
SERVIGE MODE menu is “Sensor check” 
which provides the following: 

• Wheel speed input (only one wheel 
speed signal, displayed in the right side 
window). 

• Total number of GPS satellites currently 
providing signals. 

• What mode the GPS receiver module is 
currently in (ie: Search). 

• The Gyro status provides the millivoltage 
value the navigation computer is utilizing 
for the current vehicle position. This area 
also includes an icon representing what 
direction the vehicle is heading in. 



• The direction status relates to what gear 
the vehicle is currently in (forward 
or reverse). 


50 

Navigation Systems 






























































































The last selection available in the Service Mode menu is the VIN entry display. The VIN is 
entered at the VPC when propped prior to distribution. This is for the VIN display in the 
Emergency program if needed when calling the Cross Country Croup Roadside 
Assistance Program. Additionally, if the vehicle is equipped with a Phase V phone 
the system will automatically utilize the entered VIN as follows. 

Similar to the previous phone system, the Phase V phone has the capability to contact 
Cross Country Croup using the “Assist” or “Emergency” button from the Emergency or 
Telephone functions. 



What’s new for the Phase V system is the use of dual tone multi frequency (DTMF) 
signalling. DTMF signalling provides a download of the VIN, the telephone number of the 
Phase V phone and the vehicle coordinates when the assist button was pressed. This 
information is displayed on a computer screen of the Cross Country Croup “assist” 
personnel prior to any verbal communication taking place. 

Through a data base, the VIN provides the Owner’s Name. This, in conjunction with the 
vehicle coordinates and the phone number provides the “assist” personnel with crucial 
preliminary information. 

When the call is patched in from the vehicle, the assist personnel can answer appropri¬ 
ately for an “assist” or “emergency” situation. This quick response with the owner’s 
pertinent information provides an added personnel touch and time savings in an emer¬ 
gency situation. 

The VIN is entered at the VPC for all vehicles (with or without a Phase V phone). If the 
VIN has been incorrectly entered it can be changed by turning and pressing the rotary 
knob when the correct letter or digit of the last seven character of the VIN is displayed. 


51 

Navigation Systems 



















Mark II Navigation System Calibration 

The calibration procedure of the Mark I system is not required with the Mark II system. 
This system self calibrates automatically as the vehicle is driven after following the steps 
below. 

• System must be fully functional with no faults present in fault memory. 

• Correct Map data base CD installed for your. 

• Vehicle outside with an unobstructed overhead view. Switch ignition on and allow 
system adequate time to receive a minimum of three CPS signals. This is confirmed 
by the green CPS indicator in the map display. 

• Set the map display to the 400’ scale and drive the vehicle on digitized roads. Make 
frequent turns at intersections where possible. 

While driving, the system utilizes the map CD, the received CPS coordinates, the Cyro 
sensor to determine turn activity and the wheel speed sensor input. It compares all of 
these variables and automatically pinpoints the vehicle position. 

Mark II Navigation System Diagnosis 

The navigation computer does not communicate with the DISplus/CT-1. Diagnosis of the 
navigation Computer is performed with conventional procedures and by utilizing the 
Status displays on the previous pages. 

Refer to the DIS for RCB output signal oscilloscope displays for visual confirmation of 
signal integrity. 

The Board monitor (BMBT) does however communicate with the DISplus/CT-1. Follow 
the fault symptom path of the DIS Diagnosis Program for detailed diagnostic procedures. 


52 

Navigation Systems 



E46 Mark II Board Monitor and Navigation Service Mode Displays 


The Mark II system provides a service mode display function. These screens provide 
system hardware/software identification numbers and status of Board Monitor and 
Navigation specific functions for use as a diagnostic tool. The screens are accessed 
as follows: 

• From the Main Menu select “Set”. 

• Once in the Set function, press and hold the menu button for 8 seconds. 

• The next screen to appear is the Service Mode menu. 


The first accessible function is “On-board monitor”. Pressing this selection calls up the 
version screen which provides identification of hardware/ software specific index versions 
for the installed system. 


Pressing the functions 
key at the bottom contin¬ 
ues into additional 
screens including the Key 
Functions and Brightness 
controls. 

Key Functions tests the 
key input on the BMBT 
Input status (1-25) will 
display in the window. 


|On-board monitor 

NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 

Video module 


GPS 


Sensor check 


Telematics 


1 02/05/99 Wednesday 

7:05 PM 1 


SW level: 

HW level 
DIAG index: 
BUS index: 
Encoding Index 
Supplier: 


02/05/99 Wednesday 



■Functions 


7:05 PM 


If no keys are pressed the 
status will be displayed as 

SW level: 


“FF”. 

HW level 

Version 

DIAG Index: 

■ Key Functions 

Rotating the left or right 

BUS index: 

Brightness 

rotary knob displays hex 

Encoding Index 


code input status. 

Supplier: 


Rotated slowly, the 

...:4.u ! 

-4 

{Functions 

02/05/99 Wednesday 7:05 PM | 


Key 

OBM increm. sensor 
Radio increment sensor 



{Functions 


each increment. 

The display eventually 
stops at “1F” in the left 
rotated direction and 
“EO” to the right. 

The key function test 
terminates automatically 

if no keys or knobs are moved after a short duration (“00”). 



02/05/99 Wednesday 7:05 PM j 


The brightness control allows the display illumination to be manually adjusted. 


53 

Navigation Systems 











The next accessible function 
is the NAVI/GRAPHIC 
ELEMENT 

This screen identifies hard¬ 
ware/ software specific index 
versions for the installed 
system. 

The Video module selection 
is not functional since the US 
version Mark II navigation 
system does not utilize the 
video module. 



The next available selection 
from the service mode menu 
is “GPS”. 


This display provides the 
GPS receiver module with 
the hardware version number 
and date of programmed 
software. 

Pressing the functions button 
in the lower right corner of 
this screen provides a sub¬ 
selection menu. 

GPS Status provides informa¬ 
tion on the exact coordinates 
of the vehicle based on the 
calculations of the GPS 
receiver module. 

GPS Tracking provides info 
about the individual satellites 
currently sending signals to 
the GPS receiver module. 
Though interesting, this 
display provides data which is 
not usable for BMW service 
technician scope of diagno¬ 
sis. 


On-board monitor 

NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 

Video module 


GPS 

Sensor check 
Telematics 


\A 


Receiver Version 
Receiver SW Date: 



02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM I I 02/05/99 Wednesday 


iFunctions 


7:05 PM 


Receiver Version 
Receiver SW Date: GPS Versii n 
I GPS status 
GPS tracking info 



Latitude: 

Longitude: 

Altitude: 

Date/time (UTC): 
G-speed/heading: 
Rec-Stat/Pos-Src: 
PDOP/HDOP/VDOP: 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


Functions 


7:05 PM 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


Functlonsl 


7:05 PM 


Ch 

PRN 

S/N 

Ch 

PRN 

S/N 

1 

^9 


5 




— 


6 

— 


— 


7 

— 


4 



8 




Visible Satellites: 
Almanac: 


Functions 


02/05/99 Wednesday 7:05 PM] 


54 

Navigation Systems 







































Wheel sensors 
GPS satellites: 
GPS status: 


02/05/99 Wednesday 7:05 PM 



The next selection available from the SERVICE MODE menu is “Sensor check” which 
provides: 

• Wheel speed input (only one wheel speed signal, displayed). 

• Number of satellites detected. 

• What mode the GPS receiver module is currently in; (ie: Search) 

• The Gyro status provides the millivoltage value the navigation computer is utilizing 
for the current vehicle position. This area also includes an icon representing what 
direction the vehicle is heading in. 

• The direction status indicates what gear is selected (forward or reverse). 

The Sensor check display is intended to be used while test driving the vehicle. Use the 
legend on the following pages to compare with the display status. 

The last selection available is the Telematics entry display. This replaces the “VIN” selec¬ 
tion from the E38/E39 Mark II systems. The only requirement of this entry screen is that 
the VIN is entered at the VPG when propped prior to distribution. 


On-board monitor 

NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 


Video module 


Sensor check 


Telematics 


02/05/99 Wednesday 


7:05 PM 



55 

Navigation Systems 


































This is necessary for the Emergency program if needed when calling the Cross Country 
Croup Roadside Assistance Program. 

Additionally, if the vehicle is equipped with a Phase V phone the system will automatically 
utilize the entered VIN as per E38/E39 Mark II systems. 

The VIN is entered at the VPC for all vehicles (with or without a Phase V phone). If the VIN 
has been incorrectly entered it can be changed by turning and pressing the rotary knob 
when the correct letter or digit of the last seven character of the VIN is displayed. 

The balance of the data displayed below the VIN entry is not currently used in the US 
market. 

Service Mode Menu Chart (Sensor Check) 


Status Display 

What should be displayed 

What to do if NOT OK. 

Wheel speed 
sensors: 

As the vehicle is driven, the number should increase 
with an increase in vehicle speed. 

Check fault codes in DSC sys¬ 
tem. If necessary carry out 
wheel speed sensor test. 

GPS Satellites: 

With an unobstructed upward view of the sky, the dis¬ 
play should be > 3. 

Check for Interference of signals 
to GPS antenna. 

Check integrity of circuit from 
GPS antenna to navigation 
computer. 

GPS Status: 

“See legend below” 


Gyro: 

Direction icon moves with vehicle turning movement. 

Display voltage is in millivolts and should read 
approximately 2500 mV {+ 1 - 400mV) when the vehicle is 
stationary or driven straight ahead. 

When the vehicle is turning, the signal voltage should 
increase on right hand turns and decrease on left 
hand turns. 

Replace navigation computer 

Direction: 

Reverse is displayed when range selector is in reverse. 
Forward should be displayed 
when in any other range. 

Check reverse light signal Input. 


56 

Navigation Systems 






















Service Mode Diagnostic Explanations 


GPS Status Text 
Display 

Description 

1. “GPS fault” 

Problem with GPS system. Swap navigation computer and or antenna from known 
good vehicle after checking GPS status display information. 

2. “Reception Interference” 

Problem with GPS system. Same as above. 

3. “No Almanac” 

No data yet stored from satellites. The GPS almanac is a memory account of 
received satellite signals. If the vehicle battery has been disconnected or after replac¬ 
ing a navigation computer it has an empty memory and requires satellite signals to be 
functional. After the navigation computer receives battery voltage and ground, it must 
be left outside with an unobstructed sky above with the ignition switched to KLR for 
approximately 15 minutes. 

4. “Satellite Search” 

GPS is currently searching for satellite signals. 

5. “Satellite Contact” 

At least one satellite is found 

6. “Position Known” 

Vehicle’s latitude and longitude known. Navigation is possible. 


57 

Navigation Systems 



















Replacing the Mk-3 Navigation Computer 

When replacing the Mk-3 navigation computer be aware that there are two hardware 
variants depending on the installation position (vertical or horizontal). 

The ignition should be in position 0 during removal and replacement of the computer. 
After installing, close all doors, hood and trunk. A bus line reset will be carried out within 
two minutes. Resetting allows the gyro to perform a calibration run. Do not move the car 
during this reset period. 

The coding sequence for the Mk-3 navigation computer has been changed from the 
previous Mk-2. There is now an additional step (configuration) that must be done before 
the software can be loaded. 

After resetting, a configuration signal is needed to allow the computer to load the correct 
software for use with a board monitor or MIR. This is performed using the DIS coding 
program (CD 22.0 onward) and the Navigation System operating software (CD VI 5.0 
onward). 

Note: Vehicles using the wide screen BM require CD V16.1 onward. 

1. From the DIS/CT-1 Coding /Programming select “1 ZCS Coding” 

2. Select the appropriate series (E46,E39,E38,E52,E53) 

3. Select “4 Conversion” 

4. Select “3 IKE?Kombi” 

5. Select “2 language” 

6. At the prompt “is the CD ROM present?”select yes , but do not install the operating 
software CD ROM yet. 

7. First select the main language and then an additional language, (i.e. English-spanish) 

8. Select the gender of the navigation audio voice. 

9. Select “automatic coding-yes” 

10. After coding is done the DIS/CT-1 instructs you to follow the instructions on 
the monitor for the installation of the Navigation System CD ROM. 

11. Place the navigation system software in the navigation computer CD drive. 

Important: Do not switch the ignition off during the software loading procedure. 
Do not use any software for the Mk-3 earlier than CD VI 5.0. 

12. Once loading has been completed, remove the CD and then confirm completion 
by pressing the rotary push-button on the monitor. 

13. Turn off the key for 10 seconds, then turn it back on and conduct a functional 
check. 

58 

Navigation Systems 



14. After this step has been finished, encode the navigation computer using the 
“Recoding” path in ZCS Coding. The coding process involves coding vehicle 
specific data: VIN, Model, Telematics data etc. 

The software status can be confirmed from the “Set” screen for Mk-3 systems. 

• 3 = Third generation system Mk-3. 

• 1 = Device variant (1 =Color screen, 2- MIR monochrome screen). 

• 20 - Software version of the graphic component (Version 2.0). 

After the navigation computer has been successfully programmed and coded the vehicle 
should be left in an area with a clear view of the sky with the key in KL R for at least 15 
minutes to complete the calibration process. 


59 

Navigation Systems 



Service Mode 

Just as Mk-2, Mk-3 provides an on-screen service mode for diagnosis. 

The service mode provides five different test screens: 

• On-board monitor 

• Navigation/Graphic element 

• GPS 

• Sensor Gheck 

• Telematics 

To enter the Navigation Service Mode: 

• Turn the ignition key to position 1 (KL R). 

• From the Menu screen select “SET”. 

• Once in the Set screen, press and hold the “MENU” button for 8 seconds. 

• The Service Mode menu will appear on the display. 

• Select from the Service Mode menu for navigation specific tests. 

Diagnosis 

Diagnosis is carried out using Test Modules in the Diagnosis Program as well as on¬ 
screen in the Service mode.The Sensor Gheck display is intended to be used while test 
driving the vehicle. The following pages contain charts with explanations of the Service 
Mode display. 


60 

Navigation Systems 



Service Mode Menu Chart (Sensor Check) 


Status Display 

What should be displayed 

What to do if NOT OK. 

Wheel speed 
sensors: 

As the vehicle is driven, the number shouid increase with 
an increase in vehicle speed. 

Check fault codes in DSC sys¬ 
tem. If necessary carry out 
wheel speed sensor test. 

GPS Satellites: 

With an unobstructed upward view of the sky, the display 
should be > 3. 

Check for interference of signals 
to GPS antenna. 

Check integrity of circuit from 
GPS antenna to navigation 
computer. 

GPS Status: 

“See legend below” 


Gyro: 

Direction icon moves with vehicle turning movement. 

Display voltage is in millivolts and should read 
approximately 2500 mV (+/- 400mV) when the vehicle is 
stationary or driven straight ahead. 

When the vehicle is turning, the signal voltage should 
increase on right hand turns and decrease on left hand 
turns. 

Replace navigation computer 

Direction: 

Reverse is displayed when range selector is in reverse. 
Forward should be displayed 
when in any other range. 

Check reverse light signal input. 


Service Mode Diagnostic Explanations 


GPS Status Text 
Display 

Description 

1. “GPS fault” 

Problem with GPS system. Swap navigation computer and or antenna from known 
good vehicle after checking GPS status display information. 

2. “Reception Interference” 

Problem with GPS system. Same as above. 

3. “No Almanac” 

No data yet stored from satellites. The GPS almanac is a memory account of 
received satellite signals. If the vehicle battery has been disconnected or after 
replacing a navigation computer it has an empty memory and requires satellite sig¬ 
nals to be functional. After the navigation computer receives battery voltage and 
ground, it must be left outside with an unobstructed sky above with the ignition 
switched to KLR for approximately 15 minutes. 

4. “Satellite Search” 

GPS is currently searching for satellite signals. 

5. “Satellite Contact” 

At least one satellite is found 

6. “Position Known” 

Vehicle’s latitude and longitude known. Navigation is possible. 


61 

Navigation Systems 






































Service Mode Diagnostic Explanations 


Menu 

Display 

Explanation 

GPS Status 

G-Speed 

Heading 

Rec Status 

Pos-src 

PDOP 

HDOP 

VDOP 

Relative speed over the ground 

Direction of Travel 

Search/track/position receiver status 

Number of satellites available for analysis 
Accuracy of the calculated location 
<8=sufficient determination of location 
<4=very good determination of location 

GPS Tracking Info 

OH 

PRN 

S/N 

Visible Sat 

Almanac 

Channel 

Satellite detection 

Better reception as the value increases 

Number of visible satellites, receivable sig¬ 
nals, depending upon time of day/configura¬ 
tion 

Satellite database, loaded automatically after 

15 minutes 

Telematics 

VIN 

Color 

GSM 

BMW info 
Emergency call 
out 

Initialization 

Logging off 

VIN (Automatically assigned during coding) 
Color code or text 

Telephone network/contract number 

Customer specific info 

On/off status 

Telematics services on/off status 

Logging off telematics services 


Abbreviation explanations for chart: 

PDOP Position Dilution of Precision 

HDOP Horizontal Dilution of Precision 

VDOP Vertical Dilution of Precision 

S/N Signal/noise relationship 

Gyro Piezo gyro sensor (in navigation computer) 

Dir Direction of travel 


62 

Navigation Systems 

















Navigation System Software 

Aside from coding the navigation computers after installation, the proper navigation 
system software must be loaded to ensure proper operation. 

Always check the most current version of SIB# B84 01 02 for the latest navigation 
software and loading instructions. 

There are two version of navigation software CD’s. One is for Mark III navigation systems 
without split-screen. The other version is for Mk-I through Mk-lll systems including DVD 
based navigation on l-Bus (K-bus) vehicles. 

Refer to the application chart in SIB# B84 01 02 for the most current navigation software. 

Checking Software Version 

MKI Systems 

The software version is shown in the top right corner of the "setting" screen. The soft¬ 
ware/hardware version is displayed as "1 -1/80". The numbers have the following mean¬ 
ings: first digit 1 - is a 1 st generation navigation system (MK I); second digit 1 - is a 1 st 
device variant (top navigation - MK Ic color screen); the last two digits 80 - are the soft¬ 
ware version of the graphic component (8.0). 

MKII Systems 

The software version is shown in the top right corner of the "setting" screen. The soft¬ 
ware/hardware version is displayed as "2-1/81". The numbers have the following mean¬ 
ings: first digit 2 - is a 2nd generation navigation system (MK II); second digit 1 - is a 1st 
device variant (top navigation - MK He color screen); the last two digits 81 - are the soft¬ 
ware version of the graphic component (8.1). 

MKIII Systems 

The software version is shown in the top right corner of the "setting" screen. The soft¬ 
ware/hardware version is displayed as "3-1/63" or "3-2/63"(MK III with split screen). The 
numbers have the following meanings: first digit 3 - is a 3rd generation navigation system 
(MK III); second digit 1 - is a 1 st device variant (top navigation - MK lllc color screen), or 2 
- is a 2nd device variant (radio navigation - MK Him monochrome display); the last two 
digits 63 - are the software version of the graphic component (6.3). 

DVD Navigation System for l-Bus Vehicles 

The software version is shown in the top right corner of the "setting" screen. The soft¬ 
ware/hardware version is displayed as "4-1/42". The numbers have the following mean¬ 
ings: first digit 4 - is a 4th generation navigation system (DVD); second digit 1 - is a 1st 
device variant (top navigation - DVD color screen), or 2 - is a 2nd device variant (radio 
navigation - DVD monochrome display); the last two digits 42 - are the software version 
of the graphic component (4.2). 


63 

Navigation Systems 



On Board Monitor System 

The On-board Monitor System was introduced as optional equipment on the E38 and 
E39 for the 1997 model year. It uses the latest advances in electronic technology to 
bring new levels of comfort and convenience to the driver and passengers for control of 
the audio/communication systems. 

Subsequent models such as the E53 and E46 also incorporate navigation and board 
monitors functions as well. 

In addition, the Navigation system (Mk-I through Mk-lll) is incorporated into the total 
scope of On-board Monitor Control. 


Note: The six cylinder models of the E39 and E53 with the On-board Monitor 
option are equipped with the high version IKE and On Board Computer 
functions. 


The On-board Monitor is essentially a control and display unit. All data processing and 
calculations are carried out by the individual system control modules. The display data is 
sent to the On-board Monitor over the various bus interfaces. 


The On-board Monitor is mounted in the center dash console. It replaces the 
Radio/Tape Player, MID and DSP control panel (E38) if equipped. 


It consists of control knobs and buttons for programming and operating the various 
systems. 



64 

Navigation Systems 






















































































Depending upon the year and model, there is a 5 1/4 inch, color LCD screen for display of 
all system functions on the E38 and E39. The E46 and E53 models used a 5 inch 
screen. 

Later models with Mk-lll navigation, adopted the “wide screen” on board monitor which 
has a 6.5 inch screen. The wide screen was available on the E38 and E39 from 9/00 
production. The E53 uses the wide screen BMBT from 1/01. The E46 models adopted 
the wide screen configuration starting with 3/01 for the convertible and 9/01 for all the 
other E46 models. 

The tape player drive is also part of the On-Board Monitor unit. However, the radio 
receiver/amplifier module is now mounted in the trunk. The audio system is controlled 
from the on-board monitor. 

Additionally, the systems controlled and programmed through the On-board Monitor 
include: 

• On Board Computer 

• Navigation system 
•Telephone 

• Code Function 

• Set (on-board monitor setup) 

• Digital Sound Processor (DSP) 

• Auxiliary Ventilation 

• Emergency (provides vehicle location and automatically dials telephone for help). 

• Monitor Off (Switches the monitor off). 



E46 On Board Monitor (small screen) 


65 

Navigation Systems 
































On Board Monitor and Controls and Indicators 


Audio System 

Operation of the audio system (radio/tape/CD) is similar to current systems installed in 
other models. The major difference is that the display of stations and settings is through 
the LCD panel. 


Tape Program 
and Eject 
Buttons 


1 -6 Buttons correspond to stored radio stations (12+6 auto) and 

CD selections. 

Weather Band, FM/AM, Dolby and Mode Selection 
Mode - Radio, tape or CD function 



Switches the audio 
system on/off 
(Push) and adjusts 
the volume (rotate). 

Both radio and the 
monitor display are 
switched 


Toggles the audio 
display in the monitor 
back to the previous 
screen. 

Amber LED is 
illuminated when the 
radio is ON. 


Arrow rocker switch. 
Adjusts the tone settings and 
is used for the seek/scan 
function for the radio, tape and 
CD track. 


Tone Select 

Tone - Adjusts the bass, treble, balance and fader using the tone 
and arrow buttons. 

Select - provides choice of station selection method, i.e. Manual 
Scan, Scan sensitivity. 


66 

Navigation Systems 
































































Menu Button 

The menu button is 
used to call up the 
main menu show at 
the right. 

This menu provides 
access to all of the 
On Board Monitor 
functions including: 


□ □□ 




MENU 

|On-board computer 

Television 

GPS-Navigation 

DSP 

Telephone 

Aux. Ventilation , 

Code 


Set 

Monitor off 


7:05 PM 



07/24/96 Wednesday 


Rotary Knob 

Push - Switches the monitor ON or activates the selected program displayed in the monitor. 

Rotate - Selects the desired function for programming or display. 

Adjusts the various settings of any function 


67 

Navigation Systems 





































On Board Monitor Functions 

The following On Board Monitor functions are 
a guide to the basic operation of these 
functions. Due to changes between systems 
and versions of software, always refer to the 
later service information 

On Board Computer 

The functions of the On Board Computer 
remain the same as previous systems. All On 
Board Computer calculations are still per¬ 
formed by the IKE (or cluster). 

The OBC is called up from the on board 
Monitor main menu by highlighting the BO 
and pressing the knob. 

Once the computer functions are displayed, 
all programming and resetting of the displays 
is carried out using the rotary knob. 




GPS Navigation 

The on-board monitor provides access to the 
new Navigation system. The Navigation sys¬ 
tem is controlled and displayed via the on 
board monitor. Refer to the navigation portion 
of this training module for more information on 
navigation system operation. 



68 

Navigation Systems 


























































Telephone 

Selecting the Telephone function on the 
Monitor screen will call up a rotary dial display. 
The telephone can be dialed with the rotary 
knob by turning the knob and pressing it 
when the desired digit is highlighted. Once 
the number is input, the call is initiated by 
pressing the send/end button at the left of the 
Monitor. 

All telephone programming is carried out 
through the handset as on other telephone 
models. 



Other features of the monitor telephone 
control include: 

• Memory storage and recall 

• Information on signal strength and 
call timer 

• Top 8 number storage 

• Emergency call feature 

- Displays 911 or Assist. 

- Displays the vehicles current 
coordinates in latitude and longitude 
along with the street name (if the 
street is on the digitized map 
database). 

Code Function 

The familiar BO code function is carried over 
to the On-board Monitor system. A four digit 
code can be entered into the system that will 
disable the vehicle from starting as with previ¬ 
ous systems. 




69 

Navigation Systems 

























































Set Screen 

The Set Menu provides the on-board monitor 
display set up. This includes: 

• Language Selection 

• Time/date set and format 

• Etc. 

The “Audio+BC” selection at the bottom of 
the list switches the BC display off when the 
audio display is in the monitor. 



Digital Sound Processor (DSP) 

The DSP system, introduced with the E38 is 
now controlled and programmed through the 
On-board Monitor. DSP is available on the 
E38, E39 and E53. 



Auxiliary Ventilation 

The control and programming of the auxiliary 
ventilation feature is done with the on-board 
monitor. Use the rotary knob to program the 
on times for system operation. This function 
is also referred to as “Parked Car Ventilation”. 



70 

Navigation Systems 




































































Emergency 

The Emergency function provides the exact 
location of the vehicle including: 

• Street and Town (if on digitized map) 

• Longitude and Latitude Coordinates 

If the vehicle is equipped with the BMW 
Telephone, 911 or Assist (BMW roadside 
assistance) can be called directly from this 
screen. 

If the vehicle is not equipped with the BMW 
Telephone the emergency program provides 
your location. 



Monitor OFF 

Pressing the “Monitor Off” button switches the monitor to a blank screen. All programs 
are still functioning but not displayed in the monitor. The monitor is turned back on by 
pressing or turning any button on the on-board monitor. 


71 

Navigation Systems 














Mark II On Board Functions 


At first glance the system looks and operates 
similar to the previous system. Only when 
looking further into the control settings and 
features is a change noticed. 

Automatic Date/Time Display 

When a door is opened the GM signals status 
of “door open” on the K-bus. Via the l-Bus, 
the IKE passes the signal onto the navigation 
computer which generates the RGB signals 
for display of the Date/Time on the bottom 
edge of tine LGD. 

The Set function of the opening menu pro¬ 
vides additional owner customized settings for 
the board monitor display. After selecting set 
from the main menu, scroll down to the bot¬ 
tom of the list, an additional three items are 
included: 

• BG display: Provides selection of either 
the outside temperature or estimated 
arrival time of the set distance set in the 
board computer functions. These items 
are displayed along with the other BG 
functions when the Audio and BG set 
function is “On”. 

• Golor set: Provides three set variations of 
screen color schemes. 

• Day/night: Provides a deviation of the 
selected color set when the headlights 
are switched on. 

Though subtle, these changes provide added 
convenience and provide the owner the 
opportunity to slightly customize their 
vehicle’s On-board monitor display. 




72 

Navigation Systems 
































































Navigation Computer Removal 

Removal of the navigation computer can be done by placing 4 small philips head screw 
drivers into the holes provided. 

The preferred method is to use special tool number 65 5 400. 




73 

Navigation Systems 



























Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 

Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the concern indicated by the 
instructor. Complete this worksheet using the proper “Complaint, Cause and 
Correction” format. 

Vehicle: _ Chassis #: _ Production date: _ 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 



74 

Navigation Systems 



Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 

Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the concern indicated by the 
instructor. Complete this worksheet using the proper “Complaint, Cause and 
Correction” format. 

Vehicle: _ Chassis #: _ Production date: _ 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 



75 

Navigation Systems 



Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 

Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the concern indicated by the 
instructor. Complete this worksheet using the proper “Complaint, Cause and 
Correction” format. 

Vehicle: _ Chassis #: _ Production date: _ 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 



76 

Navigation Systems 



Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 

Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the concern indicated by the 
instructor. Complete this worksheet using the proper “Complaint, Cause and 
Correction” format. 

Vehicle: _ Chassis #: _ Production date: _ 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 



77 

Navigation Systems 



Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. What is different about the GPS receiver between the Mark I, II and III systems? 


2. How can the signal provided by the gyro sensor to the navigation computer be 
checked? 


3. Describe how the display signals are transmitted from the navigation computer to 
the board monitor. 


4. What step is necessary before loading the navigation computer operating 

software CD on a newly replaced navigation computer? Where can the software 
status be confirmed after it has been loaded? 


5. How is the VIN entered into the navigation computer? 


78 

Navigation Systems 




























-^ 1 Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

6. List the most significant changes made to the Mk-3 navigation computer over the 
previous Mk-2. 


7. What is the difference between the “magnetic field sensor” (compass) and the 
gyro sensor? What systems use each of these sensors? 


8. What is (was) ARCNET and why systems is it used on? 


9. How is the navigation computer removed? 


10. What are some of the advantages of the “widescreen” navigation system? 


79 

Navigation Systems 































