Table of Contents 

E46 Driver Information Systems 

Subject Page 

E46 Instrument Cluster.4 

Bus Communication .5 

Gateway Function.5 

Cluster Displays .7 

Check Control LCD Matrix .7 

Transmission Matrix Display.7 

Odometer/BC Display .7 

Dynamic Digital Inputs .8 

Distance Signal .8 

CAN BUS Signals .8 

Transmission Data.8 

Oil Temperature.8 

Dimmer Signal.8 

K-Bus Signalling .8 

Analog Input Signals.9 

Battery Voltage .9 

Fuel Tank Level .9 

Outside Temperature Sensor.9 

Digital Input Signals.10 

Steering Column Stalk Switch .10 

Brake Pad Wear Sensors.10 

Instrument Panel Button.10 

Inputs for Warning Lamps.10 

Output Signals.11 

Speed Signal “A” .11 

K-Bus Interface.11 

Low Fuel.11 

Gong Output.11 

Redundant Data Storage .12 

Service Interval Indicator (SIA IV) .14 

System Components .15 

Service Interval Reset.15 

SIA Reset Procedure using Reset Mode (from 9/99).16 

Reset using Diagnosis Program .17 

Instrument Cluster Replacement.17 

Diagnosis .17 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 







































Subject Page 

On Board Computer.18 

Instrument Cluster Test Functions .19 

Park Distance Control.23 

Components.24 

PDC Control Module.24 

Ultrasonic Sensors.24 

Transmitting Mode.25 

Receiving Mode .25 

System Operation .26 












E46 Driver Information Systems 


Model: E46 

Production: From Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the operation of the E46 instrument cluster 

• Identify and locate driver information system components 

• Diagnose concerns related to the driver information system 


3 

E46 Driver Information Systems 




E46 Instrument Cluster 

The instrument cluster is part of the overall driver information system. The design of the 
E46 instrument cluster is similar to the “low” version cluster introduced on the E39. 



The cluster on the E46 still uses the five familiar analog gauges which are the fuel level, 
speedometer, tachometer, coolant temperature and the fuel economy gauge. 

There are also three LCD blocks which display: 

• Check Control Pictogram - this area displays information regarding lamp failures, 
door and trunk status as well as fluid levels (i.e. coolant and washer fluid) 

• Odometer Display - this display shows total mileage and trip odometer informa¬ 
tion. The Board Computer (BC) information is also displayed here. There are 5 
pieces of information which can de displayed here by scrolling with the turn signal 
stalk switch. The new service interval indicator is also displayed here (SIA IV). 

• Transmission Display - the transmission range and program indicator is shown 
here. Any transmission related faults are indicated to the driver by a gear symbol. 

In addition to the LCD display blocks, there are various indicator lamps some of which 
include the oil pressure warning, battery charge indicator, MIL etc. 

The E46 makes extensive use of bus network for communication between control other 
vehicle systems. The bus network also helps streamline communication and reduce the 
overall wiring requirement. 


4 

E46 Driver Information Systems 








Other features of the E46 cluster include: 

• Stepper motor drives for the analog gauges 

• New design Service Interval Indicator (SIA IV) 

• Automatic transmission range/program display 

The instrument cluster is a sealed unit and contains no serviceable components, 
other than the back lighting illumination bulbs. 

Bus Communication 

The E46 cluster is part of a vehicle bus network which includes the following bus 
systems: 

• Controller Area Network - The CAN bus supplies the cluster with information to 
operate the tachometer and fuel economy gauge. The “TD” (engine speed) and the 
“ti” (injector on time) signals are now sent to the cluster as part of the CAN-Bus 
signals rather than independent dedicated signals as before. The transmission 
range, program and fault indicator signals are also now a part of CAN-Bus informa¬ 
tion as well. This further reduces the wiring requirement and increases reliability. 

• Body Bus - The K-bus provides the cluster with a connection to other vehicle 
systems such as the LSZ, IHKA and GM. Signals are shared between these 
systems which allow for a reduction in sensors and switches. 

• Diagnosis Bus - The D-bus allows diagnostic communication between the vehicle 
and the diagnostic equipment. The cluster provides a “gateway” to connect the 
D-bus and other bus networks. 

Gateway Function 

The cluster provides a connection between bus systems. This allows different bus 
networks to transfer information between them. The cluster “translates” this information 
and distributes it to the required network. For example, the D-bus does not connect 
directly to all modules on the E46. Any modules on the K-bus are diagnosed via the 
pathway created by the cluster. The path is as follows - D-bus > cluster > K-bus > com¬ 
ponent. 

Signals are also shared via the gateway as well as commands. An example of this would 
be the cruise control system. The MFL control module, which control cruise control 
switches, sends a command to the DME system. The DME systems is responsible for 
engine speed control. The command for “accelerate” for example, is sent to the DME via 
the gateway (cluster) to the CAN-Bus. 


5 

E46 Driver Information Systems 



E46 Bus Overview 


IHKA 




INSTRUMENT CLUSTER 





MFL 

RADIO GR 


ABS/ASC 




TELEPHONE 

PREPARATION 




20 PIN 

DIAGNOSTIC 

CONNECTION E46 Bus System (as introduced) 


6 

E46 Driver Information Systems 





































































































































Cluster Displays 


Check Control LCD Matrix 

The pictogram check control display carries 
over from the E39 for failure display warnings 
of various lights, doors/trunk open and low 
fluid indications. 

Inputs for warning lamp indication are 
processed by the cluster electronics and the 
appropriate LED is illuminated. 

Transmission Matrix Display 

The right LCD matrix is used to display the 
driving range and program on vehicles 
equipped with an automatic transmission. 

The transmission fault display is now also 
integrated into the display matrix. The gear 
with the explanation point will illuminate when 
the electronic control of the transmission 
detects a fault. 



Odometer/BC Display 

The odometer/BC display shows the total mileage as well as the trip odometer reading. 
The SIA IV also displays for 5 seconds when the key is switched on to display service 
interval information. 

The BC also displays 5 basic pieces of information which can be scrolled with the turn 
signal stalk switch. 



7 

E46 Driver Information Systems 


/1 \ /1 \ 


















Dynamic Digital Inputs 
Distance Signal 

This input is supplied to the cluster by the ABS/ASC/DSC control module as a square 
wave signal. Pulses from the left rear wheel speed sensor are processed by the ABS 
module to produce this signal. The cluster electronics process the input for the cluster 
display and pass the signal along, on the K-Bus, as speed signal “A” for other control 
modules requiring the vehicle speed signal. 

CAN-Bus Signals 

The “Ti”, engine temperature and “TD” signals are produced by the DME control 
module and sent to the cluster. The cluster also passes the TD signal out over the K- 
Bus. 

Transmission Data 

The EGS (AGS) control module provides the range selector position, driving program 
and fault lamp activation signals to the cluster over the CAN line. 



Oil Temperature 

This input is a pulse width modulated signal from the Electronic Oil Level Sensor. As oil 
level decreases the pulse width of the signal increases. If the signal shows an oil level 
that is too low over a period of time, the instrument cluster will illuminate the Oil Warning 
indicator LED in yellow. 

Dimmer Signal 

This is a pulse-width modulated signal from the LSZ. It is used to control the intensity of 
the back lighting of the instruments and the LCDs when the lights are switched ON. This 
signal is also output over the “K”-Bus. 

K-Bus Signalling 

The Cluster receives signals for the Check Control Pictogram over the K-Bus. 


8 

E46 Driver Information Systems 





































Analog Input Signals 


Battery Voltage 

Battery voltage is monitored by the cluster and a fault is stored if the voltage exceeds 16 
volts. 

Fuel Tank Level 

Two lever action sensors are wired in parallel to the cluster. The two varying voltage 
signals are processed by the cluster for fuel gauge and low fuel warning display. 




Outside Temperature Sensor 

A Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) sensor is used to measure the ambient 
temperature. The signal is processed by the cluster and passed out over the K-Bus to 
modules requiring this input for processing. 


9 

E46 Driver Information Systems 






























Digital Input Signals 

Digital inputs refer to those inputs which are represented by a ground or B+ signal. The 
status of these signals is represented by a change in voltage either on or off (1 or 0). 

The normal ignition switch terminals (KL R, KL 15 & KL 50) are input to the cluster. 
Various functions are dependent on ignition switch position. 

Steering Column Stalk Switch 

As with previous systems the turn signal stalk is used to call up BC functions. The stalk 
switch (LSS) is a ground input to the cluster. 


Brake Pad Wear Sensors 

The pad sensor inputs are used to illuminate the brake pad warning indicator as in the 
past. The brake pad circuit is monitored for an open or interruption of the ground when 
the sensor is worn through. The input is dampened to prevent a blinking light when the 
sensor is not completely open. 


KL R 



9 


INSTRUMENT PANEL BUTTON 

(MILEAGE RESET - BC TEST) 




BC STALK CONTROL 



BRAKE PAD 

WEAR 

SENSORS 


Q. 

2 

< 

_j 

hi 

z 

o 

z 

LU 

* 

o 

LU 

X 

o 


X 

o 

5 

O 


if) 

CD 

< 




X 







o 







h— 







< 







z 







X 







LU 

1 [ 1 

z 





!□ 

X 

o 





< 

D 


z 

_l 



2 

if) 

if) 

o 

L- 

HM 

o 

LU 

> 

x 

o 

u_ 

if) 

O 

X 

LL 

LU 

X 

X 

c 

o 

o 

LU 

* 

< 

LU 

_l 

a 

5 

o 

5 

z 

cc 
1 
0 
< 
m 

0 

z 

0 

X 

_l 

o 

LU 

z 

a> 

'5 

5- 

o 

X 

CD 

0 

z 

* 

D 

-1 

LL 

LU 

* 

o 

< 

0 

— 

X 

< 

if) 


X 

z 

X 

< 

X 

< 

< 

o 

LU 

0 

GL 

X 


Instrument Panel Button 

The reset button is used to reset the trip - odometer as in the past. It will also display the 
mileage, if pressed with the key switched OFF. This button is also used for BC/cluster 
test functions. 


Inputs for Warning Lamps 

Various switches are used to signal the cluster for warning and indicator lamp illumination 
including fluid levels, control unit fault and status indicators. Examples of these include 
the MIL lamp from the ECM (DME), the RPS indicator from the CVM, the seat belt status 
and Airbag Warning Lamp (AWL) from the MRS control module. 


10 

E46 Driver Information Systems 








































Output Signals 
Speed Signal “A” 

The vehicle speed signal is available as an output for control modules that require precise 
vehicle speed information. Speed signal “A” is also sent as an output over the K-Bus. 

K-Bus Interface 

The K-Bus is used to transfer data between the cluster and other modules on the link. 
The diagnostic interface also passes over the K-Bus fortroubleshooting with the BMW 
diagnostic equipment. 

Low Fuel 

Based on the processing for the low fuel indicator lamp, this output is also sent to the 
DME (ECM) control module. The signal is stored along with a mis-fire detection fault for 
troubleshooting purposes. 

Gong Output 

The T3 tone is used for check control warnings. 



LCM 

IHKA 

GM 

▼ 


LOW FUEL LEVEL 
(MISFIRE DETECTION) 

-► 





11 

E46 Driver Information Systems 
























Redundant Data Storage 

Specific information is stored redundantly in the instrument cluster and in the Light 
Switch Module. The data stored redundantly includes: 

• VIN 

• Total Mileage 

• Service Interval data 


The redundant storage of this information allows for the replacement of a module without 
the loss of the total mileage accumulated or the loss of the SI data. 


The data is compared each time KL 15 is switched on. If the data does not match, the 
manipulation dot in the mileage display block will be illuminated. 



The following points must be noted with regards to the redundant storage of this data. 

1. If the vehicle ID number is not the same in both modules, the manipulation dot is 
illuminated. All functions of both modules continue to operate. 

2. Data will only be transferred from the LSZ to the cluster if the ID numbers match and 
the cluster mileage is zero. 

3. The VIN is entered in the cluster through coding and will only be accepted when the 
cluster mileage is zero. 

4. The stored mileage in the LSZ can only be overwritten by a higher mileage. 

5. If the two mileage values stored vary by more than 120, and the VINs are the same, 
the cluster will continue to accumulate mileage and a fault will be stored in the clus¬ 
ter for data transfer. 

6. If the K-Bus link fails, the cluster will continue to store mileage and set a fault for the 
Bus link. 

New components should only be installed for replacement purposes and not for use as 
test components for diagnosis as miles will accumulate if the vehicle is driven for road 
testing purposes. 


12 

E46 Driver Information Systems 




















E46 Cluster Overview 





BC STALK CONTROL 


KL 58g 



(Ti/TD) CAN 



BRAKE PAD 

WEAR 

SENSORS 


VEHICLE SPEED SIGNAL 
nimn^ 


LEFT REAR 
WHEEL SPEED 
SENSOR 



CAN 



13 

E46 Driver Information Systems 




















































































































































































Service Interval Indicator (SIAIV) 

Beginning with the E46, the new SIA IV service interval indicator system is now used. 
The new system now longer uses the colored LED’s as used in the past, but rather a 
numeric display of mileage remaining to the next service. 

With this system, the actual mileage remaining until the next service will be displayed 
when the ignition is turned on. The service mileage will be displayed in the odometer 
display for approximately 5 seconds. 


MLSEMttE , 

1 

□ i nn 


□ 1 LJUml 


The text “Oil Service” or “Inspection” will also illuminate to show which service is due. 
A minus (-) symbol before the mileage display indicates that a service is past due. 


The calculation process for determining the service interval is similar to SIA III. Like the 
SIA III system, the SIA IV system calculates service intervals based on fuel used. 

A reference value of fuel is stored in the instrument cluster during the coding process, 
this value is in gallons and is model dependent. As the vehicle is driven, the instrument 
cluster monitors the injector on time (“ti”) signal and deducts the amount of fuel used 
against the reference value. 


In other words, the injector on time is an indicator of how the vehicle is driven. 

For example, a large number of short trips would consume more fuel and therefore the 
average injector on time would be greater. This increased fuel consumption would 
reduce the service interval mileage because the average injector on-time would be higher 
and would deduct gallons (theoretical) from the stored value (Coded Inspection Limit) at a 
faster rate. 


The “Coded Inspection Limit” value for each vehicle can be found in a Group62 Service 
Bulletin. 


14 

E46 Driver Information Systems 



System Components 

The SIAIV system consists of the instrument cluster, the engine control module and the 
stability control system (ASC/DSC). The instrument cluster contains all of processing 
electronics and tine SIA display in the odometer area. 

The stability control system supplies the road speed signal and the engine control 
module supplies the injector on time (“ti”) signal via the CAN-Bus. 




Service Interval Reset 

When a vehicle comes in for an oil service or inspection (I or II), the service indicator must 
be reset. This is important to assure consistent service intervals. Depending upon the 
production date of the vehicle, there are a few methods to reset the service intervals. 

On vehicles with a diagnosis socket in the engine compartment, the service interval 
indicator is reset with the aid of the SIA reset tool (62 1 110). On vehicles where this 
diagnosis socket is no longer installed in the engine compartment (2001 models an up), 
the service interval indicator (SIA) is reset according to a defined procedure with the 
left-hand button in the instrument cluster (trip odometer reset button). 

Although the 20-pin underhood diagnostic connector was omitted in 2001 vehicles, the 
“Reset Mode” in the instrument cluster was possible from 9/99. 

In addition to the reset mode in the cluster, the SIA could be reset using the diagnostic 
equipment (DISplus/GT-1). 


15 

E46 Driver Information Systems 























































SIA Reset Procedure using Reset Mode (from 9/99) 

The reset procedure is as follows: 

• Ignition key must be “off” 

• Press and hold the trip odometer button in the instrument cluster, and turn the 
ignition to KLR. 

• Keep the button pressed for approximately 5 seconds until one of the following 
words appears in the display: “OIL SERVICE” or INSPECTION with the additional 
text - RESET. 

• Release the button and press and hold it again until the “reset” begins to flash. 

• While the display is flashing, press the left button briefly to reset the service interval. 
After the display has shown the new interval, the following will appear: “END SIA” 

Note: The system can only be reset again after 10 liters (2.5 gal) of fuel has 
been consumed. 

The data for the service interval indicator (SIA) are also stored in the light switching center 
(LSZ ). After replacing the instrument cluster, completing encoding and allocation based 
on the vehicle identification number, the SIA data are transferred to the instrument cluster. 



* A 


r ESET SIA H END SIA 

OILSERVICE H 

15000 Miles 


V J 


KEEP PRESSED 
FOR 5 SECONDS 
AFTER KEY IS 
SWITCHED ON. 


E46 service interval reset 


TAP BUTTON TO 
RESET SI DISPLAY. 


16 

E46 Driver Information Systems 










Reset using Diagnosis Program 

The DISplus or GT-1 can be used to reset the Service Interval Indicator. The procedure is 
as follows: 

• Connect the Diagnosis head to the diagnostic connector of the vehicle. 

• Identify the vehicle and perform the Short Test. 

• Select Function Selection and then Service Functions. 

• Highlight Reset Service Interval Indicator (Test module S6211 -00001) 

• Select with tester. 

• Follow the directions from the help information in the test module (upper right 
corner). 

• Select which service is to be reset and press the continue key. 

• An acknowledgement is displayed on the screen that the reset has been carried out. 

Instrument Cluster Replacement 

If the instrument cluster (Kombi) is replaced the SI data can be retrieved from the LSZ on 
E46 vehicles and from the LCM III on the E52. Coding procedures are the same as SIA II. 

Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the SIA System is carried out using the Diagnosis program of the DISplus or 
Gt-1. 


17 

E46 Driver Information Systems 




On Board Computer 

The On Board computer of the E46 contains the following functions: 

• Time 

• Outside temperature 

• Average fuel consumption 

• Driving range on remaining fuel 

• Average speed 


• OUTSIDE TEMPERATURE 



• AVERAGE SPEED 



• FUEL CONSUMPTION 



• ESTIMATED DRIVING RANGE 
ON REMAINING FUEL 



The current time is always displayed when KL R is switched on. Any other BC display 
value can be called up by pressing the turn signal lever. 

To set the clock “turn” the odometer reset button to the left or right to set the desired 
time. 

To reset any other programmable displays - hold the turn signal lever in for > 2 seconds. 

A freeze warning is incorporated into the BC. If the temperature drops below 37 degrees, 
the gong will sound and the temperature display will flash. 

The displays of the Board computer can be changed over from Fahrenheit to Celsius by 
pressing the instrument cluster button and switching the ignition key on. IHKA display 
will also change over. The average fuel consumption and average speed displays are 
reset by pressing and holding the turn signal lever for > 2 seconds. The BC then starts to 
calculate new average values. 


18 

E46 Driver Information Systems 



































































Instrument Cluster Test Functions 

In addition to the fault memory and diagnostic link, the base instrument cluster contains a 
series of test functions that can be accessed to check various functions and values. The 
test functions are displayed in the mileage LCD block. There are a total of 21 test func¬ 
tions. The test functions are similar to those of previous Board computers and contain 
similar tests. 

• Tests 1 & 2 are always unlocked. 

• Tests 3 -21 are only accessible after unlocking the test function. 

Test 19 is the unlock function for accessing the displays. 


1. Switch Off 



2. Press and Hold 



3. Switch to KL R 



Test 01. main menu is displayed 


4a. Do nothing and display will 
automatically go into sub tests 
of main menu 0.1 








4b. Press and release immediately 
(< 1 second) to advance to 
next main test menu. 





Scrolling through the numbered 
test functions is achieved by 
pressing the instrument cluster 
button. 

The button is either pressed 
momentarily (tapped) for 
< 1 second or pressed and held 
for > 1 second. 

This signals the BC to display 
the sub-tests of the displayed 
main test menu or continue on 
to the next main test menu. 


\ 1 


19 

E46 Driver Information Systems 



























































































Instrument Cluster Test Functions (1-6) 


TEST 01. Vehicle specific data including: 

Values (simulated) 

Subtests: 

12345 

1.0 

VIN 

4812 

1.1 

Body Number 

834762 

6_1.2 

Part number of cluster 

010203 

1.3 

Coding/Diagnosis/Bus index 

3495 

1.4 

Manufacturing date (Calender week/year 

04_600 

1.5 

Hardware/software # of cluster (HW:04, SW:6.00) 

415_06 

3_1.6 

Injection status, number of cylinders, engine factor 

TEST 02. - Cluster System Test - activates the gauge drivers, indicators and LED’s to confirm 
function. 

TEST 03. - SI Data 

Values (simulated) 

Subtests: 

1500 

3.0 

liters 

0 

3.1 

Period inspection days (not applicable for US market) 

TEST 04. - Momentary Consumption. 

Values (simulated) 

Subtests: 

0267 

4.0 

26.7 liters/1000km 

0073 

4.1 

7.3 liters per hour 

TEST 05. - Distance Gone Consumption (Range) 

Values (simulated) 

Subtests: 

0195 

5.0 

19.5 liter/100km 

226 

5.1 

momentary distance to go (226km) 


6. - Fuel level sensor input in liters 


Values (simulated) 

Subtests: 

237415 

6.0 

Fuel level averaged - LH sensor input = 23.7 liters RH sensor = 41.5 liters 

0652 

6.1 

Total tank level averaged = 65.2 liters 

0667 

1_6.2 

Indicate value and tank phase 1 = both sensors OK 

2 = one sensor fault 

3 = implausible input 


20 

E46 Driver Information Systems 




































































Instrument Cluster Test Functions (7-19) 


TEST 07. Temperature and Speed: 


TEST 08. - Input values in hexadecimal form 

TEST 09. - Battery Voltage 

TEST 10. - Country Coding 

TEST 11.- Cluster Code 

TEST 12. - Not used 
TEST 13. - Gong Test 

TEST 14. - Fault memory - (not for diagnosis) 
TEST 15 to 18 - Not used 
TEST 19-Lock/Unlock 


21 

E46 Driver Information Systems 


Subtests: 

Display changes from “L-ON“ to “L-OFF” every second. To unlock test 

-functions, press the cluster button immediately when it changes to 

19.0 “L-OFF”. Tests are automatically locked when exiting test functions. 


Values (simulated) 

L-ON 

L-OFF 


Subtests: 

13.0 Activate gong by pressing button (gong response is delayed) 


Values (simulated) 

Gong 


Subtests: 

11.0 Cluster code 


Values (simulated) 

000003 


Subtests: 

10.0 US 02 


Values (simulated) 

02 


Subtests: 

9.0 12.5 volts 


Values (simulated) 

125 


Subtests: 

8.0-8.3 Hex code, instrument cluster inputs (for engineering use) 


Values (simulated) 

XXX 


Subtests: 

7.0 

Coolant temp input = 32 C 

7.1 

Outside temperature input = 24.5 C 

7.2 

Engine speed 5,283 RPM 

7.3 

Vehicle speed 58km/H 


Values (simulated) 

032 

245 

5283 

058 



























































Instrument Cluster Test Functions (20-21) 

TEST 20. Not Used 



TEST 21. - Input values in hexadecimal form 

Values (simulated) 

Subtests: 


Reset 

21.0 

Reset software 


22 

E46 Driver Information Systems 










Park Distance Control 

Park Distance Control is a safety/convenience system that is an option on the E46. The 
system is carried over from the E39 and features the ultra-sonic sensors on the rear 
bumper only. 

The sensors detect the close proximity to other objects when maneuvering the vehicle in 
tight spaces (such as parallel parking or parking in narrow garages spaces). 

The driver is warned, through an audible tone (beeping), when the vehicle comes close 
to another object. As the distance to the object decreases, the beeping frequency 
increases until a steady tone is produced. As the distance to the object increases, the 
steady tone will return to a beep and stop when the vehicle moves away from the object. 

The PDC is automatically switched ON when the ignition is switched on, however it does 
not become active until the vehicle is shifted into reverse. 




4 ULTRA-SONIC SENSORS 
IN REAR BUMPER TRIM 



23 

E46 Driver Information Systems 








































































































































































Components 

The PDC consists of the following components: 

PDC Control Module 

The PDC control module activates the ultrasonic sensors mounted in the rear bumper 
cover. After activation, the module monitors the signals coming back through the sensors. 
Through this signal, the control module is able to determine the distance to any object 
close to the bumpers of the vehicle. As the vehicle comes close to an object, the control 
module will activate the acoustic warning through the right rear audio system speaker. 

The PDC control module is mounted in the trunk on the right side above the battery. 

Ultrasonic Sensors 

Mounted in the rear bumper. The sensors are small transmitter/receiver modules that are 
specifically designed for automotive use. The sensors are limited to the following angles 
of monitoring: 

• 90° on the horizontal plane 

• 60° on the vertical plane 



24 

E46 Driver Information Systems 




Transmitting Mode 

The control module sends a 40 Khz signal to the sensor and each sensor is then activat¬ 
ed in a specific sequence (firing order). The ceramic element of the sensor vibrates and 
produces an ultrasonic sound wave that is sent out from the bumper. 

Receiving Mode 

If the sound wave contacts an object, the wave is bounced back to the sensor. The 
returning wave causes the ceramic element to vibrate creating an electrical signal as 
feedback to the control module. 

The control module determines the distance to the object by the time difference 
between the sent signal and the received ultrasonic wave signals. 



25 

E46 Driver Information Systems 
























































System Operation 

When KL 15 is switched ON, the PDC system is switched "ON", in the standby mode. 
The system performs a self-check of the ultrasonic sensors and control electronics. 

When the vehicle is shifted into reverse, the system is activated and the sensors are 
activated in the predetermined order. 

If an object is detected within the operating range of one the sensors, a signal is sent to 
the PDC control module and the acoustic warning is generated. At the same time the 
control module checks the signals from the adjacent sensors to help determine the 
actual distance to the object. 

As the distance to the object decreases, to approximately 1 V 2 feet, the output acoustic 
frequency increases until a steady tone is generated. 

As the distance to the object increases the frequency will decrease until the object is out 
of the monitoring range of the sensor. 





26 

E46 Driver Information Systems 





























Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 

Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the concern indicated by the 
instructor. Complete this worksheet using the proper “Complaint, Cause and 
Correction” format. 

Vehicle: Chassis #: Production date: 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 



27 

E46 Driver Information Systems 




Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 

Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the concern indicated by the 
instructor. Complete this worksheet using the proper “Complaint, Cause and 
Correction” format. 

Vehicle:_Chassis #: _ Production date:_ 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 



28 

E46 Driver Information Systems 




Classroom Exercise - Review Question 

1. Why is it important that the instrument cluster and LSZ should NOT be replaced at 
the same time? 


2. What bus systems are connected to the E46 instrument cluster? 


3. What is the purpose of the “pictogram” display? 


4. What is the “low fuel level” output signal used for? 


5. Explain SIAIV processing: 


29 

E46 Driver Information Systems 



Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

List the OBC functions on the E46 instrument cluster: 



7. How does the IHKA module receive outside temperature information? 


8. What information does the E46 instrument cluster receive from the CAN-Bus? 


9. Describe the “gateway”function on the E46 cluster: 


10. When does the E46 PDC system become active? 


30 

E46 Driver Information Systems 





























