Table of Contents 


E46 Lighting Systems 

Subject Page 

E46 Lighting Systems.4 

System Components.5 

LSZ Control Module .5 

LSZ Switch (Headlight Switch).6 

High Beam/Turn Signal Stalk Switch.6 

Brake Light Switch.7 

Hazard Warning Switch.7 

Fog Light Relay .8 

Rain and Light Sensor.8 

Exterior Lighting.9 

Headlights .9 

Tail Lights.9 

Brake Lights.10 

E46 Convertible Third Brake Light.10 

Advantages of Neon Technology.10 

Principle of Operation.11 

Lamp Monitoring.11 

Emergency (Failsafe Lighting) .12 

Home Lighting.13 

Redundant Storage .13 

Crash Control Activation.14 

Fog Lights.14 

Dimmer Circuit (KL58g).14 

Indicator Lamps.14 

Rain/Driving-Light Sensor (RLS).15 

Xenon Headlight Systems.17 

LWR .18 

Version Identification.18 

Headlight Replacement Parts.18 

Xenon High Intensity Discharge Bulbs .19 

Phases of Bulb Operation.19 

Functional Description.19 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 



































Subject Page 

Xenon Bulb Monitoring.20 

Xenon Headlight Assembly Components .20 

Bi-Xenon Headlights.21 

Components.22 

Bi-Xenon Headlight .22 

Electrical control facility for bi-xenon headlights.22 

Diagnosis.23 

Xenon Headlight Testing .23 

Xenon Headlight SI/TRI Bulletin.23 

Adaptive Headlights (AHL) .24 













E46 Lighting Systems 


Model: E46 

Production: From Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the lighting systems used on E46 

• Identify and locate lighting system components 

• Diagnose lighting system concerns 


3 

E46 Lighting Systems 




E46 Lighting Systems 

The E46 lighting system consists of a Light Switch Center (LSZ) module which controls 
all exterior lighting. In addition to the electronic control and monitoring system for the 
external vehicle lights, the LSZ contains the switch for parking lights/low beam, the push 
buttons for fog lights as well as the potentiometers for instrument lighting. 

The LSZ provides the functions of the LCM including: 

• Hot and cold monitoring of the exterior lights. 

• Emergency lighting function 

• Short circuit protection 

• Redundant storage of mileage and SI data 



4 

E46 Lighting Systems 

























System Components 

The lighting system components on the E46 include: 

• LSZ control module 

• LSZ switch assembly 

• High-low beam/turn signal switch 

• Brake light switch 

• Hazard warning light switch 

• Fog light relay 

• Exterior lights 

• Dash/LCD lighting 

• RLS (if equipped from 2002) 

LSZ Control Module 

The LSZ control module contains the electronics for the control and monitoring of the 
exterior lighting. The LSZ module is mounted behind the headlight switch to the left side 
of the steering wheel. 

There is a single connector on the module for all inputs and outputs. 

From 2002, there some changes to the LSZ module. These include a modified PWM 
signal for lighting control (freq 80hz), there a additional outputs circuits added for rear 
brake lights and bi-xenon systems and a new headlight switch to accommodate RLS. 



E46 Lighting Systems 




LSZ Switch (Headlight Switch) 

The headlight switch is mounted on the front of the LSZ and is connected via a ribbon 
cable. The headlight switch provides inputs to the LSZ for the operation of the parking 
lights, headlights and the instrument panel dimming. 

The switch is a separate component from the LSZ and can replaced as a separate part. 

There is also a phototransistor located on the face of the headlight switch which provides 
ambient light signals. The LSZ uses these signals to adjust the instrument cluster 
illumination during varying ambient light conditions (i.e. entering a tunnel etc.). 

There are two variations of the headlight switch, the original version contains the 
headlight on/off switch, the dimmer thumb wheel fog light switch (if equipped) and the 
phototransistor, the updated version includes an additional switch position for the RLS 
functions. 


Headlight Switch (from start of production) Headlight Switch (with RLS function) 



High Beam/Turn Signal Stalk Switch 


The high beam/turn signal switch is located on the left side of the steering column. 
The switch provides a coded ground input to the LSZ to activate the turn signals. The 
switch also provides input for the high beam and “flash to pass” functions. 



6 

E46 Lighting Systems 




























Brake Light Switch 

The brake light switch provides input to the LSZ for brake light control. The switch 
provides a B+ signal when the brakes are applied. The switch is also monitored by the 
LSZ for faults. 

The brake light switch provides a low voltage digital signal to the LSZ when the brake 
lights are not actuated. If this signal is interrupted the LSZ interprets this as a faulty brake 
light switch and initiates emergency mode. 




Hazard Warning Switch 


1 S29 

J Brake light switch 
p 31E<2 


The hazard warning switch is located in the center console and provides a ground input 
to the LSZ module. 



7 

E46 Lighting Systems 

















Fog Light Relay 

The fog light relay (if equipped) is located behind the glove box. It is controlled as a direct 
output of the LSZ. 

Rain and Light Sensor 

Beginning in 2002, the Rain Sensor was replaced by the new Rain and Light Sensor 
(RLS). The RLS is connected to the K-Bus and provides the LSZ (and other modules) 
with information regarding ambient light conditions. 

With the headlight switch set to “A” position, the headlights will automatically be switched 
on when the ambient light conditions are reduced. 

The rain sensing electronics of the RLS only pertain to wiper operation. The operation of 
the headlights are not affected. 



8 

E46 Lighting Systems 


Exterior Lighting 


Headlights 

From start of production the E46 was available with conventional halogen headlights as in 
the past. The headlights are arranged in the familiar 4 headlamp configuration. 


As an option, Xenon headlamps became available from the start of production in 1999. 
The Xenon system is use at that time was manufactured by Bosch. This system 
remained in use until the 2002 model year when the Bi-Xenon lights came into use. 



Tail Lights 

The Tail lights is use from the start of production (99 model year) are conventional 
filament type (incandescent) bulbs. These bulbs are replaceable and are controlled by 
the LSZ using pulse width modulated signals. 



9 

E46 Lighting Systems 















Brake Lights 

The brake lights used on the E46 are conventional filament type bulbs. This includes the 
third (center) brake light. 

E46 Convertible Third Brake Light 

The E46iC from 2002, uses Neon technology for the third brake light which is mounted 
in the trunk lid. The remainder of the exterior lighting circuits carry over from the E46 
Sedan and Coupes. The Electronic brake light switch is the input to the LSZ for brake 
light activation. The LSZ, as an output, provides power to the Neon light module for 
activation of the light. The light module consists of the ignitor, and Neon tube. 



Advantages of Neon Technology 

The use of Neon lighting in an automotive applications provides the following 
advantages: 

• Light failures caused by shock and vibration are reduced due to the lack of a filament 
in the Neon bulb. 

• The average bulb life is improved 

• The design of the Neon bulb housing allows for more flexibility in styling. The Neon 
tube can conform to the contour of the vehicle. 

• Amber Neon allows the use of clear lenses (for vehicle color schemes) 

• Neon technology enhances safety because of the extremely fast ignition time which 
allows the other driver’s more time to react. 


10 

E46 Lighting Systems 












Principle of Operation 


Lamp Monitoring 

Lamps monitoring on the E46 is a function of the LSZ module. The module report bulb 
status to the instrument cluster via the K-bus to allow the display of faulted bulbs to be 
represented in the LED pictogram. 

The lamps are monitored in OFF and ON status, this is referred to as Hot and Cold 
monitoring. 

Cold monitoring in the OFF status takes place by briefly sending a low voltage pulse 
through the lamp filament. The voltage pulse, which is in the millivolt range, does not 
supply enough current to illuminate the lamp filament. But the voltage pulse is sufficient 
enough to allow the circuitry of the LSZ to measure voltage drop. 

Therefore the lamp filament can be monitored in the OFF status. This allows to driver to 
be warned before the lamp is needed. This of course enhances the safety of the driver 
and other road users. 

Hot Monitoring, as it suggests, allows for the monitoring of the lamp filament when active. 
The LSZ measures the voltage drop of the circuit and compares it to stored values. The 
appropriate check control pictogram is illuminated when a faulty lamp is detected. 


HOT MONITORING COLD MONITORING 



Note: Due to the Hot and Cold monitoring capabilities, it is very important to 
use the specified lamps with the correct wattage rating. Using substan¬ 
dard or incorrectly rated lamps could affect the lamp monitoring and 
cause erroneous check control messages. Also, if the battery voltage 
drops below approx. 9.5 V, the lamp status can no longer be monitored or 
output. 


11 

E46 Lighting Systems 
























Emergency (Failsafe Lighting) 

The LSZ provides emergency lighting in the event of a control module failure. If the 
processor of the LSZ control module fails, back up hardware will allow the following 
lighting circuits to function: 

• Low Beam headlights 

• Tail lights 

• Parking Lights 

• Brake Lights 

The headlights and tail lights will come on as soon as KL 15 is switched on, the brake 
will operate when the brake pedal is pressed. 

Direction indicators, hazard warning lights, high beam, headlight flasher, fog lights and 
rear fog lights cannot be switched on. 

Diagnosis is not possible and if in emergency mode, the light switching center must be 
replaced. 



30 
15 

31 


LOW BEAM (LEFT) 
LOW BEAM (RIGHT) 





TAIL LIGHTS 


BRAKE LIGHTS 


0 

<J 


BRAKE LIGHT SWITCH 



12 

E46 Lighting Systems 







































































Home Lighting 

This convenience feature provides lighting for the driver and passengers to leave the 
vehicle and enter their house. 

The feature is switched on by activating the headlight flasher switch after the lights and 
ignition are switched off. 

The feature is switched off after the coded time delay or by switching the ignition switch 
to ON. 


LOW BEAM (LEFT) 




Redundant Storage 

The LSZ serves as the redundant storage module in parallel with the instrument cluster. 
This includes all data used for vehicle identification which is encoded on the assembly 
line. In addition the total mileage and SI data are also stored in the LSZ. 

If either the Cluster or LSZ has to be replaced, the data is taken from the remaining mod¬ 
ule and transferred to the replacement unit. This can only occur ONCE the VIN has been 
entered into the replacement unit. Once the VIN is entered, the module becomes part of 
the vehicle and can not be interchanged with another vehicle. 



13 

E46 Lighting Systems 


















































Crash Control Activation 

During an impact which involves the deployment of the airbags, the MRS module will 
send a “crash telegram” message over the K-Bus. The ZKE system will respond by 
unlocking the doors (if locked) and turn on the interior lights. 

The LSZ will respond by activating the hazard flashers as well. 

Fog Lights 

The LSZ is also for switching on the control circuit of the fog light relay. The fog light 
switch is integrated into the LSZ control switch. As per safety and governmental regula¬ 
tions, the fog lights can only be switched on when the parking or headlights are on. 

Dimmer Circuit (KL58g) 

The LSZ controls the external KL58g circuit via pulse width modulation. The intensity of 
the illumination is controlled my modulating the pulse width which in turn increases or 
decreases circuit current. 

The KL58g circuit is an output of the LSZ and includes the illumination circuit control for 
the IHKA module, ashtray/lighter, and the switches for power windows, sunroof and LSZ 
switch etc. 

Other circuits are controlled by a “KL58g” telegram message over the K-Bus, these 
include the instrument cluster and MFL illumination. 

In addition to the “thumb wheel” control of the dimmer circuit, the illumination is also 
influenced by the phototransistor in the LSZ switch. 

Indicator Lamps 

The LSZ also controls the various indicator lamps via the K-bus. The indicators for the 
directionals, fog lights, high beams and the LED’s in the pictogram are also triggered 
based on K-Bus telegrams from the LSZ. 


14 

E46 Lighting Systems 



Rain/Driving-Light Sensor (RLS) 

The new RLS replaces the familiar Rain 
Sensor already in use. The RLS now has the 
added functions of monitoring ambient light 
conditions to influence the operation of the 
headlights. 

The driving lights (headlights) are turned on 
and off automatically based on input from the 
RLS depending upon ambient light conditions. 

The new RLS contains two additional optical 
sensors have been integrated in the 
sensor housing. The RLS continues to use the 
same rain sensing electronics as used on the 
previous AIC system. The two additional light 
sensors are used for headlight operation. 

The two sensors have the following function: 

• Sensor number 1 is a surrounding-light sensor that records the light intensity in a 
wide angle above the vehicle. 

• Sensor number 2 is a frontal-light sensor that records the light intensity in a narrow 
angle in in front of the vehicle. A processor measures and determines which sensor 
is switched on. 

The following conditions are monitored by the (RLS): 

• Dawn/dusk 

• Darkness 

• Driving through a tunnel 

• Precipitation such as rain or snow 

Note: When the wiper switch is in the intermittent position, The RLS knows the switch is 
on by the freguency of the windshield wipers. (The frequency for the intermittent wipers 
is 15 wiping cycles per minute. If the wiper switch is in position I or II the RLS knows the 
wipers are switched on permanently. 

If wiper switch condition is on, The RLS in the E46 transmits the information thru the 
K-bus to the central light switch. (LSZ). 

If the RLS switch position(“A”) on the LSZ has been selected, the exterior and instru¬ 
ment lights are activated by the LSZ under the following conditions: 

• One of the above RLS conditions is satisfied. 

• The front fog lights are switched on. 



15 

E46 Lighting Systems 


1 



Light switch on LSZ 

(shown in “A” position) 


2. Sensor #2 


Note: If the LSZ front fog light is switched on and one of the above mentioned 
RLS conditions is satisfied, the exterior lights will only go out after the 
front fog lights have been turned off. 

In addition, the lights are switched on in the event of the following malfunctions. 

• The RLS has detected a sensor fault. 

• Communication between the RLS and the LSZ is disturbed. 

The following lights are switched by the LSZ: 

• Terminal R turns on the parking light, the low beam headlight, the license plate light 
and the instrument lights. 

• Terminal 15 turns on the parking light, the low beam headlights, the license plate 
light. In order to switch the parking light on the LSZ switch must be set to parking 
light position on. 

• With the ignition switch in the “0” position, the exterior and instrument lights are 
switched off. 

The sensitivity of the RLS can be adjusted by means of the car memory function. 



During bad weather and fog the driver must switch on the 
fog lights manually. The automatic driving-light control 
will not turn the fog lights on during bad weather 
conditions. 


16 

E46 Lighting Systems 





Xenon Headlight Systems 

In order to improve night time driving visibility, Xenon 
headlight systems were developed for the automotive 
industry. Xenon technology is also referred to as High 
Intensity Discharge lighting or HID. 

For BMW vehicle Xenon technology was first intro¬ 
duced to the US market in 1993 on the E32 750iL. 
Since this time Xenon technology has evolved and 
spread throughout the model lineup. 

The first thing noticed about Xenon lamps is the 
blue/white appearance of the headlights. 



There are numerous benefits to Xenon headlights and these include: 

• Longer bulb life - typically the xenon bulbs will last from 3 to 5 times longer than 
conventional halogen bulbs. 

• Increased light output - Xenon headlights produce 2.5 to 3 times more light (lumens) 
than halogen headlights. 

• Blue/white light - The blue/white light emitted from Xenon headlights simulates a 
natural daylight appearance as opposed to the yellowish light from halogen bulbs. 
The light color of a light source is measured in color temperature (do not confuse 
with thermal temperature). Color temperature is measured in Kelvins (K). The 
higher the number, the whiter the light appears to be. 

- Natural daylight = 4,500 to 5000 K 

- Xenon headlights = 4,000 to 4,500 K 

- Halogen headlights = 3,200 K (yellow) 

• Better driving visibility - the combination of higher lumens and color temperature 
provides a superior lighting source. The beam is wider and brighter in front of the 
vehicle than conventional halogen bulbs improving safety and driver comfort. 

XENON HALOGEN 



17 

E46 Lighting Systems 



























































































































































































































































































LWR 


On vehicles equipped with Xenon headlights systems, it is necessary to prevent the light 
beam from affecting oncoming traffic. The Headlight Beam Throw Control (LWR) system 
is used to adjust the headlights horizontally (on a vertical plane). The is accomplished by 
using stepper motors in the headlight assembly. 

The stepper motors are controlled by the LWR control module based on inputs from front 
and rear mounted ride level sensors. 

As the vehicle suspension is loaded by driving or by passengers and cargo, the LWR 
module corrects the headlight position. This ensures the optimum headlight adjustment. 

Version Identification 

Xenon systems on BMW vehicles are supplied by two manufacturers - Bosch and Hella. 
These systems vary between models. 

The first version system on the E38 is referred to as Generation 2.1 an can be identified 
by the flat bottom edge on the headlight housing. 

The Generation 3 system has been introduced on the 1999 model year E38 and can be 
identified by the rounded (scalloped) edge of the headlight assembly. 

Headlight Replacement Parts 

In previous model years, individual replacement parts were not available for headlight 
assemblies. This was due to the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) relat¬ 
ing to the pitting or corrosion of the reflector components in non-sealed beam headlight 
assemblies. 


BMW has submitted corrosion test data for headlight components which have passed the 
FMVSS providing the availability of headlight assembly spare parts. This approval has 
been given for all Bosch headlight assemblies (including halogen). 


Vehicle 

Model 

Model 

Year 

Manufacturer/Version 

LWR 

(Yes/No) 

Individual 
replacement 
parts availability 

E32 (750il_) 

93-94 

Hella (Light & Control module) 

Generation 1 

No 

No 

E38 (750il_) 

95-98 

Bosch (Light & Control module) 

Generation 2.1 

No 

Yes 

E38 (All) 

99-01 

Bosch (light) and Hella (control module) 
Generation 3 

Yes 

Yes 

E39 (All) 

99-02 

Hella 

Generation 3 

Yes 

No 

E46 

99- 

Bosch Light and Control Module 

Yes 

Yes 


18 

E46 Lighting Systems 



































Xenon High Intensity Discharge Bulbs 

Xenon bulbs are identified as D2-S. Xenon bulbs illuminate when an arc of electrical 
current is established between two electrodes in the bulb. The xenon gas sealed in 
the bulb reacts to the electrical excitation and head generated by the current flow. 

The distinct blue/white light is the result of the xenon gas reacting to the controlled 
current flow. 

Phases of Bulb Operation 

• Starting phase - the bulb requires an initial high voltage pulse of 18-25kV to estab¬ 
lish the arc. 

• Warm up phase - Once the arc is established, the power supply to the bulb is regu¬ 
lated to 2.6 amps generating a lamp output of 75 watts. This is the period of 
operation where the xenon gas begins to brightly illuminate. The warm up phase 
stabilizes the environment in the bulb ensuring continual current flow across the two 
electrodes. 

• Continual phase - once the warm up phase is completed, the system switches to a 
continuous mode of operation. The supply voltage for the bulb is reduced and the 
operation power required for continual bulb illumination is reduced to 35 watts which 
is less than a conventional halogen bulb. 

Functional Description 

To regulate the power supply to the bulbs, additional components are required. The 
xenon control modules (1 per light) receive operating power from the lighting control 
module ( LSZ E46) when the headlights are switched on. 

The xenon control modules provide the regulated power supply to illuminate the bulbs 
through their phases of operation. The igniters establish the electric arcs. Integral coils 
generate the initial high voltage starting pulses from the control module provided starting 
voltage. Thereafter they provide a closed circuit for the regulated power output from the 
control modules. 



+ 




LEFT 



XENON 



CONTROL 

LCM 


MODULE 

(E38/E39 

LSZ 

(E46) 




RIGHT 

XENON 




CONTROL 

MODULE 


LEFT 

IGNITER 


RIGHT 

IGNITER 



19 

E46 Lighting Systems 













































Xenon Bulb Monitoring 

Xenon bulb function is monitored by the LSZ. The bulbs are only “hot” monitored. Cold 
monitoring is not possible since the lighting control module is not in direct control of the 
xenon bulb. For this reason cold monitoring for low beam headlights is encoded off in the 
lighting control module for Xenon headlight equipped vehicle. 

The lighting control module detects xenon bulb failure via a reduction in current flow to 
the xenon control module. When a bulb fails, the xenon control module’s current con¬ 
sumption drops to 60mA indicating unsuccessful xenon bulb illumination. The lighting 
control module then posts the appropriate matrix display message or LED illumination in 
the Check Control Pictogram display of the E46 and E39 Low Instrument Clusters. 


Xenon Headlight Assembly Components 


Xenon Control Module Cover 


Xenon Control Module 


H-7 Bulb (halogen high beam 


LWR Stepper motor 


Gasket Seal 



Rubber boot cover 


Ignites 


D-2S Xenon Bulb (low beam 


Light frame assembly 


Replaceable lens cover 


20 

E46 Lighting Systems 



Bi-Xenon Headlights 

At BMW, the bi-xenon light now replaces the conventional headlight with HI lamp bulb. 

In contrast to the previous Xenon headlamp design, the new Bi-Xenon headlight allows for 
low beam and high beam operation from the same lamp. 

The previous system only used a conventional halogen bulb for the high beam. The 
Bi-Xenon system still utilizes the halogen high beam, but only for “flash-to-pass”. 

The bi-Xenon consists of a new D2S/R lamp. An electromagnetic shutter is used to 
direct the light beam in either “low beam” or “high beam” mode. During low beam 
operation, the shutter covers a part of the reflector assembly which reduces the light 
intensity and re-directs the beam to a lower angle to avoid blinding oncoming traffic. 

In the case of high beam, the halogen lamps are supplemented by an enlargement of the 
focus angle of the xenon driving light. To create the high beam distribution, the shutter 
again re-directs the beam to a higher angle. 

As mentioned previously, the headlight flasher (flash to pass) still uses the halogen bulbs. 

The bi-xenon light does not have self-diagnosis capabilities. In automatically running test 
modules, the functionality of the components is tested. In the event of a fault, fault codes 
are stored in the fault memory. Status inquiries on the individual functions can be 
activated in the control-module functions. 



21 

E46 Lighting Systems 









Components 

Relevant safety and accident prevention regulations must be observed when conducting 
all tests and work on the xenon light system. The xenon light headlight system carries 
dangerous high voltages! 

Bi-Xenon Headlight 

Bi-xenon headlights consist of headlights with D2S/R bulbs (bulb with a xenon gas 
charge) an electronic control facility (ignition device and control module) 



Electrical control facility for bi-xenon headlights 

The electronic control facilities consist of bi-xenon control module and bi-xenon ignition 
device. The ignition unit generates the high voltage to initiate the arc needed to ignite the 
D2S/R bulb. 


22 

E46 Lighting Systems 






Diagnosis 

Xenon control modules are not connected to the diagnostic link. However, the vehicle 
specific Lighting Control Module (E38/E39 - LCM or E46 - LSZ) does incorporate xenon 
headlight specific diagnosis up to the xenon control module. 

Xenon Headlight Testing 

Warning: Xenon headlight control systems generate high output voltage. Prior to headlight 
removal or testing observe the vehicle warning labels and be cautious by following safe¬ 
guards to prevent accidental injury. 

All xenon headlight systems (control module, Ignites and bulb) can be tested with Special 
Test Adapter (P/N 90 88 6 631 000) in conjunction with the DIS Measurement System 
only. 

Refer to SI 04 33 96 for detailed adapter introductory information. 

The DIS Measuring System includes all of the cable connection information and test 
procedures in the “Xenon Preset Measurement”. 

The test provides an automatic oscilloscope setup and provides conclusive “defective/not 
defective” test results. 

Xenon Headlight SI/TRI Bulletin 

• SI 6308 98: Xenon Headlamp Reduced Service Life - 1999 740iL. This bulletin 

address a small group of possibly defective xenon control modules. This bulletin 
uses the special test adapter and specific oscilloscope setup procedures to check 
the xenon control module output. 

• SI 63 02 98: E39 Headlight Alignment Procedure 

• SI 63 02 93: Xenon Headlights - Color, Fuses, Warranty 

• TRI 63 01 92: Gas Discharge Xenon Low Beam Headlights. 


23 

E46 Lighting Systems 



Adaptive Headlights (AHL) 

The AHL system also referred to as Adaptive Light Control (ALC) is available on the E46 
from 2003. This system is only available with the optional Bi-Xenon headlights. 

The AHL system allows the headlight to move in a vertical plane which follows the move¬ 
ment of the vehicle. In a turn, the roadway is illuminated completely. This improves visi¬ 
bility in turns and allows for increased safety. 

The AHL system also takes over the functions of LWR by adjusting the headlights in a 
horizontal plane. This prevents the Xenon lights from blinding oncoming traffic. 



aratGjiz 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Ride level sensor (fr/rr) 

7 

RLS 

2 

Instrument cluster 

8 

LSZ 

3 

DISplus 

9 

AHL control unit 

4 

Brake light switch 

10 

Stepper motor for Vertical movement R/S 

5 

DSC 

11 

Stepper motor for Vertical movement L/S 

6 

Steering angle sensor 




24 

E46 Lighting Systems 
































































The AHL system adjust the headlights up to 15 degrees for the light on the outside of 
the turn and 7 degrees for the light on the inside of the turn. These adjustments are 
based on input from the steering angle sensor, the road speed (from DSC) and the yaw 
rate input (also from DSC). 



02422_02 

Each headlight assembly contains 2 stepper motors for headlight movement. One 
stepper motor is responsible for vertical movement for the LWS functions. The other is 
for the horizontal movement for the AHL functions. 

The Stepper Motor Controller, located in each headlight assembly, is responsible for the 
stepper motor functions. 

The AHL module is located in the control module carrier behind the glovebox. 


25 

E46 Lighting Systems 


























































































































Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, diagnose the concern listed below. 
Complete this worksheet using the “Complaint, Cause and Correction” format. 


Vehicle:_ Chassis #: _ Production Date: 

Complaint:_ 


Cause: 


Correction: 


26 

E46 Lighting Systems 




Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

What is different regarding the LSZ in 2002? 


Explain the difference between “Hot” and “Cold” monitoring: 


What are some of the advantages of Neon technology? 


What are the differences/advantages of Bi-xenon headlights as compared to the 
previous Xenon technology? 


What occurs when the LSZ is in “Emergency Mode” (failsafe)? 


27 

E46 Lighting Systems 





























6 . 


Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

Explain the “Home Lighting” feature: 



7. What is the purpose of LWR? 


8. What influence does the RLS have on headlight operation? 


28 

E46 Lighting Systems 




















