Table of Contents 

E46 Central Body Electronics 

Subject Page 

Central Body Electronics (ZKE V).5 

Windshield Wiping and Washing .7 

Wiping Stages .8 

Single Wipe .8 

Intermittent Wipe .8 

Slow (I) and Fast (II).8 

Windshield Washing.8 

Automatic Interval Control (Rain Sensing Wipers).10 

Components.10 

Theory of Operation .11 

Rain Sensor Function.13 

Rain Sensor Control Module Adaptation .14 

Service Note .14 

Windshield Wiper Failsafe Operation .14 

Windshield Wiper System Diagnosis .14 

Rain/Driving-Light Sensor (RLS).15 

Sport Wagon Rear Wiper/Wash System.17 

Rear Wiper Operation (Sportwagon) .18 

Intermittent Wiper Interval Programming (Rear Wiper) .18 

Continuous wiping .18 

Rear window washing .18 

Central Locking.24 

System Features .24 

E46 Convertible Central Locking .26 

E46 Sportwagon Central Locking .27 

Tailgate and Window Locking System.27 

Driver’s Door Lock Actuator .28 

Door Contact Hall Sensor .31 

Lock Actuator Control.32 

Trunk Lid Switch Contacts .33 

Central Locking Button.34 

Interior Trunk Release Button .34 

Crash Signalling .34 

Remote RF (Keyless) Entry .35 

Remote Key Initialization .37 

LED Status.37 

FZV Key Test.37 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 








































Subject Page 

Model Year 2000 FZV Key.38 

Remote Key Initialization.39 

FZV Key Rechargeable Battery.39 

Power Windows (Sedan, Coupe and Sportwagon).42 

Power Windows (Convertible).44 

Anti-Trap Protection (from 9/03) .45 

Components.47 

New Style Window Switches .47 

Rear Window Child Lockout Switch .47 

Service Note (Window Switch).48 

Power Window Motors.48 

Window Motor Limit Stop Function.48 

Anti-Trap Detection (Sedan, Coupe and Sportwagon).49 

Convenience Opening/Closing.49 

Sunroof.50 

Sunroof Switch.50 

Sunroof Motor Module (SHD).51 

Initialization (to 9/01) .51 

Procedure.51 

Anti-Trap Feature .52 

SHD Self Diagnosis.52 

Sunroof Fault Response Characteristics.52 

Emergency Sunroof Operation.52 

Interior Lighting .53 

Components.53 

Door Contacts.53 

Interior Light Unit Assemblies.54 

Front seat interior/map light unit .54 

Rear seat interior/reading light units .54 

Front footwelI lights .54 

Automatic Control Function .55 

Anti-Theft (DWA) System.60 

Components.61 

Door Contacts.61 

Trunk Lid Switch Contacts.61 

Trunk Lock Key Position Switch .61 

Hood Contact Switch .62 

DWA LED .62 

Tilt Sensor.63 

Interior Protection Sensor (UIS) .64 

Alarm Siren.65 

DWA Arming/Disarming.66 

Emergency Disarming.66 

Alarm Indication.67 

DWA LED Status.67 
















































Subject Page 

Front Power Seats .68 

Seat Controls .68 

Passenger Seat (without memory).69 

Seat Position Motors .70 

Seat Motor Activation.71 

Driver’s Seat Adjustment .71 

Passenger Seat Adjustment.71 

Driver’s Seat Memory Function.72 

Memory Recall Modes of Operation.72 

Driver’s Seat Memory (Car Memory Influence).73 

Power Seat Diagnosis .73 

E46 Convertible Front Seats.74 

Seat System Components .74 

Seat Integrated Belt System .74 

Seat Belt Assembly.75 

Comfort Entry Aid .76 

E46 Convertible Seat Memory System.77 

System Components .77 

System Operation .77 

Memory Seat IPO .78 

Passenger Seat Memory IPO .79 

Mirror Memory System (E46iC) .80 

Components.80 

System Operation .80 

Outside Mirror Control E46 (late production).82 

Mirror System Components .83 

Mirror Operation .83 

Optional Seat Pleating (1999 Model Year) .84 

Seat Heating Switch .84 

Carbon Fiber Heating Pads .85 

Diagnosis.85 

Center Console Switch Center (SZM).86 

Seat Heating Operation.86 

SZM Monitoring of Seat Heating .87 

Optional Seat Back Lumbar Support.89 

Operation .89 

Diagnosis .89 

Dual Power/Heated Outside Mirrors.90 

Windshield Washer Nozzle Jet Heaters .90 

Consumer Cutoff.91 

Battery Status.92 

Diagnosis.92 













































E46 Central Body Electronics 


Model: E46 

Production: From Start of Production 

■micnure 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the operation of ZKE V 

• Identify and locate ZKE V components 

• Diagnose ZVE V systems 


4 

E46 Central Body Electronics 


Central Body Electronics (ZKE V) 

The ZKE V system is a further development of the previous ZKE systems used on past 
BMW models. Many of the features and functions of ZKE V are familiar and operate the 
same as in the past. However, there are some refinements and functional differences. 

The following functions are directly controlled by the General Module (GMV): 

• Windshield wiping/washing • Central locking (including trunk/tailgate) 

• FZV Keyless entry • Power window operation 

• Interior Lighting • Optional DWA alarm system 

• Consumer cutoff/sleep mode • Car and Key memory functions 

The following functions are part of the ZKE system, but are not directly controlled 

by the GM V: 

• Automatic Interval Control (AIC - Rain Sensor) 

• Sunroof Operation (SHD) 

• Driver’s seat electrical adjustment with memory (Seat memory on K-Bus) 

• Passenger seat electrical adjustment 

• Comfort entry aid (convertible only) 

• Seat heating 

• Side view mirrors (memory/adjustment/heating) 

ZKE V includes the following features: 

• Similar to the E36 GM IV, the E46 GM V controls it’s respective peripheral compo¬ 
nents directly (no P Bus). It does however communicate with other pertinent control 
modules via the K-Bus. 

• The Central Locking system uses a door lock actuator with hall effect sensors. 

• The GM V is responsible for the Key Memory feature. It provides the added conve¬ 
nience of identifying users of the vehicle. Whenever the vehicle is locked or 
unlocked via the FZV key less entry system, a unique key identification signal 

(key number) is transmitted to the General Module. 

The key identification signal alerts the GM V to communicate with other control sys¬ 
tems over the K Bus to store (when locked) or reset (when unlocked) certain driver 
adjustable settings for the driver using the specific key. The GM also resets certain 
driver adjustable settings that it controls directly. 


5 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




The E46 Body Electronics system control modules are: 

• General Module V: main controller for ZKE functions. The GM V communicates with 
other vehicle control modules via the K-Bus. 

• Seat Memory Module - SM: Located in the driver’s seat base, the SM controls and 
memorizes the driver’s seat position(s). The SM communicates with the GM Vvia 
the K-Bus. 

• Sunroof Module - SHD: Located above the rearview mirror, the sunroof module 
controls it’s integral sunroof motor as on previous systems. The SHD communicates 
with the GM V via the K-Bus. 



DWA ALARM 
SIREN (OPTIONAL) 

FZV SIGNAL VIA THE 
ANTENNNA AMPLIFIER 

w 



GM V LOCATED IN CARRIER 
FORWARD OF GLOVE BOX 



FZV 

General 

DWA 

(optional) 

Module W 




DOOR LOCK & FUEL 
FLAP ACTUATORS 


<M> 

<M> WINDOW MOTORS 


INTERIOR LIGHTING 





Sunroof Motor 
Module - SHD 


Optional Rain 
Sensor (AIC) 



Seat Memory 
Module - SM 



6 

E46 Central Body Electronics 







































Windshield Wiping and Washing 

• All wiping/washing functions are controlled by 
the GM. 

• The E46 Windshield Wiping System may be 
optionally eguipped with a Rain Sensor. This 
added function detects rain drops on the wind¬ 
shield and automatically activates the wipers in 
the intermittent mode if the stalk switch is in the 
intermittent position. 

• Output control of the wiper motor is through a 
double contact relay. The relay is located in the 
engine compartment E-box and is tan in color. 



• The system has four wiping stages and four interval wiping speeds. The wiping 
stage inputs are coded signals through a two wire link with a combination of high/low 
inputs as on previous systems. 



7 

E46 Central Body Electronics 










































Wiping Stages 
Single Wipe 

Holding the wiper switch down in the single position provides a ground signal to activate 
the slow speed circuit providing wiper operation until the switch is released. 

Intermittent Wipe 

The intermittent wiping time inputs are provided by a potentiometer mounted in the 
wiper stalk switch. 

• The intermittent wiping intervals are dependent on the road speed. 

• As road speed increases, the wiping interval delay is decreased. 

Note: If the vehicle is equipped with AIC (Rain Sensing Wipers), the intermit¬ 
tent setting will be used to adjust the sensitivity of AIC. The chart below 
only applies to vehicles which are not equipped with AIC (Rain Sensor 
or RLS). 


Thumbwheel 

Position 

Vehicle Speed in Miles per Hour 

<4 

5-22 

23-45 

46-60 

61-87 

>87 


Wiper Time Delay in Seconds - Based on wiper setting 1 -4 

1 

26 

19 

17 

15 

15 

13 

2 

17 

12 

11 

10 

9 

7 

3 

10 

6 

6 

5 

4 

3 

4 

5 

3 

3 

2 

2 

2 


Slow (I) and Fast (II) 

The stage I and stage II wiping speeds are also affected by road speed. The factory 
encoded settings are the same as previous systems. Stage I automatically switches 
to intermittent when the vehicle is stopped 

Note: This feature is known as “Switch back when stationary” and may 
be activated or de-activated in Car and Key Memory (CKM). 

Windshield Washing 

Pulling the windshield wiper switch rearward closes the “windshield wash” contacts and 
provides a switched ground input to the GM. The GM activates the windshield washer 
pump directly via a final stage transistor. 


8 

E46 Central Body Electronics 







































Wiper System Overview 


Switch Logic 

1 

2 

Single Wipe 

H 

L 

Intermittent Wipe 

L 

H 

Slow Wipe (Stage 1) 

H 

L 

Fast Wipe (Stage II) 

L 

L 


KL R KL 30 


KL 30 


WIPER/ “ R 
WASHER “ ^T\ rP 

SWITCH 1 ( 1 


WINDSHIELD 

WIPER 

DOUBLE 

RELAY 





\ 

a 







-n 

RAIN 




SENSOR 

(OPTIONAL) 




y 


KL 31 • 


9 

E46 Central Body Electronics 






























































Automatic Interval Control (Rain Sensing Wipers) 

The Windshield Wiping System will also be available with an optionally equipped Rain 
Sensor. The Rain Sensor provides added driver convenience and enhances safety by 
automatically activating the intermittent function of the windshield wipers when water 
droplets are detected on the windshield. 



Components 

The rain sensor unit is mounted on the top center area of the interior windshield surface 
directly behind the rearview mirror. The unit contains: 

• Optical Prism Body: This portion of the unit is permanently fixed to the wind¬ 
shield. It can not be removed and can only be replaced with a replacement wind¬ 
shield. 

The prism body has a reflective surface that faces the back of the windshield. The 
prism body also acts as the windshield mount for the Rain Sensor Control Module. 

• Rain Sensor Control Module: The control module incorporates the following; 

-Infra Red Emitter and Detector Diodes 

-Optics heater (prevents condensation from forming on the diodes and prism) 
-Optics evaluation and control electronics 

The control module requires four signals for operation; KL R, KL 31, Windshield Wiper 
Motor Park Signal Feedback and K Bus interface. 


10 

E46 Central Body Electronics 


KLR 


OPTICAL 

PRISM 



RAIN 



► ( ACTIVATE^ 

t \WIPERS J 



KL 31 


T 

V 


WIPER 

MOTOR 



Theory of Operation 

The optical infra red portion of the sensor operates by the principle of refraction (bending 
of a light ray). The rain sensor control module activates the emitter diode which sends a 
beam of infra red light through the windshield on an angle. The set angle is important 
because it provides the beam with a calculated reflective path back to the detector diode. 

The beam is reflected back into the windshield due to the density difference of the glass 
compared with the ambient air on the outside surface of the glass. When the windshield 
is clean (no rain drops, moisture or dirt) the detector diode receives 100% of the infra red 
light that the was sent by the emitter. With this condition, the rain sensor evaluation elec¬ 
tronics determines the windshield is free of rain drops. 



11 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





























The density of water is closer to that of glass than air. When rain starts to accumulate in 
the sensor monitoring area, it causes part of the infra red beam to extend past the outside 
surface of the glass and into the rain drop. When this occurs, the beam is refracted and 
only part of the beam returns to the detector diode. 

The rain sensor evaluation electronics determines the windshield has a few rain drops 
(or dirt) on it. 



The intensity of the returned infra red beam diminishes proportionally with an increase of 
water droplets. The rain sensor control module generates a signal proportionate to the 
amount of rain on the windshield and broadcasts it to the GM V via the K-Bus. 

The GM V activates the intermittent wipe cycle if the windshield wiper stalk switch is in 
the intermittent position. It also adjusts the freguency of wiping the windshield depend¬ 
ing on the four position thumb wheel. 


12 

E46 Central Body Electronics 








Rain Sensor Function 

The rain sensor is online as soon as it receives KL R operating power. 

• When the windshield wiper stalk switch is placed in the intermittent position the GM 
signals the rain sensor control module via the K Bus of the request for intermittent 
wiping and the position of the knurled wheel (sensitivity). 

• As an acknowledgement, the rain sensor sends a command via the K Bus to activate 
the wiper motor. If more than 12 seconds pass before the GM receives the 
acknowledgement, the GM concludes the rain sensor has a defect and operates the 
intermittent wipe function as a system not equipped with a rain sensor. The wiper 
intermittent cycling is based solely on the knurled wheel setting. 

• The rain sensor continuously monitors the windshield for rain accumulation and sig¬ 
nals the GM to activate the wipers based on the knurled wheel position and how fast 
the rain accumulates on the windshield. 

• The knurled wheel position signal (1 -4) via the K-Bus informs the rain sensor of the 
selected level of sensitivity. 

- Position 1 (least sensitive) delays the wiper activation signal. 

- Position 4 (most sensitive) sends the wiper activation signal to the GM sooner. 

• When the wiper motor park contacts signal the GM of the wiper arm position, the 
signal is simultaneously sent to the rain sensor as an indication that the windshield 
has been cleared of water drops and causes the rain sensor to reset the sensitivity 
delay timer back to 0. 

• Depending on the intensity of the rain the wipers will be operated continuously as if 
set in the normal wiper stalk switch position regardless of the knurled wheel setting. 
For this reason, the vehicle speed signal on the K-Bus is not utilized on rain sensor 
equipped wiper systems. 

• If the ignition switch is turned off with the wiper switch in the intermittent position, 
the rain sensor will only become active after the ignition is switched back on and one 
of the following occurs: 

- The stalk switch is moved from the intermittent position and then back. 

- The knurled wheel setting is adjusted. 

- The wash function is activated. 

The reason behind this switching strategy, is to have the driver make a conscious 

decision to activate the system. 


13 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Rain Sensor Control Module Adaptation 

The rain sensor control module adapts to the optics system environment as follows: 

• Windshield Aging - As the vehicle ages the possibility of stone chipping in the rain 
sensors monitoring area may occur which will cause a loss of light in the optics 
system. 

The control module adapts for loss of light based on the intensity of the detected 
infra red light with a cleared windshield (wiper motor park signal). Therefore, the rain 
sensors function is not adversely affected due to windshield aging. 

• Dirty Windows: The rain sensor adaptation reacts less sensitively to a dirty wind¬ 
shield (dirt, road salt, wax residue) after a completed wipe cycle. A dirty windshield 
has a film on it that diminishes the ability of the infra red to refract into present water 
droplets. This causes a delay in the rain sensor detection capabilities which length¬ 
ens the time intervals on an intermittent wipe. 

Service Note 

For vehicle equipped with the rain sensor system (AIC). Make sure the wiper blades are in 
perfect condition. Only use window cleaner to clean the windows. Dirty windows can 
cause the rain sensor control module to set a fault due to the end limits of its adaptation 
abilities. 


Windshield Wiper Failsafe Operation 

The GM provides failsafe operation of the wiper system if faults are detected with any of 
the following input signals: 


Function 

Faulted Input Detected 

Failsafe Function 

Intermittent Wipe 

Short or open circuit of the knurled 
wheel signal 

Delay value for setting 3 is used 

Intermittent wipe with rain sensor 
(AIC) 

Faulted rain sensor or K-Bus signal 
corrupt 

Normal intermittent wipe 
implemented 

Wiper motor not functional moving 

Park contact feedback signal takes 
longer than 16 seconds 

Wiper motor control deactivated 
for 3 minutes. 


Windshield Wiper System Diagnosis 

The GM monitors the circuits of the wiper potentiometer, wiper motor, double relay, the 
windshield washer pump and terminal 30. The DIS or GT-1 provide fault symptom trou¬ 
bleshooting following the new E46 Diagnostic concept as well as Status and component 
activation functions. 


14 

E46 Central Body Electronics 

















Rain/Driving-Light Sensor (RLS) 

As of the 2002 model year, the new Rain and Light sensor was introduced to the E46 
and other models. The driving lights are turned on and off automatically with the RLS 
depending on the outside light conditions around the car. 



Two additional optical sensors have been integrated in the housing of the Automatic 

Interval Control (AIC) for the RLS. The AIC controls the wiper intervals. 

The two sensors have the following function: 

• Sensor number 1 is a surrounding-light sensor that records the light intensity in a 
wide angle above the vehicle. 

• Sensor number 2 is a frontal-light sensor that records the light intensity in a narrow 
angle in in front of the vehicle. A processor measures and determines which sensor 
is switched on. 

The following conditions are monitored by the (RLS): 

• Dawn/dusk 

• Darkness 

• Driving through a tunnel 

• Precipitation such as rain or snow 

Note: When the wiper switch is in the intermittent position, The RLS can 
detect the switch position by the frequency of the windshield wipers. 
(The frequency for the intermittent wipers is 15 wiping cycles per 
minute. If the wiper switch is in position I or II the RLS can determine 
this by the constant wiping frequency. 


15 

E46 Central Body Electronics 






If wiper switch condition is on, The RLS in the E46 transmits the information thru the 
K-Bus to the central light switch. (LSZ). 


Headlight switch in RLS position 



If the RLS switch position on the LSZ has been selected, the exterior and instrument 

lights are activated by the LSZ under the following conditions: 

• One of the above RLS conditions is satisfied. 

• The front fog lights are switched on. 

Note: If the LSZ front fog light is switched on and one of the above mentioned 
RLS conditions is satisfied, the exterior lights will only go out after the 
front fog lights have been turned off. 

In addition, the lights are switched on in the event of the following malfunctions. 

• The RLS has detected a sensor fault. 

• Communication between the RLS and the LSZ is disturbed. 

The following lights are switched by the LSZ: 

• Terminal R turns on the parking light, the low beam headlight, the license plate light 
and the instrument lights. 

• Terminal 15 turns on the parking light, the low beam headlights, the license plate 
light. In order to switch the parking light on the LSZ switch must be set to parking 
light position on. 

• With the ignition switch in the “0” position, the exterior and instrument lights are 
switched off. 

The sensitivity of the RLS can be adjusted by means of the car memory function. 



During bad weather and fog the driver must switch on the 
fog lights manually. The automatic driving-light control 
will not turn the fog lights on during bad weather condi¬ 
tions. 


16 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





Sport Wagon Rear Wiper/Wash System 

The rear wiper/washer a function of the ZKE system and follows the basic operational 
sequences of the E39 Sport Wagon” wiper system. The rear wiper motor and gear 
assembly is mounted in the tail gate through insulating bushing to prevent operation 
noises from being transmitted into the body’s interior. 



GEAR DRIVE 


MOTOR 


WIPER ARM 
DRIVE SHAFT 


SPRING LOADED 
DRIVE PIN 
(drive wheel to 
wiper arm drive shaft) 


WIPER 

ARM WIPER 
ARM 
NUT 


SPRING 

WASHER 


DRIVE WHEEL 

CONTROL 
MODULE 


PER 
BASE 
HOUSING 
UT 


The wiper pivot bearing, wiper shaft and wiper arm are mounted on the rear window. A 
mechanical coupling is used to connect the two components as on the E39 wagon. 



17 

E46 Central Body Electronics 






Rear Wiper Operation (Sportwagon) 

Operation of the rear wiper/washer is controlled from the wiper stalk switch on the steer¬ 
ing column. The scope of operation is the similar to the E39 wagon as follows: 

• Intermittent Wipe - Standard operation 

• Programmed Intermittent Wipe 

• Continuous Wipe 

• Washing Cycle 

Pressing the wiper stalk switch forward to the first detent activates the rear wiper in the 
intermittent mode. The timed interval is approximately 7 seconds. The full sweep and 
park positions of the wiper arm are recognized by two hall sensors on the motor gear 
assembly. If the wiper is switched OFF, the wiper arm will return to the park position. 

Intermittent Wiper Interval Programming (Rear Wiper) 

The programming for the interval functions of the rear wiper is as follows: 

• Briefly switch the wiper ON/Off. 

• Wait the desired interval time. 

• Switch the wiper back ON again 

• The OFF time will be the programmed interval - up to approximately 30 seconds. 

Continuous wiping 

Continuous wiping is activated any time the transmission is shifted into reverse. The rear 
wiping module receives the reverse signal from the LSZ for continuous wiping activation. 

Rear window washing 

Rear window washing is activated by pressing the stalk switch forward past the wiping 
detent. The washer cycle is as follows: 

• Wash cycle 1 - washer pump is switched ON for 1.5 seconds. The wiper activation 
starts 1 second later. 

• Wash cycle 2 - washer pump is switched ON for .5 seconds - after a delay of of .8 
seconds. Wiper continues to operate. 

• Wash cycle 3 - washer pump is switched ON for .5 seconds - after a delay of .8 
seconds. This is followed by two wipe dry cycles. 

NOTE: The wiper will remain in the intermittent wiping mode after washing 
until wiper is switched off. 


18 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



E46 Sportwagon RearWiper/Washer IPO 


REAR 

WASH 



MODULE/MOTOR 


19 

E46 Central Body Electronics 

































Workshop Exercise - Wiper Systems 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, perform a complete vehicle short test. 
Locate the following wiper system components: 

Wiper motor _ 

Wiper double relay _ 

Rain Sensor (or RLS)_ 

Locate the General Module, and using the proper test cables and adapters, perform 
the following tests. 

Locate the park contact signal from the wiper motor. Using a fused jumper, ground 
the park contact signal with the wipers operational on low speed. 

What is observed with the park signal grounded? (i.e. functionality, fault codes etc.) 


Locate the wiper switch input(s) to the GM. Using the multimeter functions of the 
diagnostic equipment, use MFK 1 and 2 to measure both signal inputs simultaneous¬ 
ly and record voltage results below. 


Wiper Switch Position 

Voltage - Input 1 

Voltage - Input 2 

Single Wipe 

Volts 

Volts 

Intermittent Wipe 

Volts 

Volts 

Slow Speed (Stage 1) 

Volts 

Volts 

Fast Speed (Stage 2) 

Volts 

Volts 


20 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





















Workshop Exercise - Wiper Systems 


Locate the intermittent switch input to the GM. Use the multimeter function of the 
diagnostic equipment to measure the input voltage. Move the intermittent switch 
through all positions are record voltage below. 


Intermittent Switch Position 

Intermittent Voltage Input 

Position 1 

Volts 

Position 2 

Volts 

Position 3 

Volts 

Position 4 

Volts 


Locate Rain Sensor (or RLS) connection at sensor and disconnect sensor from 
K-Bus. Operate wipers in intermittent mode. 

What is observed regarding wiper functionality and possible fault codes? 


Notes: 


21 

E46 Central Body Electronics 
















^j ji Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. How does road speed influence wiper operation? 


2. On the E46 Sportwagon, what is the “reverse gear” input to the rear wiper module 
used for? 


3. What is the difference between the Rain Sensor and RLS? 


4. On an Rain Sensor eguipped vehicle, what happens to the wiper operation when 
the K-Bus is faulted? 


5. Explain the “Coded Input” of the wiper switch to the GM: 


22 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




























^j ji Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

6. What components make up the Rain Sensor? 


7. How can the sensitivity of the RLS be controlled? 


8. Explain how the rear intermittent wipers are programmed on the Sportwagon? 


Note: 


23 

E46 Central Body Electronics 
































Central Locking 


System Features 

• The Central Locking system of ZKE V controls the door lock, trunk lock and Fuel 
Filler Flap actuators. 

• The familiar single/double locking strategy is maintained from previous systems with 
the introduction of a new style door lock mechanism combined with dual actuator 
motors. 

The new style actuators are sealed, self contained units with no replaceable parts. 
The door lock actuators use hall effect sensors in place of pin contacts and 
microswitches to provide: 

- Door lock key position (driver’s door only), 

- Door open/closed status (replaces doorjamb switch). 

The mechanical interior lock rods only lock the actuator they control. There is no 
affect on the central lock control of other doors. The rear doors are eguipped with 
the child lock out lever preventing the door from being opened from the inside 
regardless of the actuators position. 

• The automatic locking feature activates the door lock actuators when a road speed 
signal of 5 MPH is detected via the K-Bus. The factory default encoding of this 
feature is off, but can be encoded on for individual users with the Key Memory 
function. 

• The Driver’s door lock location is the only point outside of the vehicle where the key 
can mechanically control all of the central locking system functions. The outside 
locks (driver’s door and trunk) incorporate the familiar overrunning lock cylinder that 
breaks away and freewheels if an attempt is made to destroy the lock with a screw¬ 
driver, dent puller, etc. 

• The trunk can be locked/unlocked with the key but does not lock/unlock the entire 
vehicle as on previous systems. When unlocked, the trunk can be opened by 
depressing the trunk release switch pad located above the license plate or from the 
remote trunk button in the left kick panel as on previous systems. Pressing the trunk 
release button on an FZV key also opens the trunk. 

• GM V and EWS 3.3 interface via the K-Bus to monitor double lock status and to initi¬ 
ate double lock override. This feature allows the doors to be opened from the inside 
if an accepted EWS key is switched on in the ignition when double locked. 

• The central locking switch is housed in a combined housing with the hazard flasher 
switch. Locking the vehicle from the central switch single locks the vehicle except 
for the fuel filler flap. 


24 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Continuous locking/unlocking will initiate a timed arrest of the locking system. The 
GM counts each time the locks are actuated. After approximately 12 cycles, the 
timed arrest is active. The timed arrest is deactivated one actuator cycle for every 8 
seconds until the counter is reset to 0. The timed arrest is overridden if a crash sig¬ 
nal is received from the MRS II. 

The Selective Unlocking feature is used by the GM V. A single unlock request from 
the driver’s door with the key or via the remote transmitter unlocks the driver’s door 
only. A second unlock request unlocks the remaining doors and trunk. This feature 
can be modified for individual users in Key Memory to activate all lock actuators 
simultaneously. 













E46 Convertible Central Locking 

The glove box is integrated into the scope of the central locking system on the E46iC. An 
additional actuator is positioned above the glove box to lock it whenever the central lock¬ 
ing system is activated. Additionally, the trunk is locked out whenever the top storage 
cover is unlocked while the top is being raised or lowered. The top storage cover motor 
hall sensor signals the GM any time the cover is unlocked. 

The CVM receives a signal from the GM over the K-Bus, whenever the trunk is opened, 
which locks out the soft top operation. 

A micro switch on the glove box lock cylinder signals the GM to lock the trunk electrically 
for the valet key position. The trunk can only be opened mechanically with either FZV key 
or the wallet key. 

All other functions of the central locking system remain the same as the E46 Sedan and 
Coupe. 

The antenna for the FZV system is incorporated with the receiver into the interior rear 
view mirror. 


KL 30 KL R 



26 

E46 Central Body Electronics 














































































E46 Sportwagon Central Locking 
Tailgate and Window Locking System 

The tailgate can be opened from any of three input signals including: 

• Remotely from FZV 

• Interior tailgate release button - on left kick panel 

• Unlock switch pad - located above the license plate 

Any of these input request signal the GM to activate the tailgate latch motor. The GM will 
also switch on the interior lights with a unlock request for the tailgate. 

The window is opened from the release switch located on the rear wiper arm cover. 
Pressing the switch signals the GM to activate the rear window release relay. 


GM V 



LATCH 

MECH. 


ACTUATOR 


27 

E46 Central Body Electronics 


















































Driver’s Door Lock Actuator 

The driver’s door lock provides the following familiar signals to the General Module: 

• Lock/Unlock, 

• DWA arm/disarm 

• Convenience closing and opening signals. 



It also provides a mechanical link to manually lock/unlock the actuator in the event of a 
failure. 

The GM monitors these key positions over two wires. The signals are generated by two 
hall effect sensors (Hall Sensor 1 & 2) located in the actuator. 

When the key is turned, a plastic cylinder in the lock actuator is simultaneously rotated by 
the lock tumbler extension rod. An asymmetrical shaped magnet is incorporated in the 
plastic cylinder, which when rotated changes the magnetic influence on the hall sensors. 
The presence of a magnet in close proximity to the sensing surface of either hall sensor 
creates a coded input over the two wires that the GM uses to determine the key position. 

• Magnet in front of sensor, current flow through the sensor is <5 mA (0). 

• Magnet rotated away from sensor, current flow through the sensor is >12 mA (1). 


28 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Hall effect sensors improve the actuators reliability since they are impervious to moisture 
and there are no wear contacts. 


• Key in the neutral position, both sensors are simultaneously influenced by the mag¬ 
net - 0 / 0 . 


• Key turned to the unlock position from neutral, hall sensor #1 magnet segment 
moves away from hall sensor -1/0. 


• Key turned to lock position from neutral, hall sensor #2 magnet segment moves 
away from hall sensor - 0 / 1 . 



Tumbler Extension Rod Hall Sensor 1 
(represented by arrow) \ ' 

\ Hall Sensor 


Plastic CylinderV^h 
Asymmetrical Magnet 


29 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





There are two motors incorporated in each actuator that provide two separate functions: 

• Single lock/unlock function. Also known as central lock, this motor controls the 
mechanical lock mechanism when the central lock button is pressed to single lock 
the vehicle. The lock mechanism is fully locked at this point but can still be opened 
from the interior by pulling the appropriate interior door handle twice or by pressing 
the central lock button again. When single lock function is activated, the fuel filler 
flap actuator is not locked. 

• Double lock/unlock function. Also known as central arrest, this motor is activated 
only when the vehicle is locked from the outside at the driver’s door lock with a key 
or when the GM receives a lock reguest from the FZV system. In this case the dou¬ 
ble lock motor is activated simultaneously with the single lock motor. The function 
of the double lock motor is to mechanically offset an internal rod disabling it from 
unlocking the vehicle from the interior. This prevents the doors from being unlocked 
by any means except from an unlock reguest at the driver’s door or via the FZV 
remote key. 



Actuator in unlocked position 



Actuator in locked position 


30 

E46 Central Body Electronics 







Door Contact Hall Sensor 

Also included in the drivers door actuator is a third hall effect sensor. This sensor signals 
the door open/closed status to the GM. This sensor replaces the doorjamb mechanical 
switch of previous systems. The rotary latch plate position activates the door contact hall 
sensor. 

• When the door latch is closed, current flow through the sensor is <5 mA (0). 

• When the door is open, current flow through the sensor is >12 mA (1). 

The passenger side front door and both rear door lock actuators only include this hall 
effect sensor (hall sensor 3). Hall sensors 1 & 2 are not required. 



31 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




















































Lock Actuator Control 


All door lock actuators and the fuel filler flap actuator are controlled directly by the GM 
via four internal load relays. The drivers door lock actuator has a separate circuit for the 
selective unlocking feature. If this feature is disabled by key memory encoding, the 
driver’s door lock actuator selective unlock circuit is activated simultaneously with the 
balance of the motors during unlock. 


Control during Double Lock 

Double Lock Control H 
Switched Power 


Ground 


Single Lock Control 
Switched Power 

Selective Single Lock ' 


LR RR Pass Driver’s 

Door Door Door Door 


Fuel 

Filler 

Flap 


(M) (mV mi vm: 




M 

imL 


Control during Single Lock 


Not Active 


Ground 


Single Lock Control 
Switched Power 

Selective Single Lock ' 


LR RR Pass Driver’s 

Door Door Door Door 


^ —? - 

Fuel 

Filler ; 

Flap 1 

— •-•-•— 

:m; (m : 


1 


JL X : A 

(M): (M) 1^1 


.A. 


Control during Unlock 


Double Lock Control 
Ground 


Unlock Control ^ 
Switched Power 


Single Unlock Control 
Switched Ground 1 

Selective Single Lock — 


LR RR Pass Driver’s 

Door Door Door Door 


Fuel 

Filler 

Flap 


0 w; m 

(M) (M) l(M) :M 


m 






Y ly 


M): 


32 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




Trunk Lid Switch Contacts 


The trunk lid position (open/closed) and trunk lock key positions are input signals to the 
GM V. The trunk lid closed/open signals come from the trunk lid switch contact located 
in the trunk lock actuator motor assembly. 

When closed, the trunk contact provides a ground signal to the GM signifying a "closed 
trunk". This contact also serves as the trunk light switch when the trunk lock is open. 

The actuator motor only runs in one direction to release the latch mechanism. The latch 
mechanism can also be manually unlocked with the key. 


Key 


Located on the trunk lock are two additional microswitches for key position status 
signalling to the General Module: 

• Valet position switch - With the key in the “Valet” position, the GM is provided with a 
ground input to indicate the valet reguest. The GM locks out the interior trunk 
release button preventing the trunk from being opened. 

• DWA cancel switch - When the trunk is opened with the key, the switch provides a 
ground signal to the GM preventing the DWA from activating if armed. 



Actuator Motor 


Trunk Lid Switch Contact 


Latch Mechanism (Rotary) 


Mechanical Unlock Rod from 



Valet Position and 
DWA cancel switch 


View of trunk li< 
from underside 


Trunk latch actua 
with trunk lid 
contact switch 


Mechanical unlock 
rod from key 
(trunk lock cylinder) 


Trunk lock cylinder) 


33 

E46 Central Body Electronics 












Central Locking Button 

The central lock button in the center console provides a momentary ground input signal 
to the GM. This input initiates a single lock for each door and the trunk. The fuel filler flap 
remains unlocked for refueling purposes. 

If a door is manually opened while centrally locked, the remaining doors stay locked. 



Central Locking Button 


The opened door can be re-locked when closed by manually locking or pushing the cen¬ 
tral button twice. This allows the locks of the remaining doors to be re-synchronized 
again. 


On M.Y. 2000 vehicles, a vehicle that is Double Locked may be opened from inside by 
pressing the central button once and then manually opening the door from the inside. 

InteriorTrunk Release Button 

The trunk can be opened from inside the vehicle by 
pressing the remote trunk button when the vehicle is 
unlocked or single locked from the central lock but¬ 
ton. 

The remote trunk button is locked out when the 
trunk is locked in the hotel setting and when the GM 
detects a vehicle speed signal > 4 MPH via the 
K-Bus. 

The switch provides the GM with a momentary 
ground signal when pressed. 



Crash Signalling 

The Multiple Restraint System control module provides a switched signal to the GM in 
the event of an accident. The signal is an output function of the MRS control module and 
becomes active when MRS determines a crash has occurred. 

When active, the GM unlocks the door lock actuators, switches on the interior lights and 
signals the LSZ via the K-Bus to activate the hazard warning flashers. 

Once the crash signal is active, the GM will not respond to lock requests from the system 
until the ignition switch is cycled or a front door is opened. 


34 

E46 Central Body Electronics 







Remote RF (Keyless) Entry 

The remote key receiver is part of the antenna amplifier and is installed in the left “C” pil¬ 
lar. The receiver produces a digital signal based on the transmitter command and sends 
it to the GM for processing. 

The GM then carries out all remote lock system, window and sunroof opening 
features, along with DWA arming/disarming functions. The frequency at which the key 
transmits the radio signal to the antenna amplifier is 315 MHz. 

The system is also used to convey the key identification number being used to 
lock/unlock the vehicle. This is a reguirement of the Key Memory feature. 



Antenna 

amplifier 



35 

E46 Central Body Electronics 











































Features of the key less entry system include: 

• Locking/unlocking of doors, trunk, fuel filler lid. 

• Selective unlocking of driver’s door 
(as with key in lock) 

• Arming/dis-arming of DWA alarm system 
(if eguipped). 

• Remote unlocking of the trunk only. 

• Comfort opening of windows and sunroof 

• Interior lighting activation (search mode). 

• Panic mode alarm activation (if equipped). 

• Automatic correction for up to 1000 erroneous 
activation signals. 

• Low transmitter battery fault code storage in the 
GM. 

• 3 volt lithium battery (commercially available CR 
2016) is used as the power supply for the key 
transmitters. 

• An EEPROM is used to store the key data. The 
data is no longer lost when the 

battery is replaced and initialization is not 
required. 


BUTTON #1 


\ 

TT 

PRESS ONCE = \ 


• LOCKING, \ 

// 

•DWA ARMING \ 


(if equipped), \ 

ll 

• INTERIOR LIGHTS \ 


ON WHEN \ 

w 

VEHICLE LOCKED \ 


PRESS TWICE WITHIN \ 

U 

10 SECONDS = \ 


• DEACTIVATE UIS & \ 


TILT MONITORING \ 



BUTTON #2 


PRESS ONCE: 

• UNLOCK 
DRIVER'S DOOR 

• DWA DISARMED 
(if equipped) 

• INTERIOR LIGHTS 
ON 


PRESS TWICE: 

• TOTAL UNLOCKING 


HOLD: 

• CONVENIENCE 
OPENING 

BUTTON #3 



MOMENTARILY PRESS: PRESS AND HOLD: 

• TRUNK LID OPENS • PANIC MODE (ALARM- 
If equipped) 


• The key incorporates an LED that signals the operator of signal transmitting, key 
initialization status and key self test indication. 

• The keys are now delivered with a four color label sheet containing four different 
colored labels for each of the four possible FZV keys. 


This is a helpful addition to differentiate the FZV keys during initialization to 
prevent the possibility of mis-assigning the key ID which would change the 
encoded Key Memory functions. 


36 

E46 Central Body Electronics 


















Remote Key Initialization 

The initialization of the FZV keys is required to estab¬ 
lish the Lock/Unlock signal synchronization with the 
GM V. The initialization procedure provides the GM 
with a key identification number and a “rolling code” 
for each key. If the initialization is not performed, the 
GM will not respond to the key signals. 

Up to 4 remote keys can be initialized. They must be 
initialized at the same time. Key initialization is only 
possible with the vehicle unlocked. 

Procedure: 

1. Close all doors and have all keys available. 

2. Using key number 1, turn the ignition switch to 
KL R, then switch off within 
5 seconds and remove the first key. 

3. Within 30 seconds of turning the ignition switch 
to “off” Press and hold button #2. 

4. While holding button #2, press and release 
(“tap”) button #1 three times within 10 sec¬ 
onds. 

5. Release both buttons. The LED in the key will flash momentarily. The GM will 
immediately lock and unlock the doors signaling a successful initialization. 

6. If additional keys need to be initialized repeat steps 3 - 5 within 30 seconds. 

7. Switching the ignition to KL R completes the initialization. 

Service Note: The key memory function of the GM responds to the key identification 
number of each key. If the keys are not initialized in the same order prior to initialization, 
the key memory functions activated by the keys will not be assigned correctly. 

Always initialize the keys in the same order. 

LED Status 

The following functions can be checked with the LED: 

• Flashing LED when pressing a button. Indicates that the data is being transmitted, 
(battery voltage between 3.2-2.6 volts) 

• No LED activity when pressing a button 

- ZKE responds to pressed button only to unlock a vehicle. Indicates the battery 
is below 2.2 volts - replace battery. 

FZV Key Test 

Pressing trunk release buttons together activates the key test. If the battery and FZV key 
EEPROM are “OK”, the LED will come ON for approximately 1 second. 



37 

E46 Central Body Electronics 













Model Year 2000 FZV Key 


Visual Changes: 


• New appearance with blue and white BMW roundel. 

• New button arrangement with sequential operation (enhanced convenience) 

• Rechargeable battery replaces replaceable batteries. Charged by EWS ring antenna. 

• The key housing is encapsulated and can not be opened. 

• The LED has been omitted. 


• Key will be used in E46, E38 and E39 vehicles. 



Arrow 

Press once: 

• for unlock (selective unlock) 

• Disarm DWA 

• Interior lights on 


Roundel 

Press once: 

• for locking and DWA arming 

• for interior lights when vehicle locked 
Press twice within 10 seconds: 

• to deactivate UIS and tilt monitoring 


Trunk 

Press momentarily: 
For trunk 
Press and Hold: 

For Panic Alarm 


Features of the keyless entry system include: 

• Up to 4 radio-control keys can be operated in conjunction with one vehicle. 

• Locking/unlocking of doors, tailgate,fuel filler lid. 

• Selective unlocking of driver’s door (as with key in lock) 

• Arming/dis-arming of DWA alarm system(if equipped). 

• Remote unlocking of the tailgate only. 

• Comfort opening of windows and sunroof 

• Interior lighting activation (search mode). 

• Panic mode alarm activation.. 

• Automatic correction for up to 1000 erroneous activation signals. 

• Low transmitter battery fault code storage in the GM. 

• An EEPROM is used to store the key data. 

• Keys delivered with a four color label sheet containing four different colored 
labels for each of the four possible FZV keys. 

38 

E46 Central Body Electronics 






Remote Key Initialization 

The initialization of the FZV keys is required to establish the synchronization of the 
“lock/unlock signal with the GM. The initialization procedure provides the GM with a key 
identification number and a “rolling code” for each key. If the initialization procedure is 
not performed, the GM will not respond to the key signals. 

Up to 4 remote keys can be initialized. They must be initialized at the same time. 

Key initialization is only possible with the vehicle unlocked. 

Procedure: 

1. Close all doors and have all keys available. 

2. Using key number 1, turn the ignition switch to KL R, then switch off within 5 
seconds and remove the first key. 

3. Within 30 seconds of turning the ignition switch to “off” Press and hold the arrow 
button. 

4. While holding the arrow button, press and release (“tap”) the roundel button three 
times within 10 seconds. 

5. Release both buttons. The GM will immediately lock and unlock the doors signaling 
a successful initialization. 

6. If additional keys need to be initialized repeat steps 3 - 5 within 30 seconds. 

7. Switching the ignition to KL R completes the initialization. 

SERVICE NOTE: The key memory function of the GM responds to the key identification 
number of each key. If the keys are not initialized in the same order prior to initialization, 
the key memory function activated by the keys will not be assigned correctly. 

Always initialize the keys in the same order. 

FZV Key Rechargeable Battery 

From KL R, the battery inside the key head is charged inductively by the EWS ring 
antenna via a coil antenna integrated in the key. The charging process is controlled by 
electronic circuitry integrated in the key. 

• The service life of a radio-control key used under normal conditions corresponds to 
the vehicle lifespan. 

• If the FZV keys are not used (ie: stored in a drawer), the battery will be discharged 
after approx. 1.5 years. 

• The time required to fully charge a discharged battery is approx. 30 hours. 

• The remote control can be operated about 15 times after a charging period of 
approx. 30 minutes (driving time). 


39 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



The key data is stored in a transponder chip. The transponder chip is a wireless read and 
write EEPROM. It is powered via the ring coil at the steering lock. Power is applied 
electromagnetically when the key is in the ignition switch from KL R. 

The power supply is used both for data transfer as well as for charging the battery. This 
has been made possible by new development of the transponder chip. 

As with previous systems, every press of an FZV key also provides the battery charge 
condition. When the FZV electronics receives a low power condition message three 
successive times, the GM sets a fault indicating a low battery within a specific key. The 
LCM is also informed via the bus system and alerts the driver via an instrument cluster 
matrix message. 

If the battery is recharged (used operate car), the fault will be automatically deleted when 
five successive messages are received indicating a charged battery condition. 

The battery has no affect on the EWS III communication function! 



40 

E46 Central Body Electronics 







Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


What is different about the central locking system in the convertible as compared 
to the sedan? 


Where are the door contacts located and how do they differ from previous 
models? 


What are the two microswitches used for the the trunk of the E46? 


Describe any differences about the 2000 FZV remote key as compared to 
previous models? 


What “convenience” features are available from the FZV key? 


41 

E46 Central Body Electronics 






























Power Windows (Sedan, Coupe and Sportwagon) 

Features of the Power Window system: 

• Control of the front and rear door window motors is carried out directly by the GM. 

• One-touch operation in both directions on all windows. 

• Cable type window regulator used for all windows. 

• Anti-trap detection is provided by the pressure sensitive finger guard 
(same as E38/E39). 

• A new style window switch was introduced with the E46. The switch is pulled up to 
raise the windows and pushed down to lower them. 

• The rear window switches located in the rear doors can be deactivated by the 
pressing child lock out switch in the center console. 

• Convenience closing/opening of the windows from the driver's lock cylinder or 
convenience opening only from the FZV remote key (FZV operation can be owner 
customized with the Car Memory Function). 

• Window operation with the ignition switched off until a door is opened or 16 minutes 
has elapsed after the key is switched off. 

• Window load switching is through relays integral of the GM. The GM V monitors the 
current draw for end limit position. The maximum run time for the window motors is 
limited to 8 seconds. This allows the motors to be switched off if the end limit load 
sensing fails. 


42 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Power Window Overview 




FH motor 
front right 


FH motor 



FH motor 
rear right 





43 

E46 Central Body Electronics 







Power Windows (Convertible) 

Power window operation has changed with the addition of the central power window 
switch located in the console between the window switches on the left side. The central 
switch allows all four windows to be opened with one touch operation or closed if the 
switch is held. 

The balance of the window switches allow one touch operation for opening. The driver’s 
window switch is the only one touch close switch due to the elimination of the anti-trap 
protection feature. 

The power windows are also opened when the top is lowered for approximately 1.5 sec¬ 
onds to ensure clearance when the top is lowered into the storage compartment. If the 
top switch is held after opening, the windows will close again. 



44 

E46 Central Body Electronics 

























































Anti-Trap Protection (from 9/03) 

Beginning production March 2003 the E46 M3/C and beginning September 2003 E46C, 
front windows will be eguipped with anti-trap protection. 

A new electric window motor has been developed that includes evaluation electronics to 
monitor window operation and provide “indirect trapping protection.” 



The Evaluation Electronics monitor the number of revolutions of the motor, the direction 
of rotation, and the position of the motor. 

The GM is responsible for controlling window operation. 

Window movement reguests as input into the window switches is processed by the GM 
and based on information received from the evaluation circuit the window is operating. 

Two sensors integrated in the window motor assembly provide speed, direction and posi¬ 
tion information to the evaluation electronics, which shares this with the GM. 

The GM monitors the current spikes at the beginning point and closing point of window 
operation as well as amperage during window operation. A sudden rise in amperage and 
slow down of window speed before reaching the closing point, signals the GM that the 
window is obstructed and power is cut to the window motor. 

The windows do include a panic mode so that if the switch is activated a second time the 
window is driven with full power until the switch is released. 

The windows must be initialized after repair work to the window system or GM. 


45 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




Anti-trap Protection Overview 




02819_02 




AE 



tL 


EP L-M"? 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

General Module 

4 

R/S window switch 

2 

R/S window motor 

5 

L/S window switch 

3 

L/S window motor 




46 

E46 Central Body Electronics 































































Components 


New Style Window Switches 

The E46 power window switch design is a new push - pull type switch. Each switch pro¬ 
vides the GM V with the familiar coded ground signaling strategy as previous two wire 
switches. 

Pushing a switch to the first detent and holding provides a single ground signal on one 
wire requesting the GM to operate the window motor in the down direction. When 
released, the ground signal is removed and the window motor stops. 



Momentarily pushing the switch to the second detent and releasing provides an addition¬ 
al ground signal on the second wire reguesting the “one touch mode”, operating the win¬ 
dow motor automatically. The motor runs the window down until it reaches it's end stop. 

The switch functions in the same manner for the upward run of the window motor but the 
ground signal sequencing is reversed. 

Four door vehicles have a single window switch located in the door handle trim. 

Rear Window Child Lockout Switch 

The rear window child lockout switch is incorporated in the driver's side window switch 
block. It provides a constant ground signal to the GM preventing the windows from being 
operated from the rear door switches. 

The lockout switch ground signal is overridden by the GM if the MRS crash signal is acti¬ 
vated. 


47 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Service Note (Window Switch) 

Switch block removal from the console has 
changed on the E46 (as compared to E36). 

The console trim must be removed from the 
console base. The switch blocks can be 
removed by pushing the lock tabs and 
dropping the switch from the trim. 

Power Window Motors 



The window motors are mounted on the cable regulators (E38/E39). The window motor 
control circuit consists of two wires for operating the motor in both directions. 



The motors are activated by relays in the GM. The relays provide either power or ground 
depending on the direction of window travel. 

The GM controls the polarity of the motor based on a request to run the window (window 
switch, Convenience Opening/ Closing). 

The windows are run to their limit stops which is detected by an amperage increase in 
the control circuit. Additionally, the window run cycle is limited to an 8 second duration if 
in case the amperage increase is not detected or there is a malfunction with the regulator. 


Window Motor Limit Stop Function 

If the windows are run up and down continuously a limit stop function is activated to pre¬ 
vent the window motors from overheating. The GM monitors the number of times the 
window motors are activated. It counts each cycle and stores the number in memory. 

If the repetitive window activation (up/down) exceeds one minute, the GM deactivates the 
internal relays and disregards any further input requests. The GM provides motor activa¬ 
tion after a short duration but not for the full one minute monitoring cycle. 

Overtime, the GM slowly reverses the stored count of activation until the stored number 
equals 0. 


48 

E46 Central Body Electronics 






Anti-Trap Detection (Sedan, Coupe and Sportwagon) 

The window anti-trap detection feature is only active in the one touch and convenience 
close modes of operation. If the window switch is pushed/pulled and held, the Anti-trap 
feature will not function. 



EKS= ANTI-TRAP 
CONTACTSTRIP 


The rubber pressure guards are located at the top edge of each doorframe for the Sedan 
and Sport Wagon and are incorporated into the felt edge protector in the Coupe. Each 
guard consists of two contact strips that close when subjected to pressure. This provides 
anti-trap detection and signal generation to the GM V. 

When the contact strip closes, the window immediately (10ms) reverses direction as with 
previous anti-trap systems. The contact strip does not reguire that the anti-trap feature 
be initialized prior to operation. 

The E46 pressure sensor finger guard has a resistance of 3.0 KOhm and it is monitored 
for open circuit. When pressed, the monitored resistance changes to <1 KOhm. Faults 
with the anti-trap system reguire that the window switch be held to close the window. 

Convenience Opening/Closing 

As with previous ZKE systems, the GM V provides the convenience open/close feature 
providing control of the power windows (and sunroof) from outside the vehicle with the 
key in the driver’s door lock. The FZV provides the same function for the opening only. 

• The anti-trap feature is active during convenience closing from the driver’s door lock. 

• The convenience open feature provides outside activation of the windows and sun¬ 
roof in the same manner. 

• If the GM receives a reguest to operate convenience close or open for more than 
110 seconds, the function is deactivated and a fault code is stored. 

• The Car Memory Feature can activate and deactivate the Convenience Open 
Feature from the FZV’s control. 


49 

E46 Central Body Electronics 


Sunroof 


The E46 optional sunroof is mechanically similar to previous systems. All of the electron¬ 
ic controls and relays are contained in the sunroof module (SHD). The module is con¬ 
nected to the K-Bus for comfort closing/opening, unloader signalling during engine start¬ 
up, diagnosis and fault memory purposes 



T 


Sunroof Switch 

Mounted in the sunroof motor trim cover is the sunroof switch. Also similar to previous 
systems, the switch provides coded ground signals for system operation. 

The following switch signals are generated over three wires through coded combinations: 

• Rest position 

• Slide open reguest (press and hold switch - first 
detent of open position) 

• Automatic slide open reguest (press further to 
second detent and release) 

• Tilt open (press and hold) 

• Slide close reguest (press and hold switch - first 
detent of close direction) 

• Automatic slide close reguest (press further to 
second detent and release) 



50 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





































Sunroof Motor Module (SHD) 

The combined motor module has a 13 pin 
connector for interfacing the switch, and vehi¬ 
cle harness (power ground and K-Bus.) 

The motor contains two hall effect sensors 
that monitor the motor shaft rotation providing 
sunroof panel position. 

The hall sensors also provide the end limit cut 
out function for the SHD once the system is 
initialized. The SHD counts the pulses and 
cuts the motor out prior to the detected end 
run of the sunroof panel. 

Initialization (to 9/01) 

Initialization is reguired for the SHD to learn the end positions of the motor's travel. The 
hall sensors provide pulses for motor rotation, the SHD counts the pulses and determines 
where the panel is by memorizing the stored pulses. 

If the system is not initialized, the sunroof will only operate in the tilt up and slide close 
positions. Initialize as follows: 

• Press and hold the sunroof switch in either the tilt up or slide close positions for 15 
seconds. 

• The sunroof motor operates momentarily signifying initialization acceptance. 

The SHD memorizes the pulses from the hall sensors on the next activation of the motor 
by driving the panel to its end run positions. The SHD senses an amperage increase and 
determines the end run position. The counted number of pulses is then used as the 
basis for calculating the panel position. 

Initialization (from 9/01) 

A new, adaptive, sunroof drive motor was introduced in E46 production in 9/01. There is 
a revised initialization and normalization procedure for the adaptive motor which is 
outlined in the Repair Manual under Group 54. These procedures must be followed in 
order for the sunroof to function properly. 

Procedure 

After the new motor has been recoded in the normal manner, the procedure that must be 
used is as follows: 

1. Push the sunroof button in the up (tilt) direction and hold. After approximately 20 
seconds the sunroof panel will make a small down-up movement. 

2. Release the button for no more than 5 seconds and push and hold it in the up (tilt) 
direction again. 

3. The roof will run through a full open and close cycle. Once this cycle is completed, 
the initialization and adaptation is complete. 



51 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





Note: If the motor runs in the wrong direction when pushing the button in the up (tilt) 
direction, preventing proper initialization, get the sunroof to the closed position, and dis¬ 
connect power to the motor for about 15 seconds. Reconnect the motor and start the ini¬ 
tialization procedure again, and it should work properly. 

Anti-Trap Feature 

The anti-trap feature of the sunroof uses a hall sensor to detect obstructions while the 
sunroof is closing (pulse frequency slowed down) in the automatic close function. The 
anti-trap feature is shut down prior to full closing (4mm from full closed) to allow the sun¬ 
roof to seat into the seal. 

Additionally, the anti-trap feature is not functional when the switch is held in the manual 
close position. 

SHD Self Diagnosis 

The SHD monitors its operation and stores fault codes if a defect is determined: The 
SHD monitors the following conditions: 

• SHD motor relays: The relays are checked for sticking contacts (plausibility) and non 
functional contacts. 

• Hall effect position sensors: The SHD must detect a pulse frequency from the hall 
effect sensor(s) during operation. 

• Sunroof Switch: The SHD monitors the signal plausibility of the coded signaling 
from the sunroof switch. 

Sunroof Fault Response Characteristics 

If a fault occurs with any of these functions, the SHD responds as follows: 

• Overrides the end run detection. 

• Switches the motor off if the relay contacts stick for more than 500 ms. 

• Switches the motor off if pulses are not received. 

Emergency Sunroof Operation 

If the sunroof motor does not respond to the switch signals, the hex key in the trunk lid 
tool kit is used to manually turn the motor shaft drive as on previous systems 


52 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Interior Lighting 

The GM controls the interior lighting automatically with the status change of several mon¬ 
itored inputs. The lighting can also be manually controlled using the interior light switch. 



Components 
Door Contacts 

As mentioned in the Central Locking Section, the new style door lock actuators contain a 
hall effect sensor for the purpose of monitoring door open/closed status (hall sensor 3 in 
the driver's door actuator). The hall effect sensor is located directly behind the rotary 
latch plate encased in the actuator. The sensor is activated by the rotary latch plate's 
position. 

• Door closed, the rotary latch plate is in the latched position. Current flow through 
the hall sensor is < 5 mA. 

• Door open, the rotary latch plate is in the open position. Current flow through the 
hall sensor is > 12 mA. 

A change in current flow informs the General module when a door is opened or closed. 


53 

E46 Central Body Electronics 

















































































Interior Light Unit Assemblies 


Front seat interior/map light unit 

The overhead front seat interior light unit contains a single main interior light. The light is 
controlled by the GM automatically or by momentarily pressing interior light switch locat¬ 
ed on the light assembly. 


■ 



The switch provides a momentary ground signal that the GM recognizes as a request to 
either turn the light on (if off) or turn the light off (if on). 

If the switch is held for more than 3 seconds, the GM interprets the continuous ground 
signal as a request to turn the interior light circuit off for the Workshop Mode as on previ¬ 
ous systems. The workshop mode is stored in memory and will not come back on even 
if the GM is removed from it's power supply and reconnected. The switch must be 
pressed to turn the lights back on. 

There are two reading/map lights also located in the assembly. Each map light is 
mechanically controlled by depressing it's corresponding on/off switch. The power sup¬ 
ply for the map lights is supplied by the GM through the Consumer Cut Off circuit. 

Rear seat interior/reading light units 

In each C pillar trim panel is an interior/reading light unit. These units each contain an 
interior light that is controlled with the front interior light and a mechanically switched 
reading light on the consumer cut off circuit. 

Front footwell lights 

In each front footwell, there is also a courtesy light. These lights are only operated when 
the GM provides power to the interior lighting circuit. 


54 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Automatic Control Function 

The GM provides 12 volts (linear application providing soft on feature) to the interior light¬ 
ing circuit when the one of the following inputs changes status: 

• Door contact hall sensor active (door opened) 

• An Unlock reguest from the driver's door key lock hall sensors are received. This 
only occurs if the ignition switch is off. 

• An Unlock reguest is from the FZV keyless entry system is received via the K-Bus. 
This only occurs if the ignition switch is off as well. 

• The ignition switch is switched off and the vehicle exterior lights (LSZ) have been on 
for a minimum of 2 minutes prior. This information is provided to the GM via the K- 
Bus. 

• Active crash signal from the MRS control module. 

• Lock button of FZV key is pressed with the vehicle is already locked (interior search 
function). 

The GM gradually reduces the full 12 volt power supply (linear reduction providing 
soft off) until the lights are off when the following input signal statuses change: 

• Immediately after the ignition switch is turned to KL R with the driver's door hall 
sensor door contact closed. 

• When the vehicle is locked (single or double) with the door contacts closed. 

• When the vehicle door contacts are closed. The lights remain on for 20 seconds 
and then go to soft off. 

• After the interior search function is activated, the lights will automatically turn off 
(soft off) after 8 seconds. 

• After 16 minutes with a door contact active (open door) and the key off, the lights are 
switched off (consumer cutoff function). 

• The component activation function of the DIS also has the ability to switch the 
lights. 

The Interior lighting output circuit of the GM is approximately 3.5 amps with all lights on. 


55 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise 


Using and instructor designated vehicle, remove the driver’s and/or passenger side 
door panel. Locate the anti-trap strip connector. Connect multimeter and measure 
the resistance of the EKS strip. 


What is the resistance of the EKS strip when pressed and when not pressed? 


Connect appropriate test cables and breakout box to the GM. Use the multimeter to 
measure the voltage input from the window switches at the GM. 

What is the standing voltage when the window switch is NOT actuated? 


What happens to the voltage when the window switch is pressed? 


How does the General Module determine the various requests from the switch (i.e. one 
touch up/down etc.) 


On this vehicle you are currently working on, do the windows need to be initialized to 
operate properly/ Why or Why not? 


Using the oscilloscope, check the interior lighting output signal of the GM. Lock and 
unlock the vehicle using the remote key and observe changes in scope pattern. 

What is observed regarding the changes in the oscilloscope pattern? 


56 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





Workshop Exercise 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, perform the specified diagnosis and fill in the 
worksheet using the proper “Complaint, Cause and Correction” format. 


Vehicle: 


Chassis #: Production Date: 


Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 


57 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




^j ji Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. Why is the SHD module connected to the K-Bus? 


2. How does the SHD module detect obstructions? 


3. Under what conditions will the interior lights come on? 


4. What is the difference between power window operation on the early E46iC 
(before 9/03) as compared to after 9/03 production? 


58 

E46 Central Body Electronics 

























^j ji Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

5. How does the GM determine when the Child Safety lock has been activated? 


6. Explain the EKS: 


7. What is the maximum run time of the power window motors on the Sedan? 


Notes: 


59 

E46 Central Body Electronics 































Anti-Theft (DWA) System 

All E46 vehicles are factory prepared (prewired and GM programmed) to provide the DWA 
function. The DWA system components are available as a retailer installed optional 
accessory. Once the DWA system components are installed the GM must be encode to 
recognize the installed components and carry out DWA functions. This is done with the 
ZCS “Retrofit” program function using the DIS or GT-1. 

The GM utilizes existing components and/or circuits as part of the DWA system: 

• Door lock hall effect sensor contacts (door open/closed). 

• Trunk lid switch contact (monitored for closed trunk). 

• Trunk lock key position switch (located on the trunk lock, this switch signal prevents 
DWA from activating if armed when the trunk is opened with the key). 

• Hood switch (monitored for closed hood, located under the hood). 

• DWA status LED (part of rear view mirror). 

The DWA optional accessory kit includes the following: 

• Tilt sensor (pre wiring in area of installation in right trunk area). 

• UIS Interior compartment monitoring sensor (pre wiring in area of installation in 
center headliner). 

• DWA siren (pre wiring in area of installation right cowl area next to IHKA housing). 



60 

E46 Central Body Electronics 
























































































Components 
Door Contacts 

As mentioned in the Central Locking Section, the door lock contact hall effect sensors 
provide status of door open/closed. 

• When the door latch is closed, current flow through the sensor is <5 mA (0). 

• When the door is open, current flow through the sensor is >12 mA (1). 

The GM will activate the siren if a door open signal becomes active when the DWA is 
armed. 

Trunk Lid Switch Contacts 

The trunk switch contact is located in the trunk lock actuator assembly. When closed, 
the trunk contact provides a ground signal to the GM signifying a "closed trunk". The GM 
will activate the siren if the trunk switch contact ground signal opens when the DWA is 
armed. 

Trunk Lock Key Position Switch 

Mounted on the trunk lock cylinder are two switches: 

• Valet position switch: With the key lock in the valet position, this switch provides a 
ground signal to the GM. The GM locks out the interior trunk release button prevent¬ 
ing the trunk from being opened. 

• Trunk opened with key switch: When the trunk is opened mechanically with the 
key, this switch provides a ground signal to the GM preventing the DWA from activat¬ 
ing if armed. 



61 

E46 Central Body Electronics 








Hood Contact Switch 

Located on the right side engine compartment, the hood contact switch provides a 
ground signal to the GM signifying an open hood. 



The plunger of this switch can be pulled up past a detent causing the switch contact to 
open. This feature can be used to simulate a closed hood with the hood open when 
diagnosing the DWA system. 

DWA LED 

As on previous systems, the DWA indicator is located in the rearview mirror. The LED is 
equipped in all E46 vehicles and is not part of the retailer installed accessory DWA 
system. 

The LED is provided with constant battery voltage (KL 30). The GM provides a switched 
ground signal providing the various blinking signals used to convey DWA status to the 
vehicle operator (covered further on). 



62 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





















Tilt Sensor 


Located in the right trunk area above the battery, the tilt sensor is an electronic sensing 
device with the sole purpose of monitoring the vehicle's parked angle when DWA is 
armed. 



The sensor reguires three signal wires to perform its function: 

• KL 30 - Constant battery voltage 

• Signal "STDWA"; switched ground input signal provided by the GM indicating DWA 
armed/disarmed status. The tilt sensor is used as a splice location for the STDWA 
signal to the Siren and UIS interior protection sensor. 

• Signal "NG"; switched ground output signal provided to the GM. The signal is used 
for two purposes, 

1. As a momentary acknowledgment that the tilt sensor received STDWA and is 
currently monitoring the vehicle angle. 

2. If the tilt sensor detects a change in the vehicle's angle when DWA is armed, 
signal NG is switched to inform the GM to activate the siren. 

When the tilt sensor receives the STDWA signal from the GM it memorizes the vehicle's 
parked angle. The angle of the vehicle is monitored by the solid state electronics. Once 
armed, if the angle changes, the tilt sensor provides a switched ground signal to the GM 
to activate DWA. 


63 

E46 Central Body Electronics 







Interior Protection Sensor (UIS) 

The E46 uses an interior protection sensor known as UIS. Similar to the FIS previously 
equipped on the E38/E39, the UIS monitors the vehicle interior for motion through ultra¬ 
sonic sound waves. The UIS is a combined transmitter and receiver. 

SENSOR IN HEADLINER PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SENSOR 



EMIT/RECEIVE 
AREAS OF SENSOR 


The interior sensor is mounted in the center of the headliner panel even with the "B" pil¬ 
lar. Due to the design of the vehicles interior, the sensor is uni-directional and must be 
installed in the proper direction to ensure proper operation of the system (trim cover 
ensures directional installation). 

Every time the DWA system is armed (signal 
STDWA), the sensor adapts to what ever 
objects might be stationary in the interior. 

The sensor emits ultra sonic waves in a 
programmed timed cycle. It receives echo's of 
the emitted waves. 

The UIS amplifies the received sound wave 
signals and compares them with the transmit¬ 
ted waves. The UIS also checks the incoming 
echo's for background hiss (wind noise 
through a partially open window) and adapts for this. 

• If the echo's are consistently similar, no movement is detected, 

• If the echo's are altered, (inconsistent), the UIS determines motion in the interior 

compartment. 

If motion is detected, the UIS changes to a constant cycle and the echo is compared 
again. If the inconsistency is still present the UIS sends the activate siren signal (INRS) to 
the GM. 

As with the tilt sensor, the UIS is also switched OFF when the vehicle is locked two times 
within ten seconds. This allows the sensor to be switched OFF for transportation 
purposes. 



64 

E46 Central Body Electronics 













Alarm Siren 

The siren from the DWA accessory kit is installed in the vehicle cowl on the passenger 
side of the vehicle. This location provides a secure position with loud acoustic output. 



The siren contains electronic circuitry for producing the warning tone when the alarm is 
triggered. The siren also contains a rechargeable battery that is used to power the siren 
when the alarm is triggered. 

The rechargeable battery will allow the siren to sound if it or the vehicle’s battery is dis¬ 
connected. The siren battery is recharged, from the vehicle’s battery when DWA is not in 
the armed state. 

The siren has four wires connecting it to the system; KL 30, KL 31, Signal STDWA 
(arm/disarm signal from GM), and Signal SIRENE (activate siren output signal to the GM) 

The arm/disarm output signal from the GM (STDWA) is provided to the Tilt sensor, UIS 
sensor and the siren simultaneously. The arm/disarm signal is a switched ground that 
signals the components of DWA armed/disarmed status. 

The activate siren signal (SIRENE) is high whether DWA is armed or disarmed. If a moni¬ 
tored input activates the alarm, the high signal to the siren is switched to a 50% duty 
cycle at the GM. The control circuitry in the siren activates the siren driver. If the DWA is 
armed and the battery is disconnected the siren recognizes the normally high “SIRENE” 
signal as suddenly going low, the siren is also activated. 



65 

E46 Central Body Electronics 






















DWA Arming/Disarming 

• The DWA is armed every time the vehicle is locked from the outside with the door 
lock cylinder or FZV key. 

• The LED in the rearview mirror flashes as an acknowledgment along with the exteri¬ 
or lights and a momentary chirp from the siren. 

• The GM monitors all required input signals for closed status (door closed, trunk 
closed, etc.) The inputs must be in a closed status for a minimum of 3 seconds for 
the GM to include them as an activation component. If after 3 seconds any input 
signal not in the closed status is excluded (this is acknowledged by the DWA LED) 
preventing false alarm activations. 

• If the DWA is armed a second time within 10 seconds, the tilt sensor and interior 
protection sensor are also excluded as alarm activation components. This function 
is useful if the vehicle is transported on a train or flat bed truck to prevent false alarm 
activations. 

• While armed the trunk can be opened with out the alarm being triggered as follows: 

If opened with the trunk remote button via the FZV, the GM prevents the alarm 
from activating. (This feature is customizable under the Car Memory function). 

If opened with the key at the trunk lock cylinder the trunk key position switch 
signals the GM and in the same manner prevents the alarm from activating. 

In either case, when the trunk is returned to the closed position, it is no longer 
considered as an activation signal. 

Panic Mode Operation- When the trunk button is pressed and held, the GM is sig¬ 
naled to activate the siren for the Panic Mode. The panic mode is function with either an 
armed or disarmed DWA system. 

Emergency Disarming 

Emergency disarming occurs automatically if a key is used to turn the ignition switch on 
and the EWS accepts it. The EWS signals the GM to unlock the doors and deactivate 
the DWA. 


66 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Alarm Indication 


When the alarm is triggered, the siren will sound for 30 seconds. At the same time the 
low beam headlights and four way flashers will flash for 5 minutes. The GM signals the 
the LSZ via the K-Bus to flash the lights. 

Following an alarm trigger, the system will reset and trigger again if further tampering is 
done to the vehicle. 

DWA LED Status 


DWA Status 

DWA LED Condition 

Disarmed 

OFF 

Armed 

Continual slow flash 

Armed with one or more monitored inputs not in 
closed position (i.e. trunk not fully closed etc.) 

Rapid flash for 10 seconds then continual slow flash. 

Alarm activated 

Rapid flash for 5 minutes then continual slow flash 

Rearmed in less than 10 seconds 

On for 1 second 

Disarmed after activated alarm 

Rapid flash for 10 seconds, then OFF 


67 

E46 Central Body Electronics 


















Front Power Seats 


Seat Controls 

Located in each seat base are the respective seat controls. The switch modules are con¬ 
toured to fit behind the outboard seat base plastic trim. They each incorporate the seat 
adjustment switches and motor control circuitry. 



As in the past there are no serviceable replacement parts (switch levers, switch buttons, 
etc.) they must be replaced as a complete unit if necessary. They differ from driver's to 
passenger seats as follows. 

Driver’s Seat - Seat Memory Control Module (SM) 

• In addition to the position switches, the SM also contains the memory position 
switches and monitors the seat motor positions via pulsed signals from hall effect 
sensors in each driver's seat position motor. 

• The SM communicates with the GM and Instrument cluster via the K-Bus to provide 
Car and Key Memory seat adjustment functions. 

• The SM is equipped with on board diagnostics which monitor motor circuits for 
opens, shorts and not plausible operation. The SM communicates with the 
DISplus/GT-1 for diagnosis, and car memory encoding. 

• The electronics are protected against polarity reversal and excess voltage. A non¬ 
volatile memory maintains memory settings if the SM or battery is disconnected. 


68 

E46 Central Body Electronics 








Passenger Seat (without memory) 

• The passenger seat control switch is purely a mechanical switching module that 
activates the passenger seat motors without position monitoring capabilities. 

• Due to it's limited operation reguirements, the passenger seat control switch is not 
eguipped with on board diagnostics. 

• The Passenger Seat control switch is eguipped with an overload protection function. 
If excessive amperage is drawn due to a defective motor or a switch is stuck driving 
a motor to its' end limit, the function activates opening the motor control circuit. 



69 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



























































Seat Position Motors 

There are either 3 or 4 electric motors in the front seats depending on the seat model. 

The motors differ from driver’s to passenger seats as follows: 

Driver’s seat motors: 

• Each motor is individually controlled by the SM via a two wire circuit providing motor 
activation in both directions. 

• Each position motor incorporates a hall effect sensor that provides a single pulsed 
square wave signal for each revolution of the motor. The hall sensor is required for 
the memory feature of the driver’s seat and as feedback for motor load protection. 

• When a motor is activated, the SM also memorizes what direction the seat switch 
was moved to since it can not determine the exact seat position based on the hall 
sensor signal alone. This is required if the exact position is needed for memory 
storage. 

Passenger seat motors: 

• Each motor is individually controlled by the Seat Control Switch. 

• Each position motor is connected to the seat position switch by a two wire circuit 
providing motor activation in both directions (no hall effect sensors). 

• Each position motor is connected to the seat position switch by a two wire circuit 
providing motor activation in both directions (no hall effect sensors). 



70 

E46 Central Body Electronics 







Seat Motor Activation 


Driver’s Seat Adjustment 

When a position switch is moved, the control electronics of the SM receives an input sig¬ 
nal to move the corresponding motor until the switch is released. 

The position switch is also memorized for the reguested direction (ie: slide forward/slide 
backward). 

The SM includes a multiplexed switch unit that handles the polarity control and motor 
selection simultaneously. 

Only one motor can be activated at a time. 

The multiplexer control activates the polarity contacts and then the individual motor con¬ 
tacts to run the motors individually. 

Passenger Seat Adjustment 

Operation of the passenger seat is always possible regardless of key position. Moving a 
position switch operates a the motor control contacts directly, The switch applies volt¬ 
age and ground path directly to operate the motor. Reversing the switch simply changes 
the motor polarity.. More than one passenger seat motor can be run simultaneously. 



SEAT BASE 
(UP/DOWN) 


SEAT BASE 
(TILT) 


BACK REST 


SEAT BASE 
(FOWARD/BACK) 


71 

E46 Central Body Electronics 















































Driver’s Seat Memory Function 

As with previous systems, the seat memory feature of the SM stores three seat positions 
for recall. The positions are stored in a non-volatile memory preventing loss of positions 
if in case the SM or the battery is disconnected. 

The additional buttons on the SM (M) provide activation of recording memory position 
and (1 -2-3) for storing or recalling a specific seat setting. 


Storing current seat position: 

• Seat in desired position, 

• Ignition switch in KL R, 

• Press the M button until it illuminates 

• Within 7 seconds press the 1,2 or 3 button to store. 


The stored position can be recalled at any time by pressing the appropriate memory 
location button (1-2-3). 



Memory Recall Modes of Operation 

Depending on current SM input signals via K-Bus, the memory recall operates in two 
distinctly different modes: 


• One-touch mode (TTB) 

If one of the following input signal status is current; Ignition switch off with the dri¬ 
ver’s door open, or KL R on, door open or closed, the SM resets the seat position 
by a momentary “one touch” of the selected memory button. 

• Press and hold mode of operation (DTB). 

If one of the following input signal status is current; Ignition switch off with the dri¬ 
ver’s door closed, or KL 15 on, door open or closed, the SM resets the seat posi¬ 
tion by a continuous ’’press and hold” of the selected memory button. 


72 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Driver’s Seat Memory (Car Memory Influence) 

The SM can be encoded to recall a specific seat position for a vehicle user when the GM 
signals the SM to automatically recall stored positions separate of the 1-2-3 button 
selections. 

This feature is encoded through the car memory function and activated by the key mem¬ 
ory function. The SM will monitor the seat position and store it in another area of it's 
memory when the vehicle is locked with the remote keyless entry system. The GM 
sends a request to memorize the seat position and store it for FZV key user 1,2,3 or 4. 

If another user of the vehicle changes the seat position the SM restores the memory 
position the next time the specific key is used to unlock the vehicle. 

This feature can be further modified to activate the position recall based on the owner's 
selected activation scenario. For example, the owner can choose to; disable this feature, 
initiate memory recall when the unlock signal is initially sent before a door is opened, or 
initiate memory recall when the unlock signal is sent but only when the driver's door is 
opened. 

Power Seat Diagnosis 

The SM communicates with the DISplus or GT-1 via the K-Bus - instrument cluster gate¬ 
way - to the D-Bus. The SM monitors the seat motors and circuits as well as it's internal 
operation. Any detected faults are stored in the SM fault memory and are called up when 
diagnosing the system with the Fault Symptom diagnostic plan. 

The SM also provides status display to the DIS of its input and output control signals as 
well as component activation. 


73 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



E46 Convertible Front Seats 

The front seats of the E46iC are specially designed to reduce forces acting on the 
occupants during a collision. Due to the lack of a b-pillar on a convertible, the seat belt 
attachment points are all contained on the seat itself. This design is referred to as the 
Seat Integrated Belt system (SGS). 

This convertible front seats also incorporate the “Comfort Entry Aid System”. This sys¬ 
tem allows a rapid seat movement to allow rear seat passengers to enter with minimum 
effort. 

Seat System Components 


SEAT 

INTEGRATED 

BELT 


SEAT MEMORY 
MODULE 



HEADREST 

MOTOR 


COMFORT ENTRY 
SWITCH 


INERTIA 

REEL 


BACKREST 


SEAT 
SWITCH 
MODULE 


SEAT HEIGHT 
MOTOR 

SEAT FORWARD/ 
BACK MOTOR 



SEAT 

TILT 

MOTOR 


BACKREST 

MOTOR 


Seat Integrated Belt System 

The SGS seat is similar in design to the SGS seat in the E31. The backrest and seat 
frame a reinforced to allow the belt system and deflection points to be integrated into the 
seat. All of the fastening points move with the seat as it is adjusted. This ensures the 
best possible restraint irrespective of the seat position or occupant size. This minimizes 
the amount of belt slack which improves safety during impact. The design of the SGS 
system causes all forces during a collision to be channeled into the reinforced floor pan. 


74 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





Seat Belt Assembly 

The fixed anchor point and seat belt tensioner are mounted on the seat frame. The upper 
belt deflection point is attached to the headrest which causes the belt to be optimally 
positioned when the head rest is moved. 

The inertia reel locking mechanism is attached to the backrest frame of the seat. It 
consists of two independent triggering devices which act on the inertia reel. 

• The first triggering device locks the belt during fast cornering, heavy braking, roll over 
or during an impact. 

• The second triggering device serves as an auxiliary safety lock and is controlled by 
the “Mass Moment of Inertia”. The position of the mass moment of inertia is a 
decisive factor for the belt to lock. 

The inertia reel locking mechanism is connected through a lever and a cable drive to a 
gear assembly on the seat back hinge. As the angle of the backrest is adjusted, the gear 
assembly and cable drive will change the angle of the inertia lock. This ensures that the 
lock is in the proper position for locking at any seat back angle. 



75 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




































Comfort Entry Aid 

The switch for the comfort entry aid feature is positioned at the top of the seat back. The 
switch provides an input to the seat module which activates the seat forward/backward. 

When pressed forward, the motor rapidly moves the seat to its most forward position. 
When pressed rearwards, the seat returns to the previous set position. 

When the lever for the backrest is raised and the backrest is pulled forward, the backrest 
lock switch provides an input to the seat module. The module activates the headrest 
motor and it moves down to its lowest position. When the seat backrest is re-locked, the 
module activates the head rest motor to return to the previous set position. 

This feature will only activate when the seat is moved forward far enough to cause the 
headrest to interfere with the sun visor as the back rest is pulled forward. The seat 
module recognizes the position of the seat base for activation of this feature. 




76 

E46 Central Body Electronics 









E46 Convertible Seat Memory System 

The seat memory system uses two control modules on each front seat. One processor 
is incorporated into the seat adjusting switch and a second processor is mounted under 
the seat. The functions of the two control modules is to process the following inputs and 
outputs to control the seat: 

• Seat Adjustments 

• Comfort entry aid switch 

• Seat back rest lock microswitch 

• Seat belt fastened 

• K-Bus communication with the GM and instrument cluster 

As with previous systems, the driver seat memory feature stores three seat positions for 
recall. The positions are stored in the non-volatile memory preventing loss of positions in 
case the SM or battery is disconnected. 

System Components 

Refer to the Driver’s and Passenger memory seat IPO diagram. 

System Operation 

The seat adjusting switch block communicates with the control module over dedicated 
lines. The output stages for seat motor movement are in the control module. The seat 
positions are recognized through the use of hall sensors on the motors. All components 
of the seat memory are monitored for faults. 

Additional functions of the memory system include memorizing the position of the seat 
and headrest when the entry aid feature is activated. The seat will return to its previous 
set position when the entry aid switch is pressed rearward or the seat back rest is locked. 


77 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Memory Seat IPO 



78 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



















































































Passenger Seat Memory IPO 


KL 30 


ENTRY AID 
SWITCH 


PASSENGER’S 
SEAT BACK 
LOCK MS 

SEAT 

ADJUSTMENT 

MODULE 


c 



KL 31 


MEMORY 

SEAT 

MODULE 



SIGNAL SEAT 
BACK LOCK 



SEAT BASE 
(FORWARD/BACK) 


79 

E46 Central Body Electronics 









































































Mirror Memory System (E46iC) 

The function of the mirror memory system is to: 

• Memorize mirror positions, 

• Adjust mirrors, 

• Control heaters for the outside mirrors. 

• Communicate with the Driver’s seat memory module to recall mirror positions. 

Components 

The mirror memory system consists of the following components: 

• Mirror adjusting switch 

• Driver’s mirror memory module 

• Passenger’s mirror memory module 

• Driver’s seat memory module 

• Mirrors with adjusting motors and feedback potentiometer 

System Operation 

Each mirror module is responsible for mirror adjustment, storage of the mirror positions 
and mirror heating. Operation of the mirror adjusting switch remains the same for initial 
setting of the mirror positions. Feedback potentiometers are used for mirror position 
recognition for memory storage purposes. The driver’s mirror module communicates with 
the passenger’s mirror module and the seat module over the K-Bus. 

When a memory position is set with the seat module, a signal is sent to the mirror mod¬ 
ules over the K-Bus and the current positions are stored in memory locations 1, 2 or 3 in 
the respective modules. 

When a memory button is pressed for recall of a stored position, the seat module signals 
the mirror modules over the K-Bus to return the mirrors to the stored settings. 


80 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



Mirror Memory Overview 


KL 30 



DRIVER’S 

SEAT 

MEMORY 

MODULE 


KL 30 


KL 31 


DRIVER’S 

MIRROR 

MEMORY 

MODULE 


K-BUS 


\ POWER 
SUPPLIES 



"EEDBACK 

& 

GROUND 


PASSENGER’S 

MIRROR 

MEMORY 

MODULE 



FEEDBACK 

& 

GROUND 


81 

E46 Central Body Electronics 













































































Outside Mirror Control E46 (late production) 

The outside mirror control functions have changed in 2003 models. Beginning with the 
Sedan and Sportwagon (from 3/03) and the Coupe and Convertible (from 9/03) the 
outside mirror control now includes the new LIN-Bus. The M3 continues to use the con¬ 
ventional mirror control system. 

The GM will store the mirror memory position and access the position either through seat 
memory switches or car key memory. 

The motion control of the mirrors is by the mirror electronics located in the mirror motor 
assemblies. Mirror position is monitored by potentiometers and passed on to the GM via 
the LIN Bus. The mirror switch passes all requests for movement over the LIN Bus to the 
GM which then sends command signal to the mirror electronics, again via the LIN Bus. All 
mirror functions including mirror heating and automatic folding are also controlled by the 
GM. 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Mirror Switch 

10 

Instrument Cluster 

2 

R/S Mirror electronics 

ii 

Engine Control Module (DME/ECM) 

3 

R/S mirror heating 

12 

Outside temperature sensor 

4 

R/S horizontal motor 

13 

L/S potentiometers 

5 

R/S vertical motor 

14 

L/S folding motor 

6 

R/S folding motor 

15 

L/S vertical motor 

7 

R/S potentiometers 

16 

L/S horizontal motor 

8 

Seat memory controller 

17 

L/S mirror heating 

9 

General Module (GM) 

18 

L/S Mirror electronics 


82 

E46 Central Body Electronics 













































































Mirror System Components 

The mirror system consists of the following components: 

• Left and Right Mirror Assemblies with integrated drive motors, potentiometers and 
heating elements 

• Mirror Switch Assembly 

• Flat band wiring harness 



Mirror Operation 

All decisions regarding mirror function and movement are made by the GM and passed 
on to the mirror electronics for execution. 

Mirror position is monitored by the GM via LIN Bus information from the potentiometers. 

Tilt function when in reverse of the passenger mirror is the same as on previous E46 
models. 

Mirror heating is controlled by the GM based on information received from the outside 
temp sensor. 

In all mirror operations the GM is the master control module and the mirror electronics are 
the secondary modules. 


83 

E46 Central Body Electronics 







Optional Seat Heating (1999 Model Year) 

The optionally equipped E46 Seat Heating feature is similar to previous systems with two 
preset temperature settings. The seat heating system consists of the following 
components: 

• Console mounted, temperature regulating seat heater switches. 

• Two section (Seat base and back) carbon fiber heating pad with temperature sensor. 
If seat heating is equipped on the sport seat, a third heating pad is incorporated into 
the thigh support. 

Seat Heating Switch 

Each seat push-button switch contains two LED's that correspond with the two preset 
temperature settings. 

• Both LED's ON, Higher temperature setting selected 

• Left LED ON only, Lower temperature setting selected 

The switches contain temperature regulation electronics that provide 100% current flow 
to the seat heating element pad when first activated providing fast heat build up. Once 
the temperature is attained, the electronics regulates the current flow to stabilize the set 
temperature. 

The switches provide operating current to the seat heaters until switched off. There is no 
preset time limit of operation. 





84 


E46 Central Body Electronics 






If the battery voltage drops below 11.4 volts, the seat heating switch cuts the power sup¬ 
ply to the heating pads but the LED's in the switch remain illuminated. The seat heating 
switches restore power to the heating pads when the battery voltage raises above 12.2 
volts for more than five seconds. 

Carbon Fiber Heating Pads 

In each seat is a two section (three section on sport seats), heating pad. The sections are 
wired in parallel. The heating pads are resistors which when provided operating power 
from the seat heating switches produce radiant heat to the following temperatures. 

• High temperature setting selected (40°C at heating pad) 

• Lower temperature setting selected (37°C at heating pad) 

The seat base heating element also contains a temperature sensor for feedback to the 
seat switch to provide the temperature regulation output control. 

Diagnosis 

The seat heater switches contain a diagnostic mode of operation that provides a self 
check of the system components when activated. The diagnostic information is provided 
via flash codes from the LED's. 

Diagnostic mode activation: 

• Switch ignition OFF 

• Press and hold the suspect seat heating switch button 

• Switch the ignition ON 

• Release the heating switch button 

• Both LED's illuminate steady indicating the seat heating system is functioning. 

• Within 10 seconds the LED will begin flashing the following codes: 

• Single flash = Switch faulty due to overheating or short 

• Double flash = Short or open in temperature sensor or it's circuit. 

• Triple flash = Heating element shorted 

Normal operation of seat heating can only be resumed after cycling the ignition key. 


85 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




Center Console Switch Center (SZM) 

From 2000 Model Year, E46 vehicles are equipped with a new Center Console Switch 
Center (SZM). 



The SZM directly controls the front seat heating and provides a diagnostic interface with 
the DISplus/GT-1 via the K BUS. 

SZM also provides a unitized switching center for Dynamic Stability Control (DSC III), 
Convertible Top operation switches and Harman/Kardon sound system button. 

The switch signal output for these systems is a direct output signal. All diagnosis func¬ 
tions are carried out through their respective control systems. 

Seat Heating Operation 

The front seat heaters are adjustable through three ranges of heating output temperature. 

Pressing the respective seat heater button once provides stage 1. All three LEDs illumi¬ 
nate and the heating elements are provided regulated output current producing a seat 
temperature of 111°F. 

Pressing the button a second time provides stage 2. The top LED switches off and the 
heating elements are regulated to an output temperature of 102°F. Pressing the button a 
third time provides stage 3. The top and middle LEDs are off and the heating elements 
are regulated to an output temperature of 95°F. 

The SZM monitors the seat heating element temperature via an NTC feedback signal to 
regulate the output current which maintains the seat temperature. 

Seat heating is switched off by pressing the button a fourth time, pressing and holding 
the button for more than 1 second or when the ignition is switched off. 


86 

E46 Central Body Electronics 










SZM Monitoring of Seat Heating 

Battery Voltage: The SZM switches current supply to the heating elements off when 
battery voltage drops below 11.4 volts. However, the heating stage LEDs remain on. 
Regulated output current resumes when battery voltage raises above 12.2 volts for more 
than 5 seconds. 



SZM Internal Temperature: The power output stages for the seat heating elements 
generate a considerable amount of heat when in stage 1 operation. The SZM monitors 
it’s own internal temperatures and reduces the heating output when internal tempera¬ 
tures rise to a temperature of 185°F or switches it off completely above 203°F. 

As with battery voltage monitoring, the heating stage LEDs remain on when these tem¬ 
peratures are exceeded. 

Fault Monitoring: The SZM monitors the temperature sensors and heating mats for 
faults. Detected faults are stored in the SZM. Fault Symptom Troubleshooting in con¬ 
junction with stored faults will initiate the diagnostic paths using the DIS/GT-1. 

The following faults can be recognized: 

• Shorts or opens in the wiring circuits. 

• Shorts or opens in the temperature sensors 

• Open in heating element. 

If a short is detected in the temperature sensor, the seat heating is switched off to pre¬ 
vent overheating. The Stage LEDs are also switched off with this fault present. 


87 

E46 Central Body Electronics 











SZM l-P-0 Schematic 


KL 30(BATTERY) 


ZE3 EC 

[Him 

-► 


KL 31 (GROUND) 

_ 

* 

KL 15 (IGNITION ON) 


KLR (ACC) 


KL 87 (OPERATING POWER^ 

^gj6®j58G (PANEL LIGHTING) 


LCM III 




2$ 



SZM 





"O. 


—Q . 


DRIVER’S SEAT HEATING 




Ddf f 


PASSENGER’S SEAT HEATING 






ffnffil , DIS & 

KtJ MoDiC 


o 


M 


REAR WINDOW 
( M ) ROLLER 
BLINDS 


PDC CONTROL 
MODULE 



EDO CONTROL 
MODULE 


DSC I 
CONTROL 
MODULE 


88 

E46 Central Body Electronics 













































































Optional Seat Back Lumbar Support 

The optional air bladder lumbar support system is similar to the E38/E39 comfort seat. 

Each seat contains the following components: 

• Four position circular rocker switch in the seat base trim in the area of the seat 
switches. 

• Electrically controlled air compressor with over pressure cut out under each seat. 

• Two solenoid activated air controlling valve blocks (one per air bladder). Each valve 
block includes an inlet and an outlet valve. When energized they direct air into the 
bladder(s) to inflate or relieve trapped air to deflate the bladders. 

• Connecting hoses and air bladders in lower seat back 



Operation 

The lumbar support system can be operated at any time regardless of key position. The 
four position circular rocker switch provides power switching to operate the system as fol¬ 
lows: 

• Position 1: The internal switch contacts provide a power and ground path for both 
valve block inlet valves and the air compressor. Both bladders inflate until the switch 
is released. If the switch is held continuously, an overpressure bypass valve opens 
on the compressor preventing damage to the bladders. 

• Position 2: Compressor activated, upper bladder inflates, lower bladder deflates 

• Position 3: Compressor activated, lower bladder inflates, upper bladder deflates 

• Position 4: Compressor is not activated. Upper and Lower bladders both deflate. 

Diagnosis 

The seat lumbar support system is purely electro-pneumatic control system. No elec¬ 
tronic diagnostic communication is possible. 


89 

E46 Central Body Electronics 





Dual Power/Heated Outside Mirrors 

This section applies to Sedans produced prior to 9/99 or vehicles equipped with manual 
seats. 

he E46 is equipped with Dual Power/Heated Outside Mirrors and Windshield Washer 
Spray Nozzle Heaters as standard equipment. Control of the mirrors is carried out directly 
by the mirror switch located in the driver's door handle. The switch also provides power 
to the heating element in the driver's door mirror. Passenger door mirror heating element 
power supply is provided directly. The mirrors are heated regardless of outside ambient 
temperature. The heating element resistance produces a mirror temperature of approxi¬ 
mately 60°C. 



The switch utilizes the familiar four way button and a changeover switch. The switch is 
provided with operating power (KL 15) and ground. 

Each mirror has two motors providing horizontal and vertical adjustment. Pushing the 
four way button to an up/down or left/right position activates the corresponding motor. 

Windshield Washer Nozzle Jet Heaters 

The windshield washer nozzle jet heaters are provided power when the outside tempera¬ 
ture switch closes at 6°C +/- 4°C. The switch open when the temperature raises to 
16°C +/- 4°C. 

The outside temperature switch is located on the lower edge (passenger side) 
of the air dam. 


90 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




Consumer Cutoff 


The interior lights are connected to the consumer cut off circuit. These consumers are 
connected to KL 30 and can remain on if one of the control switches are left on. This 
would prevent the ZKE from going into the sleep mode. However, the consumer cut off 
will switch Kl 30, to the interior lighting, off after 16 minutes (sleep mode active). 

To achieve "sleep mode" in the workshop: 

• Switch the ignition off 

• Close all doors, trunk and hood (mechanically 
close latches with doors open if necessary) 

• Central lock vehicle 

• Wait 16 minutes 

If one of the following signals from the chart below are activated before the vehicle is in 
sleep mode, the 16 minute cycle starts again. After the 16 minute wait period, the vehi¬ 
cle will be in "sleep mode". To bring the system out of sleep mode, the GM responds to 
a status change of the signals from the chart below. 


Signal 

Activity 

Originating 

Module 

K-Bus 

High 

General Module 

Door jamb sensors (possibility of 4) 

Low 

General Module 

Trunk lid lock cylinder microswitch 

High 

General Module 

Interior trunk lid pushbutton microswitch 

Low 

General Module 

Central locking button 

Low 

General Module 

Hood microswitch 

Low 

General Module 

Trunk key position switch (DWA) 

Low 

General Module 

Interior light switch 

Low 

General Module 

UIS sensor 

Low 

General Module 

Tilt alarm sensor 

Low 

General Module 

Driver’s door lock sensors (lock/unlock) 


Driver’s door 


91 

E46 Central Body Electronics 








































Battery Status 

The GM monitors KL R on a dedicated circuit. If the ignition is switched on and detected 
via the KL R circuit but the GM does not receive KL R status via the K Bus, the GM moni¬ 
tors the KL R voltage level. If after an additional 0.3 seconds there is no K Bus activity, 
the GM initiates an emergency running program. 

A substitute value for vehicle speed is used to allow the GM to operate certain functions. 

The emergency running program will terminate if the GM detects a vehicle speed or 
KL R status via the K-Bus. 

Diagnosis 

The General Module contains an EEPROM fault memory which is non-volatile. Diagnosis 
is carried out with the DISplus or GT-1. This diagnostic link is through the gateway (clus¬ 
ter) via the K-Bus. 


92 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, perform the specified diagnosis and fill in the 
worksheet using the proper “Complaint, Cause and Correction” format. 


Vehicle: 


Chassis #: 


Production Date: 


Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 


93 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise 

Using an instructor designated vehicle, perform the specified diagnosis and fill in the 
worksheet using the proper ‘‘Complaint, Cause and Correction” format. 

Vehicle: Chassis #: Production Date: 

Complaint: 

Cause: 


Correction: 



94 

E46 Central Body Electronics 




Workshop Exercise 


Using the proper test cables, measure the LIN-Bus signal at the GM using the oscil¬ 
loscope and observe the pattern. Operate mirror functions and observe changes to 
the LIN-Bus signal. 

What is observed regarding the LIN-Bus signal and what are the changes if any, when 
operation various mirror functions? 


Using the proper fused jumper, ground the LIN-Bus and observe any functional 
changes to the mirror system. 

What is observed regarding mirror operation and what fault codes, if any are stored? 


Connect the proper test cables (amp clamp) to check for closed circuit current draw. 
Monitor the closed circuit current until the vehicle goes to sleep and record your 
observations below: 

Record the current draw at the following time values: 


Time 

Current Values 

1 minute 

Amps 

5 minutes 

Amps 

10 minutes 

Amps 

15 Minutes 

Amps 

After 16 minutes 

Amps 


95 

E46 Central Body Electronics 

















- j j i Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. List the functions directly controlled by the GM V. 


2. How does the GM V communicate with other control modules? 


3. How does the GM V signal the tilt sensor, UIS sensor and siren that the alarm 
system has been armed? 


4. How does the GM V recognize the key position from the drivers door? What is the 
best way to check those signals? 


5. What additional output does the GM V use for the E46 convertible central locking 
system? 


96 

E46 Central Body Electronics 


























- j j i Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

6. Describe the procedure used by the GM V to recognize an FZV key. Can the GM 
differentiate between different keys? How many can it recognize? 


7. Explain why the model year 2000 FZV key no longer has replaceable batteries, and 
describe the charging process. 


8. Describe what happens when the GM V receives the crash signal from the MRS 
control module: 


9. Why does the SHD (sunroof) module reguire initialization but the windows do not? 


10. What type of sensor is used to detect the position of a seat with Memory? What 
type of signal does it produce? 


97 

E46 Central Body Electronics 



























