Table of Contents 


MS45.1 

Subject Page 

MS45.1 

Purpose of the System .3 

System Components.4 

New System Component / Functions .6 

PowerSupply .7 

Air M anagement .13 

Fuel M anagement .14 

Emissions Management.19 

Performance Controls .30 


Initial Print Date: 08/03 Revision Date: 09/03 











MS45.1 


Model: E46 - with M54orM56 SULEVengine 
E60- 525i,530i 
E83 - M54B30 automatic 

Engine Management: M54B25, M54B30, M56 SULEV Engines 

Production: Start of Production MY 2003 to present - E46 

Start of Production MY 2004 to present- E60, E83 

Pin Connector: 134 Pins - 5 Modular Connectors 

■BIECTWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Diagnose the IBS via the ECM 

• Understand the Fuel Delivery System including service access 

• Explain the Filler Venting System 

• Diagnose the M ini HFM 

• Explain FDC influence on performance 


2 


MS45.1 


MS45.1 

Purpose of the System 

The M 545.1 system is a further enhancement of the M S45 system currently used on M 54 
engines and manages the following functions: 



The basic engine management inputs, processes and outputs are not included in this 
module because they have not changed. Refer to modules M 542/43 and M 545 in this 
workbook for additional detailed information. Also, refer to ST045 E85 Technical Training 
hand out for additional detailed information on the M S45 Engine Management System. 

The following section is based on new controls / functions for MS45.1 system. 


3 

MS45.1 


































System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



4 


MS45.1 















































































































System Components: Bus Overview 


LU 



n 

(N 

O 

V 

CD 

CT1 

CN 

O 


Z 

< 

O 

0. 


■c 

Ol 

c 

a 

X 


(0 

o 

5 


< 

o 


5 

MS45.1 
























































New System Components / Functions 

MS45.1 Engine Control Module: The ECM is located in the under hood E box (below). 
The following modified controls / functions have been made to M S45.1 for use in the E60. 

New hot film air mass sensor (HFM ). 

Changed data record variant (matched to E60). 

Lead to the CAS forstart enable (starting relay is integrated in the CAS). (automatic/SM G 
transmissions only). 

The Driving Dynamics control (FDC) signal is transmitted via the PT-CAN. 

The cruise control (FGR) signal is sent from the M FL via the PT-CAN to the ECM . 
Connection of the intelligent battery sensor (IBS) to the bit-serial data interface (BSD). 
The software for power management (vehicle electrical system) is integrated in the EC M. 
The A/C compressor is activated via the PT-CAN. 

Fault diagnosis is performed through the SGM via the PT-CAN to the ECM. 

Activation of the ECM main relay (525i / 530i in E box, 545i in IVM ). 

Bosch LSU 4.2 linear lambda oxygen sensors (pre-catalyst as in N62). 

M ini hot film air mass sensor (HFM ) in the secondary air system. 



The 134 pin ECM is manufactured by Siemens to BMW specifications. The ECM is the 
SKE (standard shell construction) housing and uses 5 modular connectors. Fortesting, 
use the Universal Adapter Set (break-out box) Special Tool #90 88 6 121 300. 


6 

MS45.1 









Power Supply 


ECM Main Relay 

The ECM main relay in the E60 is supplied with power by the ECM throughout the PT-CAN 
bus activity. Voltage is supplied to all the output actuators (which receive power via KL 87 
from the relay) throughout the PT-CAN bus activity. 


The activation of main relay (525i / 530i in E box, 545i in IVM) KL 87 is necessary for the 
function of the bit-serial data interface (BSD). The BSD is supplied with power by the ECM 
via KL 87 and a pull up resistor. The following components communicate with the ECM via 
the bit-serial data interface: 


Alternator 

Intelligent Battery Sensor (IBS - refer to Voltage Supply and Bus Systems for more 
detailed information) 



1. Intelligent Battery Sensor (IBS) 

2. Battery 

3. Ignition / Starter Switch (ZAS) 

4. ECM 

5. Alternator 

6. Starter 


7. Integral Starter Relay (525i / 530i in CAS, 545i in IVM) 

8. Rear Power Distribution Box w/ Terminal 30g Relay 

9. Front Power Distribution Box 

10. Car Access System (CAS) 

11. Micro-Power Module (MPM) 


7 


MS45.1 


















Lead to Car Access System (CAS) 

A lead is installed between the ECM and the CAS for vehicles with automatic orSMG trans¬ 
missions and the comfort starting function. The CAS contains the function of the electronic 
immobilizer (EWS - as in the E65) and the starter relay. 

The ECM supplies the CAS with the signal for start enable. This facilitates the comfort 
starting function and prevents starter engagement while the engine is running. 


Intelligent Battery Sensor (IBS) 

The IBS sends the calculated batten/ values to the ECM via the BSD. The IBS calculates 
changes in battery SoC/SoH based on information received from the ECM on the battery 
during the period of time between engine "OFF" and deactivation of the ECM main relay. 
After the ECM main relay has been switched off, the IBS continues to constantly observe 
the SoC of the battery. 

Terminal IBS Wake-up 

When the key is switched off, before the ECM enters sleep mode, the ECM informs the IBS 
of the current SoC of the battery. The IBS monitors the SoC and when it drops below the 
programmed threshold, a terminal 15 wake-up signal is sentto the ECM. The ECM wakes 
up, obtains information on the current SoC of the batten/ from the IBS and requests the 
auxiliary electrical loads to switch off. 

Afterone wake-up sequence the IBS is prohibited from waking the vehicle again during this 
key off cycle. The vehicle subsequently reassumes sleep mode. 

The ECM reads the histogram after starting the vehicle. A corresponding entry is made in 
the ECM fault code memory if a closed-circuit current infringement is determined. 

IBS Diagnosis 

The IBS features a fault code memory that is read out by the ECM . Self diagnosis checks 
the voltage, current, temperature measurement, terminal 15 wake up as well as system 
errors in the IBS. 


Alternator 

Bosch and Valeo alternators are installed in the E60. The alternators are fitted depending 
on the type of engine and equipment configuration. They differ with regard to their rating 
of 140 A and 170 A and are aircooled. 


8 


MS45.1 



Power Management 


The power management software is contained in the ECM . When the vehicle is at rest, the 
IBS is partially responsible for power management. The tasks of the power management 
system include: 


Adaptation of the alternator charging voltage 

Idle speed boost for increasing the power output of the alternator 

Reduction of peak loads in the event of a shortfall in coverage provided by the vehicle 

electrical system 

Deactivation by means of bus messages of electric loads such telephone, on reaching 
the start capability limit of the vehicle 





INPUT 


4 



DME 


® 


@ 

EPROM 



• 


« 

. L_ L . . 



OUTPUT 




KT-11339 


1. Battery Voltage 

2. Current Input 

3. Temperature Input 

4. ECM 

5. Power Management 


6. EPROM with maps for Voltage,Current and Temp 

7. Idle Speed control 

8. Specified Alternator Charging Voltage 

9. Deactivation of Electrical Loads 

10. Peak Load Reduction 


Variable Battery Charging Voltage 

The variable battery charging voltage function ensures improved charging management of 
the battery in unfavorable driving situations. The power management controls the temper¬ 
ature dependent voltage for the charging voltage of the alternator via the BSD line. 


9 

MS45.1 














Idle Speed Boost 

The idle speed can be increased in situations where the battery does not cover power 
requirements. When the specified voltage alone is no longer sufficient, the ECM boosts the 
idle speed corresponding to the engine status. 

Reducing Peak Loads 

The peak load of the vehicle electrical system is reduced when there is still a shortfall in bat¬ 
tery coverage despite boosting idle speed. Peak load reduction is accomplished by: 

Reducing power output, e.g. by controlling the clock cycles of the rear window defog- 
ger 

If reducing the power output is not sufficient, individual electric loads can be switched 
off in extreme situations 

Electric Load Cutout 

The electric loads in the E60 are divided into the following categories: 

Comfort loads, e.g. window defogger, seat heating, steering wheel heating 

Electric loads switch off automatically after engine "OFF." These electric loads can be acti¬ 
vated again after the vehicle has been restarted. 


Legally required auxiliary electric loads, e.g. side lights, hazard warning lights 

Legally required auxiliary loads must be operational fora certain period of time after engine 
"OFF." These legally required electric loads are not switched off even on reaching the start 
capability limit of the battery. 


Auxiliary electric loads, e.g. independent heating, independent ventilation, communica¬ 
tion components such as central information display, telephone, telematic services 

Auxiliary loads can be switched on after engine "OFF." The comfort electric loads switch 
off automatically on reaching the start capability limit of the battery. Switch off is request¬ 
ed by the EC M in the form of a CAN message. 


System related afterrunning loads, e.g. electric cooling fan 
System related afterrunning loads can maintain operation fora defined period of time 


10 

MS45.1 



Battery Charge Management 

There are 2 "counters" in the ECM power management module. One counter is responsi¬ 
ble forthe battery charge and the otherforthe battery discharge level. The state of charge 
(SoC) of the battery is formed by the difference between the charge acceptance and draw 
level. 

The power management calculates the current SoC value on restarting the vehicle. The 
power management receives the corresponding data from the IBS via the BSD. 

Battery State of Health 

The IBS measures the drop in the battery terminal voltage and the starting current of the 
starter when the vehicle is started. The IBS detects vehicle start based on current draw in 
excess of 200A. The engine running signal is made available by the ECM . Internal resis¬ 
tance of the battery is calculated from the current and voltage drop. 

Starting current and voltage drop determined during the start phase are transferred via the 
BSD to the ECM. From this data, the power management calculates the battery state of 
health (SoH). 

Data Transfer to the IBS 

The following data is transferred via the BSD to the IBS before the ECM assumes sleep 
mode: 

Battery SoC 
Battery SoH 

Outside (ambient) temperature 
Available discharge level 
Terminal IBS wake-up enable 
Terminal IBS wake-up disable 
ECM enters sleep mode 


Notes: 


11 


MS45.1 





Workshop Exercise - Power Supply 


1. Where are these components located (in the vehicle) and what are the component num¬ 
bers? 


525i / 530i (545i) 

ECM Main Relay 

S tarter R elay _ 

Fuel Injector Relay _ 


2. Where are the Engine Management power supply fuses located? 


525i/530i 

(5451) _ 


3. Does the 525H 530i have Comfort Start? _ 

If yes, what component controls this function? 
(5451) _ 


4. What new functions do you observe about the mechanical Ignition switch (with the key)? 


5. Disconnect the B + power wire for the IBS (at the battery), is there a Test Plan available? 


What Diagnosis, Operation and component selection path(s) did you select to discov¬ 
er if a Test Plan was available? _ 

6. Select Control Unit Functions, Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under the "Part 
Functions" column for observing the "Messages and Results" of the IBS? _ 


12 


MS45.1 




Air Management 

Hot Film Air Mass Sensor (HFM) 

A new hot film air mass sensor (HFM) manufactured by 
Siemens is used for the M54 in the E60. The HFM is located 
behind the air filter housing in the intake air ducting. 

1. Intake air temperature sensor 

2. Hot film air mass sensor 

3. O-ring 

KT-10819 

The HFM is inserted in the air filter housing (plug in) and secured with two screws. In this 
position the HFM is freely suspended in the intake air flow. The HFM is more compact in 
design than its predecessor and the grill is now omitted. This compact design decreases 
pressure loss in the intake track. 

Its operation and output signals are the same as the previous HFM. The intake air tem¬ 
perature sensor is integrated in the HFM . 



Notes: 


13 

MS45.1 





















Fuel Management 

Fuel Tank 

The fuel tank is made of high density 
polyethylene (reduced weight) layers 
which is manufactured to meet safety 
requirements. 

The fuel tank has a capacity of 70 litres 
(18.5 gal), including a reserve capacity of 
10 litres. 


A mid-chassis mounted "saddle" type 
tank (1) is used providing a tunnel for the 
driveshaft but creates two separate lower 
chambers. 

The E60 fuel tank design reduces the potential evaporative emissions. This design reduces 
the number of external connections and openings by increasing the amount of "in tank" or 
integral components including molding the filler pipe to the tank. 

The fuel tank is held in place by 2 retaining bands. The tank is secured in the middle by a 
plastic lug formed into the tank. All body contact points are insulated with foam or rubber. 

The service access caps are locat¬ 
ed at the top of the fuel tank. The 
following components can be 
accessed from the vehicle interior: 

Right swirl pot, fuel pump, fuel 
level sensor, suction-jet pump, 
fuel lines to left tank half and left 
suction-jet pump. 

Left fuel level sensor, fuel filter 
and fuel pressure regulator. 

1. Towards front of vehicle 

The six pin wiring harness connector is located on the right service cap. The six pin wiring- 
harness connector has 2 wires for the fuel pump power supply and 2 wires for both fuel 
level sensors. The fuel feed line is connected to the left service cap with a quick release 
coupling. 

14 




MS45.1 





Fuel Delivery Unit 

The fuel delivery unit located in the fuel tank ensures bubble free fuel delivery underall oper¬ 
ating conditions. In case of service, the left and right fuel delivery units can be removed 
completely. The two fuel level sensors can be replaced individually. 


1. Service access, left 

2. Fuel filter 

3. Fuel pressure regulator 

(3.5 bar) 

4. Fuel delivery unit, left 

5. Fuel delivery unit, right 

6. Cross over lines 

7. Swirl pot 

8. Service access, right 

9. Tank bottom 



Swirl Pot 

The swirl pot contains the electric fuel pump and a suction-jet pump and is open at the top. 
The base of the swirl pot features an outlet protection valve, which allows fuel to flow from 
the right tank half into the swirl pot. It prevents the fuel from flowing back into the right tank 
half (trap). 

The swirl pot ensures that the fuel pump is always immersed in fuel so that the pump does 
not draw in air. Bubble free fuel delivery is very important particularly at low fuel levels and 
under high driving dynamics conditions when the tank is almost completely empty. 


Notes: 


15 

MS45.1 

















Fuel System 



1. Filler neck 

2. Outlet protection valve 

3. Electric fuel pump 

4. Fuel filter 

5. Fuel supply line 

6. Fuel injectors/rail 

7. Fuel pressure regulator 

8. Suction-jet pump, left 

9. Suction-jet pump, right 

10. Fuel level sensor, right 

11. Fuel level sensor, left 

12. Service access cap, left 


13. Service access cap, right 

14. Filling vent valve 

15. Service vent valve 

16. Service vent valve 

17. DMTL with activated carbon canister 

18. Tank vent valve (evap. purge) 

19. Evaporative purge air 

20. Air filter 

21. ECM 

22. Oxygen sensor (pre-catalyst) 

23. Exhaust manifold 


16 

MS45.1 


















































Fuel Delivery 


>V 



KT-11211 


1. Filler pipe 4. Fuel filter 

2. Outlet protection valve 5. Feed line 

3. Electric fuel pump 6. Fuel injectors/rail 

Fuel Flow: Right tank half => swirl pot => fuel pump => fuel filter => fuel rail. 

The fuel is pumped into the right tank half. The swirl pot contains the electric fuel pump. 
Fuel passes through the valve incorporated in the base of the swirl pot into the swirl pot. 
When the fuel level is higher, fuel also enters the swirl pot from the top. 

The electric fuel pump draws in the fuel from the swirl pot (fuel pump relay located in glove- 
box) It pumps the fuel into the fuel filter in the left tank half. The fuel flows from the fuel 
filter through the feed line to the fuel rail. 

Fuel Level Sensors 

The fuel tank contains 2 sensors, one in each tank half. The tank sensors operate with float 
elements, which are attached to a pivoted arm (angle measurement). A specific angle of 
the sensor joint corresponds to each tank chamber fill level. 

The sensor joint incorporates a potentiometer with wipers and resistor paths. Every angle 
has a specific resistance value. The sensor is supplied with 5 Volts by the instrument clus¬ 
ter and measures the voltage drop by the current resistance on which the wiper is resting. 

The voltage drop measured is processed in the instrument cluster as follows: 


Conversion into a fuel level for the two chambers (on the basis of a comparison table) 
Display of the fuel level 


MS45.1 




















Fuel Pressure Regulation 



1. Fuel pressure regulator (3.5 bar) 3. Return line 

2. Suction-jet pump, left 4. Suction-jet pump, right 

Fuel Flow: From pressure regulator => suction-jet pump in left tank half and suction-jet 
pump in right tank half => swirl pot in right tank half. 

The suction-jet pumps direct the fuel from the left and right tank halves into the swirl pot. 
This ensures that the electric fuel pump always has a sufficient supply of fuel available. 

The fuel filter incorporates the pressure regulator. The pressure regulator is a spring loaded 
diaphragm regulator, which limits the pressure in the fuel feed line to 3.5 bar (for M 54). 

When the pressure rises above 3.5 bar, the pressure regulatoropens a discharge port. The 
excess fuel flows back through the discharge port into the right tank half (swirl pot) and dri¬ 
ves the two suction-jet pumps (non-return fuel system). The fuel feed line delivers the fuel 
at 3.5 bar to the fuel rail. 



Workshop Exercise - Fuel Management 


Using the mock up cut away fuel tank assembly: 

1. Remove the service access caps, fuel pump and fuel filter. 


18 

MS45.1 




























Emissions Management - M54B25 / M54B30 Ultra Low Emission Vehicle II 
(ULEVII) 

LEV II - Amendments to Low-Emission Vehicle regulations 

At its November 1998 meeting, the Air Resources Board (ARB) amended California's Low- 
Emission Vehicle (LEV) regulations. The new amendments, known as LEV II, will advance 
the state's clean air goals through improved emission reduction standards for automobiles. 
The ARB first adopted LEV standards in 1990. These first LEV standards run from 1994 
through 2003. 

LEV II regulations, running from 2004 through 2010, represent continuing progress in emis¬ 
sion reductions. As the state's passenger vehicle fleet continues to grow and more sport 
utility vehicles and pickup trucks are used as passengercars ratherthan work vehicles, the 
new, more stringent LEV II standards are necessary for California to meet federally-man¬ 
dated clean air goals outlined in the 1994 State Implementation Plan (SIP). 

LEV II brings the advanced emission controls of passenger cars to light trucks and sport 
utility vehicles; 

Near-zero evaporative emissions 

Advanced electronic engine management and on-board diagnostic systems 
M ore efficient catalysts 
Increased engine durability 


The SIP is the state's "road map" to attain federal clean air standards by 2010 and includes 
among its measures strategies to further reduce air pollution from automobiles and other 
mobile sources. When LEV II is fully implemented in 2010, it is estimated that smog-form¬ 
ing emissions in the Los Angeles area will be reduced by 57 tons per day, while the 
statewide reduction will be 155 tons per day. 

The U.5. EPA has proposed the adoption of more stringent "Tier 2" (II) exhaust emission 
standards to start with the 2004 model year. The current federal evaporative emission 
standards are very similar to the current California standards. The more stringent California 
LEV I and LEV II programs are necessary to attain the national and state ambient ozone 
standards, and to fulfill the requirements of state and federal law. 


19 

M S 45 1 



Evaporative Emissions Standards 

Evaporative emissions from motor vehicles account for approximately half of the reactive 
organic gas (ROG) motor vehicle emission inventory in the state, and are classified into 
three types - running loss, hot soak and diurnal emissions. 

Running loss emissions occur when the vehicle is driven. 

Hot soak emissions occur immediately after a fully-warmed up vehicle is stationary with 
the engine turned off. 

Diurnal (daily, happening every day) emissions occur when a vehicle is parked and are 
caused by daily ambient temperature changes. M ost of these emissions result during 
increasing ambient temperatures which cause an expansion of the vapor in the fuel tank. 


Exhaust Emission Reductions 

The LEV II amendments include three major interrelated elements designed to reduce to 
exhaust emissions: 

Restructuring the light-duty truck category so that most SUVs, mini-vans and pick-up 
trucks are subject to the same low-emission vehicle standards as passenger cars 

Strengthening the NOx standard for passengercarand light-duty truck LEVs and ULEVs, 
and changing other emission standards 

Establishing more stringent 2004 and subsequent model year phase-in requirements for 
passenger cars, lightduty trucks and medium-duty vehicles. They also contain various 
other changes, including elimination of the TLEV standard after the 2003 model year. 


The LEV II Amendments 

The LEV II amendments affect passenger cars, light-duty trucks, and medium-duty vehi¬ 
cles. The main elements are: 

Extension of passenger car emission standards to heavier sport utility vehicles and pick 
up trucks (with gross vehicle weight up to 8,500 pounds) which formerly had been reg¬ 
ulated under less stringent emission standards. 

Extension and tightening of the fleet average emission standards during 2004-2010 
(a fleet includes all new vehicles from an auto manufacturer) 

Creation of a new super-ultra low emission vehicle (SULEV) category for light-duty vehi 
cles (SULEV'S will only emit a single pound of hydrocarbons during 100,000 miles of dri¬ 
ving - about the same as spilling a pint of gasoline) 


20 

MS45.1 



Significantly lower oxides of nitrogen emission standards for the low and ultra-low emis¬ 
sion vehicle categories, a reduction of 75% from the current LEV standards 

Increased emission control durability standards from 100,000 miles to 120,000 miles for 
passenger cars and light trucks 

Further reduction of evaporative emissions 

Creation of partial zero-emission vehicle (ZEV) credits for vehicles that achieve near zero 
emissions. The credits would include full ZEV credit for a stored hydrogen fuel cell vehi¬ 
cle, 0.7 credit for methanol reformer fuel cell vehicles, 0.4 credit for a compressed nat¬ 
ural gas 5ULEV and 0.2 fora gasoline fueled 5ULEV 

Changes in how the smog index is calculated 

Amendments to the zero-emission and hybrid electric vehicle test procedures 

Removal of a less stringent emission standard that would have resulted in increased 
sales of new diesel cars, pickups, and SUVs. 


E60 Evaporative Emissions 

The control of the evaporative fuel vapors (Hydrocarbons) from the fuel tank is important for 
the overall reduction in vehicle emissions. The evaporative system has been combined with 
the ventilation of the fuel tank, which allows the tank to breath (equalization). The overall 
operation provides: 

An inlet vent, to an otherwise "sealed" fuel tank, for the the entry of air to replace the fuel 
consumed during engine operation. 

An outlet vent with a storage canister to " trap and hold" fuel vapors that are produced 
by the expansion/evaporation of the fuel in the tank, when the vehicle is stationary. 

The canister is then "purged" using the engine vacuum to draw the fuel vapors into the 
combustion chamber. This "cleans" the canister allowing for additional storage. Like any 
other form of combustible fuel, the introduction of these vapors on a running engine must 
be controlled. 

The ECM controls the Evaporative Emission Valve which regulates purging of evaporative 
vapors. The evaporative system must be monitored for correct purge operation and Leak 
Detection. 


21 


MS45.1 



The E60 fuel tank design reduces the potential evaporative emissions. This design reduces 
the number of external connections and openings by increasing the amount of "in tank" or 
integral components including molding the filler pipe to the tank. In addition, the plastic 
walls of the fuel tank are made up of several layers. 



KT-11188 


1. Activated carbon canister (with DMTL) 

2. Port, purge air line 

3. Fresh air filter 

4. Filler neck 

5. Service vent line 

6. Filler vent line 


7. Service access cap, right 

8. Service vent valve 

9. Filler vent valve 

10. Service access cap, left 

11. Service vent valve 

12. Towards front of vehicle 


Note: The distinction between the following vent gases: 

Service vent gases - service vent gases are created at high ambient temperatures by 
heating of the fuel. 

Filler vent gases - filler vent gases are created by the air displaced by fuel during 
refuelling. 


22 


MS45.1 













Service Venting System 

The service venting system is integrated in the tank system and ensures pressure com¬ 
pensation in the tank for the following situations: 

Reduction of Excess Pressure 

Excess pressure is generated by heating of fuel. The gases rising from the tank flow 
through the service vent valves and the vent lines to the activated carbon filter. 

Compensation of Negative Pressure 

Negative pressure is generated by the fuel pump pumping off the fuel. The air is routed in 
the opposite direction for pressure compensation. Fresh air is routed to the fuel tank via 
the DMTL fresh air filter on the activated carbon filter. 


Valves for Ventilation and Venting 

Service Vent Valves 

The fuel tank incorporates 2 service vent valves with a rollover function: if the car is inclined 
at an angle exceeding 45 s (impending or actual rollover situation), the floats in the service 
vent valves close off the vent apertures. This prevents any fuel from escaping through the 
activated carbon filter. 

A compensating volume is required in the fuel tank for the service venting function. This 
compensating volume is the space above the fuel level when the fuel tank is completely full 
(approx. 6 liters). The compensating volume remains unfilled when automatic cutout of the 
fuel pump nozzle is triggered. 

Pressure Relief Valve 

Any damage to the vent lines or the activated carbon filter may result in a pressure increase 
in the fuel tank. To prevent such a pressure increase, the filler cap incorporates a 300 mbar 
pressure relief valve. 


Notes: 


23 

MS45.1 



Filler Venting System 



^ vL> vS» 


& & 




KT-11184 


1. Filler neck 

2. Outlet protection valve 

3. Electric fuel pump 

4. Fuel filter 

5. Fuel supply line 

6. Fuel injectors/rail 

7. Fuel pressure regulator 

8. Suction-jet pump, left 

9. Suction-jet pump, right 

10. Fuel level sensor, right 

11. Fuel level sensor, left 

12. Service access cap, left 


13. Service access cap, right 

14. Filling vent valve 

15. Service vent valve 

16. Service vent valve 

17. DMTL with activated carbon canister 

18. Tank vent valve (evap. purge) 

19. Evaporative purge air 

20. Air filter 

21. ECM 

22. Oxygen sensor (pre-catalyst) 

23. Exhaust manifold 


Refuelling 

The following safety requirements are met when the tank is filled: 

Grounding - The filler neck is provided with a metal bayonet collar which accommodates 
the filler cap or the fuel pump nozzle. The filler neck is grounded by the cap or fuel noz¬ 
zle insertion. 

Prevention of fuel sloshing back - A slosh baffle is fitted where the filler neck enters the 
tank. This prevents the fuel from sloshing back into the filler pipe. 


24 


MS45.1 









































On-Board Refueling Vapor Recovery (ORVR - DM TL Equipped Vehicles) 

The ORVR system recovers and stores hydrocarbon fuel vapor during refueling. When 
refueling the E60, the pressure of the fuel entering the tank forces the hydrocarbon vapors 
through the Filling Vent Valve (14) and the large tank ventilation line into the Carbon Canister 
(17). The HC's are stored in the Carbon Canister and the system can then "breathe" 
through the DM TL and the fresh air filter. 

Note: A small diameter connection to the filler neck is provided and is necessary for check¬ 
ing the filler cap/neck during Evaporative Leak Testing. 

The ventilation continues until the rising fuel level lifts the float in the Filling Vent Valve (14) 
and closes the outlet. When the ventilation outlet is closed, a pressure cushion (vaporarea) 
is created in the fuel tank. This creates a backup of fuel into the filler neck and the tank is 
full. 

This leaves a vaporarea of approximately 6 liters above the fuel level. This area provides 
integral liquid/vapor separation. The vapor condensates separate and drain back into the 
fuel. The remaining vapors exit the fuel tank (when sufficient pressure is present) through 
the Service Vent Valves (15 & 16) to the Carbon Canister. 

Note: The Service Vent Valves are also equipped with protection floats in the event of an 
"overfill" situation. 


E60 Exhaust Emissions 

The combustion process of a gasoline powered engine produces Carbon Monoxide (CO), 
Hydrocarbons (HC) and Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx). 

• Carbon Monoxide is a product of incomplete combustion under conditions of air deficiency, 

CO emissions are dependent on the air/fuel ratio. 

• Hydrocarbon are also a product of incomplete combustion which results in unburned fuel. 

HC emissions are dependent on air/fuel ratio and the ignition of the mixture. 

• Oxides of Nitrogen are a product of peak combustion temperature (and temperature duration). 

NOx emissions are dependent on internal cylinder temperature affected by the air/fuel ratio 
and ignition of the mixture. 

Control of exhaust emissions is accomplished by the engine and engine management 
design as well as after-treatment. 

• The ECM manages exhaust emissions by controlling the air/fuel ratio and ignition. 

• The ECM controlled Secondary Air Injection further dilutes exhaust emissions leaving the engine 
and reduce the catalyst warm up time. 

• The Catalytic Converter further reduces exhaust emissions leaving the engine. 

25 

MS45.1 



Secondary Air Injection 

Injecting ambient air into the exhaust stream after a cold engine start reduces the warm up 
time of the catalysts and reduces HC and CO emissions. The ECM controls and monitors 
the Secondary Air Injection. 

An Electric Secondary Air Pump and Air Injection Valve direct fresh air through an internal 
channel in the cylinder head into the exhaust ports. 

The Air Injection Valve is opened by air 
pressure (from the pump) and is closed 
by an internal spring. 


1. Secondary air (injection) valve 

2. Secondary air filter 

3. M ini Hot film air mass sensor (HFM) 

4. Intake hose 

5. Secondary air pump (SLP) 

The secondary air pump is equipped with an additional intake hose (4) to accommodate a 
secondary air filter with the mini HFM (3). The mini HFM is secured in the secondary air 
cleaner with two screws. 



Mini Hot Film Air Mass Sensor (HFM) 

A compact mini hot film air mass sensor (HFM manufactured by Siemens) is used in the 
secondary air system for the M 54 in the E60 (US market). 


The mini HFM detects the air mass supplied by the secondary- 
air pump. This function monitors the secondary air system for 
OBD compliance. 

When the mini HFM detects no air mass or insufficient air 
mass, a fault is stored in the ECM and the Malfunction 
Indicator Light (M IL) is activated. 

The mini HFM has a compact pipe shaped design with 0-ring 
connections. 



26 

MS45.1 







The "Malfunction Indicator Light" ( M IL) will be illuminated underthe following conditions 

Upon the completion of the next consecutive 
driving cycle where the previously faulted sys¬ 
tem is monitored again and the emissions rele¬ 
vant fault is again present. 

Immediately if a "Catalyst Damaging" 
fault occurs. 

KT-10888 

The illumination of the light is performed in accordance with the Federal Test Procedure 
(FTP) which requires the lamp to be illuminated when: 

A malfunction of a component that can affect the emission performance of the vehicle 
occurs and causes emissions to exceed the standards required by the (FTP). 

Manufacturer-defined specifications are exceeded. 

An implausible input signal is generated. 

Catalyst deterioration causes HC-emissions to exceed the standard (FTP) limit. 

M isfire faults occur. 

A leak is detected in the evaporative system, or "purging" is defective. 

ECM fails to enter closed-loop oxygen sensorcontrol operation within a specified time inter¬ 
val. 

Engine control or automatic transmission control enters a "limp home" operating mode. 

Ignition is on (KLI5) position before cranking =Bulb Check Function 

Within the BMW system the illumination of the Malfunction Indicator Light is performed in 
accordance with the regulations set forth in CARB and as demonstrated via the Federal 
Test Procedure (FTP). 



27 


MS45.1 


The "Malfunction Indicator Light" can be diagnosed with an aftermarket Scan Tool that 
allows Technicians without BMW Special Tools or Equipment to Diagnose an emission sys¬ 
tem failure. 

With the use of a universal scan tool, connected to the 

"OBD" DLC (located in the driver's side lower A-pillar 
area) an SAE standardized DTC can be obtained, 
along with the condition associated with the illumina¬ 
tion of the "M alfunction Indicator Light". 

Using the DISplus or GT1, a fault code and the conditions associated with its setting can 
be obtained prior to the illumination of the "Malfunction Indicator Light". 



\J 


KT-061703 


D-Bus 





LM 


K-CAN 


MOST 


SGM 





SMG 

SBSL 

SBSR 

4 

N 

DME 


AFS 

—- 

DDE* 

TMFA 

TMBF 






-— DSC 

SFZ 

SZL EKP* 

—■ 

1 



1 

- ACC 


ECS 





i 

-— ARS 


AHL 

— 



byteflight 


PT-CAN 


02994_02b 


There is no direct connection to the OBD diagnostic connector. The ECM is connected to 
the SGM via the PT-CAN Bus. The OBD diagnostic connector is connected to the SGM 
via the Diagnosis Bus. 


The hardwire shown above between the CAS2 and the PT-CAN control modules is the 
KLI5 (w up) signal. 


28 

MS45.1 






































Workshop Exercise - Emissions Management 


1. What are the pin and connector numbers at the ECM for the Mini HFM ? 


2. Is there a Test Plan available for the mini HFM ? _ 

If so, disconnect the Mini HFM and activate the Test Plan. 

Reconnect the Mini HFM, clear fault codes and activate the Test Plan again. What do 
you observe? _ 


3. Select Control Unit Functions, Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under the “Part 

Functions" column for observing the "Messages and Results" of the Mini HFM? _ 

4. Is there a "Component Activation" feature for the Secondary Air Pump? _ 

If so, install the appropriate break out box and observe voltage at the ECM on the cir¬ 
cuit that measures the Mini HFM signal. 

With the voltmeter displayed, Component Activate the Secondary Air Pump, what volt¬ 
age did you observe? _ 


Note: QC1 Test Drive 

With the introduction of Seimens M545 and M545.1 engine management systems the 
QC1 test drive shall now include the following procedure. This procedure needs to be per¬ 
formed prior to vehicle delivery to ensure all emission relevant adaptations are validated 
within the EC M (DM E). 

From a stop, accelerate moderately in 1st gear (Ml for automatic). Shift to 2nd gear (M2 
for automatic) and accelerate to 4500rpm minimum. Leaving car in gear, allow vehicle to 
decelerate without touching brakes or accelerator pedal until 1000 rpm is seen. During the 
deceleration there will be a small bump (load reversal) felt at approximately 1200rpm. 

These engine management will be in many future products so it is important to get into 
the habit of performing this procedure prior to new vehicle delivery. This procedure is not 
necessary on existing vehicles or those programmed at a Center. 


29 

MS45.1 




Performance Controls 

Driving Dynamics Control (FDC with SMG - if equipped) 

The M 545.1 EC M contains two different throttle progres¬ 
sion functions (Sport and Normal). The FDC function is 
selected by pressing the '‘SPORT" button located in the 
center console (1). 

When pressed, the button provides an input signal to the 
center console switch center (SZM ). The signal is trans¬ 
mitted from the SZM via the K-CAN > SG M > PT-CAN to 
the ECM and the power steering. 

This activates the sport characteristics for the Electronic 
throttle control (EDK). This provides an increase in throt¬ 
tle opening and response time over the non-sport posi¬ 
tion. 

When this function is activated, "SPORT" appears in the LC display in the instrument clus¬ 
ter. When the ignition is cycled, this function resets back to the non-sport function (it must 
be re-selected by the driver). 



KT-11846 




Workshop Exercise - Performance Controls 


1. What are the pin and connector numbers at the SZM for the SPORT button? 


2. Is there a Test Plan available for FDC ? _ 

3. Select Control Unit Functions, Diagnosis Requests. Is there a status under the "Part 
Functions" column for observing the ",Messages and Results" for the SPORT button? 


If so, what status did you observe (activate and deactive function with the button)? 


30 

MS45.1 



