Table of Contents 

ME 9.2 / 9.2.1 / 9.2.2 

Subject Page 

ME 9.2.2 

Objectives of the Module.2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components .4 

Power Supply.8 

Principle of Operation .9 

Integrated Voltage Supply Module.10 

Engine Wiring Harness.11 

Air Management. 12 

Variable Intake M anifold .14 

Valvetronic.15 

Principle of Operation.19 

Fuel Management.24 

Principle of Operation.31 

Ignition Management.35 

Principle of Operation.38 

Emissions Management.41 

Evaporative Emissions .41 

Exhaust Emissions .45 

Bosch LSU Oxygen Sensor .46 

Secondary Air Injection.50 

Principle of Operation.53 

Performance Controls. 62 

Bi-VAN OS .62 

Oil Condition.66 

Electric Cooling Fan .67 

Alternator.68 

Electronic Box Cooling Fan .70 

Comfort Start.70 

Cruise Control .73 

Review Questions.76 

Initial Print Date: 01/04 Revision Date: 


































ME 9.2/9.2.1/9.2.2 


Model: E65 - 7451 / E66 - 745Li 
E53 - X5 with N62B44 
E60 - 545i 

E 63/64 - 645c i, 645c ic 

Production Date: ME 9.2 - 11/01 - E65, 01/02 - E66 up to 9/2003 

ME 9.2.1 - 9/2003 - 9/2004 
ME 9.2.2 - 9/2004 - present 

Manufacturer: Bosch 

Pin Connector: 134 Pins - 5 Modular Connectors 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Locate and describe the Integrated Voltage Supply Module. 

• Understand Valvetronic Positon Sensor operation. 

• Name the Component Location of the Fuel Supply System. 

• Describe how the Electric Fuel Pump is activated. 

• Identify the type of Ignition Coils used in the ignition system. 

• List where the Evaporative Emission Components are located. 

• Understand Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor operation. 

• Name the functions of the Oil Condition Sensor. 

• Explain the Comfort Start feature. 

• Demonstrate how to program and delete Cruise Control preset speeds. 

2 

ME 9.2 






ME 9.2 

Purpose of the System 

The ME 9.2 system manages the following functions: 




Emissions: 


Performance Controls: 

Secondary Air Injection 


Bi-VANOS 

Pre and Post Catalyst Oxygen Sensing 


Oil Condition 

Oxygen Sensor Heating 


Electric Cooling Fan 

M isfire Detection 


Alternator 

Evaporative Purge Control/Leak Testing 


E-Box Cooling Fan 

M alfunction Indicator Light 


Comfort Start 

Cruise Control 


The basic engine management inputs, processes and outputs are not included in this 
module because they have not changed, referto the ST055 Engine Electronics hand out 
for details. 


3 


ME 9.2 


































System Components 


ME 9.2 Engine Control Module - New Features:This Bosch engine management 
system is introduced for more stringent emission requirements as well as reducing fuel 
consumption and increasing driving performance. A flash EE PROM is used as the stor¬ 
age medium for the program data, fault code memory as well as the adaptation values. 
The ECM works in combination with the Valvetronic Control Module. Both Control 
Modules control the N62 engine: 

• ME 9.2 ECM - overall engine manage¬ 
ment 

• Valvetronic Control Module - intake valve 
lift 

The ECM (1) is located in the electronic box in 
the engine compartment together with the 
Valvetronic Control Module (2) and the Inte¬ 
grated Voltage Supply Module (3). 

The ECM controls an electric cooling fan in 
the base of the electronic box to draw in cool 
airfrom the passenger compartment. 



The 134 pin ME 9.2 ECM is 
manufactured by Bosch to BMW 
specifications.The ECM is the 
SKE (standard shell construction) 
housing and uses 5 modular con¬ 
nectors. 

Fortesting, use the Universal 
Adapter Set (break-out box) 

Special Tool: # 90 88 6 121 300 

Starting with the M E 9.2 system, 
a Multichannel AdapterTool is used in 
conjunction with the DISplus to perform the 
complete N62 Engine Test (found under 
Service Functions). 

The Multichannel AdapterTool is installed (in 
series) between the ECM and the engine har¬ 
ness connectors (1, 3 and 5). In addition, the 
four cables of M F K2 plug into the adapter sur¬ 
face. 



X60001 X60002 X60003 X60004 X60005 

9-Pin 24-Pin 52-Pin 40-Pin 9-Pin 



4 


ME 9.2 




















ME 9.2 ECM Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



IVM 


B+ 


KL 15 


KL15 "WAKEUP" 


KL 50E 


CAS 


31 



MAP 

SENSOR 


‘■Lr - 

VARIABLE 
INTAKE MANIFOLD 
MOTOR 


AIRMASS 

SIGNAL 




COOLUfT 

TEMP- A 
SEMMWyj \_J 



RPM 

SEI«« 




CAM. 

SEItSOK 

(4X) 


VALVETRONIC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 


KNOCK 

SENSOR 

(4X) 





DMTL 



RADIATOR OUTLET 
TEMPERATURE 
SENSOR 


m ) mniJiiG code _n_n_ri_rL 


KL50E 


CAS 



CRUISE CONTROL 


0 


■LIGHT 

WITCH 


DCS VEHICLE SPEED 



GENERATOR 


EHDIHE 

LHLSihKlFi 





MU 


ME 9.2 


POWER 

SUPPLY 


AIR 

MANAGEMENT 


FUEL 

MANAGEMENT 


IGNITION 

MANAGEMENT 


EMISSION 

MANAGEMENT 


PERFORMANCE 

MANAGEMENT 



IVM 


B+ 


IGNITION COILS 


INJECTORS 


OXYGEN SENSORS 


VALVETRONIC CONTROL MODULE 


CAS 



VALVETRONIC 

CONTROL 

MODULE 




elKUM 



VALVETRONIC 
MOTOR & VALVE 


FL*I UJECTORS 

(8X) 


ZGM 


SIM | — | SBSR^ -(7) 



dNmag coil 

GGITTROL 

m 


HEATED THERMOSTAT 


SENSCn 

HEATIHU 


h { 

SECONDARY 

+ 

i_ij 

AIR PUMP 

RELAY 




MU 





: 

□ 

1 

1-UPtDE 




H 

VALVE 



L 

2] 

hmudl 

a 


CHECK 

ENGINE 

LIGHT 


m a 




42 - 04-23 

5 


ME 9.2 
























































































































































































































Components 

The following list shows the new components of the M E 9.2 Engine M anagement 
Control: 

Sensors 

Accelerator Pedal _ 

Hot Film Air Mass Meter (HFM) _ 

Knock Sensor 1 _ 

Knock Sensor2 _ 

Knock Sensor 3 _ 

Knock Sensor4 _ 

Crankshaft Sensor _ 

Oxygen Sensor Post Catalytic Converter 1 _ 

Oxygen Sensor Post Catalytic Converter 2 _ 

Oxygen Sensor Pre Catalytic Converter 1 _ 

Oxygen Sensor Pre Catalytic Converter2 _ 

Coolant Outlet Temperature Sensor _ 

Water Temperature Sensor _ 

Exhaust Camshaft Sensor 1 _ 

Exhaust Camshaft Sensor 2 _ 

Intake Camshaft Sensor 1 _ 

Intake Camshaft Sensor 2 _ 

Intake Manifold Pressure Sensor _ 

Oil Condition Sensor _ 

Barometric Pressure Sensor in the ECM (P2) _ 

Variable Intake Manifold Position Sensor _ 

Actuator 

Variable Intake Manifold _ 

Electronic Throttle Valve (EDK) _ 

Injector Valves 1-8 _ 

Electronic Fan _ 

Electronic Box Fan _ 

Secondary Air Pump _ 

Evaporator Emission Valve _ 

VANOS Exhaust Camshaft 1 _ 

VANOS Intake Camshaft 1 _ 

VANOS Exhaust Camshaft 2 _ 

VANOS Intake Camshaft 2 _ 

Valvetromc Control Module _ 

Ignition Coils 1-8 _ 

Map Controlled Thermostat _ 

42 - 04-24 


6 


ME 9.2 










































Components 

The following list shows the new components of the M E 9.2 Engine M anagement 
Control: 

Switch 

Starter Switch 

Relay 

ECM Relay 
Starter M otor Relay 
Secondary Air Pump Relay 
Valvetronic Relay 

Power Supply Relay to Ignition Coils 

Interface 

Car Can Bus High 
Car Can Bus Low 

Engine LoCAN High (Engine Local CAN) 

Engine LoCAN Low (Engine Local CAN) 

















Power Supply 

KL30 - Battery Voltage: B+ is the main supply of operating voltage to the ECM which is 
provided by the Power Module through the Integrated Voltage Supply Module (IVM). The 
IVM simply provides a splice point to provide B + to the ECM . 



42 - 02-01 


42 - 02-01 

Power Supplies: The component power supplies (KL15 and ECM Relays) are fused to the 
ME 9.2 ECM and output components. The fuses and relays are housed in the Integrated 
Voltage Supply Module (IVM) located in the Electronic Box. The fuses are separately 
replaceable, the relays are integral in the IVM. 

KL15 - Ignition Switch Signal: When the ignition is switched "on” the ECM is informed 
from the CAS Module that the engine is about to be started via a "wakeup" call (15w) over 
the PT CAN line. The ECM also receives a "hardwire" KL15 input from the CAS Module. 
The ECM activates a ground circuit to the IVM to energize three relays providing operating 
power to the ECM and engine management components. KL15 "off" removes the ECM 
operating voltage and the KLI5 signal from the PT CAN bus. 

KL50 E - Start Request Signal: The momentary start request is transmitted from the 
CAS M odule to inform the EC M to activate the starter relay (in the IVM ) and activate engine 
management components. 

Ground: M ultiple ground paths are necessary to complete current flow through the ECM. 


8 

M E 9.2 Power Supply 








































Integrated Voltage Supply Module (IVM) 

The IVM contains integral relays, replaceable fuses and offers a convenient splice point for 
harness connections. The IVM serves as a central power supply for Engine Management 
(including Valvetronic), Electronic Transmission and DSC. This diagram is a partial repre¬ 
sentation of the IVM for Engine Electronics. 



9 

M E 9.2 Power Supply 





























































































































Principle of Operation 


When KL15 is switched "on” the ECM is ready for engine management. The ECM will acti¬ 
vate a ground path to energize the three Engine Control M odule Relays in the IVM (see dia¬ 
gram on the previous page). 

The 1st EC M Relay supplies operating voltage through a fuse (in the IVM) to the ECM. 

The 2nd ECM Relay supplies operating voltage through a fuse (in the IVM) to the Fuel 
Injectors. 

The 3rd ECM Relay supplies operating voltage through a fuse (in the IVM) to the 
Oxygen Sensors. 

The Ignition Coil Relay (4th relay) is energized by the CAS Module which supplies operat¬ 
ing voltage through a fuse (in the IVM) to the Ignition Coils. 


The IVM receives high amperage voltage supply 
from fuses F101 and F104 (100 Amp). The fuse 
junction is located on the right inner fender of 
the engine compartment (under the remote 
charging post). This supply is forthe consumers 
that are controlled by the IVM internal relays. 

When KL15 is switched "off" the ECM operat¬ 
ing voltage is removed. The CAS Module will 
maintain voltage to the Ignition Coil Relay for a 
few seconds to maintain ignition coil activation 
(Emission Optimized - introduced in 2000 MY). 



Ground is required to complete the cur¬ 
rent path through the ECM. The ECM 
also: 

Internally links a constant ground (1) 
to the engine sensors. 

Switches ground (2) to activate 
components. 



10 

M E 9.2 Power Supply 


© © 


42 - 04-03 








































Engine Wiring Harness 



Engine Wiring Harness 


42 - 04-05 


1. Plug connectors to electronic box modules: ECM, Valvetronic and IVM 

2. Plug connectors to fuel injectors 

3. Valvetronic position sensor plug connector 

4. Camshaft position sensors plug connectors 

5. Plug connector to ignition coils 


Indirect Signals and Wiring 

There is no direct connection to the OBD diagnostic connector. The ECM is connected to 
the ZGM (central gateway module) via the PT-CAN bus. The OBD diagnostic connector is 
connected to the ZG M . 

The fuel pump relay is controlled by the ECM via the ZGM and ISIS (Integrated Safety and 
Information System) using the airbag control unit in the SBSR (right-hand side satellite B- 
pillar). This enables the fuel pump to be switched off in the event of an accident. 


There is no direct control for the air conditioning compressor. The A/C compressor is now 
controlled by the IHKA control module. The IHKA signals the ECM via the PT CAN bus and 
the ZGM. 


11 

M E 9.2 Power Supply 



Air Management 

Electronic Throttle Valve: The throttle valve on the N62 is not necessary for engine load 
control. This is carried out by the intake valve variable lift adjustment (Valvetronic). 



• Throttle valve housing with throttle valve 

• Throttle valve actuator 

• Two Throttle valve potentiometers 

• A return spring fitted to the throttle plate shaft 
that assists in reducing the throttle opening to 
a minimum present opening. 


Electronic Throttle Valve 42 - 02-25 

The ECM provides the operating voltage and ground to the Electronic Throttle Valve for 
opening and closing the throttle plate. 


5V 

Throttle Valve Position: The throttle plate position is 4 ' 5V 
monitored by two integral potentiometers providing DC 
voltage feedback signals to the ECM. 

Potentiometer signal 1 is the primary signal (closed 0.5V 
- full open 4.5V). 

Potentiometer signal 2 is used as a plausibility cross- 
check (closed 4.5V - full open 0.5V) through the total ov 
range of throttle plate movement. 


SIGNAL VOLTAGE WITHINTHE 



42 - 04-02 


Notes: 


12 

ME 9.2 Air Management 




















Accelerator Pedal Position (PWG): The 

accelerator pedal module provides two variable 
voltage signals to the ECM that represents 
accelerator pedal position and rate of move¬ 
ment. The ECM will activate the Valvetronic sys¬ 
tem. 

Dual Hall sensors are integral in the accelerator 
pedal module. The ECM compares the two val¬ 
ues for plausibility. 

The ECM provides voltage (5v) and ground for 
the Hall sensors. As the accelerator pedal is 
moved from rest to full throttle, the sensors pro¬ 
duce a variable voltage signal. 


• Hall sensor 1 (request) = 0.5 to 4.5 volts 

• Hall sensor 2 (plausibility) = 0.5 to 2.0 volts 


If the signals are not plausible, the ECM will use 
the lower of the two signals as the request 
input. The acceleration response will be slower 
and the maximum Valvetronic opening will be 
reduced. 



42 - 04-02 



Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM): The air vol¬ 
ume input signal is produced electronically by 
the HFM (1) which uses a heated metal film in 
the air flow stream. The HFM housing is mount¬ 
ed in the air inlet pipe between the air filter and 
the throttle valve. 

As air flows through the HFM, the film is cooled 
changing the resistance which affects current 
flow (voltage drop) through the circuit. The ECM 
monitors this change regulating the amount of 
fuel injected. 



42 - 04-04 


13 

ME 9.2 Air Management 
































































Air Temperature Signal: The HFM contains an integral air temperature sensor. This is a 
Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) type sensor. This signal is needed by the ECM to 
correct the air volume input for changes in the intake air temperature (air density) affecting 
the amount of fuel injected, ignition timing and Secondary Air Injection activation. 

The ECM provides the power supply to the sensor which decreases in resistance as the 
temperature rises and vice versa. The ECM monitors an applied voltage to the sensor that 
will vary as air temperature changes the resistance value. 


Variable Intake Manifold: In the N62 engine, 
the infinitely variable intake manifold is operated 
by turning the rotor in the intake manifold. 

Adjustments to the intake manifold are carried 
out by the ECM controlling a drive unit. The 
drive unit is mounted on the rear of the intake 
manifold. 

The drive unit consists of a 12 V DC electric 
motor with worm gears and an integral poten¬ 
tiometer for the intake manifold position feed¬ 
back. 



42 - 04-05 


The drive unit is equipped with a 5-pin connec¬ 
tor. If the drive unit fails, the system remains in 
its current position. The driver may notice a loss 
in power. 



42 - 04-06 


Notes: 


14 

ME 9.2 Air Management 












Valvetronic: The N62 Valvetronic control system simultaneously varies the valve opening 
time and the valve opening lift according to engine speed and load. The electrical structure 
of the fully variable valve lift adjustment consists of the following individual components: 

.Valvetronic Control - 

P 

• Valvetronic Control Module 

• ECM 

• ECM Main Relay (in the IVM) 

• Valvetronic Relay (in the IVM) 

• Two eccentric shaft adjustment motors 

• Two eccentric shaft position sensors 

• Two magnetic wheels on the eccentric shafts 


The Valvetronic control module adjusts the valve 
lift based on a request from the ECM. The 
Valvetronic control module (located in the E 
Box) adjusts the eccentric shaft motors by two 
internal power output stages. 

Faults in the Valvetronic system are detected by 
the Valvetronic control module and are transmit¬ 
ted via the LoCAN to the ECM where they are 
stored for diagnostics. 



1 


42 - 04-08 


Valvetronic Motors: Two DC motors (2) are fitted to adjust the two eccentric shafts. They 
are operated at a frequency of 16 kHz in order to make exact adjustments. In order to posi¬ 
tion the motors exactly, the polarity is briefly reversed once the target position has been 
reached (as identified by the ECM). This generates braking torque which immediately stops 
the motors. 


The eccentric shaft sensors continuously monitor the position 
of the Valvetronic assembly. The self-stopping of the motors 
and the worm gear drives prevents position changes when 
the system is deactivated. If automatic adjustment is not 
detected, the fault is recorded and the motors are moved 
back to the target position. 

The adjustment time required to move the motors from the 
minimum to the maximum valve lift is approximately 300 ms. 
The motors can peak up to 100 Amps during adjustment. 



15 

ME 9.2 Air Management 











Valvetronic Sensors: Each eccentric shaft is monitored by a magneto-resistive position 
sensor. The N62 engine has two sensor assemblies, one for each eccentric shaft. These 
sensors are very durable for the environment (inside the cylinder head) and cope well with 
vibrations and high temperatures. The sensor assembly consists of: 


• Measuring Sensor 

• Evaluation Sensor 

• Communication Electronics 


A magnetic wheel is mounted on the end of the 
eccentric shaft. The eccentric shaft sensor is 
mounted through the cylinder head cover at the 
back. 

Both sensors monitor the eccentric shaft rotation angle of 180°. The Valvetronic control 
module supplies the sensors with 5 volts and ground. 



v 42-04-10 

Eccentric Shaft Position Sensor 


1. Magnetoresistance element with resistance R (a) 

2. Lines of magnetic field 

3. Direction of rotation of magnetic field 

4. Current flow 1 


The magneto-resistive element consists of a fer¬ 
romagnetic layer. The resistance R is dependent 
on the angle (a) under the influence of a strong 
magnetic field. The magnetic field is generated 
by permanent magnets. 

The resistance of the magneto-resistive element (1) in the sensor is dependent on the direc¬ 
tion of the lines of the magnetic field (2) as influenced by the eccentric shaft magnetic 
wheel. The angle value signal of the measuring sensor is opposite to that of the evaluation 
sensor (opposing voltage values) during the rotation of the eccentric shaft. The Valvetronic 
control module constantly compares the values with each other. 



Magneto-Resistance Principle 

42-04-11 


16 

ME 9.2 Air Management 





The position data “message” is transmitted via a serial interface from the eccentric shaft 
sensors to the Valvetronic control module. Each of the two sensors requires three interfaces 
for data transfer: 

• CS (chip select - measuring sensor or evaluation sensor) 

• DAT (data transfer - of eccentric shaft position) 

• CLK (clock line - signals the sensor requesting an update) 

There is only one clock line, but it works inside the sensor assembly on both the measur¬ 
ing and evaluation sensor. The measuring sensor transmits the eccentric shaft positions to 
the Valvetronic control module at shorter intervals than the evaluation sensor. 

Once the exact position of the eccentric shaft has been recorded by the magneto-resistive 
bridge circuit, this value is stored in an internal register. The Valvetronic control module 
sends the command to the measuring sensor via the CS line to transmit or upload the data 
from the internal register to the output register. The Valvetronic control unit then sends the 
command to the output register via the CLK line to transfer the data. 

The data “message” from the measuring sensor is then issued on the DAT line, giving the 
exact position of the eccentric shaft (at a frequency of 250 kHz). The evaluation sensor 
works similarly but is only periodically checked for position (plausibility). 



42-04-41 


17 

ME 9.2 Air Management 















































Ambient Pressure: The ambient pressure sensor is located in the ECM (integral). This 
sensor enables continuous measurement of the air pressure. The signal is used in the ECM 
to calculate the altitude correction for the mixture formation and as a reference value for the 
intake manifold pressure. 

The voltage supply from the ECM is 5 V. The resistance of the sensor is dependent on pres¬ 
sure. The output voltage signal is processed by the ECM. 


Intake Manifold Pressure Sensor: The pressure sensor is located in the back of intake 
manifold (1 peizo-electric). The voltage supply from the ECM is 5 V. The varying resistance 
of the sensor is dependent on manifold pressure. The output voltage signal is processed 
by the ECM. The intake manifold pressure is calculated by the ECM and is compared with 


the ambient pressure (internally measured). 

An intake manifold vacuum of 50 mbar is 
required for the fuel tank evaporative purge 
function. 

This vacuum is set by the electronic throttle 
valve and monitoring with the intake manifold 
pressure sensor. 





42-04-06 


Notes: 


18 

ME 9.2 Air Management 





















Principle of Operation 


Air flow into the engine is regulated by the Valvetronic system controlling valve lift adjust¬ 
ment. The intake air flow is set by adjusting the valve lift while the throttle valve is fully 
opened. This further improves cylinder filling and reduces fuel consumption. All of the ECM 
monitoring, processing and output functions are a result of regulated air flow. 


The Accelerator Pedal Position is monitored by the ECM for pedal angle position and 
rate of movement. As the accelerator is moved, a rising voltage signal from the Hall sen¬ 
sors requests acceleration (and at what rate). 

The ECM will request the Valvetronic control module to increase the intake valve “lift”. As a 
result of the increased air flow, the ECM will increase the volume of fuel injected into the 
engine and advance the ignition timing. The “full throttle” position indicates maximum 
acceleration to the ECM, and in addition to the functions just mentioned, this will have an 
effect on the air conditioning compressor (covered in Performance Controls). 

As the accelerator pedal is released (integral springs), the decrease in voltage signals the 
ECM to activate fuel shut off if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). The Valvetronic con¬ 
trol module will decrease the valve lift to maintain idle speed. The ECM monitors the engine 
idle speed in addition to the accelerator pedal position and Valvetronic position. 

The pedal position sensor consists of two separate Hall sensors with different voltage char¬ 
acteristics and independent ground and voltage supply. Sensing of the accelerator pedal 
position is redundant. The pedal position sensor is monitored by checking each individual 
sensor channel and comparing the two pedal values. Monitoring is active as soon as the 
sensors receive their voltage supply (KL15). 


The Electronic Throttle valve is operated by the ECM (supplying voltage and ground) for 
opening and closing based on the accelerator pedal position, engine load and intake man¬ 
ifold vacuum. 

When the throttle valve is operated, the ECM monitors feedback potentiometers located on 
the actuator shaft for position/plausibility. These two sensors operate inversely (voltage val¬ 
ues) with throttle plate actuation. 


19 

ME 9.2 Air Management 


The tasks of the throttle valve are: 

Starting the engine 

During the starting procedure at a temperature between 20 °C and 60 °C, airflow is con¬ 
trolled by the throttle valve. 

If the engine is at operating temperature, it will be switched to non-throttle mode approx¬ 
imately 60 seconds after start up. In cold conditions, however, the engine is started with 
the throttle valve fully opened, which has a positive effect on the starting characteristics. 

Ensuring a constant vacuum of 50 mbar in the intake manifold 

This vacuum is needed to exhaust the blow-by gases from the crankcase and the fuel 
vapors from the activated charcoal filter. 

The backup running function 

If the Valvetronic system should fail, the throttle valve implements the engine's backup run¬ 
ning function (conventional load control). 


The Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM) varies voltage monitored by the ECM representing 
the measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by the ECM to determine the 
amount of fuel to be injected. 

The heated surface of the hot-film in the intake air stream is regulated by the ECM to a con¬ 
stant temperature of 180° above ambient air temperature. The incoming air cools the film 
and the ECM monitors the changing resistance which affects current flow through the cir¬ 
cuit. The hot-film does not require a “clean burn”, it is self cleaning due to the high operat¬ 
ing temperature for normal operation. 


The Air Temperature signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The vary¬ 
ing voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found in 
cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the amount 
of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on oxygen sensing ratio. 

The ignition timing is also affected by air temperature. If the intake air is hot the ECM retards 
the base ignition timing to reduce the risk of detonation. If the intake air is cooler, the base 
ignition timing will be advanced. The ECM uses this input as a determining factor for 
Secondary Air Injection activation (covered in the Emissions section), VANOS, Valvetronic, 
Knock adaptation and exhaust flap operation. 


20 

ME 9.2 Air Management 


The Valvetronic System is operational when activation of terminal 15 switches the ECM 
main relay to supply voltage. The Valvetronic module reduces the voltage supply to the 
internal electronics and the sensors (5 volts). The system carries out a pre-drive check. The 
relays (in the IVM) are activated after a delay (approx. 100 ms) which supplies the load cir¬ 
cuit for the Valvetronic motors. From this stage on, the ECM and the Valvetronic control 
module communicate via the LoCAN bus. 

The ECM determines the intake valve lift for starting based on engine and ambient tem¬ 
perature (large lift when cold, minimum lift when warm). The ECM also determines the 
intake valve lift based on the acceleration requested by the driver. The Valvetronic control 
module converts the ECM command by operating the motors until the actual value from 
the eccentric shaft position sensor corresponds with the target value. The Valvetronic con¬ 
trol module transmits the exact position of the eccentric shaft to the ECM via the LoCAN 
bus. When the Valvetronic module detects a fault, it is also transmitted on the LoCAN bus 
to the ECM for storage in fault memory. 


Fault 

Emergency Program 

Effect 

Sensor Faulty 

Activated 

Maximum Valve Lift 

LoCan 

Activated 

Maximum Valve Lift 

Valvetronic 

Activated 

Valve Lift Which is 
Currently set 

Operating Motor Fault 

Activated 

The Second Motor is 
Driven in Exactly the 
same position at the 
faulty motor 


A Redundant Position Control Hard Wire is between the ECM and the Valvetronic control 
module. Only two messages can be transmitted using this wire: 

• Test function 

• Maximum valve lift 


A signal with a frequency of 100 Hz is placed on this wire to transmit these two messages. 
The test function is carried out during the pre-drive check. The pulse width rate is 50%. 

• The maximum valve lift command is given if the LoCAN bus is faulty. In this case, the 
pulse width rate is 80%. 


21 

ME 9.2 Air Management 




• If there is a fault (backup running function) when running with maximum valve lift, the 
operating motors are supplied with 30% power. This drives the motors softly to the limit 
stop which prevents additional mechanical faults. The load control is now operated 
conventionally by using the throttle valve. 



42-04-13 


Valvetronic Block Diagram 


DME (ECM) 

K1 Valvetronic Relay (in IVM) 

K2 Valvetronic Relays (in IVM) 
Ml Valvetronic Motor Bank 1-4 


M2 Valvetronic Motor Bank 5-8 
V SG Valvetronic Control Unit 

51 Valvetronic Sensor Bank 1-4 

52 Valvetronic Sensor Bank 5-8 


The Bank Alignment function adjusts the distribution of load between the two cylinder 
banks. This alignment runs continuously during the engine operation to assure an equal 
load distribution to both cylinder banks. 

The values of the individual cylinders are determined by the load request and the crankshaft 
reference/rpm signal. The ECM compares these actual values with stored limit values. As 
soon as the values are recognized, the ECM increases the lift of the intake valves on each 
bank. 


22 

ME 9.2 Air Management 












































































After deletion of the adaptation values, the bank alignment is automatically performed by 
the ECM (or the DISplus can be used). The eccentric shafts are adjusted in steps (1 degree 
of rotation increments) until both bank outputs are equal. The following conditions must be 
present for the bank alignment: 

ECM 


• No load on the engine 

• Coolant Temperature > 85 degrees C 

• No Faults Present 

• All Auxiliary Consumers Switched Off 

• Minimum Valve Lift Detected 


If faults relative to bank alignment are present, the following should also be considered dur¬ 
ing diagnosis: 

Faults Related to Bank Alignment 

• Damaged Valves 

• Defective HVA Elements 

• Misfire - Related functions and components (injection, 

ignition, compression, etc.) 


The Valvetronic control module is assigned (programming) to the appropriate engine and 
ECM by the DISplus. 


The Idle Speed Control is also regulated by the Valvetronic system. Reduced valve lift when 
the engine is idling ensures that the engine receives the appropriate airflow. When the 
Valvetronic system is in use, the idle speed control and intake manifold vacuum is also reg¬ 
ulated using the electronic throttle valve. 

During the starting procedure at a temperature of between 20 °C and 60 °C, airflow is con¬ 
trolled by the throttle valve. If the engine is at operating temperature, it will be switched to 
non-throttle mode approximately 60 seconds after it is started up. 

At temperatures below 20 °C, the engine is started with the throttle valve fully opened using 
the Valvetronic for idle speed control (this has a positive effect on the starting characteris¬ 
tics). 

Note: If the idle speed control is faulty, the engine must be checked for vacuum leaks 
because leaking air has an immediate effect on idling (unmetered air leaks). 


23 

ME 9.2 Air Management 


Fuel Management 


Fuel Tank: The fuel tank is made of high density polyethylene (reduced weight) which is 
manufactured to meet safety requirements and is mounted over the rear axle. The tank 
capacity is 23.2 US gallons (88 liters) including a reserve capacity of 2.3 US gallons (10 
liters) for vehicles with the N62 engine. A “saddle” type tank is used which provides a tun¬ 
nel for the driveshaft but creates two separate low spots in the tank. A Syphon jet is 
required with this type of tank to transfer fuel from the left side, linked to the fuel return line. 
As fuel moves through the return, the siphon jet creates a low pressure (suction) to pick up 
fuel from the left side of the tank and transfer it to the right side at the fuel pick up. 

There must be no escape of fuel vapors when the tank is being filled and it must be possi¬ 
ble to fill the tank quickly and the fuel must not foam up. The fuel is prevented from foam¬ 
ing up when the tank is being filled because the tank filler pipe is located low down on the 
fuel tank. An anti-spitback flap is fitted on the fuel tank filler pipe as it enters the tank to pre¬ 
vent fuel from splashing back towards the pump nozzle during refuelling. The filler neck is 
designed so that the incoming fuel functions like a venturi tube during refuelling and also 
draws external air into the tank so that no fuel vapors can escape during this stage. 


24 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 













Fuel System 


1. Air cleaner 

2. Intake manifold 

3. Engine 

4. Exhaust system 

5. Oxygen sensor 

6. Evaporative emission valve (TEV) 

7. ECM 

8. Purge vapors 

9. Carbon Canister 

10. Fuel tank leak diagnostic module (DM TL) 

11. Roll-over valve 

12. Dust filter 

13. Service Ventilation 

14. Pressure test lead 

15. Fuel tank cap 


16. Service vent valve (float valve) 

17. Anti-spitback flap 

18. Surge chamber (fuel pump baffling) 

19. Electric fuel pump (EKP) 

20. Pressure relief valve 

21. Suction jet pumps 

22. Fuel Tank 

23. Outlet protection valve 

24. Refueling breather 

25. Fuel filter 

26. Fuel pressure regulator (3.5 bar) 

27. Injection rail 

28. Float valve 

29. Liquid/vapor expansion tank 

30. Filler vent valve 


25 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 



















































































Tank Ventilation: Optimum ventilation of the tank system ensures trouble free refuelling 
and that no vacuum can develop during this operation. 

The Ventilation System Consists of: 

• Two service vent valves (left/right 16) 

• Filling ventilation valve (30) 

• Hose to the fuel expansion tank (24) 

• Two rollover valves in the fuel expansion tank (11 +28) 

• Service vent hose (13) 

• Activated-carbon filter with hoses (9) 

• Dust filter (12) 


Tank Ventilation Components: 

• Service vent (16): The service vent valve (16) on the right side of the tank consists of 
a float which locks the ventilation while fuel is being admitted (ball valve). The service 
vent valve ensures that no fuel enters the ventilation pipe when the vehicle is on an 
incline. A simple ventilation connection piece is located in the left tank chamber. Both 
service vent valves ensure that no air pockets form in the lower portions of the tank. 

• Expansion tank (29): The task of the expansion tank is to receive fuel when the fuel 
tank is full and the vapors have expanded due to heat. 

• Rollover valve (11): The rollover valve is also a plastic ball valve. When the vehicle is 
in its usual position, the rollover valve is open allowing air to flow in and out. In the 
same way, fuel can flow via the filling vent valve (28) from the fuel tank into the expan¬ 
sion tank and from the expansion tank back into the fuel tank. In the event of an acci¬ 
dent in which the vehicle rolls over, the ball locks the expansion tank inlet and outlet 
openings and prevents fuel from escaping. 

• Dust filter (12): The dust filter prevents dust and small insects from entering the acti¬ 
vated carbon filter. 


Tank Ventilation Function 

During refuelling, the air escapes via the service ventilation in the expansion tank. Air mol¬ 
ecules in the tank have combined with hydrocarbon molecules. These must not escape 
into the atmosphere. The air containing hydrocarbon molecules is fed through the activat¬ 
ed carbon filter. This filters out the hydrocarbon molecules and stores them. 


26 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


The activated carbon filter is purged when the engine is running. This means that atmos¬ 
pheric air is drawn through the activated carbon filter in the opposite direction and is sup¬ 
plied for combustion via the engine's purge air pipe (8). The evaporative emission valve (6) 
controls the purging, which is activated by the ECM. 

The air which is now free of hydrocarbon molecules escapes via the dust filter into the 
atmosphere. If the fuel level reaches the ventilation valve (30), the ball floats and closes the 
ventilation pipe. The tank pressure increases beyond the pump nozzle cut-out pressure and 
switches it off. During fuel withdrawal, the fuel tank system is ventilated in the reverse direc¬ 
tion to prevent the formation of a vacuum. 


Fuel Supply System: The fuel tank system must fulfill various requirements concerned 
with supplying the engine with fuel. These include: 

• Providing sufficient fuel volume and pressure regardless of the driving style 

• Ensuring that the tank can be almost completely drained (full utilization of volume) 

The tank is made up of two halves which are only directly connected up to a certain height. 
A large proportion of the fuel volume cannot reach the fuel pump without assistance (suc¬ 
tion jet pumps). 

Fuel Supply System Components: 

• Fuel tank (22) 

• Surge chamber (18) 

• Fuel pump (19) 

• Two suction jet pumps (21) 

• Outlet protection valve (23) 

• Pressure relief valve (20) 

• Internal tank fuel lines 

• Fuel filter with fuel pressure regulator (25+26) 

• Fuel distributor pipe with injection valves (27) 


Internal Tank Fuel Circuit Operation 

The fuel pump supplies fuel from the surge chamber via the fuel filter (located next to the 
frame rail under the driver’s floor) to the fuel injection valves. The fuel pump always pumps 
more fuel than the engine requires in all operating conditions. The fuel pressure regulator 
built into the fuel filter adjusts the pressure to 3.5 bar and feeds the excess fuel in the return 
flow back into the tank. 


27 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 



The pressure regulator valve in the return flow sets a return pressure of 1.0 - 1.5 bar. This 
pressure prevents fuel vapor locks in the return flow and also ensures operation of the two 
suction jet pumps. 

The fuel flows from the pressure regulator valve on to an intersection point where the fuel 
return flow is split. Some of the fuel flows through the suction jet pump in the left half of the 
tank via the internal fuel line to the surge chamber. The suction jet pump acts like a venturi 
tube which draws the fuel from the left half of the tank into the right half. 

The other amount of diverted fuel flows via the second internal fuel supply directly to the 
right half of the tank and to the second suction jet pump (21). This pumps the fuel from the 
right half of the tank into the surge chamber to ensure that the surge chamber is always 
filled with enough fuel in all driving conditions and takes full advantage of the reserve capac¬ 
ity. 

Fuel Pressure Regulator 

The pressure regulator is integrated in the fuel filter and the two parts are only available as 
a single unit. There is a return line from the pressure regulator between the fuel pressure 
regulator and the fuel tank. The pressure regulator has a small hose connected to ensure 
that if there are any leaks in the pressure regulator, any leaking fuel does not escape into 
the environment. This hose connects to the intake air pipe behind the HFM. 


Electric Fuel Pump (EKP) 

The fuel pump is a two part in-tank gear pump. The first part is for the pre-delivery stage. 
It primes the second part in-tank gear pump which is designed to eliminate cavitation. The 
two parts are driven by the same electric motor. 


Electric Fuel Pump (EKP) Regulation 

The fuel is delivered in accordance with fuel consumption by engine use controlled regula¬ 
tion. This produces the following benefits: 

• The load balance of the alternator/battery is improved (lower pump power demand) 

• The lower power input reduces the fuel pump heat radiation in the fuel tank 

• Integration of the crash cut-out in the EKP regulation 

• Longer EKP service life 

• Deletion of the EKP relay 


28 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


Injection Valves / Fuel Rail 


The fuel injection valves have been positioned 
closer to the intake valves. This means that 
larger injection angles can be covered by the 
injection spray. Greater fuel spray atomization 
leads to optimum fuel mixing and thereby 
reduces fuel consumption and exhaust emis¬ 
sions. 

The Non Return Fuel Rail System has been 
improved for better fuel distribution. A “service 
valve” is provided to check fuel pressure 
(arrow). 



42 - 02-84 


The Siemens fuel injection valves are the dual outlet “directional angle plate” type with a coil 
reisistance of approximately 12 ohms each. 


Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor: This sensor provides the crankshaft position and 
engine speed (RPM) signal to the ECM for engine management operation. This is a Hall 
type sensor mounted in the bell housing which scans the impulse wheel (attached to the 
ring gear). The impulse wheel contains 58 teeth with a gap of two missing teeth. The ECM 
provides the power supply to this component. 


The rotation of the impulse wheel generates a 
square wave DC voltage signal in the sensor 
where by each tooth of the wheel produces one 
square wave. The ECM counts the pulses and 
determines engine rpm. 

The gap of two missing teeth provides a refer¬ 
ence point that the ECM recognizes as crank¬ 
shaft position. 

The crankshaft position sensor is monitored as 
part of OBD II requirements for Misfire Det¬ 
ection. 



42 - 02-04 


Notes: 


29 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 













Camshaft Position Sensors (Hall Effect): The ECM uses the signal from the camshaft 
sensors to set up the triggering of the ignition coils, correct timing of fully sequential fuel 
injection and VANOS operation. The ECM monitors power flow through the Hall elements 
as the basis for the signal output. 

As the camshafts rotate, the leading edge of the impulse wheel approaches the sensor tip 
creating a magnetic field with the permanent magnet in the sensor. The attraction causes 
the magnetic field to penetrate through the Hall element. The magnetic field affects the 
power flow in the element causing the input signal to go high. As the impulse wheel pass¬ 
es by the sensor, the signal goes low. 

The repetitive high/low creates a square wave 
signal that the ECM uses to recognize the 
camshaft position. The ECM determines an 
approximate location of the camshaft position 
(high or low signal) during engine start up opti¬ 
mizing cold start injection (reduced emissions). 

An impulse wheel is mounted on the end of 
each camshaft for position detection. The sen¬ 
sors are mounted on each side at the back of 
the cylinder heads cover (2 and 3). 



Engine Coolant Temperature: The Engine 
Coolant Temperature is provided to the ECM 
from a Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) 
type sensor. The ECM determines the correct 
fuel mixture and base ignition timing required for 
the engine temperature. 

The sensor is located in the thermostat housing 
(3). The sensor decreases in resistance as the 
temperature rises and vice verse. The ECM 
monitors an applied voltage to the sensor (5V). 
This voltage will vary (0-5V) as coolant temper¬ 
ature changes the resistance value. 



42 - 04-89 


Notes: 


30 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 




















Principle of Operation 


Fuel Management delivers fuel from the tank to the intake ports of the engine. To accom¬ 
plish this, fuel supply must be available to the fuel injectors. Then the fuel must be inj¬ 
ected in the precise amount and at the correct time. The ECM does not directly monitor 
fuel supply, although it does control it. The ECM controls and monitors fuel injection. 


The Fuel Pump (EKP) 

EKP regulation and fuel cut-out in the event of a crash, are ISIS (Intelligent Safety Integration 
System) features. 

The fuel requirement is transmitted by the ECM via the PT CAN bus and the byteflight bus 
to the right hand side satellite B-pillar (SBSR). The EKP regulation is integrated in the SBSR. 
The SBSR controls the front right belt force limiter and the fuel pump. 

The SBSR controls the EKP via a pulse width modulated (PWM) signal according to the fuel 
quantity required by the ECM. The present pump speed is recorded in the SBSR from the 
EKP electrical current consumption to calculate the fuel quantity required. The fuel quanti¬ 
ty required is then set (from the coded map in the SBSR) by the PWM signal to control cur¬ 
rent which regulates the pump speed. 


P’PCAN 


byteftigtit 





Fuel Requirement Signal Path 


Note: If the fuel quantity requirement from the ECM and/or the EKP rotation speed signal 
in the SBSR fails, the fuel pump will continue to operate with the greatest delivery rate when 
terminal 15 is activated. This guarantees the fuel supply even if the control signals fail. 


31 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 

























The Fuel Injectors will be opened by the ECM to inject pressurized fuel into the intake 
ports. The ECM Relay (in the IVM) supplies voltage to the fuel injectors. The ECM controls 
the opening by activating the ground circuit for the Solenoid Windings. The ECM will vary 
the duration (in milli-seconds) of “opening” time to regulate the air/fuel ratio. 

The ECM has eight Final Stage output transistors that switch ground to the eight injector 
solenoids. The Injector “triggering” is first established from the Crankshaft Position/RPM 
Sensor. 

The ECM is programmed to activate the Final Stage output transistors once (per cylinder) 
for every working cycle of the engine (Full Sequential Injection). The ECM calculates the total 
milli-second time to open the injectors and triggers them independently. 

During start up, the ECM recognizes the Camshaft Position (Cylinder ID) inputs. The 
camshaft positions are referenced to the crankshaft position. This process “times” the injec¬ 
tion closer to the intake valve opening for increased efficiency. When activated, each injec¬ 
tor delivers the full fuel charge at separate times for each cylinder working cycle. 

The Camshaft Position input is monitored by the ECM during start up. There will be an 
effect on injector timing if this input is missing when the engine is started. When KL15 is 
switched “off”, the ECM discontinues voltage to the Fuel Injector Relay and deactivates the 
eight Final Stage transistors to discontinue fuel injection. 


The Injector “open” Time maintains engine operation after start up is determined by the 
ECM (programming). 

The injection ms value is influenced by battery voltage. When cranking, the voltage is low 
and the ECM will increase the ms value to compensate for injector “lag time”. When the 
engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the injection ms 
value due to faster injector reaction time. 

Cold starting requires additional fuel to compensate for poor mixture and the loss of fuel as 
it condenses onto cold intake ports, valves and cylinder walls. The cold start fuel quantity 
is determined by the ECM based on the Engine Coolant Temperature Sensor input during 
start up. 

During cranking, additional fuel is injected for the first few crankshaft revolutions. The ECM 
recognizes the Camshaft Positions and precisely times the Full Sequential Injection. After 
the first few crankshaft revolutions, the injected quantity is metered down as the engine 
comes up to speed. 


32 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


When the engine is cold, optimum fuel metering is not possible due to poor air/fuel mixing 
and an enriched mixture is required. The Coolant Temperature input allows the ECM to 
adjust the injection ms value to compensate during warm up and minimize the the fuel 
injected at engine operating temperature. 

When the engine is at idle, minimum injection is required. Additional fuel will be added if the 
ECM observes low engine rpm and increasing Valvetronic valve lift / air volume inputs 
(acceleration enrichment). As the accelerator pedal is actuated, the ECM monitors accel¬ 
eration and rate of movement. The ECM will increase the volume of fuel injected into the 
engine by increasing the injection ms value. The “full throttle” position indicates maximum 
acceleration and the ECM will add more fuel (full load enrichment). 

As the accelerator pedal is released, the ECM decreases the injection ms value (fuel shut 
off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreases fuel consumption and 
lowers emissions. When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injection ms value is 
increased (cut-in) to prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon the 
engine temperature and the rate of deceleration. 

The HFM signal provides the measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by 
the ECM to determine the amount of fuel to be injected to “balance” the air / fuel ratio. 

The Air Temperature Signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The vary¬ 
ing voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found in 
cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the amount 
of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on the oxygen content (details 
in Emissions). 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECM to start injection as well as providing infor¬ 
mation about the engine operation. This input is used in combination with other inputs to 
determine engine load which increases / decreases the injection ms value. Without this in¬ 
put, the ECM will not activate the injectors. 

When KL15 is switched “off”, the ECM relay discontinues voltage to deactivate the eight 
Final Stage transistors to cease fuel injection. 


33 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


Injection “Reduction” Time is required to control fuel economy, emissions, engine and 
vehicle speed limitation. The ECM will “trim” back or deactivate the fuel injection as neces¬ 
sary while maintaining optimum engine operation. 

As the Valvetronic valve lift is decreased during deceleration, the ECM decreases the injec¬ 
tion ms value (fuel shut off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreas¬ 
es fuel consumption and lowers emissions. 

When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injection ms value is increased (cut-in) to 
prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon the engine temperature 
and the rate of deceleration. 

The ECM will deactivate the injectors to control maximum engine rpm (regardless of vehi¬ 
cle speed). When the engine speed reaches 6500 rpm, the injectors will be deactivated to 
protect the engine from Over-Rev. As the engine speed drops below 6500 rpm, injector 
activation will be resumed. 


Maximum vehicle speed is limited by the ECM reducing the injection ms value (regardless 
of engine rpm). This limitation is based on the vehicle dimensions, specifications and 
installed tires (speed rating). 

The ECM will also protect the Catalytic Converters by deactivating the injectors. 


If the ECM detects a “Misfire” (ignition, injection or combustion), it will selectively deactivate 
the Final Stage output transistor for that cylinder(s). On the ME 9.2 system, there are eight 
individual injector circuits resulting in deactivation of one or multiples. This will limit engine 
power, but protect the Catalytic Converters. 


Fuel Injection Control Monitoring is performed by the ECM for OBD II requirements. 
Faults with the fuel injectors and/or control circuits will be stored in memory. This monitor¬ 
ing includes: 

• Closed Loop Operation 

• Oxygen Sensor Feedback 

These additional corrections are factored into the calculated injection time. If the correction 
factor exceeds set limits a fault will be stored in memory. 


34 

ME 9.2 Fuel Management 


Ignition Management 


Ignition Coils: The high voltage supply required to ignite the mixture in the combustion 
chambers is determined by the stored energy in the ignition coils. The stored energy con¬ 
tributes to the ignition duration, ignition current and rate of high voltage increase. The Coil 
circuit including primary and secondary components consists of: 


1. Coil Assembly 

2. Insulator Boot 

3. Spark Plug 

4. ECM Final Stage Transistor 

5. Secondary Coil Ground 




Ignition Coil 


42 - 04-00 


The Coil Assembly contains two copper windings insulated from each other. One winding 
is the primary winding, formed by a few turns of thick wire. The secondary winding is 
formed by a great many turns of thin wire. 


The primary winding receives battery voltage from the Ignition Coil Relay (in the IVM) which 
is activated by the CAS Module. The ECM provides a ground path for the primary coil (Coil 
Terminal 1) by activating a Final Stage transistor. The length of time that current flows 
through the primary winding is the “dwell” which allows the coil to “saturate” or build up a 
magnetic field. After this storage process, the ECM will interrupt the primary circuit at the 
point of ignition by deactivating the Final Stage transistor. The magnetic field built up with¬ 
in the primary winding collapses and induces the ignition voltage in the secondary winding. 


The high voltage generated in the secondary 
winding is discharged through Coil Terminal 4 
to the spark plug (insulated by the boot con¬ 
nector). 

The primary and secondary windings are un¬ 
coupled, therefore, the secondary winding 
requires a ground supply (Coil Terminal 4a). 


Insulator 

Boot 


-t 


1 

-1- 

1 

1 

1 

—( 

1- 

1 

1 

1 

4a 




Secondary 

Winding 


\UJ 


42 - 04-01 

35 

ME 9.2 Ignition Management 























































There is an individual ignition circuit and coil for 
each cylinder on the ME 9.2 system. The ME 
9.2 uses “pencil type” ignition coils manufac¬ 
tured by Bremi. The eight individual ignition coils 
are integrated with the insulated connector 
(boot). 

The coils are removed by lifting the swivel latch connector retainer to release the wiring har¬ 
ness, apply a slight twist and lift the assembly upwards. The primary ignition cables are 
routed on the top of the cylinder head covers. 



42 - 04-02 


Spark Plugs: The spark plugs introduce the ignition energy 
into the combustion chamber. The high voltage “arcs” across 
the air gap in the spark plug from the positive electrode to the 
negative electrodes. This creates a spark which ignites the 
combustible air/fuel mixture. 

The spark plugs are located in the center of the combustion 
area (on the top of the cylinder heads) which is the most suit¬ 
able point for igniting the compressed air/fuel mixture. The 
correct spark plugs for the ME 9.2 are the NGK BKR6EQUP 
quad electrode (non-adjustable gap). 



The Ignition System is monitored by the ECM via the Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. If a 
Misfire fault is present, the ECM will deactivate the corresponding fuel injector for that cylin¬ 
der. Engine operation will still be possible. 


Knock Sensors: These are required to prevent detonation (pinging) from damaging the 
engine. The Knock Sensor is a piezoelectric sound conductor microphone. The ECM will 
retard the ignition timing (cylinder selective) based on the input of these sensors. 


There are four Knock Sensors bolted to the 
cylinder heads between cylinders 1 & 2, 3 & 4, 
5 & 6 and 7 & 8. If the signal value exceeds the 
threshold, the ECM identifies the “knock” and 
retards the ignition timing for that cylinder. 

If a fault is detected with the sensor(s), the ECM 
deactivates Knock Control the ignition timing 
will be set to a conservative basic setting based 
on intake air temperature and a fault will be 
stored. 



42 - 04-04 


36 

ME 9.2 Ignition Management 









































Camshaft Position Sensor (Cylinder Identification): The camshaft sensors (Hall type) 
inputs allows the ECM to determine camshaft positions in relation to crankshaft position. It 
is used by the ECM to establish the “working cycle” of the engine for precise ignition tim¬ 
ing. For details about the sensor, refer to the Fuel Management section. 


Accelerator Pedal Position (PWG): As the accelerator pedal is actuated, the ECM 
advance the ignition timing. The “full throttle” position indicates maximum acceleration to 
the ECM, the ignition will be advanced for maximum torque. For details about the sensor, 
refer to the Air Management section. 


Hot-Film Air Mass Meter (HFM): The air volume input signal is used by the ECM to deter¬ 
mine the amount of ignition timing advance. For details about the sensor, refer to the Air 
Management section. 


Air Temperature: This signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The sen¬ 
sor is located in the HFM. The ECM will adjust the ignition timing based on air temperature. 
If the intake air is hot the ECM retards the ignition timing to reduce the risk of detonation. If 
the intake air is cooler, the ignition timing will be advanced. If this input is defective, a fault 
code will be set and the ignition timing will be set to a conservative basic setting. For details 
about the sensor, refer to the Air Management section. 


Notes: 


37 

ME 9.2 Ignition Management 
















Principle of Operation 


Ignition Management provides ignition to the combustion chambers with the required volt¬ 
age at the correct time. Based on the combination of inputs, the ECM calculates and con¬ 
trols the ignition timing and secondary output voltage by regulating the activation and 
dwell of the primary ignition circuit. The ECM controls and monitors the primary ignition 
circuit as well as the secondary ignition output (Misfire Detection). 

The ECM has a very “broad” range of ignition timing. This is possible by using a Direct 
Ignition System, or sometimes referred to as “Static Ignition System”. Reliability is also 
increased by having separate individual ignition circuits. 

The Ignition Control is determined by the ECM (load dependent). The ECM will calculate 
the engine “load” based on a combination of the following: 

The dwell time will be regulated based on battery voltage. When cranking, the voltage is 
low and the ECM will increase the dwell to compensate for saturation “lag time”. When the 
engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the dwell due to 
a faster saturation time. 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECM to start ignition in firing order (1-5-4-8-6-3- 
7-2) as well as providing information about the engine operation. This input is used in com¬ 
bination with other inputs to determine engine load which advances/retards the ignition tim¬ 
ing. Without this input, the ECM will not activate the ignition. 

Cold start is determined by the ECM based on the engine coolant temperature and rpm 
during start up. A cold engine will crank over slower than a warm engine, the ignition tim¬ 
ing will range between top dead center to slightly retarded providing optimum starting. 

When starting a warm engine, the rpm is higher which results in slightly advanced timing. 
If the engine coolant and intake air temperature is hot, the ignition timing will not be 
advanced reducing starter motor “load”. 


During cranking, the ECM recognizes the Camshaft 
Position (compression stroke) and activates the igni¬ 
tion per cylinder (firing order). 


Multiple Ignition Pulses ensure good spark quality dur¬ 
ing engine start up. The ECM will activate the ignition 
coils multiple times (1) per 720° of crankshaft revolu¬ 
tion. 



38 

ME 9.2 Ignition Management 







































The ignition timing will be progressively advanced assisting the engine in coming up to 
speed. As the engine speed approaches idle rpm, the timing remains slightly advanced to 
boost torque. When the engine is at idle speed, minimum timing advance is required. This 
will allow faster engine and catalyst warm up. The multiple pulsing switches to single pulse 
when engine speed >1350 RPM (varied with engine temperature). 

The timing will be advanced when the ECM observes low engine rpm and increasing accel¬ 
erator/air volume inputs (acceleration torque). As the Valvetronic valve lift is increased, the 
ECM advances the timing based on the engine acceleration request (and at what rate). The 
ECM will fully advance timing for the “full throttle” position indicating maximum acceleration 
(torque). 

The Air Flow Volume signal provides the measured amount of intake air volume. This input 
is used by the ECM to determine the amount of timing advance to properly combust the 
air/fuel mixture. 

The Air Temperature Signal assists the ECM in reducing the risk of detonation (ping). If the 
intake air is hot the ECM retards the ignition timing. If the intake air is cooler, the ignition 
timing will be advanced. 

As the Valvetronic valve lift is decreased, the ECM decreases the ignition timing if the rpm 
is above idle speed (coasting). This feature lowers the engine torque for deceleration. When 
the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the timing is slightly advanced to prevent the engine 
from stalling. The amount of advance is dependent upon the engine temperature and the 
rate of deceleration. 


Emission Optimized - IGNITION KEY OFF 

“Emission Optimized Ignition Key Off” is a programmed feature of the CAS Module. After 
the CAS Module detects KL 15 is switched “off”, the ignition coil relay (in the IVM) stays 
active (CAS voltage supply) for two more individual coil firings. This means that just two 
cylinders are fired - not two revolutions. 

This feature allows residual fuel injected into the cylinders, as the ignition key is switched 
off, to be combusted as the engine runs down. 

When KL15 is switched “off” the ECM removes the operating voltage from the fuel injec¬ 
tion relay (in the IVM). The CAS Module will maintain power to the ignition coil relay for a 
few seconds to maintain ignition coil activation (by the ECM). 


39 

ME 9.2 Ignition Management 


Knock Control 


The use of Knock Control allows the ECM to further advance the ignition timing under load 
for increased torque. This system uses four Knock Sensors located between cylinders 1 & 
2, cylinders 3 & 4, cylinders 5 & 6 and cylinders 7 & 8. Knock Control is only in affect when 
the engine temperature is greater than 35 °C and there is a load on the engine. This will dis¬ 
regard false signals while idling or from a cold engine. 

Based on the firing order, the ECM monitors the Knock Sensors after each ignition for a 
normal (low) signal. If the signal value exceeds the threshold, the ECM identifies the “knock” 
and retards the ignition timing (3°) for that cylinder the next time it is fired. 

This process is repeated in 3° increments until the knock ceases. The ignition timing will be 
advanced again in increments right up to the knock limit and maintain the timing at that 
point. 

If a fault is detected with the Knock Sensor(s) or circuits, the ECM deactivates Knock 
Control. The ignition timing will be set to a conservative basic setting (to reduce the risk of 
detonation) and a fault will be stored. 



42 - 04-05 


40 

ME 9.2 Ignition Management 








































Emissions Management 


Evaporative Emissions: The control of the evaporative fuel vapors (Hydrocarbons) from 
the fuel tank is important for the overall reduction in vehicle emissions. 

The evaporative system has been combined with the ventilation of the fuel tank, which 
allows the tank to breath (equalization). The overall operation provides: 

• An inlet vent, to an otherwise "sealed" fuel tank, for the entry of air to replace the fuel 
consumed during engine operation. 

• An outlet vent with a storage canister to "trap and hold" fuel vapors that are produced 
by the expansion/evaporation of fuel in the tank, when the vehicle is stationary. 

The canister is then "purged" using the engine vacuum to draw the fuel vapors into the 
combustion chamber. This "cleans" the canister allowing for additional storage. Like any 
other form of combustible fuel, the introduction of these vapors on a running engine must 
be controlled. The ECM controls the Evaporative Emission Valve which regulates purging of 
evaporative vapors. 


On-Board Refueling Vapor Recovery (ORVR): The ORVR system recovers and stores 
hydrocarbon fuel vapor during refueling. Non ORVR vehicles vent fuel vapors from the tank 
venting line back to the filler neck and in many states reclaimed by a vacuum receiver on 
the filling station’s fuel pump nozzle. 

When refueling, the pressure of the fuel entering the tank forces the hydrocarbon vapors 
through the tank refuelling breather hose (24 on the following page) to the liquid/vapor 
expansion tank and into the active charcoal canister. 

The HC vapors are stored in the active charcoal canister and the system can then “breath” 
through the DM TL and the air filter. 


41 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 


1 


2 



Fuel System 


42 - 04-00 


1. Air Cleaner 

2. Intake manifold 

3. Engine 

4. Exhaust system 

5. Oxygen Sensor 

6. Evaporative emission valve (TEV) 

7. ECM 

8. Purge vapors 

9. Carbon canister 

10. Fuel tank leak diagnostic module (DM-TL) 

11. Roll-over valve 

12. Dust filter 

13. Service ventilation 

14. Pressure test lead 

15. Fuel tank cap 


16. Service vent valve (float valve) 

17. Anti-spitback flap 

18. Surge chamber (fuel pump baffling) 

19. Electric fuel pump (EKP) 

20. Pressure relief valve 

21. Suction jet pump 

22. Fuel tank 

23. Outlet protection valve 

24. Refueling breather 

25. Fuel Filter 

26. Fuel pressure regulator (3.5 bar) 

27. Injection rail 

28. Float valve 

29. Liquid/vapor expansion tank 

30. Filler vent valve 


42 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 



































































































Liquid/Vapor Expansion Tank: Fuel vapors are rout¬ 
ed from the refuelling breather hose and the Service 
Ventilation hose to the Liquid/Vapor Expansion Tank (1) 
located in the right rear fender well. 

The vapors cool when exiting the fuel tank, condense 
and drain back to the fuel tank. The remaining vapors 
exit the Liquid/Vapor Expansion Tank to the Active 
Carbon Canister. 



Active Carbon Canister: As the fuel vapors enter the 
canister, they will be absorbed by the active carbon. 
The remaining air will be vented to the atmosphere 
through the end of the canister (passing through the 
DM TL and filter) allowing the fuel tank to “breath”. 


42 - 04-01 

When the engine is running, the canister is then "purged" using intake manifold vacuum to 
draw fresh air through the canister which extracts the hydrocarbon vapors into the com¬ 
bustion chamber. This cleans the canister for additional storage. The Active Carbon 
Canister (2) is combined with the DM TL Pump and is located in the right rear fender well. 


Evaporative Emission Valve: This ECM controlled solenoid valve (located on the front of 
the engine) regulates the purge flow from the Active Carbon Canister through the air inlet 
pipe into the intake manifold. 

The ECM Relay (in the IVM) provides operating 
voltage, and the ECM controls the valve by reg¬ 
ulating the ground circuit. The valve is powered 
open and closed by an internal spring. 

If the Evaporative Emission Valve circuit is 
defective, a fault code will be set. If the valve is 
“mechanically” defective, a driveability com¬ 
plaint could be encountered and a mixture relat¬ 
ed fault code will be set. 



42 - 04-02 


43 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 












1 


DMTL (Diagnosis Module - Evaporative Leakage 
Detection): This component ensures accurate fuel 
system leak detection for leaks as small as 0.5 mm 
(.020”) by slightly pressurizing the fuel tank and evapo¬ 
rative components. The DM TL pump contains an inte¬ 
gral DC motor which is activated directly by the ECM. 
The ECM monitors the pump motor operating current 
as the measurement for detecting leaks. 

The pump also contains an ECM controlled change 
over valve that is energized closed during a Leak 
Diagnosis test. The change over valve is open during all 
other periods of operation allowing the fuel system to 
“breath” through the inlet filter. The DM TL is located 
with the Active Carbon Canister. 


1. In its inactive state, filtered fresh air enters the evap¬ 
orative system through the sprung open valve of the 
DM TL. 

2. When the ECM activates the DM TL for leak testing, 
it first activates only the pump motor. This pumps air 
through a restricted orifice (0.5 mm) which causes 
the electric motor to draw a specific amperage value 
(20-30 mA). This value is equivalent to the size of the 
restriction. 

3. The solenoid valve is then energized which seals the 
evaporative system and directs the pump output to 
pressurize the evaporative system. 


• A large leak is detected in the evaporative system if 
the amperage value is not achieved. 

• A small leak is detected if the same reference 
amperage is achieved. 

• The system is sealed if the amperage value is high¬ 
er than the reference amperage. 



FRESH _ 
AIR INLET 


DM-TL 



(Diagnostic Module - 
Tank Leak detection) 

V V 


V 



FRESH — 
AIR INLET 


DM-TL 



(Diagnostic Module - 
Tank Leak detection) 

w V 


V 



ECM 

MAIN 

RELAY 


r\ r\ 


D 


IDE ID 



2 


3 


44 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 


42 - 04-05 
















































































































































































































































Exhaust Emissions: The combustion process of a gasoline powered engine produces 

Carbon Monoxide (CO), Hydrocarbons (HC) and Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx). 

• Carbon Monoxide is a product of incomplete combustion under conditions of air defi¬ 
ciency. CO emissions are strongly dependent on the air/fuel ratio. 

• Hydrocarbons are also a product of incomplete combustion which results in unburned 
fuel. HC emissions are dependent on air/fuel ratio and the ignition of the mixture. 

• Oxides of Nitrogen are a product of peak combustion temperature (and temperature 
duration). NOx emissions are dependent on internal cylinder temperatures affected by 
the air/fuel ratio and ignition of the mixture. 

Control of exhaust emissions is accomplished by the engine and engine management 

design as well as after-treatment. 

• The ECM manages exhaust emissions by controlling the air/fuel ratio and ignition. 

• The ECM controlled Secondary Air Injection further dilutes exhaust emissions leaving 
the engine and reduces the catalysts warm up time. 

• The Catalytic Converter further reduces exhaust emissions leaving the engine. 


Oxygen Sensors: The N62 engine is fitted with a total of four oxygen sensors. One planar 
broadband oxygen sensor (constant characteristic curve), which regulates the fuel-air mix¬ 
ture, is located upstream (2) of each of the two catalytic converters. The catalytic convert¬ 
er assemblies are integral with the exhaust manifolds (1). 


There is a post catalytic converter sensor (Bosch LSH25) for 
each cylinder bank positioned downstream of the catalytic 
converter (3) which monitors the catalyst efficiency. 

This monitoring means that if the exhaust gas concentration is 
too high, a fault code is stored. The post catalyst sensors can 
also detect an emission relevant fault in a pre-catalyst oxygen 
sensor. 



43 - 02-06 


45 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 









Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensor: The N62 engine is equipped with new 
planar wideband oxygen sensors (pre-catalyst). The sensor is planar shaped (type of con¬ 
struction) which is more compact and is made up of thin layers of zirconium dioxide (Zr02) 
ceramic films. This modular lamination structure enables the integration of several functions 
including the heating element which ensures the minimum operating temperature (750 °C) 
is reached rapidly. 

In contrast to conventional oxygen sensors, the wideband features can measure not only 
at Lambda=1, but also in the rich and extremely lean range (Lambda=0.7 to complete 
atmospheric oxygen) very rapidly. 

To operate effectively, the oxygen sensor requires ambient air as the “reference gas” inside 
the sensor. The ambient air reaches the inside of the sensor through the plug connection 
and through the harness. The plug connection socket must therefore be protected from 
contamination (wax, preservatives, engine degreasers, engine washing, etc.). In the event 
of the oxygen sensor malfunctioning, the connector should always be checked first with 
regard to contamination and cleaned if necessary. The plug connection must be discon¬ 
nected and then reconnected to remove any oxidation from the connector pins. 


1. Exhaust gas 

2. Pump cell 

3. Platinum electrode, reference cell 

4. Heating element 

5. Heating element 

6. Reference air gap 

7. Zirconium ceramic layer 

8. Measuring gap 

9. Reference Cell 

10. Platinum electrode, reference cell 

11. Platinum electrode, pump cell 

12. Platinum electrode, pump cell 



& 




42-04-07 


Sensor Element Design 


The pump cell (2) and reference cell (9) are made of zirconium dioxide and each coated with 
two porous platinum electrodes. They are arranged so that there is a measuring gap (8) of 
approx. 10 to 50 microns between them. This measuring gap is connected by an inlet 
opening to the exhaust gas (1). The pump cell is controlled by the ECM applying voltage to 
the electrodes to initiate oxygen ion pumping across the porous membrane of the reference 
cell, providing a quicker response time. 


46 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 










































If the exhaust gas content is lean, the pump cell pumps oxygen away from the measuring 
gap to the outside. The direction of flow is reversed for rich exhaust gas content, then oxy¬ 
gen is pumped from the exhaust gas into the measuring gap. The pump current flow is pro¬ 
portional to the oxygen concentration (lean) or the oxygen requirement (rich). The pump is 
constantly working to maintain that the gas composition in the measuring gap is constant¬ 
ly at Lambda=1. The required current of the pump cell is evaluated by the ECM as a sig¬ 
nal that represents oxygen content in the exhaust gas. 


Oxygen Sensor Signals 

The sensor conductivity is efficient when the oxygen sensor is hot (750° C). For this reason, 
the sensor contains a heating element. This reduces warm up time, and retains the heat 
during low engine speed when the exhaust temperature is cooler. The oxygen sensor heat¬ 
ing elements receive power from the IVM (12 V) and the ground sypply is pulse width mod¬ 
ulated by the ECM. 

The monitored voltage signal is constantly changing due to combustion variations and nor¬ 
mal exhaust pulsations. 

• At a value of Lambda =1, the pump cell requires approx. 3 mA. 

The oxygen sensor signal voltage is approx. 1,5V 
The reference cell voltage is approx. 450mV 

• At a Lambda value <1 (rich), the oxygen sensor signal voltage is approx. 0.3V 

• At a Lambda value >1 (lean), the oxygen sensor signal voltage is approx. 4.3V 


If necessary, the ECM will “correct” the air/fuel ratio by regulating the ms injection time. The 
ECM monitors the length of time the sensors are operating in the lean, rich and rest condi¬ 
tions. The evaluation period of the sensors is over a predefined number of oscillation cycles 
and pump cell amperage. 


Catalytic Converter Monitoring: The efficiency of catalyst operation is determined by 
evaluating the oxygen storage capability of the ceramic monolyth catalytic converters using 
the pre and post oxygen sensor signals. 


A properly operating catalyst consumes or stores most of the 02 (oxygen) that is present 
in the exhaust gas (input to catalyst). The gases that flow into the catalyst are converted 
from CO, HC and NOx to C02, H 2 O and N2 respectively. 


47 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 


In order to determine if the catalysts are working correctly, post catalyst oxygen sensors are 
installed to monitor exhaust gas content exiting the catalysts. The signal of the post cat. 02 
sensor is evaluated over the course of several pre cat. 02 sensor oscillations. 


During the evaluation period, the signal of the 
post cat. sensor must remain within a relatively 
constant voltage range (700 - 800 mV). ju 

3 

h 

The post cat. 02 voltage remains high with a si 
very slight fluctuation. This indicates a further < 
lack of oxygen when compared to the pre cat. 
sensor. If this signal decreased in voltage and/or 
increased in fluctuation, a fault code will be set 
for Catalyst Efficiency. 



TIME 


42 - 04-08 


Bosch LSH 25 Oxygen Sensors: The post catalyst oxygen sensors produces a low volt¬ 
age (0-1000 mV) proportional to the oxygen content exiting the catalytic converters. 


Ambient Air 



Exhaust 

Stream 


42 - 04-09 


Oxygen Sensors 


1. Electrode (+) 

2. Electrode (-) 

3. Porous Ceramic Coating (encasing electrolyte) 

4. Protective Metal Cage (Ventilated) 

5. Casing 

6. Contact Sleeve 


7. External Body (Ventilated) 

8. Contact Spring 

9. Vent Opening 

10. Ouput Lead 

11. Insulator 

12. Exhaust Pipe Wall 


48 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 


























































The “tip” of the sensor contains a microporous platinum coating (electrodes) which conduct 
current. The platinum electrodes are separated by solid electrolyte which conducts oxygen 
ions. The platinum conductors are covered with a highly porous ceramic coating and the 
entire tip is encased in a ventilated metal “cage”. 

This assembly is submersed in the exhaust stream. The sensor body (external) has a small 
vent opening in the housing that allows ambient air to enter the inside of the tip. 

The ambient air contains a constant level of oxygen content (21 %) and the exhaust stream 
has a much lower oxygen content. The oxygen ions (which contain small electrical charges) 
are “purged” through the solid electrolyte by the hot exhaust gas flow. The electrical 
charges (low voltage) are conducted by the platinum electrodes to the sensor signal wire 
that is monitored by the ECM. 



42 - 04-10 

If the exhaust has a lower oxygen content (rich mixture), there will be a large ion “migration” 
through the sensor generating a higher voltage (950 mV). 

If the exhaust has a higher oxygen content (lean mixture), there will be a small ion “migra¬ 
tion” through the sensor generating a lower voltage (080 mV). 

This conductivity is efficient when the oxygen sensor is hot (250° - 300° C). For this reason, 
the sensor contains a heating element. This “heated” sensor reduces warm up time, and 
retains the heat during low engine speed when the exhaust temperature is cooler. 


49 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 

























Secondary Air Injection: Injecting ambient air into the exhaust stream after a cold engine 
start reduces the warm up time of the catalysts and reduces HC and CO emissions. The 
ECM controls and monitors the Secondary Air Injection. 

An Electric Air Pump and Air Injection Valves direct fresh air through internal channels in the 
cylinder heads into the exhaust ports. 


1. Air Intake Duct 

2. Air Cleaner housing with Intake Air Silencer 

3. Intake Pipe with HFM 
(Hot-Film Air Mass Flow Sensor) 

4. Secondary Air Valves 

5. Secondary Air Pump 



43 - 04-05 


Secondary Air System 


Secondary Air Pump (SLP): The electrically-operated secondary air pump is mounted to 
the vehicle body. The pump draws out filtered fresh air from the air cleaner housing during 
the warm-up phase and supplies it to the two secondary air injection valves. 

Once the engine has been started, the secondary air pump is supplied with voltage by the 
Secondary Air Pump Relay (located in front of the glovebox) which is activated by the ECM. 
It remains switched on until the engine has taken in a certain amount of air. The ON period 
may be a maximum of 90 seconds and it depends on the following engine operating con¬ 
ditions: 


• Coolant temperature (from -10 °C to approximately 60 °C) 


• Ambient air temperature (from the HFM) 

• Engine speed 


The power is supplied from the fuse junction 
(#102 - 50 Amp) located on the right inner fend¬ 
er of the engine compartment (under the 
remote charging post) for the relay to energize 
the SLP. 



50 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 









Non-return Valves (SLV): One non return 
valve is mounted on each cylinder head. 


1. Cylinder Head Lead 

2. Non-return Valve (SLV) 

3. Secondary Air Pump Connection 



View From Rear of The Cylinder Head 


The Non-return valves are opened by the air pressure generated from the secondary air 
pump. The secondary air is led through a pipe to the secondary air ducts (integral in the 
cylinder heads) for distribution into the exhaust ports. There are two outlets in each exhaust 
port next to the exhaust valve guides. 


The Non-return valves are sprung closed as soon as the secondary air pump is switched 
off. This prevents exhaust vapors, pressure and condensation from flowing back to the sec¬ 
ondary air pump. 


Misfire Detection: As part of the OBD II regulations the ECM must determine misfire and 
also identify the specific cylinder(s), the severity of the misfire and whether it is emissions 
relevant or catalyst damaging based on monitoring crankshaft acceleration. 


In order to accomplish these tasks the ECM monitors the crankshaft for acceleration by the 
impulse wheel segments of cylinder specific firing order. The misfire/engine roughness cal¬ 
culation is derived from the differences in the period duration of individual increment gear 
segments. If the expected period duration is greater than the permissible value a misfire 
fault for the particular cylinder is stored in the fault memory of the ECM. 



Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 



IK 


Function 

Selection 

Document 

Test 

Module 




Test 

System 








SMOOTH RUNNING ENGINE 
(NOTE SQUARE WAVE SIGNAL) 



ENGINE MISFIRE DETECTED 


42 - 02-13 


51 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 












































































































































































































































































































































































Depending on the level of misfire rate measured the ECM will illuminate the "Malfunction 
Indicator Light”, deactivate the specific fuel injector to the particular cylinder and switch 
lambda operation to open-loop. 

In order to eliminate misfire faults that can occur as a result of varying flywheel tolerances 
(manufacturing process) an internal adaptation of the flywheel is made. The adaptation is 
made during periods of decel fuel cut-off in order to avoid any rotational irregularities which 
the engine can cause during combustion. This adaptation is used to correct segment dura¬ 
tion periods prior to evaluation for a misfire event. 

If the sensor wheel adaptation has not been completed the misfire thresholds are limited to 
engine speed dependent values only and misfire detection is less sensitive. The crankshaft 
sensor adaptation is stored internally and if the limit is exceeded a fault will be set. 


Notes: 


52 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 






















Principle of Operation 


Emissions Management controls evaporative and exhaust emissions. The ECM monitors 
the fuel storage system for evaporative leakage and controls the purging of evaporative 
fuel. The ECM monitors and controls the exhaust emissions by regulating the combustible 
mixture and after treating by injecting fresh air into the exhaust system. The catalytic con¬ 
verters further break down remaining combustible exhaust gases and is monitored by the 
ECM for catalyst efficiency. 


The Evaporative Leakage Detection is performed on the fuel storage system by the 
DM TL pump which contains an integral DC motor that is activated by the ECM. The ECM 
monitors the pump motor operating current as the measurement for detecting leaks. 

The DM TL generates a pressure of 20-30 mbar in the fuel tank and evaporative system. 
The electrical current required for this is calculated by the ECM serves as the indirect value 
for the tank pressure. 

The DM TL carries out a reference measurement before each measurement. This is per¬ 
formed by building up a pressure for 10-15 seconds using an internal orifice of 0.5 mm as 
a reference and the ECM monitors the current required by the pump motor (20-30 mA). 

If a lower pressure is detected in the pressure build-up (low current draw) as compared to 
the reference measurement, this indicates a leak in the fuel tank/evaporative system. If a 
higher pressure is detected (higher current draw), the system does not have a leak. 

The pump also contains an ECM controlled change over valve that is energized closed dur¬ 
ing a Leak Diagnosis test. The ECM only initiates a leak diagnosis test every second time 
the criteria is met. The criteria is as follows: 

• Engine OFF with ignition switched OFF. 

• ECM still in active state or what is known as “follow up mode” (ECM Relay energized, 
ECM and components online for extended period after key off). 

• Prior to Engine/Ignition switch OFF condition, vehicle must have been driven for a min¬ 
imum of 20 minutes. 

• Prior to minimum 20 minute drive, the vehicle must have been OFF for a minimum of 5 
hours. 

• No faults in the ECM for DM TL / tank venting system. 


53 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 


• Fuel Tank Capacity must be between 10 and 90% (safe approximation between 1/4 - 
3/4 of a tank). 

• Ambient Air Temperature between -7°C & 35°C 

• Altitude < 2500m (8,202 feet). 

• Battery Voltage between 11.5 and 14.5 Volts 

When these criteria are satisfied every second time, the ECM will start the Fuel System 
Leak Diagnosis Test. The test will typically be carried out once a day ie:, once after driving 
to work in the morning, when driving home in the evening, the criteria are once again met 
but the test is not initiated. The following morning, the test will run again. 


PHASE 1 - REFERENCE MEASUREMENT 

The ECM activates the pump motor. The pump pulls air from the filtered air inlet and pass¬ 
es it through a precise 0.5 mm reference orifice in the pump assembly. 

The ECM simultaneously monitors the pump motor current flow. The motor current raises 
quickly and levels off (stabilizes) due to the orifice restriction. The ECM stores the stabilized 
amperage value in memory. The stored amperage value is the electrical equivalent of a 0.5 
mm (0.020”) leak. 

PHASE 2 - LEAK DETECTION 

The ECM energizes the Change Over Valve allowing the pressurized air to enter the fuel 
system through the Charcoal Canister. The ECM monitors the current flow and compares 
it with the stored reference measurement over a duration of time. 

The time taken for the measurement is: 

• 60-220 seconds if there are no leaks 

• 200-360 seconds if there is a leak measuring 0.5 mm (small leak) 

• 30-80 seconds if there is a leak measuring over 1 mm (large leak) 

The evaporative emission valve is closed during the measurement. The time taken for the 
measurement is dependant on how much fuel there is in the tank. 

Once the test is concluded, the ECM stops the pump motor and immediately de-energizes 
the change over valve. This allows the stored pressure to vent thorough the charcoal can¬ 
ister trapping hydrocarbon vapor and venting air to atmosphere through the filter. 


54 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 


Test Results 


The time duration varies between 
30 & 360 seconds depending on 
the resulting leak diagnosis test 
results (developed tank pressure 
“amperage” within a specific time 
period). 

When the ECM detects a leak, a 
fault will be stored and the 
“Malfunction Indicator Light” will 
be illuminated. Depending on the 
amperage measurement detect¬ 
ed by the ECM, the fault code 
displayed will be “small leak” or 
“large leak”. 


Current 



Refuelling While a Leak Diagnosis is Taking Place: The ECM detects refuelling during 
a leak diagnosis as a result of the pressure drop when the fuel filler cap is opened and the 
increase pressure while filling the tank is being filled. 

In this case, the leakage diagnosis is interrupted. The solenoid valve in the DM TL is swi¬ 
tched off and the tank pressure escapes through the activated carbon canister. 

If refuelling does not take place immediately after the fuel filler cap has been opened, the 
system will detect a large leak and the a fault will be stored in the ECM. If refuelling is 
detected in the next driving cycle (increase in fuel level), the fault is cleared. 

The ECM detects refueling from a change in the fuel tank 
sending unit level. If the filler cap was not properly installed, 
when the leakage test is performed and leakage is detected; 
the variable indicator lamp (shown to the right) and the 
“Please Close Filler Cap” Check Control message will be 
displayed. 

If the filler cap is correctly installed and leakage is not present 
the next time the test is performed, the “Malfunction Indicator 
Light” will not be illuminated. 



42-02-15 


55 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 




















Starting with 2002 MY, a heating element was 
added to the DM TL pump to eliminate con¬ 
densation. 

The heater is provided battery voltage when 
KL15 is switched “on” and the ECM provides 
the ground path. 



Catalyst Monitoring is performed by the ECM under oxygen sensor closed loop opera¬ 
tion. The changing air/fuel ratio in the exhaust gas results in lambda oscillations at the pre¬ 
catalyst sensors. These oscillations are dampened by the oxygen storage activity of the 
catalysts and are reflected at the post catalyst sensors as a fairly stable signal (indicating 
oxygen has been consumed). Conditions for Catalyst Monitoring: 


Requirements 

• Closed loop operation 

• Engine coolant temperature 

• Vehicle road speed 

• Catalyst temperature (calculated)* 

• Valvetronic position deviation 

• Engine speed deviation 

• Average lambda value deviation 


Status/Condition 

YES 

Operating Temp. 

3 - 50 M PH (5 to 80 km/h) 
350°C to 650°C 
Steady 

Steady/stable engine speed 
Steady/stable load 


* Catalyst temperature is an ECM calculated value based on load/air mass and time. 


Note: The catalyst efficiency is monitored once per trip while the vehicle is in closed loop 
operation. 


56 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 























As part of the monitoring process, the pre and post 02 sensor signals are evaluated by the 
ECM to determine the length of time each sensor is operating in the rich and lean range. 

If the catalyst is defective the post 02 sensor signal will reflect the pre 02 sensor signal 
(minus a phase shift/time delay), since the catalyst is no longer able to store/comsume oxy¬ 
gen. The catalyst monitoring process is stopped once the predetermined number of cycles 
are completed, until the engine is shut-off and started again. After completing the next 
"customer driving cycle" whereby the specific conditions are met and a fault is again set, 
the "Malfunction Indicator Light” will be illuminated. 


Secondary Air Injection Monitoring is performed by the ECM via the use of the pre-cat¬ 
alyst oxygen sensors. Once the air pump is active and is air injected into the exhaust sys¬ 
tem the oxygen sensor signals will indicate a lean condition. If the oxygen sensor signals 
do not change within a predefined time a fault will be set and identify the faulty bank(s). 
When diagnosing a Secondary Air Injection fault, in addition to the electric air pump and 
non-return valves always consider the following: 

• Restricted air inlet to the pump. 

• Restricted supply hoses to the non-return valves. 

• Internal restrictions in the cylinder head passages into the exhaust ports. 


Misfire Detection is part of the OBD II regulations the ECM must determine misfire and 

also identify the specific cylinder(s), the severity of the misfire and whether it is emissions 

relevant or catalyst damaging based on monitoring crankshaft acceleration. 

Emission Increase: 

• Within an interval of 1000 crankshaft revolutions, the ECM adds the detected misfire 
events for each cylinder. If the sum of all cylinder misfire incidents exceeds the pre¬ 
determined value, a fault code will be stored. 

• If more than one cylinder is misfiring, all misfiring cylinders will be specified and the 
individual fault codes for all misfiring cylinders and for multiple cylinder will be stored. 

Catalyst Damage: 

• Within an interval of 200 crankshaft revolutions the detected number of misfiring 
events is calculated for each cylinder. The ECM monitors this based on load/rpm. If 
the sum of cylinder misfire incidents exceeds a predetermined value, a fault code is 
stored and the “Malfunction Indicator Light” will be illuminated. 


57 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 


If the cylinder misfire count exceeds the predetermined threshold the ECM will take the fol¬ 
lowing measures: 

• The oxygen sensor control will be switched to open loop. 

• The cylinder selective fault code is stored. 

• If more than one cylinder is misfiring the fault code for all individual cylinders and for 
multiple cylinders will be stored. 

• The fuel injector to the respective cylinder(s) is deactivated. 


The Integrated Ambient Barometric Pressure Sensor of the ME 9.2 is part of the ECM 

and is not serviceable. The internal sensor is supplied with 5 volts. In return it provides a 
linear voltage of approx. 2.4 to 4.5 volts representative of barometric pressure (altitude). 

The ME 9.2 monitors barometric pressure for the following reasons: 

• The barometric pressure signal along with calculated air mass provides an additional cor¬ 
rection factor to further refine injection “on” time. 

• Provides a base value to calculate the air mass being injected into the exhaust system 
by the Secondary Air Injection System. This correction factor alters the secondary air 
injection “on” time, optimizing the necessary air flow into the exhaust system. 



© 


INTEGRAL 

BAROMETRIC 

PRESSURE 

SENSOR 


PROVIDES ADDITIONAL CORRECTION 
FACTOR FOR FOLLOWING FUNCTIONS 


m 


2 3 



J® 



42 - 04-16 


58 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 























































The Malfunction Indicator Light is illuminated when the OBD system (integral in the 
ECM) determines that a problem exists and a corresponding “Diagnostic Trouble Code” is 
stored in the ECM’s memory. The Malfunction Indicator appears both in the instrument clus¬ 
ter upper center section (fixed) and in the Check Control Display (variable indicator). This 
light informs the driver of the need for service with a Check Control message displayed. 

After fixing the problem the fault code is deleted to turn off the light. If the conditions that 
caused a problem are no longer present, the OBD system can turn off the light automati¬ 
cally. If the OBD system evaluates the component or system three consecutive times and 
no longer detects the initial problem, the dashboard light will turn off automatically. 


The Malfunction Indicator Light will illuminate for the following reasons: 

• Pre-drive check when the ignition is switched on (in the fixed location) 

• Increased emissions (both fixed and variable indicator locations with message dis¬ 
played) 

• Engine fault - drive with moderation (variable indicator location with message dis¬ 
played) 


Fixed Location 





42 - 04-18 

Variable Indicator Location 

59 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 







The Malfunction Indicator Light will illuminate with a “half 
shading” in the variable indicator location for the following rea¬ 
sons: 

• Engine fault - with reduced power (with message dis¬ 
played) 

• Engine damage possible! (with message displayed) 



42 - 04-18 


Emissions Diagnosis 

The "BMW Fast" (BMW fast access for service and testing) diagnosis concept is used in 
the E65 for ME 9.2 ECM. This concept is based on the "Keyword Protocol 2000" (KWP 
2000) diagnosis protocol defined as part of the ISO 14230 standard. Diagnosis communi¬ 
cation takes place entirely on the basis of a transport protocol on the CAN bus. The 
Diagnosis bus is connected to the Central Gateway Module (ZGM). 


Vehicle Diagnosis Access Point 


The diagnosis tool is connected to the vehicle at the OBD diagnosis connector (On-Board 
Diagnosis). The connector is located behind a small cover in the drivers side kick panel trim. 
There is a black plastic cap that bridges KL30 to the D-bus when the connector is not being 
used. This cap must be removed before installing the diagnosis cable. 


The TxD lead is located in pin 7 of the OBD 
socket and is connected directly to the ZGM. 

The ZGM detects by means of the data 
transmission speed whether a BMW diagno¬ 
sis tool (DISplus, MoDiC, GT-1) or an after- 
market scanner is connected. 

The ECM allows access to different data 
depending on the diagnosis tool connected. 



Note: When using an OBD scan tool for diagnosis, the transmission speed is 10.4 KBit/s. 


60 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 
















Diagnosis Bus 

The aim of diagnosis is to enable a Technician to reliably identify a defective component. By 
the use of appropriate hardware and monitoring software, the microprocessor of the diag¬ 
nosis tool is able to detect faults in the ECM and its peripherals. 

Faults identified are stored in the fault memory and can be read out using the Diagnosis 
Program. Data transfer between the vehicle and the diagnosis tool takes place via the 
Diagnosis bus (D bus). 

The new features of the diagnosis bus are: 

• Faster data transmission speed of 115 kBd. 

• Central diagnosis access point (OBD connector). 

• Single diagnostic cable (TxD II) for the entire vehicle. 

• Omission of the TxDI cable. 

• Access to diagnosis functions requires “Authorization”. 

• Diagnosis protocol "KWP 2000" (Keyword Protocol 2000). 

• Standardized diagnosis structure for all control units. 



42 - 04-21 


The ECM is not directly connected to the OBD diagnostic connector. The OBD diagnostic 
connector is connected to the ZGM. The ECM is connected to the ZGM (central gateway 
module) by the PT CAN bus. The ECM is also connected to the Valvetronic control module 
by the Lo CAN (local) bus. Valvetronic faults are stored in the ECM. 


61 

ME 9.2 Emissions Management 
































































Performance Controls 


Bi-VANOS Control (Variable Camshaft Adjustment) 

Performance, torque, idle characteristics and exhaust emissions reduction are improved by 
Variable Camshaft Timing (Bi-VANOS). The VANOS units are mounted directly on the front 
of the camshafts and adjusts the timing of the Intake and Exhaust camshafts from retard¬ 
ed to advanced. The ECM controls the operation of the Bi-VANOS solenoids which regu¬ 
lates the oil pressure required to move the VANOS units. Engine RPM, load and tempera¬ 
ture are used to determine Bi-VANOS activation. 



42 - 04-00 

The Bi-VANOS mechanical operation is dependent on engine oil pressure applied to posi¬ 
tion the VANOS units. When oil pressure is applied to the units (via ports in the camshafts 
regulated by the solenoids), the camshaft hubs are rotated in the drive sprockets changing 
the position which advances/retards the intake/exhaust camshafts timing. The Bi-VANOS 
system is “fully variable”. When the ECM detects that the camshafts are in the optimum 
positions, the solenoids maintain oil pressure on the units to hold the camshaft timing. 

The operation of the VANOS solenoids are monitored in accordance with the OBD II 
requirements for emission control. The ECM monitors the final stage output control and the 
signals from the Camshaft Position Sensors for Bi-VANOS operation. 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 






Solenoid Valves: The Bi-VANOS solenoid valves are mount¬ 
ed through the upper timing case front cover. There are two 
solenoids per cylinder head to control the oil flow to the 
camshaft ports for the intake and exhaust VANOS units. 

The 4/3 way proportional solenoid valve is activated by the 
ECM to direct oil flow. The solenoid valve is sealed to the front 
cover by a radial seal and secured by a retaining plate. 



Hydraulic Actuation 


42 - 02-41 


When oil pressure is applied to chamber A, the blades are forced away from the VANOS 
housing (counterclockwise). The blades are keyed into the hub which results in the hub 
position being rotated in relation to the housing (with sprocket). The hub is secured to the 
camshaft which changes the camshaft to sprocket relationship (timing). The example below 
shows the adjustment procedure together with the pressure progression based on the 
VANOS unit for the exhaust camshaft. 


1. Front View of VANOS 
Unit 

2. Side View of VANOS 
Unit 

3. Camshaft Oil Port 
(Chamber B) 

4. Solenoid Valve 

5. Engine Oil Pump 

6. Supplied Oil 
(Switched Through 
Solenoid) 



7. Supplied Oil Pressure 
(From Engine Oil 
Pump) 



VANOS 


During this adjustment chamber B is open (through the solenoid) to allow the oil to drain 
back through the cylinder head (internal reservoir). 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 

































When the solenoid valve switches over, oil pressure is applied to chamber B. This forces 
the blades (and hub) in a clockwise direction back to the initial position, again changing the 
camshaft timing. 


The example below shows the reset procedure together with the pressure progression 
based on the VANOS unit for the exhaust camshafts. 


1. Front View of VANOS 
Unit 

2. Side View of VANOS 
Unit 

3. Camshaft Oil Port 
(Chamber B) 

4. Solenoid Valve 

5. Engine Oil Pump 

6. Oil Return (Switched 
through Solenoid) 



7. Supplied Oil Pressure 
(From Engine Oil 
Pump) 



VANOS 


During this adjustment chamber A is open (through the solenoid) to allow the oil to drain 
back through the cylinder head (internal reservoir). 


Camshaft Sensors: The camshaft sensors 
(Hall effect) are mounted through the cylinder 
head cover. There are two sensors per cylinder 
head to monitor the intake and exhaust 
camshaft positions. The sensors monitor the 
impulse wheels attached to the ends of the 
camshafts. 

1. Valvetronic Position Sensor 

2. Intake Camshaft Position Sensor 

3. Exhaust Camshaft Position Sensor 



42 - 02-48 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 





























The chart below shows the Bi-VANOS unit camshaft adjustment possibilities. The valve lift 
adjustment has also been incorporated. 

The special feature of Valvetronic is that the air mass drawn in the cylinders can be easily 
determined by the valve lift and closing time. The air mass can then be limited, thus the 
term “load control”. 


With the help of VANOS, the closing point can be easily selected within a defined range. 
With valve lift control, the opening duration and cross section of the valve opening can also 
be easily selected within a defined range. 



1. Exhaust Valve Open 

2. Exhaust Valve Closed 

3. Intake Valve Open 

4. Intake Valve Closed 


Vacuum pump 

The N62 engine requires a vacuum pump for the vacuum assisted brake booster. With the 
throttle valve open while the car is being driven, additional vacuum is needed. The vacuum 
pump is driven by cylinders 1 -4 exhaust camshaft via the VANOS unit. The pump is lubri¬ 
cated through an oil gallery from the cylinder head. 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 






























































































Oil Condition 


An oil condition sensor records the exact engine oil level, oil temperature and the condition 
of the engine oil. Recording the engine oil level protects the engine from having a level 
which is too low which will result in engine damage. Recording the condition of the oil 
means that it is possible to determine exactly when an oil change is required. 


Oil Condition Sensor (OZS): The electronic condi¬ 
tion sensor is located in the engine sump mounted to 
the engine oil pan. 


1. Electronic Sensor 

2. Housing 

3. Lower section of the oil sump (inverted view) 


The sensor consists of two connected cylinder capac¬ 
itors. The smaller capacitor (6) records the oil condi¬ 
tion. Two metal tubes (2+3) act as capacitor electrodes 
located inside the sensor. The engine oil (4) dielectric is 
located between the electrodes. 



42 - 04-06 


With increased wear and additive 
deterioration, the electrical materi¬ 
al properties of the engine oil 
change. 


1. Housing 

2. Outer metal tube 

3. Inner metal tube 

4. Engine oil 

5. Oil level sensor 

6. Oil condition sensor 

7. Sensor electronics 

8. Oil sump 

9. Temperature sensor 




Oil Condition Sensor 


ME 9.2 Performance Controls 




















































The different electrical material properties of the engine oil (dielectric) change the capaci¬ 
tance of the oil condition sensor. This capacitance value is processed to a digital square 
wave signal in the evaluation electronics (!) which is integrated in the sensor. This signal is 
sent to the ECM over the BSD interface as a “statement” about the engine oil condition. 
The ECM processes this sensor value to calculate the next oil change service. 


The engine oil level is determined in the upper section of the sensor (5). This part of the 
sensor is located on the top of the oil level in the oil sump. As the oil level lowers (dielec¬ 
tric), the capacitance of the sensor also changes. The sensor electronics process this 
capacitance value into a digital square wave signal which is also sent over the BSD inter¬ 
face to the ECM. 

PT'CAN 


A platinum temperature sensor (9) is integrated at the 
base of the oil condition sensor to measure the oil tem¬ 
perature. The engine oil level, oil temperature and 
engine oil condition are constantly recorded when volt¬ 
age is supplied (KL15). The oil condition sensor is sup¬ 
plied with voltage from the IVM. 

The oil condition sensor electronics performs its own 
diagnostics. A fault in the OEZS results in a corre¬ 
sponding error message that is transmitted over the 
BSD interface to the ECM for fault storage. 


Electric Cooling Fan 



The variable speed electric cooling fan is controlled by the ECM. The ECM uses a remote 
power output final stage (mounted on the fan housing). The power output stage receives 
power from the fuse (50 amp) junction located on the right inner fender of the engine com¬ 
partment (under the remote charging post). The electric fan is controlled by a pulse width 
modulated signal from the ECM. 

The fan is activated based on the ECM calculation of: 


• Coolant outlet temperature (monitored by the Outlet Temperature Sensor in the ther¬ 
mostat housing) 

• Catalyst temperature 

• Vehicle speed 

• Battery voltage 

• Air Conditioning high side pressure (calculated by IHKA via a bus signal to the ECM) 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 























Alternator 


1. Watertight Housing 

2. Rotor 

3. Stator 

4. Seal 


Altenator 

Regulation 



Due to the high power capacity of 180 A, the alternator is cooled by the engine's cooling 
system to enhance heat dissipation. The brushless Bosch alternator is installed in an alu¬ 
minum housing which is mounted to the engine block. The exterior alternator walls are sur¬ 
rounded with circulated engine coolant. The function and design of the alternator is the 
same as in the M62, with only minor modifications. The BSD interface (bit-serial data inter¬ 


face) for the ECM is new. 


The alternator can actively communicate with the ECM 
via the BSD (bit-serial data interface). The alternator 
conveys data to the ECM. 

PT-CAN 

This is necessary to allow the ECM to adapt its calcu¬ 
lations and specific control to the alternator output. 


The connection with the ECM makes it possible to 
almost completely equalize the alternator load torque. 
This supports the engine idling speed control and the 
battery load balance. 

In addition, the ECM receives information from the 
Power Module about the battery's calculated temper¬ 
ature and charge status. This means that alternator 
output can be adapted precisely to the temperature 
and load status of the battery which increases the bat¬ 
tery service life. 


U$D 



dz s 


f AUQ 


■ (=Mh 



» 1 

- GKfi 





I DSC 



=GS 


| e:ck 


42 - 04-08 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 









































The ECM takes on the following functions: 

• Activation/deactivation of the alternator. 

• Informing the alternator regulator of the nominal voltage value to be set. 

• Controlling the alternator's response to load. 

• Diagnosing the data line between the alternator and the ECM. 

• Storing alternator fault codes. 

• Activating the charge indicator lamp in the instrument cluster. 

The charge indicator display strategy has not changed in comparison with the alternators 
currently in use. Regulating the alternator output is particularly important when activating 
Valvetronic operating motors. 

A temperature protection function is implemented in the voltage regulator. If the alternator 
overheats, the alternator voltage is reduced until an appropriate temperature has been 
reached. 

The ECM can recognize the following faults: 

• Mechanical faults such as blockages or belt drive failure. 

• Electrical faults such as exciter diode defects or over/under voltage caused by regula¬ 
tion defects. 

• Connection defects between the ECM and the alternator. 

Coil breaks and short-circuits cannot be recognized. The basic alternator function is in 
operation even if the BSD interface fails. 


Note: The alternator regulator voltage is influenced by the ECM - BSD interface. The bat¬ 
tery charge voltage can therefore be up to 15.5 V, depending on the battery temperature. 
If a battery charge voltage of up to 15.5 V is measured, the regulator is not faulty. A high 
charge voltage indicates a low battery temperature. 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 


Electronic Box Cooling Fan 


The E-box develops very high temperatures 
caused by engine heat and the energy dissipat¬ 
ed by the control units. The ECM controls an 
electric cooling fan in the base of the electronic 
box to draw in cool air from the passenger com¬ 
partment. 

Since electronic control modules need to oper¬ 
ate at a reduced temperature, the air tempera¬ 
ture in the E-box must be kept as low as possi¬ 
ble. Lower temperatures extend the life expec¬ 
tancy of electronic control modules. 



Comfort Start 

The comfort start makes easy engine starting possible 
because the starter remains automatically activated until the 
engine is running (rpm signal). Security is enhanced by using 
the CAS Module with coded keys and the ignition starting but¬ 
ton (integral). 



When starting to the engine, the CAS contains the data for the EWS code which is trans¬ 
ferred to the ECM. The transmission of EWS data between the CAS and the ECM is over 
the data line D - EWS. Terminal R and terminal 15 is directed by the CAS for all electrical 
systems. The CAS also activates KL15 WUP (Wake UP) for control modules on the PT- 
CAN. 


When KL15 WUP is activated, the control modules change from the state of rest into the 
operating condition. During the starting procedure, KL 50L for the comfort starting relay (in 
the IVM) and KL 50E is switched to the ECM for the starting request. The ECM will activate 
a ground signal to the comfort starting relay to energize the starter motor. 

The brake light switch is monitored by the ECM for the comfort start feature as well as 
cruise control. An engine start is possible only if the brake pedal is pressed. For safety rea¬ 
sons, the CAS monitors both signals of the brake light switch (the actual brake light switch 
and the brake light test switch). 

The selector lever of automatic transmission must be in position P or N. The position of the 
selector lever is detected from the direct hardwire signal or via a CAN signal. 

70 


ME 9.2 Performance Controls 










Comfort Start - Block Diagram 




ME 9.2 Performance Controls 







































































Actuation Time of Terminal 50: The monitored actuating times of terminal 50 protects 
the starter against overloading. The actuation times of terminal 50 are: 

• A maximum of 21 seconds. A repetition is possible immediately. 

• The actuation time is reduced for each repetition by 2 seconds until the minimum 
actuation time of 3 seconds is reached. 

• If the start/stop button is pressed for longer than the preceding actuation time, the 
actuation time is increased by 2 seconds again (up to a maximum of 21 seconds). 


Switching off the Engine: The vehicle engine is switched off when the vehicle is stopped 
and the start/stop button is pressed. If the start/stop button is pressed for longer than 2 
seconds, the vehicle engine is switched off and then the key is automatically released and 
pushed out with spring pressure ("convenience off"). 


Incorrect Operation and "Emergency On": To ensure the safety of the vehicle in the 
case of an accidental engine shutdown during driving, the "Emergency On" function is 
available. An engine shutdown during driving can be caused by accidentally pressing the 
start/stop button (the button must be pressed for at least 1 second or 3 times consecu¬ 
tively). 

The "Emergency On" function enables the starter to be actuated again without brake oper¬ 
ation at a vehicle speed above 5 km/h (3 mph). The "Emergency On" function also prevents 
terminal R from being switched off during driving. 


Service Functions: When replacing the ECM and/or CAS Module, the following must be 
completed: 

The Service Function "DME/DDE - CAS alignment" in the DISplus. After the alignment the 
two modules are rigidly assigned to each other and the vehicle. 

Note: It is not possible to exchange these control modules with another vehicle for testing 
purposes. 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 


Cruise Control 


The cruise control (FGR) is a function of the ECM and has multi-speed capability on the 
E65. This multi-speed function allows the driver to program and store multiple speed set¬ 
tings which can then be activated as required. 

This means that speed settings such as 30, 50, or 65 mph can be selected directly at the 
touch of a button without having to drive the vehicle precisely at that speed beforehand. 
This is a considerable added convenience. Those preset cruise control speeds are pro¬ 
grammed by the driver in advance and then activated when driving. 


1. Preset speeds 

2. Cruise control active: 
illuminated pointer 

3. Cruise control not active: 
silhouette pointer 


Briefly press/pull the lever to illuminate the cruise control mask in the speedometer. The 
memory will accept and store up to 6 preset speeds. When the cruise control is not active, 
the silhouette pointer indicates the last speed at which it was activated. 

When the cruise control is active, the illuminated pointer indicates the speed that is cur¬ 
rently being maintained. The cruise control can be activated at any speed from approxi¬ 
mately 20 mph upwards. 

When the ignition is switched OFF, the cruise control is switched off at the same time. 
Moving the lever up/dn will deactivate the cruise control and delete the mask in the 
speedometer. The cruise control function is overridden by braking, selecting transmission 
setting "N" or active DSC intervention. 


Speedometer in Instrument Cluster: 




ME 9.2 Performance Controls 



Cruise Control Lever: The cruise control is 
operated by the left lower steering column lever. 

When the lever is pressed forward to (but not 
beyond) the detent, the current road speed is 
stored and maintained. 

Flicking the lever forwards increases the vehicle 
road speed by approx. 1 mph at a time. If the 
lever is pressed and held, the vehicle acceler¬ 
ates. When the lever is then released, the speed 
is stored and maintained. 


When decelerating, flicking the lever backwards repeatedly reduces the vehicle road speed 
by approx. 1 mph at a time. When the multi-speed function is activated, the preset speed 
indicators on the speedometer can be hidden. This is done by pressing and holding the 
cruise control lever up or down for more than 3 seconds. 



42 - 04-13 


Programming/Deleting Preset Speeds 

Programming of preset speeds should be performed while the vehicle is stationary with 
KL15 switched “on”. It is also possible to program the preset speeds while driving. 
However, altering the preset speed also alters the current speed being maintained. 

To program a preset speed, the cruise control lever is pressed forwards or backwards 
beyond the detent. A pointer then appears on the speedometer that indicates the preset 
speed. To increase the preset speed, the cruise control lever must be pressed forward to 
the detent. To reduce the preset speed, the cruise control lever must be pulled backwards 
to the detent. 

To store the preset speed, the slide switch (in the end of the lever) must be pressed and 
held in for at least 3 seconds. The stored preset speed is indicated by a pointer on the 
speedometer. A preset speed is deleted by selecting it using the cruise control lever and 
then pressing and holding the slide switch in for at least 3 seconds. The speed pointer then 
disappears. 

Note: The preset cruise control speeds are a Vehicle Memory function. 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 









Function 

Activate cruise control accelerate/set 
Decelerate/set 

Activate multi-speed function 

Select next higher preset speed 

Select next lower preset speed 

Cancel cruise control 

Recall/set/delete preset speeds 
while cruise control active 


Operated By 

Move lever forwards 

Move lever backwards 
Pressing lever forwards past detent 
Pressing lever forwards past detent 
Pressing lever backwards past detent 
Move lever up/down 
Press slide switch inwards 


Notes: 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 





















Review Questions 


1. Describe the Integrated Voltage Supply Module (IVM) for the Fuel Injectors and 
Ignition Coils: 


2. List the three signal operations required to detect Valvetronic Positon. 


3. Describe how the Electric Fuel Pump is activated. 


4. What type of Ignition Coils are used in the N62? 

5. Where is the Active Charcoal Canister and DM TL located? 


6. What are the advantages of the Bosch LSU Planar Wideband Oxygen Sensors? 


7. List the functions of the Oil Condition Sensor. 


8. Explain the Comfort Start feature. 


9. How are the Cruise Control preset speeds programmed and deleted? 



ME 9.2 Performance Controls 

























