Table of Contents 

Emissions Overview 

Subject Page 

Emissions Overview.3 

Purpose of the System.3 

What is OBD? .3 

What is the most common problem detected by OBD? .4 

Fuel FillerCap .4 

M isfire Detection.4 

Engine Misfire Diagnosis .5 

OBD History .8 

OBD I .9 

OBD II .9 

Objectives of OBD II .9 

Overview of the National Low Emission Vehicle Program .10 

Emission Reduction Stages .10 

SULEV.12 

M56 Engine.12 

Catalytic Converters.12 

Oxygen Sensors.12 

Fuel Injectors.13 

Secondary Air System .14 

Fuel System .15 

Cooling System.16 

System Monitoring.17 

Permanent Monitoring .17 

Cyclic M onitoring.17 

Drive Cycle .18 

Example of a Drive Cycle for Completing all OBD II 

Relevant Checks .18 

Readiness Code .21 

Readiness Code using the DISplus/GT-1 .22 

OBD II Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTC) .23 

ScanTool Connection.24 

20 Pin Diagnostic Socket Deletion .25 

BMW FaultCode (DISplus/GT-1).27 

OBD II Fault Memory and Fault Codes.28 

Emission Control Function Monitoring & Comprehensive 
Component Monitoring.28 


Initial Print Date: 02/01 


Revision Date: 09/04 





































Emissions Overview 


Model: All Equipped with OBD II 
Production: 1995 to Present 

Manufacturer: Bosch and Siemens Engine Control Modules 
Pin Connector: 88 and 134 Pins 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe What is Required to Illuminate the "Malfunction Indicator" Light. 

• Describe The Difference Between TLEV, LEV ,ULEV, and SULEV. 
(SULEV - See Service Bulletin at the end of module.) 

• Identify Vehicle Emission Compliance by Production Date. 

• List the Systems/Components that are Permanently M onitored. 

• Access the Readiness Codes using the DISplus/GT-1. 

• Find the DLC Connector Locations in Various BMW Vehicles. 


2 

Emissions Overview 



Emissions Overview 


Purpose of the System 
What isOBD? 

Today many of the engine's control systems such as throttle opening, fuel injection, igni¬ 
tion, emissions and performance are controlled by an electronic control module and the 
related sensors and actuators. The first on-board diagnostic (OBD) systems were devel¬ 
oped by the manufacturer as a way to detect problems with the electronic systems. 


Beginning with 1994 model year, requirements for OBD systems have been established 
by the EPA and CARB.The purpose ofthe OBD system is to assure proper emission 
control system operation forthe vehicle's lifetime by monitoring emission-related compo¬ 
nents and systems for deterioration and malfunction. This includes also a check ofthe 
tank ventilation system for vapor leaks. 


The OBD system consists ofthe engine and transmission control modules, their sensors 
and actuators along with the diagnostic software. The control modules can detect system 
problems even before the driver notices a driveability problem because many problems 
that affect emissions can be electrical or even chemical in nature. 


What happens if a problem is detected? 


When the OBD system determines that a prob¬ 
lem exists, a corresponding "Diagnostic Trouble 
Code" is stored in the control module's 
memory. 


The control module also illuminates a yellow 
dashboard Malfunction Indicator Light indicat¬ 
ing "Check Engine" or "Service Engine Soon" 
or displays an engine symbol. 


Have you seen this light? 


CHECK 

ENGINE 




A short introduction to OBD 


This light informs the driver of the need for service, NOT ofthe need to stop the vehicle. 
A blinking orflashing dashboard light indicates a rather severe level of engine misfire. 


After fixing the problem the Fault code is deleted to turn off the light. If the conditions that 
caused a problem are no longer present the vehicle's OBD system can turn off the dash¬ 
board light automatically. If the OBD system evaluates the component or system three 
consecutive times and no longer detects the initial problem, the dashboard light will turn 
off automatically. 


3 

Emissions Overview 






What is the mostcommon problem detected by OBD? 


Fuel FillerCap 

If the fuel filler cap is not properly closed after 
refueling, the OBD system will detect the 
vapor leak that exists from the cap not being 
completely tightened. 

If you tighten the cap subsequently, the 
dashboard light should be extinguished with¬ 
in a few days or after deleting the Fault code. 
This is notan indication of a faulty OBD sys¬ 
tem. The OBD system has properly diag¬ 
nosed the problem and accordingly alerted 
the driver by illuminating the dashboard light. 



Please check the fuel filler cap first when the 
dashboard light comes on to avoid unneces¬ 
sary diagnostic time. To check the fuel filler cap turn the cap to the right until you hear a 
click orthe cap reaches the full stop. Make sure that the retaining strap is not caught 
between the filler pipe and the fuel filler cap. If the light should stay on further in depth 
evaporative leak diagnosis is required. 


Misfire Detection 

As part of the CARB/OBD II regulations the Engine Control M odule must determine if 
misfire is occurring and also identify the specific cylinder(s). The ECM will determine 
severity of the misfire event, and whether it is emissions relevant or catalyst damaging. In 
orderto accomplish these tasks the ECM monitors the crankshaft for acceleration losses 
during firing segments of cylinder specific firing order. If the signal is implausible an erro¬ 
neous reference mark can be obtained by the ECM which will result in a misfire fault 
being set. 

Possible causes of cylinder misfire faults (actual field findings): 

• Vehicle ran low or out of fuel 

• Poorfuel quality (ex. water in fuel, customer uses an additive, etc.) 

• Low/high fuel pressure 

• Ignition coil 

• Fouled spark plug(s) 

• Restricted / contaminated fuel injector(s) 

• Crankshaft position sensor 

• Poor combustion due to low compression or high leakage 

• Blocked/restricted Catalyst 


4 

Emissions Overview 






Engine Misfire Diagnosis 

Engine Misfire is the result of inefficient combustion in one or more cylinders. The causes 
of Engine M isfire are extensive but can be grouped into the following sub-systems. 
Considerthe charts below as an additional diagnostic aid once the DISplus/GT-1 is con¬ 
nected, the correct fault symptom has been chosen and the fault memory has been inter¬ 
rogated. Follow the Test Module as displayed by the DISplus/GT-1. 


IGNITION SYSTEM 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION TEST CORRECTION 

SparkPlug: • Incorrect spark plug installed Secondary • Verify correct spark plug 

• Electrode gap closed ortoo small Ignition • Replace if necessary 

• Electrode(s) missing DIS plus Preset • Swap with another cylinder 

• Oil orfuel fouled spark plug Measurement 

• Ceramic insulation cracked 

Secondary • Wet or moist due to water infiltration. • Check water ingress, repair, replace 

circuit: (wiring, • High resistance due to corrosion. • Check resistance value, replace 

M73-cap, rotor) 

Ignition • Secondary/P rimary Circuits open orshorted. Secondary • Inspect and replace if necessary 

Coil(s): • Housing cracked, damaged. and Primary • Swap with another cylinder 

IgnitionCoil • Powersupply, Primary control and Primary • Look for open, loose connector, 

&Engine ground (shunt signal) circuits impaired. Ignition & corrosion, crossed or backed out 

Harness Term 4A feed- pins (also consider ignition unloader or 

Connectors backPreset EC M relay on MY97 and newer cars). 

Measurements • Determine defective condition, 
repair or replace. 

• A secondary ignition oscilloscope display provides vital information 
about the ignition system's condition. 

• Follow the precautions in group 12 of the Repair Instructions. 

• Use the following scope patterns as a guideline for ignition system 
diagnosis. Use the preset measurement function of DIS plus. 


Evaluation of secondary signal amplitude at idle speed. 

1. Normal Ignition Voltage Peak: Spark Plug is OK 

2. Low Ignition Voltage Peak: Gap too small (defective) 

3. H igh Ignition voltage peak: Gap too large (defective) 


5 

Emissions Overview 














Pistons, • Hole in piston crown, ring(s) broken, 

Rings, valve(s) not seating, valve(s) bent, 

Valves, valve spring(s) broken, camshaft lobe 

Camshaft: cracked, etc. 

Hydraulic • HVA oil bore restricted or blocked. 
Valve • Engine oil pressure builds up too slow. 

Actuator • Intermittent Misfire Fault - Not 
(HVA): Currently Present. 

• HVA binding/sticking in bore. 

Vacuum • Unmetered vacuum leaks causing a 
Leaks: "lean" operating condition. Possible 

"Excessive Mixture Deviation" 

fault codes. 


• Idle Quality - Rough Run¬ 
ning Preset. 

• Cylinder compression & 
leakdown tests. 

• Idle Quality - Rough Run¬ 
ning Preset. 

• Listen to HVA 

• Check Oil Pressure 

• Cylinder leakdown 


CORRECTION 


• Correct condition as 
required. 


■ Always consider 
mechanical com¬ 
ponents when 
diagnosing misfire. 

■ Inspect for scoring. 


Idle Quality - Rough Run- • Correct condition as 
ning Preset. Test for vacuum required, 
leaks per Repair Instr. and S IB 

on "Crankcase Ventilation". 

■ Interpret Add. & Multiple adaptation values 


FUEL QUALITY, DELIVERY, INJ ECTION & EVAPORATIVE SYSTEMS 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION 


Fuel (quality): ‘Contaminated fuel. 

(water, other non combustible). 

Fuel Delivery: • Fuel pump delivery pressure low, 
restriction in fuel line to fuel rail or 
running loss valve. 

• Fuel filter restricted (clogged). 

• Low fuel in tank. 


Running Loss ‘Valve stuck in "small circuit" position. 

Valve: 


Fuel Injectors: 


1 Leaking fuel injector pintle seats cause 
rich engine starts with hot ambient 
temperatures. 

1 Blocked (dirty) injector(s). 


TEST 


1 Check fuel 
pressure & 
volume. 

1 Check fuel 
pump power 
and ground 

1 Check valve 


•Ti Preset& 
status page. 

• Sec Ign scope 
pattern. 


CORRECTION 


•Clean fuel system, replace fuel. 


Determine restriction/flow reduction, 
replace component as necessary. 
Interpret Additive and Multiplicative 
adaptation values. 


• Display "diagnosis requests" in DISplus 
and test valve for proper function, repl¬ 
ace valve as necessary. 

Check injectors for leakage. 

Swap suspect injector with another 
cylinder. 

• Inspect injector, replace if necessary. 


Fuel Pressure 
Regulator: 


Evaporative 

System: 


1 Regulator defective, causes fluctuation 
in the injected quantity of fuel causing 
mixture adaptation faults. 

1 Defective evaporative system vent 
causing fuel tank collapse and fuel. 
starvation. 


Fuel pressure • Check nominal fuel pressure value with 
engine operating undervaried speeds. 


DISplus status, ‘Check the fuel tank condition and vent 
Evap test line, 

with press¬ 
ure tool, • Check Fresh AirValve onTLEV E36 

purge valve vehicles orLDP/DM TL and filter on 
func.test. ORVR vehicles for proper system 

"breathing". 


Emissions Overview 










IMPLAUSIBLE ECM CONTROL FUNCTION OR SENSOR INPUT SIG- 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION TEST CORRECTION 

Crankshaft • Implausible signal for misfire detection. • DIS plus preset • Determine defective sensoror 

Position • Increment wheel loose or damaged measurement. increment wheel and replace. 

Sensoror (internal on M44, M52 and M54, 

Increment external on M 62 & M 73). 

Wheel: • Air gap between sensor and wheel. 

• Noticeable at higher rpm. 

Catalyst • Excessive exhaust back pressure • DIS plus preset • Determine catalyst condition, replace 

Damaged: (bank specific fault present, more measurement or repair as necessary, 

noticeable under heavy load and of oxygen 

high rpm). sensor. 

• Back pressure test per SIB with Special Tool. 

Oxygen • Excessive mixture deviation, • Monitor • Swap sensorfrom other bank (if app- 

Sensor: possible vacuum leaks. oxygen licable) and see if fault transfers to 

sensor other bank, 

signal via 
DIS preset. 

Engine • Internal control module fault. *Checkfault • Highly unlikely but must be considered. 

Control memory. 

Module • Misfire Reprogramming. *RefertoSIB • Check Model/Prod range - reprogram 

When diagnosing a Misfire fault code, Remember: 

"M isfire" is caused by a defect in the internal combustion engine or a defect in the 
control of the engine operation. 

"Misfire" is the result of improper combustion (variation between cylinders) as 
measured at the crankshaft due to: 

- Engine mechanical defects; breakage, wear, leakage orimpropertolerances. 

- Excessive mixture deviation; air (vacuum leaks), fuel and all the components that deliver 
air/fuel into the combustion chambers. 

- Faulty ignition; primary, secondary including spark plugs. 

- Faulty exhaust flow; affecting back pressure. 

- Tolerance parameters; ECM programming. 

A Misfire fault code(s) is the "symptom" of a faulty input for proper combustion. 
When diagnosing a misfire, review the charts to assist you in finding the faulty 
input. 

T 

Emissions Overview 









OBD History 

As a result of low fuel costs, together with a high standard of living and a dense popula¬ 
tion, the state of California was affected particularly heavily by air pollution. This spurred 
the state to pass the most comprehensive and stringent emissions and consumption 
laws in the world. The automobile manufacturers were reminded of their obligations and 
this drove them on to comply with the new regulations at enormous expense. 


• In continuing efforts to improve air quality, the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) amended the Clean Air Act in 1990. The Clean Air Act was originally mandat¬ 
ed in 1970. The Clean Air Act has a direct impact on automobile manufactures 
whereby they are responsible to comply with the regulations set forth by the EPA. 
The 1990 amendment of the Clean Air Act set forth all of the changes currently 
being introduced on vehicles sold in the United States today. 

• In 1967, the State of California formed the California Air Resources Board (CARB)to 
develop and carryout air quality improvement programs for California's unique air pol¬ 
lution conditions. Through the years, CARB programs have evolved into what we 
now know as ON Board Diagnostics and the National Low Emission Vehicle 
Program. 

• The EPA has adopted many of the CARB programs as National programs and laws. 
One of these earlier programs was OBD I and the introduction of the "Check 
Engine" Light. 

• BMW first introduced OBD I and the check engine light in the 1987 model year. This 
enhanced diagnosis through the display of "flash codes" using the check engine 
light as well as the BMW 2013 and GT-1. OBD I was only the first step in an ongoing 
effort to monitor and reduce tailpipe emissions. 

• By the 1989 model year all automotive manufactures had to assure that all individual 
components influencing the composition of exhaust emissions would be electrically 
monitored and that the driver be informed whenever such a component failed. 

• Since the 1996 model year all vehicles must comply with OBD II requirements. OBD 
II requires the monitoring of virtually every component that can affect the emission 
performance of a vehicle plus store the associated fault code and condition in mem¬ 
ory. 

If a problem is detected and then re-detected during a later drive cycle more than 
one time, the OBD II system must also illuminate the "Check Engine" Light in the 
instrument clusterto alert the driverthata malfunction has occurred. However, the 
flash code function of the Check Engine Light in OBD I vehicles is nota 
function in OBD II vehicles. 


8 

Emissions Overview 



• This requirement is carried out by the Engine Control Module (ECM/DM E) as well as 
the Automatic Transmission Control Module (EGS/AGS) and the Electronic Throttle 
Control Module (EML)to monitor and store faults associated with all 
components/systems that can influence exhaust and evaporative emissions. 

OBD I 

The essential elements here are that electrical components which affect exhaust emis¬ 
sions are monitored by the motor-electronics system and an optical warning signal 
(CHECK ENGINE Light) is issued in the event of an OBD I-relevant malfunction. The cor¬ 
responding fault can be read out via a flashing code without the aid of a testing device. 

OBD II 

Since J anuary 1996, OBD II has been compulsory on all vehicles in the US market. The 
main difference from OBD I is that not only are the purely electrical components moni¬ 
tored but also all the systems and processes that affect exhaust emissions and fuel sys¬ 
tem evaporative emissions. 

The operational reliability of the exhaust-treatment system must be guaranteed for 5 
years and/or 100,000 miles; this is maintained by emission certification. In this case, the 
data relevant to exhaust/evaporative emissions are read out via a standardized interface 
with a universal "diagnosis device". If a violation is identified, the vehicle manufacturer in 
question is legally bound to eliminate the fault throughout the entire vehicle series. 


Objectives of OBD II 

• Permanent monitoring of components rel¬ 
evant to exhaust emissions in all vehicles. 


• Immediate detection and indication of sig¬ 
nificant emission increases overthe entire 
service life of each vehicle. 


• Permanently low exhaust emissions in 
the field. 



9 

Emissions Overview 





Overview of the National Low Emission Vehicle Program 

Emission Reduction Stages 

While OBD II has the function of monitoring foremission related faults and alerting the 
operator of the vehicle, the National Low Emission Vehicle Program requires a certain 
number of vehicles produced (specific to manufacturing totals) currently comply with 
the following emission stages; 

TLEV: Transitional Low Emission Vehicle 


LEV: Low Emission Vehicle 


ULEV: Ultra Low Emission Vehicle. 


Priorto the National Low Emission Vehicle Program, the most stringent exhaust reduction 
compliancy is what is known internally within BMW as HC II. The benefit of exhaust 


emission reductions that the 
National Low Emission Vehicle 
Program provides compared with 
the HC II standard is as follows; 

TLEV: 50% cleaner. 


LEV: 70% cleaner. 


ULEV: 84% cleaner. 


Grams/Mile at 100,000 miles 

Compliance 

Level 

N M HC 

Non Methane 
Hyd rocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.156 

4.2 

0.6 

LEV 

0.090 

4.2 

0.3 

ULEV 

0.055 

2.1 

0.3 


Grams p er Mile @ 50 F - C old Eng ine Startup 


C ompliance 
Level 

NMHC 

Non Methane 
Hyd rocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.250 

3.4 

0.4 

LEV 

0.131 

3.4 

0.2 

ULEV 

0.040 

1.7 

0.2 


G rams/M ile at 50,000 miles 

Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non Methane 
Hyd rocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.125 

3.4 

0.4 

LEV 

0.075 

3.4 

0.2 

ULEV 

0.040 

1.7 

0.2 


10 

Emissions Overview 
































OBD II Emission Compliance 



1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

M44 

E36 


HC II 

TLEV 



1/96 1/97 

M44 

Z3 

HC II 

TLEV 

10/96 1/97 

M 52 
E36 

TLEV 

10/95 

M52TU 

Z3 


TLEV 


1/97 


9/98 - M52TU 


S52, E36, M3 
Mcoupe, Mroadster 


TLEV 


9/98 


M 54 


2.5 LEV 

Z3 


3.0 ULEV 


10/00 


M52TU 

E46 


LEV 


6/98 


M 54 


2.5/3.0xi LEV 9/0( 

E46 


3.0 ULEV 6/0( 


S54 M3 

Mcoupe, Mroadster 


LEV 


-1-- 1/01 


E39 


TLEV 


LEV 


3/96 


9/98 - M52TU 


M 54 


2.5 LEV 

E39 


3.0 ULEV 


9/00 


M62TU 
E38E39 


HC II 

LEV 

1/96 9/98 -M62TU 

M62TU 

E53 


LEV 

LEV-Truck 


9/99 4/00 


M54 3.0 
E53 


ULEV-Truck 


4/00 


S62 
M5 Z8 


TLEV 


9/99 


M73TU 

E38 


HC II 


LEV 


1/95 


9/98 - M73TU 


11 

Emissions Overview 































































































SULEV 


M56 SULEV (Super Ultra Low Emission Vehicle) is available on a limited (by state) basis 
in the E46/2, E46/3 and E46/4. SULEV models (E46 sedan, coupe and sportwagon all 
with automatic only) will be sold in California, New York and M assachusetts as 2003 
models and in Vermont starting in 2004 model year. 

In addition these vehicles are certified as PZEV (Partial Zero Emissions Vehicles). 


PZEV regulations include: 

•Vehicles must meet SULEV tailpipe emissions standard (approx. 1/5 of U LEV standards) 
•Vehicles conform to Zero Evaporative Emissions 
•Vehicles subject to extended OBD regulations. 

• Emission relevant components warranted for 15 years or 150,000 miles 


M56 Engine 

The following components are used to achieve SULEV and Zero Evaporative Emission 
requirements: 

• Pistons Revised to change spark travel path 

• Catalytic Converters Ceramic carriers with high cell density for better "Warm Up" Control 

• Oxygen Sensors Planarwide band 02 sensors in front of the cats 

• Vanos Positioning changed during start up for improved start up and emissions 

• Fuel Pump Control Revised with raised pressure and more accurate flow control 

• Fuel Injectors New design for improved fuel flow and higher working pressure 

• Fuel System All metal fuel system components made of stainless steel 

• Air Intake System Revised to block HC escape 

• Crankcase Ventilation Revised 

• Secondary Air System Mass airflow sensorto monitor secondary airflow 

• Cooling System Revised to reduce Ozone levels 


Catalytic Converters 

The catalysts attached in direct proximity to the 
engine and are equipped with ceramic(s) carriers 
in high cell density technology. These converters 
reach operating temperature faster and offer 
quicker control of exhaust emissions. Vehicles are 
also equipped with dual downstream converters. 

Oxygen Sensors 

The M56 engine use for Oxygen sensors, two pla¬ 
nar broadband sensors upstream of the converter 
and two sensors downstream. 

The planar broadband sensor reach operating 
temperature very fast and are able to effect fuel 
mixtures in approximately 5 seconds. 


12 

Emissions Overview 







1 . 
2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

Fuel Pump System 

Fuel system operating pressure is increased to 5 Bar. 



Instrument Cluster 
DM E 
D IS plus 

Fuel pump control unit 
MRS 

Fuel pump 


The fuel pump is controlled by the Fuel pump control unit, based on engine demand as 
received from the DM E overthe Lo-CAN. The fuel pump control unit additionally 
receives information overthe K-Bus, specifically crash information from the MRS. 



Fuel Injectors 

Nozzle diameter of the fuel injectors has been reduced and 
the installation angle has been changed. The injectors were 
also adapted to perform at the higher system operating pres¬ 
sure. 

Injectors screw into the rail and a tap to test pressure read¬ 
ings is NOT provided. 


13 

Emissions Overview 















Secondary Air System 



The secondary air pump has been 
revised to improve its response time in 
cold weather starting situations. 

A HF M (Hot Film Air M ass M eter) has 
been added to the secondary air system 
to monitor air volume pumped into the 
exhaust for more accurate control of the 
NOxemissions. 



mRHi n? 


1. DMTL 

2. Pressure Pipe 

3. Charcoal canister 

4. Breather Pipe 

5. Evaporation Line 

6. Fuel Fill Line 

7. FuelTank 

8. Fuel Tank Vent Line 


14 

Emissions Overview 

















Fuel System 

In order to meet the Zero Evaporative Emission requirement, the fuel system was com¬ 
pletely revised. The fuel tank, tank filler neck, charcoal canister, fuel rail and tank ventila¬ 
tion valve are all made of stainless steel. 


When perform repairs on the fuel system, it is imperative that all fitting remain clean and 

that the proper tightening torques are 
observed. 



The fuel tank is manufactured of high 
grade steel and completely coated to 
meet the requirements of a minimum 
durability of 15 years. 

The fuel tank can be exchanged only as a 
complete unit. 



4. 

5. 


Electric fuel pump 
Liquid Vapor Separator 


15 

Emissions Overview 



















Cooling System 



The radiatorofthe E46 SULEV looks 
similarto the standard E46 radiator. 


The surface of the cooling fins are 
coated with a special "PremAir" coat¬ 
ing. 

The coating consists of multiple porous 
layers of a catalytic surface. The task of 
the catalyst coating is to convert Ozone 
into Oxygen. 


16 

Emissions Overview 


System Monitoring 

Within the framework ofOBD II, certain components/systems must be monitored once 
per driving cycle while other control systems (e.g. misfire detection) must be monitored 
permanently. A "driving cycle" consists of engine startup, vehicle operation 
(exceeding of starting speed), coasting and engine stopping. 


Permanent M onitoring 

Permanently monitored systems are monitored according to temperature immediately 
after startup. In the event of malfunctions (e.g. oxygen sensor), the M alfunction Indicator 
Light will illuminate immediately. 

The following are monitored permanently: 

• M isfire Detection 

• Fuel System (duration of injection) 

• All emission related electrical circuits, components and systems of the ECM,TCM 
and EM L (if equipped). 

Cyclic Monitoring 

Systems monitored once per driving cycle will only result in a fault being registered after 
the corresponding operating conditions have been completed.Therefore, there is no 
possibility for checking when the engine is started up briefly and then shut down. 

The following are monitored once per driving cycle: 

• Oxygen Sensor Function 

• Secondary Air Injection System 

• Catalytic Converter Function (efficiency) 

• Evaporative Vapor Recovery System 


Due to the complexity involved in meeting the test criteria within the defined 
driving cycle, all tests may not be completed within one "customer driving 
cycle". The testcan be successfully completed within the defined criteria, 
howevercustomerdriving styles may differ and therefore may notalways 
monitor all involved components/systems in one "trip". 


17 

Emissions Overview 



Drive Cycle 

The following diagram shows how a drive cycle is set (test drive) in orderfor all the sys¬ 
tems to be monitored once. The test conditions can be created in any desired order after 
startup. 



Example of a Drive Cycle forCompleting all OBD II Relevant Checks 

1. Engine cold start, idling, approximately 3 minutes. Evaluated: 

• Secondary Air System 

• Evaporative Leak Detection (LDP Equipped Vehicles) 

2. Constant driving at 20 to 30 MPH, approximately 4 minutes. Evaluated: 

• Oxygen Sensors - Achieved "Closed Loop" Operation 

• Oxygen Sensors - Response Time and Switching Time (Control Frequency) 

3. Constant driving at 40 to 60 MPH, approximately 15 minutes (sufficient vehicle 
coasting phases included). Evaluated: 

• Catalytic Converter Efficiency 

• Oxygen Sensors - Response Time and Switching Time (Control Frequency) 

4. Engine idling, approximately 5 minutes. Evaluated: 

•Tank-Leak Diagnosis (DM TL Equipped Vehicles after KL 15 is switched OFF) 

NOTE:The diagnostic sequence illustrated above will be interrupted if: 

•The engine speed exceeds 3000 RPM 

• Large fluctuations in the accelerator pedal position. 

•The driving speed exceeds 60 M PH 


18 

Emissions Overview 



The "Malfunction Indicator Light" ( MIL) will be illuminated underthe following 
conditions: 


• Upon the completion of the nextcon- 
secutive driving cycle where the pre¬ 
viously faulted system is monitored again 
and the emissions relevant fault is again 
present. 

• Immediately if a "Catalyst Damaging" 
fault occurs (M isfire Detection). 

The illumination of the light is performed in 
accordance with the Federal Test Procedure 
(FTP) which requires the lamp to be illuminat¬ 
ed when: 


MONITORED 

COMPONENTS 



• A malfunction of a component that can affect the emission performance of the vehi¬ 
cle occurs and causes emissions to exceed 1.5 times the standards required 

by the (FTP). 

• Manufacturer-defined specifications are exceeded. 

• An implausible input signal is generated. 

• Catalyst deterioration causes HC-emissions to exceed a limit equivalents 1.5 times 
the standard (FTP). 

• M isfire faults occur. 

• A leak is detected in the evaporative system, or "purging" is defective. 

• ECM fails to enter closed-loop oxygen sensor control operation within a specified 
time interval. 

• Engine control or automatic transmission control enters a "limp home" operating 
mode. 

• Ignition is on (KL15) position before cranking = Bulb C heck Function. 


Within the BMW system the illumination of the Malfunction Indicator Light is performed 
in accordance with the regulations setforth in CARB mail-out 1968.1 and as demon¬ 
strated via the Federal Test Procedure (FTP). The following page provides several exam¬ 
ples of when and how the M alfunction Indicator Light is illuminated based on the "cus¬ 
tomer drive cycle". 


19 

Emissions Overview 






DRIVE 
CYCLE # 1 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 2 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 3 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 4 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 5 


* DRIVE 
CYCLE # 43 

TEXT 

NO. 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT CODE 

ERASED 

MIL 

STATUS 

check] 

engine| 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

1 . 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

















2. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 














3. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

NO 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 











4. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 





5. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

N 

_ 

1 

r 

/ 

6. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

'fault/ 

Cfo^E 

ERASED 

€- -> 

OFF 


1. A fault code is stored within the ECM upon the first occurrence of a fault in the system 
being checked. 

2. The "M alfunction Indicator Light" will not be illuminated until the completion of the 
second consecutive "customer driving cycle" where the previously faulted system is 
again monitored and a fault is still present or a catalyst damaging fault has occurred. 

3. If the second drive cycle was not complete and the specific function was not checked 
as shown in the example, the ECM counts the third drive cycle as the "next consecu¬ 
tive" drive cycle. The "Malfunction Indicator Light" is illuminated if the function is 
checked and the fault is still present. 

4. If there is an intermittent fault present and does not cause a fault to be set through 
multiple drive cycles, two complete consecutive drive cycles with the fault present are 
required forthe "Malfunction Indicator Light" to be illuminated. 

5. Once the "Malfunction Indicator Light" is illuminated it will remain illuminated unless 
the specific function has been checked without fault through three complete consecu¬ 
tive drive cycles. 

6. The fault code will also be cleared from memory automatically if the specific function is 
checked through 40 consecutive drive cycles without the fault being detected or with 
the use of eitherthe DIS, GT-1 or Scan tool. 

Note: In orderto cleara catalyst damaging fault (see Misfire Detection) from 
memory, the condition must be evaluated for 80 consecutive cycles without the 
fault reoccurring. 

With the use of a universal scan tool, connected to the "OBD" DLC an SAE standardized 
DTC can be obtained, along with the condition associated with the illumination of the 
"Malfunction Indicator Light". Using the DIS plus or GT-1, a fault code and the conditions 
associated with its setting can be obtained priorto the illumination of the "M alfunction 
Indicator Light". 

20 

Emissions Overview 



























































Readiness Code 

The readiness code provides status (Yes/No) of the system having completed all the 
required monitoring functions or not. The readiness code is displayed with an aftermar- 
ketScanTool orthe DISplus/GT-l.The code is a binary (1/0) indicating; 

• 0 =Test Not Completed orNot Applicable - six cylinder vehicles 
(not ready - V8 and V12) 

• 1 =Test Completed - six cylinder vehicles (ready - V8 and V12) 


A "readiness code" must be stored after any clearing of fault memory or disconnection of 
the ECM. A readiness code of"0" will be stored (see below) after a complete diagnostic 
check of all components/systems, that can turn on the "M alfunction Indicator Light" is 
performed. 

The readiness code was established to prevent anyone with an emissions related fault 
and a "M alfunction Indicator Light" on from disconnecting the battery or clearing the fault 
memory to manipulate the results of the emissions test procedure (IM 240). 

Interpretation of the Readiness Code by the ECM (s) (SAE J 1979) 

The complete readiness code is equal to "one" byte (eight bits). Every bit represents one 
complete test and is displayed by the scan tool, as required by CARB/EPA. For example: 

0 = EGR Monitoring (=0, N/A with BMW) 

1 = Oxygen Sensor Heater Monitoring 
1 = Oxygen Sensor Monitoring 
0 = AirCondition (=0, N/A with BMW) 

1 = Secondary Air Delivery Monitoring 
1 = Evaporative System Monitoring 
0 = C atalyst Heating 
1 = Catalyst Efficiency Monitoring 



Drive the car in such a mannerthat all tests listed above can be completed (referto the 
drive cycle). When the complete "readiness code" equals "1" (ready) then all tests have 
been completed and the system has established its "readiness". 


21 

Emissions Overview 


Readiness C ode using the DIS plus/GT-1 

The readiness code can be checked with the 
DIS plus/GT-1. This is particularly helpful in veri¬ 
fying that "drive cycle" criteria was achieved. 

A repair can be confirmed before return¬ 
ing the vehicle to the customer by a suc¬ 
cessfully completed drive cycle. 

Using an M S43 system for example, the readi¬ 
ness code is found under "Service 
Functions" 




Clii“plr 1 r: cfi-ir. c 

Carpanent and ygna matron 

Ser>ic: 

Drivt 


EtctT-an ■: Iransmtajinn u Tirol 
EtftT-sn-; cw irminbiSralinn =■,>: 
O'-iWi ^ 

HC* 


■Lvt-HLI JyjS'UC littFJitt _ 

D^E(P^£| - F.VS-III cniamtion 
CO 

C- 3 fctl- 3 lhDi|. nJlH* jpflHi] 

C-dkfcrtlkiii. «uurpuort Indeedor 

Read 

Sctpo nboctuil-vil jc comprrsan ic 


Fi_nftian tiiit mvcd-Lp ufF-jin pst 
ftrtTFnttjn C+-1T L punp 


• Drive 

• Digital Motor Electronics 

• Diagnostic Function 
Select "Own Test Plan"«■^ , 


OBD II Readiness preconditions and description is shown: 


;l£i: 


;HC - Ic- C-H 3 a-tl UHhJ Eii: - Tn, f .r i™ , m -«j |P06(ty - F*ri fh<-..l - F*>, 
CAHtlH IJ'cU KHCJtS 


UJVi.ll 







*if i! id 'iJ : dn ■■ i-vyid. •..('ii', 


If.I -fS *t' : ■ .A 7 -.' ■ *4* •• . • ■ 


V" • Jh | •. 




Lirtain c.p*raEr*g rotiAtkin? irJtlbi rfcldtid I 

ark-.-* ti« angina mmgHWTt | 

i 

Fnr Hnifpurptaai. dnar Tauftmimn^ butorn 1*41' 

drtn. j 

Carry out Inst citvb and cibfe^i dagnasdc 
fLucbanor JdhlnwlMg iSQ**. 

■'Mh [}?#€ flp'-jtHi* if OK. utitr ail diagrAEtii: 
furrdforu ari atrind Did: and rrt I’tJf Girfai? ir* 

atorac nltii 'aw ft m Armory- 


Examples of functions/components checked are shown below: 































OBD II Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTC) 

The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) established the Diagnostic Trouble Codes 
used for OBD II systems (SAE J 2012). The DTC's are designed to be identified by their 
alpha/numeric structure.The SAE has designated the emission related DTC's to start 
with the letter "P" for Powertrain related systems, hence their nickname "P-code". 


Forexample: P 0 4 4 0 


P-Powertrain, B-Body, C-Chassis 



DTC Source; 0-SAE, 1-BMW - 

System; 0-Total System - 

1- Air/Fuel Induction 

2- Fuel Injection 

3- Ignition System or Misfire 

4- Auxiliary Emission Control 

5- Vehicle Speed & Idle Control 

6- Control Module Inputs/Outputs 

7- Transmission 


Sequentially numbered 
fault identifying individual 
components or circuits 
(00-99) 


• DTC's are stored wheneverthe "Malfunction Indicator Light” is illuminated. 

• A requirement of C ARB/E PA is providing universal diagnostic access to DTC's via a 
standardized Diagnostic Link Connector (DLC) using a standardized tester (scan 
tool). 

• DTC's only provide one set of environmental operating conditions when a fault is 
stored. This single "Freeze Frame" or snapshot refers to a block of the vehicles 
environmental conditions fora specific time when the fault first occurred. The infor¬ 
mation which is stored is defined by SAE and is limited in scope. This information 
may not even be specific to the type of fault. 


23 

Emissions Overview 



Scan Tool Connection 


Starting with the 1995 750iL, soon after on all 1996 model year and later BMW vehicles, 
a separate OBD II Diagnostic Link Connector (DLC) was added. 


The DLC provides access for an 
aftermarket scan tool to all emis¬ 
sion related control systems: 

• ECM - Engine Management 
Monitored Emissions 
Functions / Components 

• TCM (AGS/EGS) - 
Transmission Control 

• EM L - Electronic Throttle 
Control 

This diagnostic communication 
link uses the existing TXD II circuit 
in the vehicle through a separate 
circuit on the DLC when the 20 
pin cap is installed. 


DIS/MoDiC 
COMMUNICATE VIA: 

PIN 15-RXD (Limited use) 
PIN 20 - TXD 
PIN 17-TXD II 



CONTROL 

MODULE 


The DLC Connector bridging cap is marked "OBD II" and is found: 




NOTE: E38 and older models have a cosmetic coverand a secured DLC cover. 


24 

Emissions Overview 
















































































































20 Pin Diagnostic Socket Deletion 


Model and Production Date: E46 from 6/00 

E39, E52, E53 from 9/00 


Formodel year2001 the E39, E46 and E53 will eliminate the 20 pin diagnostic connec- 
torfrom the engine compartment. The 16 pin OBD II connector located inside the vehicle 
will be the only diagnosis port. 


The E38 and Z3 will continue to use the 20 pin connector until the end of production. 


The 16 pin OBD II connector has been in all 
BM Ws since 1996 to comply with OBD regu¬ 
lations requiring a standardized diagnostic 
port. 

Previously before 2001, only emissions rele¬ 
vant data could be extracted from the OBD II 
connector because it did not provide access to 
TXD (D-bus). 

The TXD line is connected to pin 8 of the 
OBD II connector on vehicles without the 20 
pin diagnostic connector. 




The cap to the OBD II connector contains a bridge that links KL 30 to TXD and TXD II. 
This is to protect the diagnostic circuit integrity and prevent erroneous faults from being 

logged. 


The OBD II connector is located in the driver's 
footwell to the left of the steering column for 
E39, E46 and E53 vehicles. 


Special tool 61 4 300 is used to connect to the 
20 pin diagnostic lead of the DIS until the intro¬ 
duction of the DIS plus. 


25 

Emissions Overview 




Diagnostics via the OBD II Connector 



26 

Emissions Overview 














































































BMW Fault Code (DISplus/GT-1) 


• BMW Codes are stored as soon they occur even before the "Malfunction Indicator 
Light" comes on. 

• BMW Codes are defined by BMW, Bosch and Siemens Engineers to provide 
greater detail to fault specific information. 

• Siemens systems - one set from fourfault specific environmental conditions is 
stored with the firstfault occurrence. This information can change and is specific to 
each fault code to aid in diagnosing. A maximum often different faults containing 
four environmental conditions can be stored. 

• Bosch systems - a maximum of four sets from three fault specific environmental 
conditions is stored within each fault code. This information can change and is spe¬ 
cific to each fault code to aid in diagnosing. A maximum often different faults con¬ 
taining three environmental conditions can be stored. 

• BMW Codes also store and displays a "timestamp" when the fault last occurred. 

• A fault qualifier gives more specific detailed information about the type of fault 
(upper limit, lower limit, disconnection, plausibility, etc.). 

• BMW Fault Codes will alert the Technician of the current fault status. He/she will be 
advised if the fault is actually still present, not currently present or intermittent. 


The fault specific information 
is stored and accessible 
through DISplus/GT-1. 

• BMW Fault Codes deter¬ 
mine the diagnostic output 
for BMW DISplus/GT-1. 



27 

Emissions Overview 











































































OBD II Fault Memory and FaultCodes 

Within the framework of OBD II, a diagnosis of all emission-related components/functions 
must take place during driving. Faults will be stored and displayed if necessary. Forthis 
purpose, the ECM includes OBD II memory. The standardized P codes for malfunctions 
are stored in this memory. The memory can be read out with the DISplus/GT-1 ora 
Scantool. 

Emission Control Function Monitoring & Comprehensive Component 
Monitoring 

OBD II regulations are based on section 1968.1 of Title 13, California Code of 
Regulations (CCR),The law set forth in section 1968.1 requires an increased scope of 
monitoring emission related control functions including: 

• Catalyst M onitoring 

• Heated Catalyst M onitoring (currently used on BMW 750iL vehicles) 

• M isfire M onitoring 

• Evaporative System Monitoring 

• Secondary Air System Monitoring 

• Air Conditioning System Refrigerant Monitoring (Not applicable for BMW vehicles) 

• Fuel System Monitoring 

• Oxygen Sensor Monitoring 

• Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR) System Monitoring (Not applicable for BMW vehicles) 

• Positive Crankcase Ventilation (PCV) System Monitoring (Not required at this time). 

• Thermostat Monitoring (if equipped) 

Monitoring these emission requirements is a function of the ECM which uses "data sets" 
while monitoring the conditions of the environment and the operation of the engine using 
existing input sensors and output actuators. 

The data sets are programmed reference values the ECM refers to when a specific moni¬ 
toring procedure is occurring. If the ECM cannot determine the environmental and/or 
engine operating conditions due to an impaired or missing signal, it will set a fault and illu¬ 
minate the "Malfunction Indicator Light". 

This input or control signal monitoring falls under another category called 
"Comprehensive Component Monitoring". The ECM must recognize the loss or 
impairment of the signal orcomponent.The ECM determines a faulted signal orsensor 
via three conditions: 

1. Signal or component shorted to ground. 

2. Signal or component shorted to B+. 

3. Signal or component lost (open circuit). 

Specific fault codes are used to alert the diagnostician of these conditions. 

28 

Emissions Overview 




Review Questions 

1. What is required to illuminate the "M alfunction Indicator" Light? 


2. What are the definitions and differences between TLEV, LEV and ULEV? 

TLEV =_ 

LEV =_ 

ULEV =_ 

3. What is the OBD II Emission Compliance of a: 

E46M3 _ 2001 3.0 Liter E46_ 1997 six cylinder E39 __ 

4. List systems/components which are: 


Permanently M onitored Monitored Once per Drive Cycle 





5. Under what Operations "heading" (using the DISplus/GT-1) will you access the 

Readiness Code status for an M S43 equipped E46?_ 

6. List the DLC connector locations in the following BMW vehicles: 


E38 

Z3 

Z8 

E46 


7. What are the three conditions an ECM uses to determine a faulted signal/sensor? 


29 

Emissions Overview 


























