Technical Information 



Engine 


Page 1 of 3 
October 2002 
B11 75 02 Service Engineering 


SUBJECT 

2.5 Liter Six Cylinder Engine (M56 SULEV) 

MODEL 


2003 325iA (E46) sedan, coupe and sport wagon with automatic transmission 

SITUATION 



With the introduction of the 2003 E46 325iA (sedan, coupe and sport wagon), the M54 2.5 liter engine 

to meet stricter emission requirements. 


The updated 2.5 liter engine designated M56B25, has been phased into production on E46 Super Ultra 
Low Emission Vehicles (SULEV) along with various other emission control system changes listed 
below. 

The M56B25 power output and vehicle performance is the same as the comparable model equipped 
with the M54B25 engine. 

SULEV models listed above will be sold in California, New York and Massachusetts as 2003 models 
and in Vermont starting in 2004 model year. 


The M54B25 engine will continue to be incorporated in these models (for all other states) for the 2003 
model year. 


Please initial and route to the following for information before filing 

£9 

Service Manaqer 


□ 



X 

Service Technicians - Initial Below 

a 

Service Advisor 



Parts Mgr. 








m 

Service Advisor 



Body Shop 








□ 




PDI Dept. 









★ ★ FIX IT RIGHT THE FIRST TIME, ON TIME, EVERY TIME ★ ★ 

For administrative convenience and to reduce costs, this bulletin may contain repair procedures for authorized 
BMW car centers and/or authorized BMW SAV centers. All references to SAVs and/or the X5 are ONLY intended 
for authorized BMW SAV centers. Furthermore, ONLY BMW SAV centers are authorized to perform repair and 
service work on SAVs. 




Youth 

Educational 

Systems 


© 2005 BMW of North America, LLC 


by: HK 


















2 


In addition, these vehicles are certified as Partial Zero Emission Vehicles (PZEV): 

• The vehicles meet the SULEV tailpipe emission standard, which is approximately 1/5 of the ULEV 
standard. 

• The vehicles conform to the Zero Evaporative Emissions requirements. 

• The emission relevant components are warranted for 15 years or 150,000 miles. 



HC block in the air intake system: 

Hydrocarbon escape via the intake system is 
prevented due to the use of an additional carbon 
filter (1) incorporated in the air filter housing and a 
“closed” throttle valve actuator (2). 


Fuel system components: 

All metal fuel system components (fuel rail (1), 
injectors (2), tank ventilation valve (3), etc.) are 
made of stainless steel and are fastened together 
using coupling type connectors (4). 


Fuel tank and tank ventilation system: 

The fuel tank (1), tank filler neck (2) and 
evaporative canister (3) are made of stainless 
steel. 




3 



Til 02 U05 


Crankcase ventilation system: 

The crankcase ventilation valve (1) is incorp¬ 
orated in the aluminum cylinder head cover (2). 


System components used to achieve SULEV tailpipe emission requirements: 



(1) Dual down stream catalytic converters 

(2) “Warm up” catalytic converters - high cell 
density technology 

(3) Upstream oxygen sensors - wide band 
technology 

(4) Pistons - only 3mm fire land 

(5) VANOS - set to fixed position during start up 
for improved engine start 

(6) New style fuel injectors - 4 hole design 
(5 bar fuel pressure) 


Secondary air system with secondary air mass 
flow sensor (1) used for improved monitoring of 
secondary air flow. 


In addition SULEV models also incorporate a “Direct Ozone Reduction System”. The external heat 
exchange surfaces of the radiator are coated with a catalyst which reduces the ozone in the ambient 
air drawn through the radiator. 

Note: 

As always, your feedback on new BMW products / systems is greatly valued. Please submit Quality 
Control Information Reports (Pink Sheets) regarding any M56 (SULEV) related issues. 




