Technical training. 

Product information. 

F30 Passive Safety Systems 



Edited for the U.S. market by: 

BMW Group University 

Technical Training 

ST 1113 12/1/2011 

\ _ / 


BMW Service 





General information 


Symbols used 

The following symbol is used in this document to facilitate better comprehension or to draw attention 
to very important information: 

A 

Contains important safety information and information that needs to be observed strictly in order to 
guarantee the smooth operation of the system. 


Information status and national-market versions 

BMW Group vehicles meet the requirements of the highest safety and quality standards. Changes in 
requirements for environmental protection, customer benefits and design render necessary continu¬ 
ous development of systems and components. Consequently, there may be discrepancies between 
the contents of this document and the vehicles available in the training course. 

This document basically relates to the European version of left-hand drive vehicles. Some operating 
elements or components are arranged differently in right-hand drive vehicles than shown in the graph¬ 
ics in this document. Further differences may arise as a result of the equipment specification in specif¬ 
ic markets or countries. 

Additional sources of information 

Further information on the individual topics can be found in the following: 

• Owner's Handbook 

• Integrated Service Technical Application. 

Contact: conceptinfo@bmw.de 
©2011 BMW AG, Munich, Germany 

Reprints of this publication or its parts require the written approval of BMW AG, Munich 

The information contained in this document forms an integral part of the technical training of the BMW 
Group and is intended for the trainer and participants in the seminar. Refer to the latest relevant infor¬ 
mation systems of the BMW Group for any changes/additions to the technical data. 

Information status: September 2011 

VH-23/lnternational Technical Training 




F30 Passive Safety Systems 

Contents 


1. Introduction.1 

1.1. The hidden protector.1 

2. Models.2 

2.1. Overview.2 

3. System Overview.3 

3.1. System wiring diagrams.3 

3.1.1. Bus overview.4 

3.1.2. System wiring diagram.7 

4. Functions.9 

4.1. Functions of Crash Safety Module.9 

4.2. Crash-relevant functions.9 

4.2.1. Evaluating the sensor signals.10 

4.2.2. Crash detection.10 

4.2.3. Trigger time and trigger sequence.11 

4.2.4. Activation of the ignition circuit output stages.11 

4.2.5. Sending the crash message.11 

4.2.6. Crash documentation.12 

4.2.7. Emergency call function.12 

4.3. System-monitoring functions.13 

4.3.1. System self test.13 

4.3.2. Display of system operability.13 

4.3.3. Cyclic monitoring.13 

4.3.4. Fault display and fault storage.13 

4.3.5. Output of faults (diagnosis).14 

4.3.6. Acoustic and visual seat belt warning.14 

4.3.7. CIS Mat.14 

5. System Components.15 

5.1. Crash Safety Module.15 

5.2. Sensors and switches.15 

5.2.1. Lateral and longitudinal acceleration sensor, B-pillar.16 

5.2.2. Door airbag sensor (pressure).16 

5.2.3. Front sensor.17 

5.2.4. Sensors in the ICM.18 

5.2.5. CIS mat.18 

5.2.6. Seat belt buckle switch.19 

5.2.7. Emergency call button.19 

5.2.8. Seat-position sensors.19 








































F30 Passive Safety Systems 

Contents 


5.3. Actuators.20 

5.3.1. Overview.20 

5.3.2. Driver's airbag.22 

5.3.3. Front passenger airbag.22 

5.3.4. Knee airbag.23 

5.3.5. Head airbag.23 

5.3.6. Side airbag, front.24 

5.3.7. Seat belt buckle tensioner.25 

5.3.8. Automatic tensioner with linear mechanical force limiter.26 

5.3.9. Safety battery terminal.26 

5.3.10. Airbag indicator light.27 

5.3.11. Seat belt warning light.28 

5.3.12. Indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation.28 
















F30 Passive Safety Systems 

1. Introduction 

1.1. The hidden protector 

The passive safety system of the F30 is based on the objectives and characteristics of current BMW 
models. The passive safety system fulfils all legislative requirements worldwide. 

For this, extensive measures were performed on the body and on the occupants' safety and protection 
systems. In addition to the restraint system, a special body structure with a defined crash behavior is 
also part of the passive safety system. In the event of an accident, the forces introduced are reduced in 
a defined manner and therefore have less of an impact on the occupants. 

The restraint systems ensure that the risk of injury is further reduced. 

The 4th generation Advanced Crash Safety Module ACSM is used as the central airbag control unit for 
the passive safety system in the F30. The central sensor system is incorporated in the ICM. 



1 


F30 Passive Safety Systems 

2. Models 


2.1. Overview 

In the 4th generation, the passive safety system is installed as a Crash Safety Module in the F30. The 
following table provides an overview of the versions installed for different models: 


Series 

Model 

Used as of 

Version 

E60 

5-Series Sedan 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E61 

5-Series Touring 

09/2005 

ACSM 1 

E85 

Z4 Roadster 

01/2006 

ACSM 1 

E86 

Z4 Coupe 

05/2006 

ACSM 1 

E87 

1-Series 5-door 

04/2004 

MRS 5 

E88 

1 -Series Convertible 

04/2008 

ACSM 2 

E90 

3-Series Sedan 

03/2005 

MRS 5 

E70 

X5 SAV 

11/2006 

ACSM 2 

E71 

X6 SAC 

04/2008 

ACSM 2 

E93 

3-Series Convertible 

03/2007 

ACSM 2 

F01 

7-Series Sedan 

11/2008 

ACSM 3 

F02 

7-Series Sedan long 
version 

11/2008 

ACSM 3 

F07 

5-Series Gran Turis- 
mo 

10/2009 

ACSM 3 

F10 

5-Series Sedan 

03/2010 

ACSM 3 

F25 

X3 SAV 

11/2010 

ACSM 4 

F12 

6-Series Convertible 

03/2011 

ACSM 4 

F20 

1-Series 5-door 

09/2011 

ACSM 4 

F30 

3-Series Sedan 

02/2012 

ACSM 4 


2 













F30 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 

3.1. System wiring diagrams 


The following bus overview shows the vehicle circuit structure of the F30 and incorporation of the 
modules on the PT-CAN. 



F30 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 

3.1.1. Bus overview 



4 
































































F30 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Control units with wake-up authorization 

2 

Start-up node control units for starting and synchronizing the FlexRay bus 
system 

ACSM 

Advanced Crash Safety Module 

AMPT 

Top-HiFi amplifier 

COMBOX 

Combox (Combox emergency call, Multimedia Combox) 

CON 

Controller 

D-CAN 

Diagnosis-on-Controller Area Network 

DME 

Digital Engine Electronics (DME) 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

DVDC 

DVD changer 

EGS 

Electronic transmission control 

EKPS 

Electronic fuel pump control 

EPS 

Electromechanical Power Steering 

Ethernet 

Cable-based data network technology for local data networks 

FEM 

Front Electronic Module 

FLA 

Fligh-beam assistant 

FlexRay 

FZD 

Fast, preset and fault-tolerant bus system for use in automotive sector 

Roof function center 

GWS 

Gear selector lever 

HEADUNIT/CIC 

Headunit (Car Information Computer or Basic headunit) 

ICM 

Integrated Chassis Management 

IHKA 

Integrated automatic heating / air conditioning 

K-CAN 

Body controller area network 

K-CAN2 

Body controller area network 2 

KAFAS 

Camera-based driver assistance systems 

KOMBI 

Instrument cluster (MOST only with option 6WA) 

MOST 

Media Oriented System Transport 

OBD 

On-board diagnosis (diagnostic socket) 

PDC 

Park Distance Control (with option 5DP, parking manoeuvring assistant: 
integrated in the parking manoeuvring assistant control unit, otherwise 
integrated in the Rear Electronic Module control unit) 

PMA 

Parking manoeuvring assistant 

PT-CAN 

Powertrain controller area network 

PT-CAN2 

Powertrain controller area network 2 

RAD 

Radio 


5 




















F30 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

REM 

Rear Electronic Module 

REMA LI 

Reversible electromotive automatic reel, left (not US) 

REMARE 

Reversible electromotive automatic reel, right (not US) 

SMFA 

Seat module, driver 

SWW 

Lane change warning 

TPMS 

Tire Pressure Monitoring System 

TRSVC 

Control unit for all-round vision camera 

VDM 

Vertical Dynamics Management 

ZGM 

Central gateway module 


6 









F30 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


3.1.2. System wiring diagram 



F30 System wiring diagram 


TE It-0874 




























































































































































































































F30 Passive Safety Systems 

3. System Overview 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Front sensor, left engine support 

2 

Instrument cluster 

3 

Crash Safety Module 

4 

Front sensor, right engine support 

5 

Front Electronic Module (FEM) 

6 

Terminal 30 

7 

Airbag sensor, door, right (pressure) 

8 

Head airbag, front passenger 

9 

Acceleration sensor, B-pillar on right 

10 

Indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation in roof function center 

11 

Knee airbag, front passenger 

12 

Front passenger airbag, two-stage with ventilation 

13 

Seat belt buckle contact, front passenger 

14 

Seat-position sensor, front passenger 

15 

Seat belt buckle tensioner, front passenger 

16 

Seat occupancy mat, CIS mat 

17 

Side airbag, front passenger 

18 

Automatic tensioner, front passenger 

19 

Adaptive belt force limiter, front passenger (not US) 

20 

Safety battery terminal 

21 

COMBOX 

22 

Integrated Chassis Management 

23 

Side airbag, driver's side 

24 

Seat belt buckle tensioner, driver 

25 

Seat-position sensor, driver (not US) 

26 

Seat belt buckle contact, driver 

27 

Adaptive belt force limiter, driver (not US) 

28 

Automatic tensioner, driver 

29 

Acceleration sensor, B-pillar on left 

30 

Head airbag, driver 

31 

Driver's airbag, two-stage with ventilation 

32 

Knee airbag, driver 

33 

Clock spring 

34 

Airbag sensor, door, left (pressure) 


8 





















F30 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 

4.1. Functions of Crash Safety Module 

The function of the Crash Safety Module is to permanently evaluate all sensor signals in order to iden¬ 
tify a crash situation. As a result of the sensor signals and their evaluation, the Crash Safety Module 
identifies the direction of the crash and the severity of the impact. 

The ACSM evaluates the information from the sensors and then forwards corresponding measures for 
selective activation of the necessary restraint systems. 

The Crash Safety Module monitors the system itself and indicates when it is ready for operation by 
switching off the airbag indicator light. 

If an error occurs during operation this is stored in a fault memory, and can be read out for diagnosis 
purposes. 

If a crash situation is detected, a crash message is sent to the other bus users in the data bus network 
as notification. The relevant control units respond to this signal by executing their own activities ac¬ 
cording to the severity of the crash. 

The activities include: 

• Opening the central locking system 

• Activating the hazard warning flasher 

• Switching on the interior light 

• Deactivating the electric fuel pump 

• Making an emergency call. 

An additional function of the Crash Safety Module is the acoustic seat belt warning that reminds the 
driver and front passenger using visual and acoustic signals to fasten their seat belts. Seat belt buck¬ 
le switches are used to identify whether the driver and/or the front passenger have their seat belts fas¬ 
tened. Information on occupancy of the front passenger seat is also included for the acoustic seat belt 
warning. Furthermore the position of the driver and the front passenger seat is monitored. 

The functions of the Crash Safety Module generally belong to one of the following areas: 

• Crash-relevant functions 

• System-monitoring functions 

• Additional convenience functions. 

4.2. Crash-relevant functions 

The Crash Safety Module must fulfil the following crash-relevant functions: 

• Evaluating the sensor signals 

• Crash detection 

• Determining actuators to be activated 

• Specifying the trigger time and trigger sequence 


9 




F30 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 

• Activation of the ignition circuit output stages 

• Sending the crash message to all bus users 

• Crash documentation 

• Emergency call function. 

4.2.1. Evaluating the sensor signals 

The sensors serve to identify and verify head-on, side-on and rear-end crashes and also as roll-over 
detection. 

The sensors are directly connected to the Crash Safety Module where their signals are evaluated and 
processed. 


4.2.2. Crash detection 

All F30 vehicles are equipped with the following sensors: 

• One lateral and one longitudinal acceleration sensor in the B-pillars (green) 

• One airbag sensor to monitor the pressure in each of the front doors (blue) 

• One lateral and one longitudinal acceleration sensor in the ICM (yellow) 

• One roll rate sensor in the ICM (yellow) 

• One vertical acceleration sensor in the ICM (yellow) 

• One front sensor on each of the engine supports (red). 


The airbag sensors in the car doors assist with the identification of a side-on crash. 

The front sensors on the engine supports assist with the identification of a head-on crash and the cor¬ 
responding severity. 


O* 

o* 



F30 Sensors 


10 













F30 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 


4.2.3. Trigger time and trigger sequence 

The Crash Safety Module uses the values transmitted by the sensors to determine the direction and 
severity of the crash. 

In the case of a head-on crash, corresponding high acceleration values from the longitudinal accelera¬ 
tion sensors in the B-pillar and ICM respectively must be detected for example. An algorithm uses the 
accelerations to calculate the severity and direction of the crash. This information is used to assist cal¬ 
culation of the trigger times and sequence in which the restraint systems are activated. 

A possible imminent rollover is also detected and the appropriate protection systems are energized. 

4.2.4. Activation of the ignition circuit output stages 

The Crash Safety Module is supplied by the FEM with terminal 30B. The Crash Safety Module is in of¬ 
fline mode with terminal 30B. This means that it is active on the data bus and can perform all diagnos¬ 
tic functions. Triggering of the ignition circuits is blocked and is only enabled as of terminal 15 once 
the system self-test is complete. The Crash Safety Module is also ready for ignition, even with the logi¬ 
cal terminal R after engine off. 

The ignition capacitors are recharged via a switching controller. These ignition capacitors make the fir¬ 
ing energy available in the event of a crash. If the voltage supply is interrupted during a crash, the igni¬ 
tion capacitors serve briefly as an energy reserve. 

The ignition circuit output stages consist of a high-side and a low-side power switch. The high-side 
power switch connects the ignition voltage, while the low-side power switch connects to the ground. 
The ignition circuit output stages are controlled by a microcontroller. 

The high-side and low-side power switches also serve to check the ignition circuits during the system 
self-test. 


4.2.5. Sending the crash message 

In the event of a collision involving activation of the restraint systems, the Crash Safety Module sends 
a crash message to the bus users in the bus-system network. In tandem with this, the Combox is 
prompted to send an emergency call via a direct single-wire connection. 

As a result, the respective control units perform the following functions depending on the crash severi¬ 
ty: 


Function 

Control unit 

Switch off electric fuel pump 

Digital Motor Electronics DME 
via electronic fuel pump control EKPS 

Release central locking system 

Front Electronic Module (FEM) All Doors 

Rear Electronic Module (REM) Tailgate/Trunk 

Switch on hazard warning flashers 

Front Electronic Module (FEM) 

Rear Electronic Module (REM) 

Switch on interior light 

Front Electronic Module (FEM) 

Rear Electronic Module (REM) 

Send emergency call 

Combox 


11 






F30 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 


4.2.6. Crash documentation 

In the event of a collision where one or more actuators are activated, a crash entry is stored in a non¬ 
erasable memory. After three crash entries, a non-erasable fault entry is stored in the fault memory to¬ 
gether with the information that the three crash messages have been saved. The airbag indicator light 
also lights up continuously. 

A_ 

The three crash entries could also be stored during the course of an accident. Each crash entry is as¬ 
signed a system time. The control unit remains capable of firing even after three crash entries. The 
crash entries cannot be erased and serve the purpose of subsequent device diagnosis. A maximum of 
three crash entries can be stored. The control unit must then be replaced. 


4.2.7. Emergency call function 

The emergency call functions with the BMW Assist. This means an appropriate service provider with 
a call center must be available. A telephone network must also be available in order to be able to make 
an emergency call. 

The BMW Assist optional equipment (option 6NL) must be installed for the emergency-call function to 
be available. 

Manual emergency call 

Drivers who are not directly involved in the accident can use the manual emergency call to request as¬ 
sistance. 

The emergency call button is located in the roof function center and is connected to the Combox di¬ 
rectly. 

Voice contact with the relevant service provider for the country is established by pressing the emer¬ 
gency call button. The voice contact is indicated by a flashing LED in the switch. 

Automatic emergency call 

The Crash Safety Module sends a message to the Combox in the event of an accident with corre¬ 
sponding crash severity. The Combox sends an emergency call, and also the location of the vehicle if 
available. 

Attempts are made at the same time to establish a voice contact with the occupants of the vehicle in 
order to obtain more detailed verbal information about the accident (e.g. condition of occupants). Fur¬ 
ther rescue operations can be initiated accordingly. 

Advanced Automatic Crash Notification 

In addition, the Advanced Automatic Crash Notification function features in vehicles with BMW Assist. 

The data from different sensors is transferred to the call center in the case of an emergency call, for 
example the status of the belt contacts to determine the number of persons in the vehicle or sensor 
data on the severity of the crash to obtain the probability of risk of injury. 


12 




F30 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 


The emergency call contains additional specific information on the circumstances of the accident. 

This means that more precise information regarding the accident and risk of injury is therefore avail¬ 
able at the call center and can be forwarded to the emergency coordination center. The emergency co¬ 
ordination center can then initiate appropriate measures. 


4.3. System-monitoring functions 

The Crash Safety Module has the following system-monitoring functions: 

• System self-test (pre-drive check) 

• Display of system operability 

• Cyclic monitoring 

• Fault display and fault storage 

• Output of faults (diagnosis) 

• Acoustic and visual seat belt warning 

• Deactivation of the front passenger airbag and side airbag and knee airbag on the front pas¬ 
senger side. 


4.3.1. System self test 

The Crash Safety Module performs a system self test from terminal 15. The airbag indicator light is en¬ 
ergized for roughly five seconds during the system self test. 

Once the system self test is complete and no faults have been identified, the airbag indicator light 
goes out and the system is ready to operate. 

4.3.2. Display of system operability 

The airbag indicator light in the instrument panel goes out to indicate that the Crash Safety Module is 
ready for operation. 

4.3.3. Cyclic monitoring 

Once the system self-test has been successfully concluded and the system is ready for operation, 
a cyclic monitoring procedure is performed for fault-monitoring purposes. This cyclical monitoring 
serves the internal diagnosis of the control unit and overall airbag system. Cyclical monitoring takes 
place continuously from terminal 15. This also continues when logical terminal R is reached after the 
engine is switched off. 

4.3.4. Fault display and fault storage 

The Crash Safety Module has a non-volatile fault memory. The airbag indicator light lights up to indi¬ 
cate a fault entry. 

Events, such as the activation of an airbag or seat belt buckle tensioner, are also stored in the fault 
memory. 


13 




F30 Passive Safety Systems 

4. Functions 


A _ _ 

If the fault memory contains the entry that the restraint system has been activated, this only means the 
ignited restraint system is not available for further activation and not that it malfunctioned during the 
crash. 


4.3.5. Output of faults (diagnosis) 

The fault memory can be read out via the diagnostic interface with the assistance of the Integrated 
Service Technical Application ISTA in the BMW diagnosis system. After rectifying the faults or after re¬ 
newing activated components, the fault memory can be cleared with the diagnosis command "Clear 
fault memory". 

4.3.6. Acoustic and visual seat belt warning 

An acoustic and visual seat belt warning is a standard feature of all vehicles equipped with the Crash 
Safety Module. The Crash Safety Module records whether or not the driver or front passenger have 
fastened their seat belts. If they have not, an acoustic and visual warning is output to remind them to 
fasten their seatbelts. Both seat belt buckle switches are monitored separately. 

4.3.7. CIS Mat 


Provision is made in the F30 for the airbag to be deactivated automatically in order to satisfy the regu¬ 
lations of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration NHTSA. When the child seats listed in the 
regulation are occupied by a child this must lead to deactivation of the airbag. 

To do so, a seat occupancy mat is used on the front passenger seat for the purpose of occupancy de¬ 
tection and classification of occupants in the front passenger seat. A further development of the Occu¬ 
pant Classification 3 mat (OC3 mat), the Capacitive Interior Sensing Mat (CIS mat) is used in the F30. 

The CIS mat is made up of two elements: A sensor wire, which runs parallel to the seat heating in the 
seat cushion and an evaluation unit. The CIS mat measures the capacity and ohmic resistance be¬ 
tween the sensor wire (anode) and the vehicle ground (cathode) at a frequency of 120 kHz. The CIS 
mat determines from the change in capacity and resistance whether the front passenger seat is occu¬ 
pied by an adult or a child in a child seat. 

The deactivation of the front passenger airbag, the side airbag and knee airbag on the front passenger 
side is signalled by the indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation. 

The indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation in the roof function center lights up if a child 
seat with child for e.g. a child restraint system that has been tested in accordance with the NHTSA 
regulations and is holding a small child is detected on the front passenger seat or if the front passen¬ 
ger seat is unoccupied. 

The display brightness is controlled by automatic regulation of the display illumination. 


14 




F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

5.1. Crash Safety Module 

The Crash Safety Module is accommodated in a housing with two sockets. 

The wiring harness is connected via one of the sockets. An additional socket is provided for the cock¬ 
pit wiring harness. 



F30 Crash Safety Module 


The Crash Safety Module is located in the F30 on the supporting structure of the cockpit module on 
the driver's side. 

The Crash Safety Module no longer contains any sensors. The sensors are located in the ICM on the 
transmission tunnel. 

5.2. Sensors and switches 

The following sensors and switches are installed: 

• Lateral and longitudinal acceleration sensors in ICM 

• Roll rate sensor in the ICM 

• Vertical acceleration sensor in the ICM 

• Lateral and longitudinal acceleration sensors on the B-pillars 

• One airbag sensor for pressure in each of the front doors (blue) 

• One front sensor on each of the engine supports 

• CIS mat with occupant classification 


15 










F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

• Seat belt buckle switch 

• Seat-position sensor, front passenger 

• Emergency call button 


5.2.1. Lateral and longitudinal acceleration sensor, B-pillar 

The lateral and longitudinal acceleration sensors in the B-pillars assist with the identification of head- 
on crashes, side-on crashes and rear-end crashes. 

The B-pillar airbag sensor consists of a longitudinal acceleration sensor and a lateral acceleration sen¬ 
sor. The acceleration sensors measure both the acceleration and the deceleration in the X and Y direc¬ 
tions. The resultant from the X and Y signals is decisive in identifying the direction of the crash. The 
airbag sensors in the B-pillar assist with the identification of head-on, side-on and rear-end crashes. 
The B-pillar airbag sensors on the left and right are of identical design and are allocated by way of me¬ 
chanical coding during installation. 



F30 Lateral and longitudinal acceleration sensor, B-pillar 


5.2.2. Door airbag sensor (pressure) 

Pressure sensors are installed in the driver and front passenger doors. Side crashes are identified with 
the assistance of the airbag sensors. In addition to the lateral acceleration values that are present, the 
pressure in the door cavity also increases in the event of a side-on crash. 

The airbag sensors in the doors serve to verify the plausibility of the acceleration signals from the B- 
pillar airbag sensors and the ICM when a side crash is detected. The airbag sensors are situated in 
the inner panel of the doors and measure the increase in pressure in the event of a side collision. In 
the event of a side collision with the door, the outer panel is pressed inward, thus reducing the volume 
and increasing the pressure in the door interior. This pressure change is measured by the airbag sen¬ 
sors. The airbag sensor also includes electronics, in addition to the pressure sensor, that digitize the 


16 


F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

pressure readings and transmit them cyclically to the Crash Safety Module. The data is transferred in 
the same way as the B-pillar airbag sensors. The pressure readings are evaluated in the Crash Safety 
Module. 



FI 2/FI 3 door airbag sensor (pressure) 


5.2.3. Front sensor 

Two front sensors are installed in the front area of the engine support. The measured values are for¬ 
warded to the Crash Safety Module where they are evaluated. 

The sensors in the front area of the side member on the left and right assist with identification of a 
head-on crash. 

They deliver additional information to the crash safety module on the characteristics and severity of 
the collision. Each sensor contains an acceleration sensor for recording the deceleration, signal pro¬ 
cessing technology and an ASIC for data transfer. The measured values are sent in the form of a data 
telegram to the crash safety module and are used in the calculation of the algorithm. 



17 


F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

5.2.4. Sensors in the ICM 

The ICM control unit is located centrally on the transmission tunnel. In addition to the driving dynamics 
control sensors, the ICM in the F30 also incorporates longitudinal and lateral acceleration sensors for 
crash detection. 

In order for the ICM to be able to transmit the sensor data directly to the ACSM 4, it is connected to 
the latter via two lines. The transmitted data is evaluated in the ACSM 4. 

The sensor data of the roll rate sensor and the vertical acceleration sensor is transmitted to the ACSM 
via the two additional lines. 

The sensor data of the ICM helps the ACSM 4 identify side-on, rear-end or head-on crashes and as¬ 
sists with roll-over detection. 



F30 ICM 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

ICM control unit 


5.2.5. CIS mat 

The capacitive interior sensing mat (CIS mat) is fitted in the front passenger seat instead of the seat 
occupancy mat. The CIS mat can detect whether the front passenger seat is occupied by an adult or a 
child in a child seat. The deactivation of the front passenger airbag and side airbag and knee airbag on 
the front passenger side is signalled by the indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation. 


18 










F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

5.2.6. Seat belt buckle switch 

The seat belt buckle switch detects whether the seat belt buckle tongue is in the seat belt buckle. The 
Crash Safety Module supplies power to the sensors and performs the evaluation. 

From terminal 15, the seat belt buckle switch is permanently monitored and used for the visual and 
acoustic seat belt warning and also to determine which restraint systems are triggered. 



5.2.7. Emergency call button 

The emergency call button is located in the roof function center. 



F30 Roof function center with emergency call button 


5.2.8. Seat-position sensors 

In accordance with the US legal requirement (FMVSS208), a height identification for the person in the 
driver and front passenger seat must be effected. This height identification is effected via the adjust¬ 
ment travel of the forward/back seat adjustment. In US-version vehicles, the exact position is identified 


19 




F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

using the seat-position sensors for the driver and front passenger seats. For vehicles with an electric 
seat adjustment with memory (option 459), the seat position on the driver's side is transferred from the 
seat module on the driver's side to the ACSM. 

The job of the seat-position detector is to distinguish between a relatively small person and a person 
of normal height within the lengthways adjustment range of the seat. This detection is another techni¬ 
cal feature aimed at increasing the safety of the occupants. The deployment of the two airbag stages 
and the adaptive vent valve is then adjusted to the driver's/front passenger seat position. 

The seat-position detector takes the form of a 2-wire Hall-effect sensor and is supplied with power via 
the ACSM control unit. The current level of the seat-position sensor changes depending on the seat 
position or the distance of the seat-position sensor to the permanent magnet. 


5.3. Actuators 

5.3.1. Overview 

The following actuators are installed in the F30: 

• Two-stage driver's airbag with active vent valve 

• Two-stage driver's airbag with active vent valve 

• Knee airbag on front left and right 

• Head airbag on left and right 

• Side airbag on front left and right 

• Seat belt buckle tensioner on front left and right 

• Automatic tensioner with linear force limiter 

• Automatic tensioner with adaptive force limiter 

• Safety battery terminal. 

In addition, the following indicator lights inform the vehicle occupants about the condition of the safety 
systems: 

• Airbag indicator light 

• Seat belt warning light 

• Indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation. 


20 




F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

The following graphic shows the airbags in the activated state. Depending on the type of crash, only 
specific airbags are activated. 



F30 Airbags 

The familiar three-point seat belts are used as the seat belt systems in the F30. 



F30 Seat belt 


21 





F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 


Index 

Explanation 




1 

Seat belt buckle tensioner 




2 

Reversible motor-driven reel ReMA (not US) 



3 

Automatic reel/Automatic tensioner 



The following table provides an overview of the actuators of the seat belt systems: 


Seat belt 
tensioner 

Automat¬ 
ic reel 

Force 

limiter 

Reversible 
motor-driv¬ 
en reel 

F30 Vehicles 

Yes 

Yes 

Linear 

No 


5.3.2. Driver's airbag 

The purpose of the driver's airbag is to reduce the risk of injury to the driver in combination with the 
seat belt when a head-on crash occurs. The driver's airbag is located in the steering wheel impact 
plate. The driver's airbag is equipped with a gas generator. 

A two-stage generator is installed which can be used to activate the stages at short or long time differ¬ 
ences, depending on the severity of the crash detected and taking into consideration the seat position. 

Furthermore, the driver's airbag features an active vent valve. 

5.3.3. Front passenger airbag 

The purpose of the front passenger airbag is to reduce the risk of accident to the front passenger in 
the event of a head-on crash. The front passenger airbag is located in the dashboard. When the front 
passenger airbag expands, the dashboard tears open at defined points. The front passenger airbag 
opens towards the windscreen, emerges in the upwards direction and is supported on the windscreen 
and dashboard. The front passenger airbag is equipped with a gas generator. 

A two-stage generator is installed which can be used to activate the stages at short or long time differ¬ 
ences, depending on the severity of the crash detected and taking into consideration the seat position. 


22 







F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 



F30 Front passenger airbag 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Ignition squib 

2 

Ignition squib 

3 

Vent valve 

4 

Vent valve connection 


Furthermore, the front passenger airbag features an active vent valve. 


5.3.4. Knee airbag 

The driver's side knee airbag and front passenger side control the forwards displacement of the 
occupant(s) in the event of a head-on crash. 



F30 Knee airbags 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Knee airbag, driver's side 

2 

Knee airbag, front passenger side 


5.3.5. Head airbag 

Head airbags are installed in the F30 to protect the occupants' heads in the event of a side collision. 


23 














F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

The head airbag extends from the A-pillar to the C-pillar and covers the entire area of the side win¬ 
dows. It expands between the occupants and side structure. 

System features: 

• Extended covered area across all front and rear side windows 

• Protection of occupants from glass splinters 

• Covered area for different-sized occupants optimized. 



F30 Head airbag 


5.3.6. Side airbag, front 

As with all current models, the side airbag at the front ignites out of the front seat backrest. 

The side airbags and gas generators are accommodated in a plastic housing, the airbag module. This 
is installed in the front seat backrest and is concealed by the seat cover. 

If activated, the side airbag emerges outwards from the backrest frame and spreads between the side 
structure and occupant. 

A 

It is important to ensure that no additional seat covers are fitted as they would greatly impair the func¬ 
tion of the side airbag, or even immobilize it altogether. 


24 




F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 



F30 Seat with side airbag 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Side airbag 


5.3.7. Seat belt buckle tensioner 

The task of the pyrotechnic seat belt buckle tensioner is to minimize the belt slack in the pelvis and 
shoulder regions in the event of a crash, thereby improving the restraining effect. 

The seat belt buckle tensioners are located at the driver's seat or the front passenger seat. The seat 
belt buckle tensioners are ignited in specific crash situations. 

The seat belt buckle is connected by means of a steel cable to the piston in the tensioning tube. If the 
ignition squib is triggered, gas pressure is created, which moves the piston in the tensioning tube. This 
causes the cable to pull the seat belt buckle down and the seat belt is tensioned. 


25 






F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 



F30 Seat belt buckle tensioner 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Seat belt buckle switch 

2 

Tensioning tube with piston 


5.3.8. Automatic tensioner with linear mechanical force limiter 

An automatic tensioner with linear mechanical force limiter for the driver and front passenger is used 
in the F30. In addition to force limitation effected by a torsion bar spring, the seat belt strap is retract¬ 
ed with the assistance of a gas generator in order to reduce belt slack prior to forwards displacement 
of the occupant. 

By harmonizing the individual passive safety components, seat belt tensioner, automatic tensioner, 
force limiter and airbag, the kinetic energy acting on the occupants is dissipated more evenly for the 
duration of the crash. Thus lower occupant stress values are achieved. 

5.3.9. Safety battery terminal 

The safety battery terminal is triggered at different thresholds when the Crash Safety Module detects 
a head-on, side-on or rear-end crash of sufficient severity. The line that connects the battery to the 
starter motor/alternator and positive battery connection point is then severed by means of pyrotech¬ 
nics. The safety battery terminal is located directly at the positive terminal of the battery. The safety 
battery terminal is encased completely in plastic so that in the event of separation no sparks get out¬ 
side the case. 

Even though the safety battery terminal has been disconnected, a voltage supply to all safety-relevant 
consumers such as hazard warning flashers, interior light, airbag and telephone (including emergency 
call) is ensured. 


26 








F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 



F30 Safety battery terminal 


5.3.10. Airbag indicator light 

The airbag indicator light is located on the instrument panel. The airbag indicator light lights up then 
goes out during the pre-drive check to signal readiness of the Crash Safety Module and passive safe¬ 
ty systems. The airbag indicator light is controlled via a message on the PT-CAN from the Crash Safe¬ 
ty Module to the instrument panel. The instrument panel receives a message cyclically. If the message 
remains off, the airbag indicator light is activated. 



F30 Airbag indicator light 


27 


F30 Passive Safety Systems 

5. System Components 

5.3.11. Seat belt warning light 

A visual and audible warning is issued if the seat belt is not fastened or is unbuckled during the jour¬ 
ney. 



F30 Seat belt warning light 

The status of the seat belt contacts of the rear seat bench is visible for a short period in the instrument 
cluster TFT display during starting or if a contact is changed. 

5.3.12. Indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation 

The indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation in the F30 is in the roof function center. The 
indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation is activated if the CIS mat detects a small child in 
a child seat or if the front passenger seat is unoccupied. 

The brightness of the indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation is controlled via the auto¬ 
matic brightness control of the display illumination. 



F30 Roof function center with indicator lamp for front passenger airbag deactivation 


28 





Bayerische Motorenwerke Aktiengesellschaft 
Handlerqualifizierung und Training 
RontgenstraBe 7 

85716 UnterschleiBheim, Germany 


