Table of Contents 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

Subject Page 

Introduction .5 

BMW EfficientDynamics .5 

Definition of Hybrid Vehicles .9 

Classification of Hybrids by Power Rating .10 

Micro Hybrids.10 

Mild Hybrid .10 

Full Hybrid.10 

Classification by Drive-unit Configuration.12 

Serial Hybrid .12 

Parallel Hybrid.14 

Power-split Hybrid .16 

Plug-in Hybrid.16 

Driving Conditions.18 

Start/stop Function .18 

Pullaway.18 

Accelerating (boost function).18 

Steady Driving .18 

Braking.18 

Energy Storage Devices .20 

Physical Principles of Chemical Storage.20 

Capacity.22 

Power.22 


Initial Print Date: 10/09 


Revision Date: 11/09 

























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Battery Types.24 

Lead Acid Battery .24 

Nickel-cadmium Battery.24 

Nickel Metal Hydride Battery.24 

Lithium-ion Battery (Li-ion battery).26 

Double-layer Capacitors .28 

Summary .28 

Electrical Principles.30 

Magnet.30 

Electromagnet .30 

Magnetic Field .31 

Faraday's Law of Induction.31 

Lorentz Force .32 

Transformers.33 

Electrical Machines.34 

Direct-current Machines.34 

Rotary-current (three-phase) Machines.36 

Synchronous Machine .37 

Principle of Synchronous Machines.38 

Asynchronous Machines .40 

Current Inverters .42 

Rectifiers .42 

Half-wave Rectifier.42 

Full-wave Rectifier Circuit.42 

Three-phase Full-wave Rectifier.43 

Inverters.43 

DC/DC Converter.44 

AC/AC Converter.44 

Electromechanical Switch Contactor .46 
































Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Safety.48 

High Electric Voltage .48 

Electrical Field .48 

Electric Voltage as a Cause of Current Flow .48 

Electrical Shock .50 

Burns .53 

Arc Flash .53 

Preventing Hazards.56 

Safety Rule 1 - De-energize the System.60 

Safety Rule 2 - Secure the System (Lockout) .62 

Safety Rule 3 - Ensure that the system is de-energized .63 

Nickel Metal Hydride Battery.68 

Lithium-ion Battery .70 

Electrical Machines .72 

Engineered Safety Measures.74 

Identification/labelling of High-voltage Components.74 

Protection Against Direct Contact .76 

Protection Against Indirect Contact .76 

Isolation Monitoring.77 

High-voltage Interlock Loop.78 

Discharge of the High-voltage Circuit .82 

Galvanic Separation Between HV and LV System.84 

Short-circuit Monitoring .86 

Shutdown in the Event of an Accident .88 



























4 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

Model: Generic Hybrid Vehicles 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the philosophy of BMW EfficientDynamics 

• Identify the different methods of classifying hybrids 



Identify the components of a hybrid system 

Explain the characteristic batteries used in high-voltage systems 

Understand and explain the engineered safety elements of BMW ActiveHybrid vehicles 

Explain the necessary three safety rules when working on a hybrid vehicle 

Successfully de-energize a high-voltage system 






Introduction 


BMW EfficientDynamics 

BMW EfficientDynamics is the collective term used in communi¬ 
cation to refer various technologies and innovations that interwork 
to produce a combination of reduced pollutant emissions plus 
high performance power and sheer driving pleasure. 

With BMW EfficientDynamics, BMW has assumed a global lead¬ 
ership role in the race to implement measures to reduce fuel 
consumption and C02 emissions. 

In the period since spring 2007, one-million-plus BMW new-car 
owners have already benefited from these endeavours. At this 
time the range consists of 23 models with C02 emissions figures 
of 140 g/km or lower: No other premium carmaker anywhere in 
the world can produce comparable figures. 


But BMW EfficientDynamics is more than just high precision 
injection, engine start/stop function, or brake energy recovery. In 
the long term, BMW EfficientDynamics also includes zero-emis¬ 
sions motoring with hydrogen fuel, and in the medium term BMW 
ActiveHybrid - the combination of internal combustion engine and 
electric motors in the powertrain. 

The first production BMW ActiveHybrid models, the hybrid ver¬ 
sions of the BMWX6 and the BMW 7-series, will have matured to 
production status by late 2009. Consequently, BMW - together 
with Mercedes-Benz - will rank as Europe's first automobile man¬ 
ufacturers to commence hybridizing their model range in one year. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 

5 






6 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Principles of Hybrid Technology. 

Introduction > Why BMW needs hybrid cars? 




LfriKR Wifcll 
ftnnri'r 

rNi^TH-i- 


The 

Global Warm 
Survival Guii 

Thin,.-- You Cjci Du !i:- Vii’.yi 


Note the reasons: 

























































Principles of Hybrid Technology. 

Introduction > BMW EfficientDynamics strategy 



BMW EfficientDynamics 



Note the elements of BMW EfficientDynamics strategy: 

1 

2 

3 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

7 





























8 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Principles of Hybrid Technology. 


Introduction > Definition of hybrid vehicles 



Which of the following is a hybrid vehicle? 




























Definition of Hybrid Vehicles 



This 1906 Griffon Sport was a hybrid, a bicycle fitted with an engine 

The term hybrid is derived from the Greek and means of two differ¬ 
ent origins or of mixed origin. As used in the automotive industry, 
the term refers to vehicles with two means of propulsion (utilising 
energy from two different sources) and having two different energy 
supplies. 

What makes these vehicles so special is that the elements com¬ 
bined in this way are established technological solutions in their 
own right, and the combination of the two can be utilised to pro¬ 
duce new and beneficial features. 

In adopting the hybrid approach, virtually all carmakers have opted 
for a combination of internal-combustion engine and electric motor 
or motors drawing energy from a conventional fuel tank on the one 
hand and a battery bank on the other. 

BMW's hybrid strategy calls for hybrid technology only in circum¬ 
stances in which the ratio of additional cost to savings are justified. 
The launchpad is provided by the high-end models with big engines 
like the BMW ActiveHybrid X6 and the BMW ActiveHybrid 7, 
because this is where the efficiency potential is largest. 



Why was the horse drawn carriage/buggy not considered a hybrid? 


In your own words, write down the definition of a hybrid. 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

9 


















10 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Classification of Hybrids by Power Rating 

What does BMW ActiveHybrid stand for and what distinguishes it 
from the hybrid offerings of our competitors? In principle, BMW 
ActiveHybrid refers to all hybrid-technology-related endeavours 
undertaken by BMW to achieve even higher efficiency - in this 
respect "Active" underscores the highly dynamic performance¬ 
motoring claim that will remain a keynote characteristic of all hybrid 
BMW models to come. 

BMW ActiveHybrid also refers collectively to the three different 
modes of hybridization, namely micro hybrid, mild hybrid and full 
hybrid. 

Micro Hybrids 

Micro-hybrids constitute the first level in the hybrid-car hierarchy. 
Micro-hybrid cars have a generator power of 2 to 3 kW and use 
conventional 12-V battery technology. Power and voltage are both 
comparatively low, imposing a natural limit on energy recovery dur¬ 
ing braking and in the overrun phase. 

In a micro-hybrid car, the recovered electrical energy is fed into the 
vehicle's on-board 12 V electrical system. In some cases these 
systems also have a start/stop function with conventional starter or 
integrated crankshaft starter generator. A drawback of the start/stop 
functionality is that frequent run-ups mean accelerated wear of the 
crankshaft, which has frictionless bearings and is designed for con¬ 
stant rotation. Complexity, additional weight and costs for micro¬ 
hybrid cars are not beyond reason. All in all, however, the concept 
cannot justifiably be expected to return more than 10% savings in 
energy. Strictly speaking micro-hybrid cars are not true hybrids at 
all, since they have only one means of propulsion. 


Mild Hybrid 

Mild-hybrid systems typically use voltages higher than 42 V. Today, 
some of these systems operate at voltages of 160 V or even higher. 
The power of the electrical machine represented by the electric 
motor is in the 10 to 15 kW range. Mild-hybrid systems are gener¬ 
ally built around electrical machines that transform some of the 
kinetic energy in retardation/braking into electric energy that can be 
stored in batteries. Mild-hybrid systems usually implement a 
start/stop function with the electrical machine being used to restart 
the combustion engine when the latter is needed again after shut¬ 
ting down. The electrical machine of a mild-hybrid car is also used 
to some extent as a booster along with the combustion engine for 
pullaway and acceleration. Some mild-hybrid systems cut off the 
fuel supply to the combustion engine if the high-voltage accumula¬ 
tor is adequately charged and the car is travelling at a steady speed 
up to about 50 km/h. Under these circumstances the car is pro¬ 
pelled only by the electrical machine so as to economize on fuel. 

Full Hybrid 

One of the characteristics of the full-hybrid concept that the vehicle 
can pull away from rest and drive without the combustion engine 
turning over. Full-hybrid systems use high-voltage accumulators 
with voltages ranging from approximately 100 V to in some cases 
well in excess of 200 V. In a configuration of this nature the electric 
motor is easily capable of overcoming inertia to set the car in 
motion, and when sharp acceleration is called for the torque of the 
combustion engine and that of the electric motor are used in paral¬ 
lel. This is the mode known as boost. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Principles and driving situations > Classification by power rating 

Write the missing data. 


Power of 
electric motor 

Voltage range 

Possible functions 

Fuel savings 

Micro-hybrid 

2 to 3 kW 

12V 


Less than 10% 

Mild-hybrid 



Start/stop functions 
Boost functions 
Energy recovery 


Full-hybrid 




More than 20% 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

11 











12 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Fully electric drives are similar to serial drives to some extent. 
Instead of being inside the vehicle, however, the generator is exter¬ 
nal. The battery is recharged from the public grid or a private 
source to which the vehicle is connected while not in use. 

• Serial hybrid 

• Parallel hybrid 

• Power-split hybrid 

• Plug-in hybrid 

Serial Hybrid 

A serial-hybrid car has an electric motor and a combustion engine. 

The characteristic of this concept is that only the electric motor 
acts directly on the driven wheels. 

The components in the powertrain are arranged one after the other 
and this is why the configuration is termed serial. The combustion 
engine drives an alternator that generates the energy for the electri¬ 
cal propulsion unit and for charging the battery. The flow of electri¬ 
cal energy is controlled by the power electronics. 

The size of the alternator and the electric accumulator (the battery, 
in other words) depends on the operating-mode and charging 
strategy, range and performance. The need for an extra alternator 
adds complexity to the design, but this is compensated to some 
extent by the absence of a gearbox. 

A serial-hybrid configuration offers a great deal of flexibility in terms 
of the positioning of the individual components. The single most 
telling drawback of the serial-hybrid concept is the double transfor¬ 
mation of energy and the diminished efficiency this inherently 
entails. Combustion engine and alternator both have to be 
designed for maximum propulsive power. By comparison with par¬ 
allel hybrids, the combustion engine is more powerful, but it there¬ 
fore produces more emissions and has a higher fuel consumption. 


Classification by Drive-unit Configuration 

In terms of drive-unit configuration, hybrid cars can be classified as 
belonging to one of four groups: 



Principles of Hybrid Technology. 


Principles and driving situations > Classification by drive unit configuration 


Draw in the components of a serial-hybrid drive. 




What are the features of a serial-hybrid drive: 




Advantages: 


Disadvantages: 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

13 




























14 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Parallel Hybrid 

Unlike serial hybrids, parallel hybrid systems have both the com¬ 
bustion engine and the electric motor mechanically connected to 
the driven wheels. 

The two propulsion systems can be used either separately or 
together to propel the car. The introduction of force from the two 
sources to the powertrain is parallel, hence the term 'parallel-hybrid 
system'. 

Both electric motor and combustion engine can be made smaller 
and lighter, because the power of both is combined. Savings are 
the net result, for example in terms of weight, fuel consumption and 
C02 emissions. 

An option open to designers looking to maximize performance is 
to install a full-size, full-power combustion engine and then utilise 
the boost available from the electric motor. This approach can also 
produce a reduction in fuel consumption. 

The electric motor can also operate as a generator, which is why 
the term "electrical machine" is more apt than "electric motor". In 
overrun phases and when the vehicle brakes, the electrical 
machine generates electricity which - controlled by the power 
electronics - is stored in the high-voltage battery so that the car 
can use less fuel. In terms of production outlay, a cost comparison 
actually puts parallel hybrids ahead of mild hybrids. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology. 


Principles and driving situations > Classification by drive unit configuration 


Draw in the components of a parallel-hybrid drive. 




What are the features of a parallel-hybrid drive: 




Advantages: 


Disadvantages: 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

15 




























16 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Power-split Hybrid 

Power transmission can be either serial or parallel, so hybrid sys¬ 
tems of this nature are referred to as serial-parallel or power-split 
systems. 

Various operating modes are possible and individual modes can 
be engaged to suit driving conditions: 

• Combustion engine drives alternator (electrical machine 1) 
to charge the high-voltage battery bank. 

• Combustion engine drives alternator (electrical machine 1). 
The electricity generated in this way is used to power electri¬ 
cal machine 2 (serial hybrid). 

• Combustion engine is mechanically connected to the input 
shaft, as are the electrical machines. 

Both propulsion units drive the vehicle (parallel hybrid). 

In this combined hybrid drive mode a coupling provides the means 
of switching from one propulsion unit to the other. A vehicle with 
power-split hybrid drive can be electrically powered up to a certain 
speed. 

The electronics also control the way in which the two propulsion 
modes are combined to keep the combustion engine operating in 
its most efficient range. The drawbacks of power-split hybrid drives 
are the sophisticated electronics needed for drive control and the 
high costs. Power-split systems are usually implemented as full- 
hybrid configurations. 


Plug-in Hybrid 

Plug-in hybrids are another extended branch of hybrid technology. 
A plug-in configuration further reduces fuel consumption by having 
the electrical energy accumulator charged not only by the combus¬ 
tion engine but also off the grid supply when the vehicle is not in 
use. 

If the battery charge level is sufficient the vehicle can undertake 
short journeys in zero-emission electrical mode, with the combus¬ 
tion engine in reserve and needed only for lengthy trips or when 
the battery is drained. 

A plug-in hybrid always has a large-capacity battery bank so that 
more energy from the grid can be stored to make the vehicle less 
reliant on the combustion engine and maximize the proportion of 
all-electric driving. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology. 


Principles and driving situations > Classification by drive unit configuration 



Draw in the components of a power-split hybrid drive. 


What are the features of a power-split hybrid drive: 



Advantages: 


Disadvantages: 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

17 




























18 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Driving Conditions 

The driving conditions that can apply in the case of a full-hybrid 
configuration are shown below. The corresponding driving condi¬ 
tions for other hybrid vehicles can be derived by analogy from this 
summary. 

Start/stop Function 

When the vehicle is at a standstill with the combustion engine at its 
operating temperature, for example because the traffic has been 
held up at traffic lights, the combustion engine is switched off. 

This means that the engine is not emitting C02 and fuel consump¬ 
tion is reduced. While the car is at a standstill the high-voltage bat¬ 
tery supplies power for climate control, vehicle lights etc. If the 
charge state of the high-voltage battery is not sufficient to cover 
these loads the combustion engine is started to charge the high- 
voltage battery off the electrical machine and provide enough elec¬ 
trical energy to power the various consumers. When the brakes are 
applied on the approach to traffic lights, the combustion engine is 
switched off even before the car comes to a complete standstill 
(when the car slows to a certain defined speed). 

Pullaway 

The ability of the electric propulsion unit to deliver high torque at 
low speed is utilized for pullaway from rest. The car accelerates 
solely under electric power, with the electric motors drawing the 
energy they need from the high-voltage battery. The combustion 
engine remains switched off (engine at operating temperature). 

Accelerating (boost function) 

When sharp acceleration is needed to lift the car away from rest at 
a junction, to overcome a steep gradient or to pass slower traffic, if 
the high-voltage battery is sufficiently charged its power can be 
tapped and the additional force made available as kinetic energy 
through the electrical machine. This is known as the boost func¬ 
tion. Combining the power output of the combustion engine and 


the electric motors produce driving dynamics and acceleration sim¬ 
ilar to those of a vehicle with a more powerful engine. 

Steady Driving 

The combustion engine and the electrical machine can both con¬ 
tribute to propulsion; the extent to which power is drawn from 
either source depends on the vehicle's speed and the battery's 
state of charge at a given time. 

Combustion engines do not operate at maximum efficiency when 
required to propel the vehicle at low to medium speeds. The elec¬ 
trical machine, in contrast, is capable of delivering full torque at very 
low rpm. if the high-voltage battery is adequately charged, the vehi¬ 
cle is driven solely on electrical energy. The combustion engine is 
not switched on frequently unless the charge level of the high-volt¬ 
age battery is low: Under these circumstances some power is 
tapped from the engine to recharge the battery. 

A combustion engine can operate at maximum efficiency when the 
car is being driven at a steady, relatively high speed. At this end of 
the performance band the electrical machine would have to draw 
too much energy from the high-voltage battery. Consequently, the 
combustion engine is the primary mover for driving under these 
conditions. If the high-voltage battery is in a low state of charge 
part of the power developed by the combustion engine is used to 
recharge the battery through the electrical machine. 

Braking 

The ability to utilize the energy that would otherwise be shed on 
descents or wasted when the car is decelerating is one of the main 
advantages of a hybrid drive. 

This mode is known as energy recuperation or more frequently 
energy recovery. Instead of being dissipated by conversion into 
thermal energy at the wheel brakes, excess energy is converted 
into electrical energy by the electrical machine operating as a gen¬ 
erator, and stored in the high-voltage battery. 




Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Principles and driving situations > Driving situations 

What are the driving situations of a full-hybrid vehicle? 


















Principles of Hybrid Technology 

19 

































































20 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Energy Storage Devices 

The energy storage device stores accumulated energy so that it 
will be available for use when needed at some subsequent point in 
time. Energy is often converted from one form to another so that it 
can be stored and it then has to be converted again when needed; 
this process of conversion is unavoidable in order to minimize loss¬ 
es during stoppages. For example, chemical energy (fuel) is stored 
in the fuel tank and subsequently converted into thermal and 
mechanical energy by the combustion engine. 

Losses invariably occur in any process of energy storage or energy 
transformation. There are many kinds of energy-storage devices 
(mechanical, thermal, chemical, magnetic and electrostatic). 
Chemical and electrostatic storage devices are explained in more 



detail below, because these are the types of storage device most 
frequently used as the secondary source of energy in modern 
hybrid cars. 

Basic structure of a galvanic cell 


© © 


© 


O 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Negative electrode 

3 

Separator 

2 

Electrolyte 

4 

Positive electrode 


Physical Principles of Chemical Storage 

Broadly speaking, a galvanic cell consists of the electrolyte, the bat¬ 
tery housing and of course the two electrodes. A separator through 
which ions can pass but which holds back electrons forms an addi¬ 
tional insulating barrier between the electrodes. Chemical reactions 
that take place in the galvanic cell produce an electron excess at 
one electrode and an electron deficit at the other. Consequently, 
there is an electric potential - a voltage, in other words - between 
the two electrodes. 

As the battery discharges, therefore, the chemical reaction converts 
the energy stored in chemical form to change into electrical energy. 
The reaction that supplies energy is known as discharge and con¬ 
sists of two sub-reactions (electrode reactions) which, although 
separate in space, are interlinked. 

The electrode at which the corresponding sub-reaction takes place 
at a lower ORP (oxygen-reduction potential) than the other elec¬ 
trode is the negative electrode; the other is the positive electrode. 
As the cell discharges an oxidation process takes place at the neg¬ 
ative electrode and electrons are released; at the same time at the 
positive electrode the corresponding electrons are absorbed in 
equal numbers by a reduction process. The electronic current flows 
through an external consumer circuit from the negative to the posi¬ 
tive electrode. Inside the cell the current is carried between the 
electrodes by ions in the ion-conductive electrolyte (ion current), 
and ion and electronic reactions in/at the electrodes are interlinked. 

Galvanic cells are DC voltage sources. The name indicating the 
type of galvanic cell is generally derived from the combination of 
electrode materials. The chemical make-up of the electrolyte and 
the electrode materials changes, depending on the charge state of 
the cell. The type of material from which the electrodes are made 
determines the rated voltage of the cell. 

What we generally term a "battery" usually consists of an array of 
galvanic cells interconnected in such a way as to be usable as an 
energy source. Technically a AA “battery” is a galvanic cell. 


















Principles of Hybrid Technology. 


System components > Energy storage devices 


What is the difference between a galvanic cell and a battery? 


Draw a circuit of gavanic cells for a higher voltage of Draw a circuit of gavanic cells for higher capacity of 




Principles of Hybrid Technology 

21 























































































Principles of 


Capacity 

Connecting galvanic cells in parallel produces a battery with a high¬ 
er capacity. The voltage of the battery is equal to that of a single 
cell. 

Capacity is the electrical charge stored in the battery. A battery's 
capacity is stated in ampere-hours (Ah). The actual usable capacity 
(the current that can be drawn from the battery, in other words) 
depends on the conditions of discharge. An increase in discharge 
current means a corresponding decrease in usable capacity. 

Power 

The power of a battery is stated in watts (W) and is the product of 
discharge current and discharge voltage. It is not usual to state the 
energy stored in a battery, but energy per unit of mass or unit of 
volume is nonetheless an important parameter of battery systems. 

Energy density is a measure of the distribution of energy over the 
mass of a substance and is stated in watt-hours per kilogram 
(Wh/kg). The energy density of the battery used in a hybrid car is 
crucial in terms of the range the vehicle is able to cover before the 
battery has to be recharged. 

The power density of a battery defines the battery's electrical 
power as a function of mass and is stated in watts per kilogram 
(W/kg). 



Imagine you are an engineer at the FIZ and are responsible for the 
development of batteries for hybrid vehicles. 

Write several characteristics for the perfect hybrid-battery. 


The graph below shows the power density and the energy density 
of various devices capable of storing electrical energy. 

As the graph shows, double-layer capacitors manifest a very high 
power density but a very low energy density by comparison with 
other storage devices, so they are able to discharge a very high 
power over a short period of time. 

A comparison of nickel cadmium and nickel metal hydride batteries 
shows that both have about the same power density, but the nickel 
metal hydride battery has almost twice the energy density. This in 
turn means that of two batteries capable of storing the same 
amount of energy, a nickel metal hydride battery would weigh only 
half as much as a nickel-cadmium battery. 

Translated into terms of range, a car with a nickel metal hydride 
battery would be able to travel twice as far as a car fitted with a 
nickel-cadmium battery of the same size. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 



System components > Energy storage devices 


Energy Density and Power Density of a Battery 

W/kg k 

100.000 -n-r-r-r- -r - 1 - 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Double-layer capacitor 

2 

Lead-acid battery 

3 

Nickel-cadmium battery 

4 

Nickel metal hydride battery 

5 

Lithium-ion battery 

X 

Energy density in Wh/kg 

y 

Power density in W/kg 



Wh/kg 

® 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

23 










































24 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Battery Types 

Lead Acid Battery 

The lead-acid battery is one of the oldest kind of battery systems 
(lead acid batteries have been around since 1850), but even today 
batteries of this kind supply electrical energy for millions of motor 
vehicles. Lead-acid batteries are commonly used as starter batter¬ 
ies for the combustion engines of motor vehicles. Over a limited 
period of time, batteries of this kind are also capable of supplying 
power to on-board electrical consumers even when the combus¬ 
tion engine is not running. 

The cells consist primarily of positive and negative electrodes and 
the separators, plus the reguisite structural components. Each cell 
supplies a voltage of two volts. Six cells connected in series deliver 
the battery voltage of 12 V. The energy density of a lead-acid bat¬ 
tery is typically in the order of 30 Wh/kg. 

Nickel-cadmium Battery 

Nickel-cadmium batteries (NiCd) were first developed more than 
100 years ago and the technology is still in use today. An important 
difference between lead-acid batteries and nickel-cadmium batter¬ 
ies is that in the latter the electrolyte remains unchanged through 
the charge/discharge cycle. The electrodes of a fully charged nickel 
cadmium cell consist of plates charged with cadmium at the nega¬ 
tive terminal and nickel-hydroxide at the positive terminal. The elec¬ 
trolyte is potassium hydroxide. This combination supplies a voltage 
of 1.2 V. Energy density is comparable to that of a lead-acid battery. 

Cadmium is a heavy metal and is classified as an environmentally 
hazardous substance and these batteries suffer from what is com¬ 
monly known as the memory effect - two reasons why NiCd batter¬ 
ies have recently been supplanted by new battery systems. The 
memory effect is the characteristic loss of capacity that occurs 
when a nickel-cadmium battery is frequently recharged after being 
only partly discharged. 


The battery gives the impression of "remembering" the energy lev¬ 
els it reached in previous discharge cycles. Instead of the original 
nominal amount of energy, the battery outputs only this lower 
amount of energy and the voltage drops. 

Nickel Metal Hydride Battery 

The nickel metal hydride battery (NiMH battery) is often considered 
the successor to the NiCd battery. 

An NiMH battery cell has nominal voltage of 1.2 volts. The energy 
density of an NiMH battery is about 80 Wh/kg, so it is twice that of 
an NiCd battery. NiMH batteries are virtually free of the memory 
effect described above. They are capable of releasing their stored 
electrical energy within a very short time with no more than a negli¬ 
gible tailing off in voltage level. 

NiMH batteries are easily damaged by overcharging, total dis¬ 
charge, overheating and reversed polarity. 

They are also sensitive to changes in temperature. As soon as 
ambient temperature dips close to the freezing point these batter¬ 
ies evince a significant drop in capacity. 

The anode consists of a metal alloy that can reversibly store hydro¬ 
gen in its crystal lattice to form a metal hydride. The electrolyte is a 
20% solution of potassium hydroxide, which also surrounds the 
nickel-hydroxide cathode. 

As the battery discharges the hydrogen oxidizes; this chemical 
process produces a potential of 1.32 volts at the two electrodes. In 
order to prevent the metal from oxidizing instead of the hydrogen as 
the battery approaches the end of its discharge cycle, the negative 
electrode is much larger than the positive electrode. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology. 

System components > Energy storage devices > Battery types 

What are the characteristics of the Nickel Metal 
Hydride Battery? 




Principles of Hybrid Technology 

25 










































26 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Lithium-ion Battery (Li-ion battery) 

In the 1960s, researchers were starting to look at lithium batteries 
with lithium-metal anodes and nonaqueous electrolytes. The non- 
rechargeable lithium batteries were initially used in space explo¬ 
ration and for military purposes. Low self-discharge is a feature of 
batteries of this kind and for this reason they are still used even 
today in cardiac pacemakers, clocks and cameras. Rechargeable 
lithium batteries made their commercial breakthrough with the 
market launch of a cell that dispensed entirely with metallic lithium; 
this was the Lithium-ion battery. 

Today, Lithium-ion batteries are the preferred energy source for 
portable devices with high energy demand (mobile phones, digital 
cameras, notebook computers, etc.). Their high energy density also 
makes them attractive for use in electrically powered and hybrid 
vehicles. Additional benefits are the ability to supply a constant volt¬ 
age across the entire discharge period cycle and the fact that they 
do not suffer from a memory effect. 

Most Li-ion cells have a positive electrode made of lithium-metal 
oxides built up in layers (e.g. LiCo02 or LiNi02). The negative elec¬ 
trode consists of layers of graphite. The two electrodes are in a 
nonaqueous electrolyte. There is a separator between the two 
electrodes. 

The Lithium-ion cells generate a source voltage by the movement 
of lithium-ions. When the cell is charging, positive lithium-ions 
migrate through the electrolyte from the anode and insert them¬ 
selves into the graphite layers of the cathode. The lithium-ions 
combine with the graphite (carbon) without destroying the 
graphite's molecular structure. As the cell discharges the lithium- 
ions extract from the graphite and move back to the metal oxide 
and the electrons can flow through the external circuit to the posi¬ 
tive electrode. The lithium-ions cannot combine with the graphite 
of the cathode in the process known as intercalation unless the 
negative electrode has a protective coating through which the 
small lithium-ions can pass, but that constitutes an impermeable 


barrier to molecules in the electrolyte. 

Lithium-ion batteries have a low self-discharge rate and their effi¬ 
ciency is approximately 96%, due primarily to the high migration 
capability of lithium-ions. Efficiency is affected by temperature and 
drops off sharply at low temperatures. 

A conventional Lithium-ion cell supplies a nominal voltage of 3.6 V. 
The tension of a Lithium-ion cell, therefore, is three times that of a 
nickel metal hydride battery. Total discharge to below 2.4 V causes 
irreversible damage and loss of capacity to the cell, so it is essential 
to ensure that this threshold is not reached. 

Specific power density is in the range from 300 to 1500 W/kg. 
Energy density is about twice that of a nickel-cadmium battery, 
about 95 to 190 Wh/kg. 

Lithium-ion batteries should not be discharged below 40%, 
because at lower levels significant loss of capacity can occur due to 
irreversible reactions in the electrodes. Another aspect is that the 
higher the cell voltage, the more rapid the aging process in batter¬ 
ies of this kind. Consequently, it is best to avoid keeping Lithium- 
ion batteries constantly 100% charged. The optimum state of 
charge is in the range between 50% and 80%. 

Mechanical damage can short the cell. The high current level 
would melt the casing and cause the cell to catch fire. Li-ion batter¬ 
ies should not be immersed in water. Lithium-ion cells manifest a 
severe reaction to water, particularly when they are fully charged. If 
a battery of this kind catches fire it is important not to attempt to 
extinguish it with water: smother the fire with an inert substance 
such as sand, for example. 

Each battery is an array consisting of many individual cells, so each 
cell has to be individually monitored. This is precisely what the bat¬ 
tery management system is designed to do. This system ensures 
that the individual cells are not overcharged and not discharged too 
severely, and it also balances charge over individual cells, if neces¬ 
sary. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 


System components > Energy storage devices > Battery types 




What are the characteristics of the Lithium-ion battery? 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Positive electrode 

2 

Housing with electrolyte 

3 

Lithium-metal oxide 

4 

Separator 

5 

Graphite layer 

6 

Negative electrode 

7 

Lithium-ion 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

27 


































































































28 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Double-layer Capacitors 

The principle of the double-layer capacitor was discovered in 1856 
by German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz. He described the 
make-up of double layers of charge carriers forming on electrodes 
contained in an electrolyte when a voltage is applied from an exter¬ 
nal source. Today's double-layer capacitors are marketed under 
many different names (the names vary from manufacturer to manu¬ 
facturer), including for example; Goldcaps, Supercaps, Boost Caps 
and Ultracaps. 

A double-layer capacitor is an electrostatic energy storage device 
for electrical energy with a very high power density of up to 10 
kW/kg, but an energy density of about 5 Wh/kg, which is low by 
comparison with chemical storage devices. The advantages of a 
double-layer capacitor are its very high efficiency (approaching 
100%), its low self-discharge rate and its durability. These devices, 
moreover, are completely free of the memory effect. The inherently 
low energy density renders double-layer capacitors unsuitable for 
use as sole energy accumulators for vehicle propulsion, but in com¬ 
bination with chemical storage devices the weight savings are con¬ 
siderable and an additional benefit is that the chemical accumula¬ 
tors have an extended service life. 

Capacity depends on the thickness of the insulating layer and the 
surface area of the electrodes. 

The high power density of double-layer capacitors is due to the 
very thin insulating layer and the large surface area of the elec¬ 
trodes. Activated carbon is used to produce electrodes with this 
very large surface area. Activated carbon is fine-grade carbon with 
a very large inner surface (300 to 3000 m2/g). 4 grams of activated 
carbon aggregate to an inner surface is roughly equal to the sur¬ 
face area of a football field. The insulating layer is only a few 
nanometers thick. 


The capacity of double-layer capacitors is in the range from 1 to 50 
farads and dielectric strength is about 2.5 V. As is the case with 
chemical accumulators, capacity and operating voltage can be 
increased by connecting multiple capacitors in series or in parallel. 

Summary 

As we have seen, the galvanic cell is the heart of any useful ener¬ 
gy-storage system. Consequently, selecting a cell of suitable type 
is of crucial importance in terms of the system's ability to store and 
provide energy. The table below is an overview of the properties of 
the mainstream electrical energy-storage devices. 

If voltage and/or capacity of the cell is not sufficient for a given 
application, multiple cells can be connected in series or in parallel, 
respectively. 


Device 

Cell 

Voltage 

(V) 

Power 

Density 

(W/kg) 

Energy 

Density 

(Wh/kg) 

Memory 

Effect 

Operating 

Temperature 

(°C) 

Lead Acid 

2 

5 

30 

- 

Up to 45 

NiCd 

1.2 

6 

40 

Yes 

Up to 65 

NiMH 

1.2 

7 

80 

Low 

Up to 60 

Li-ion 

3.6 

8 

95- 190 

No 

Up to 50 

Double Layer 
Capacitor 

2.3 - 2.7 

9 

5 

No 

Up to 65 




Principles of Hybrid Technology 


System components > Energy storage devices > Double-layer capacitors 




0 



o- 



10 


(?) ® 0 © 



(i) 


© 


7 

H 


® 



1 n r-. 


| kj ‘J 

<1 uu 

+ i ) 

,; Vc l 7 Nf 

-=sc c +Oi 

: Q 

Q ! A O 

w ! O q 

\ Q 

1 Q 

_ooo o 

U L-L* 

OOOQ 

— 




0 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

29 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Double-layer capacitor is discharged 

B 

Double-layer capacitor is charged 

1 

Voltage source 

2 

Switch 

3 

Insulating charge-carrier layer 

4 

Insulating charge-carrier layer 

5 

Negative electrode 

6 

Negative charge carriers 

7 

Electrolyte 

8 

Separator 

9 

Positive charge carriers 

10 

Positive electrode 








































































30 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Electrical Principles 

Magnet 

A permanent magnet (a magnet made from what is termed a mag¬ 
netically "hard" material) is usually made of an alloy primarily of iron 
and often containing cobalt or nickel. It is magnetized in the 
process of production and it retains this magnetism permanently, 
hence the name. Permanent magnets are used for a wide variety of 
purposes, including that of generating energizing fields in fraction¬ 
al-horsepower electric motors. 


Electromagnet 

A coil carrying an electric current generates a magnetic field very 
similar to that of a bar magnet. Consequently, it can be used as an 
electromagnet. Unlike the magnetism of a permanent magnet, this 
magnetism can be switched on and off, because it occurs only 
while current is flowing through the coil. 

In direct current motors with electric excitation such as series- 
wound or shunt-wound motors, electromagnets are used to gener¬ 
ate the magnetic field in the stator. Electromagnets are also used 
for the coils in relays. 



Index 

Explanation 

O 

Magnetic flux 

1 

Current through coil 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Opposite magnetic poles are mutually attractive 

B 

Like magnetic poles repel 


























































Magnetic Field 

A magnetic field can be generated with the aid of a permanent 
magnet or an electromagnet. The magnetic fields can be visualized 
as magnetic field lines running from the magnet's north pole to its 
south pole. The stronger the magnetic field, the more densely 
packed are the magnetic field lines in the diagram. 



Faraday's Law of Induction 

Electromagnetic induction was discovered in 1831 by Michael 
Faraday. Electromagnetic induction is one of the basic phenomena 
of electrophysics. Faraday's law of induction describes a relation¬ 
ship between magnetic fields and electrical voltages and is crucial 
to our understanding of how electrical machines work. 

The law of induction states that a Uind will be induced by the 
reversing magnetic flux flowing through a coil with the number of 
turns N. This relationship can be expressed as: Uind = N • /dt. 

Even in a magnetic field without a time rate of change a voltage is 
induced in the coil if the coil itself is moved inside the magnetic 
field. Induction is utilised primarily in electrical machines such as 
generators, electric motors and transformers. The direction of flux 
of the induced voltage can be determined by application of Lenz's 
law: the direction of flux of the induced current is always in such a 
direction as to oppose the motion or change causing it. 

If the current flowing through the coil changes in intensity, its mag¬ 
netic field also changes and induces in the coil a voltage that is 
opposite the change in current direction causing it. This is general¬ 
ly termed self-induction. The faster the magnetic field changes and 
the stronger the changes, the higher is the resultant induction volt¬ 
age. 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

31 











32 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Lorentz Force 

The force known to physics as the Lorentz force is the force that a 
magnetic field exercises on a moved electrical charge. A force F 
acts on the electrons in the conductor, causing the entire conduc¬ 
tor to move in one direction. The orientation of the vectoring force 
can be determined by the "right-hand rule" or by the principle of 
cause/agent/effect. Applied to the graphic above, this means: 

Cause = current —> agent = magnetic field —> effect = force on 
electrons 


Fill in the rest of the labels in the diagram to the right: 


Lorentz force acting on an electron 





































Transformers 

A transformer consists of two coils around a common iron core. 
There is no conductive connection between the two coils, in other 
words they are galvanically insulated from each other. 

If an alternating current is applied to one of the coils, the law of 
induction reguires that an alternating current will be induced in the 
second coil. A voltage can then be measured between the ends of 
the second coil. The strength of the induced voltage depends on 
the primary voltage and the number of turns in the two coils. 

U1/U2 = N1/N2 

If the primary and secondary coils have the same number of turns, 
secondary voltage U2 will be egual to primary voltage U1. If the 
secondary coil has twice as many turns as the primary coil, the sec¬ 
ondary voltage will be twice the primary voltage. A load connected 
to the secondary coil draws energy from the circuit that has to be 
made up for on the primary side. In an ideal (imaginary) transformer, 
the energy input on the primary side is equal to the energy tapped 
on the secondary side, in other words an ideal transformer is loss- 
free. The currents II and 12 are inversely proportional to the volt¬ 
ages, because in this ideal transformer power is equal on the pri¬ 
mary and secondary sides. 

U1 (II) = 112(12) 

Ideal transformers, however, do not exist in the real world, because 
losses always occur. Every transformer, therefore, outputs less elec¬ 
trical energy than it receives. The losses in electrical energy are 
partly the result of heat generated in the coils on account of electri¬ 
cal resistance and partly the result of what are known as eddy cur¬ 
rents. The eddy currents can be minimized by using a transformer 
core made up of a large number of thin iron sheets instead of a 
solid-iron core. These sheets of iron are insulated by a lacquer 
coating and this arrangement interrupts the flux of eddy currents. 


Structure of a transformer 





Index 

Explanation 

1 

Primary coil with number of turns N1 

2 

Secondary coil with number of turns N2 

3 

Magnetic flux 

4 

Iron core 


Given the following values, calculate the voltage and current of the 
second coil. 

N1 =80 number of turns 
U1 = 40 Volts 

11 = .5 Amps 

N2 = 20 number of turns 
U2 =_Volts 

12 =_Amps 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

33 






















34 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Electrical Machines 

Electrical machines are devices capable of converting electrical 
energy into mechanical movement and mechanical movement into 
electrical energy. Depending on how the energy is transformed, we 
talk about electric motors (electrical to mechanical), or generators 
(mechanical to electrical). All electrical machines make use of the 
fact that like magnetic poles repel and opposite magnetic poles 
attract. 

At least one of the magnetic fields is produced by an electric cur¬ 
rent. Electrical machines can also be classified by type of current, 
for example direct current (DC), alternating current(AC) or rotary 
current (more commonly called three-phase current) machines, or 
by the operating principle, which gives us the classifications of syn¬ 
chronous or asynchronous machines. 

Out of all these various classifications, the following electrical 
machines are discussed in more detail below: 

• Direct-current machines 

• Synchronous machines 

• Asynchronous machines. 


Direct-current Machines 

Direct-current machines were the earliest electromechanical con¬ 
verters, primarily because of historic development and the availabili¬ 
ty of electrical energy in the form of direct current from galvanic 
cells. 

The first direct-current machine was built in about 1830. The intro¬ 
duction of rotary current (three phase current) in 1890 or there¬ 
abouts meant that the DC machine was ultimately supplanted by 
the synchronous machine. Even today, however, direct-current 
machine designs are still with us and are used in a very wide range 
of applications. Direct-current motors with rating up to about 100 
Watts are used in huge numbers in vehicle electrical systems as 
motors for wipers, power window lifters and blowers and as servo¬ 
motors. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology. 

System components > Electrical machines > Direct-current machines 


Explain the operation of a direct current machine in your own words. 







Principles of Hybrid Technology 

35 






































































36 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Rotary-current (three-phase) Machines 

Three-phase machines are electromechanical converters that can 
operate either as motors or as generators. 

In motor mode the rotating magnetic field is generated by the 
three-phase rotary current. In generator mode the machine rotary 
current is an alternating current with three phases (live conductors). 
The term "rotary current" derives from the mode of generation, but 
the term "three phase" motor is more common, simply because 
these machines have three phases. 


Phases of the three alternating voltages 







ijtf 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stator 

2 

Winding U 

3 

Winding V 

4 

Winding W 

5 

Phases of rotary current 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Star circuit 

B 

Delta circuit 


In a star circuit, leg ends U2, V2 and W2 are all connected to point 
N. Outer conductors LI, L2 and L3 of the star circuit run from leg 
starting points U1, VI and W1, respectively. In a delta configuration 
the start of one coil leg is connected to the end of another coil's 
leg. Broadly speaking, the coils are all connected one behind the 
other. Outer conductors LI, L2 and L3 run from the connecting 
points to the consumer. Because the coils are connected in this 
way, only three conductors are needed to wire the three phases 
LI, L2 and L3. In principle, both types of three-phase machine 
have the same stator structure with a three-leg rotary-current 
winding. 

They differ only in the structure of the rotor. The structure of the 
rotor is the feature that enables us to distinguish between synchro¬ 
nous and asynchronous machines. 






















































































Synchronous Machine 

A three-phase synchronous machine is an electromechanical con¬ 
verter that operates with a three phase supply as an electric motor, 
or as a generator producing a three-phase supply for a consumer. 

Synchronous machines are used primarily as generators to pro¬ 
duce electrical energy in power plants. 

A synchronous machine is generally the first choice nowadays as 
well as the generator in a motor vehicle to supply electrical con¬ 
sumers and charge the battery. In the medium-power range syn¬ 
chronous machines have become rare these days although this is 
set to change because hybrid-vehicle technology is turning more 
and more to synchronous machines. 

The magnetic field in the rotor of a synchronous machine is gener¬ 
ated by permanent magnets (in small-scale machines) or by elec¬ 
tromagnets (in larger machines). In the latter case wiper contacts 
are necessary, but the current flowing through these contacts is 
comparatively low. Unlike direct-current machines, a synchronous 
machine does not need a commutator. 

Most synchronous machines are of internal-pole design. Some 
designs have the stator windings inside the machine and the rotor 
with permanent magnets outside. A machine of this kind is referred 
to as an external-rotor machine. 


Structure of a synchronous machine 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stator 

2 

Winding U 

3 

Rotor 

4 

Winding V 

5 

Winding W 

6 

Phases of rotary current 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

37 























































38 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Principle of Synchronous Machines 

When a rotary current is applied to the windings of the stator, a cor¬ 
responding rotating magnetic field is generated. The magnetic 
poles of the rotor follow the direction of the rotating field. This 
causes the rotor to rotate. The rotor moves at the same speed as 
the rotating magnetic field. This speed is known as the synchro¬ 
nous speed. Hence the term "synchronous machine". The speed 
of the synchronous motor is precisely defined by the frequency of 
the rotary current and the number of pole pairs. A frequency con¬ 
verter has to be used in order to achieve stepless speed control of 
a synchronous motor. 

Synchronous machines do not start up under their own power: 
they must be set in motion either mechanically or with the aid 
of frequency converters, accelerated to their rated speed, and 
synchronized. 


M iNmJ 



Most of the three-phase machines used in hybrid automotive tech¬ 
nology are of the synchronous type. 

The permanent magnets generate the magnetic field of the rotor, 
so it is not necessary to tap energy into the system from outside. 
This is why these machines have a very high power density, com¬ 
bined with a very high degree of efficiency (> 90%). 














Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



System components > Electrical machines > Rotary-current (three-phase) machines 


Index 

Explanation 

1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 





Note the parts of a synchronous machine. 

/T' 


What are the advantages and the disadvantages of a synchronous machine. 

Advantages Disadvantages 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

39 










































































40 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Asynchronous Machines 

A three-phase asynchronous machine can be used as either a 
motor or a generator. The characteristic feature of an asynchronous 
machine is that the rotor does not have a direct supply of electricity. 
The motor's magnetic field is built up by induction from the rotary 
field of the stator. Another term frequently used for machines of this 
type is "induction machine", because the current flowing through 
the rotor is always induced by the rotary field of the stator. The rotor 
is often shaped like a round cage with bar conductors that make up 
the cage short-circuited at the ends. 


Structure of an asynchronous machine 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Fan 

5 

Stator winding 

2 

Stator sheet pack 

6 

Short-circuit ring 

3 

Terminals (line in) 

7 

Roller bearing 

4 

Rotor sheet pack with rotor bars 

8 

Shaft 


The rotary field in the stator winding reverses the magnetic flux in 
the conductor loops of the rotor. 

This induces a voltage that causes current to flow in the short-cir¬ 
cuited conductor bars. This current generates a magnetic field of its 
own. Lenz's law states that the direction of flux of the induced cur¬ 
rent is always in such a direction as to oppose the motion or 
change causing it. The outcome is a torque that causes the rotor to 
spin in the direction of the stator's rotary field. Consequently, induc¬ 
tion is caused by the difference in the relative speeds of the rotary 
fields of the stator and the rotor. However, the rotor cannot be per¬ 
mitted to achieve the same speed as the stator's rotary field 
because under these circumstances the magnetic flux change in 
the conductor loops would be zero and no voltage would be 
induced. The difference between the speed of the stator's rotary 
field and the rotor is known as the slip speed, but it is also referred 
to as the asynchronous speed. It is dependent on load. Stator field 
and rotor rotate at different speeds so they are not in synchroniza¬ 
tion - this is why a machine of this type is referred to as an asyn¬ 
chronous motor. One advantage of asynchronous motors over syn¬ 
chronous designs is that they are inherently much simpler and 
therefore more robust. This derives primarily from the fact that the 
principle dispenses with both commutator and brushes. Simplicity 
of design also makes for lower cost of manufacture and low-mainte¬ 
nance operation. Asynchronous motors are the most commonly 
used kind of electric motor. 

In terms of electrical layout, an asynchronous machine corresponds 
to a transformer. The stator winding is the primary side and the 
short-circuited conductor bars are the secondary side. Current set¬ 
tles to a level that is dependent on speed. 



























Equivalent circuit diagram of an asynchronous motor 


Hs Xr 



T 

O- 


Index 

Explanation 

Ue 

Line voltage 

Rs 

Ohmic resistance of the stator winding 

Xs 

Inductive resistance of the stator winding 

Xr 

Inductive resistance of the rotor 

Rr 

Ohmic resistance of the rotor 


Rs and Xs are the most significant features of the equivalent circuit 
diagram of an idling asynchronous motor, and this is the reason 
why the input of a machine of this nature is almost entirely reactive 
power. 

As long as the rotor is not in motion, the machine is a transformer 
with short circuit on the secondary side. This means high currents 
and powerful magnetic fields. In this pullaway range the machine is 
not operating efficiently and the motor heats up rapidly and severe¬ 
ly. As soon as the armature starts to rotate and adjust to the rotary 
field in which it is spinning, the currents drop and efficiency 
improves. 


Speed control for asynchronous machines is generally implement¬ 
ed with power electronics and frequency converters and speed 
varies as frequency is increased or decreased. 

Advantages of asynchronous machines: 

• Durability 

• Low maintenance, because structure is straightforward 
and brushless 

• Comparatively low manufacturing costs 

• Self-start capability 

• High short-term overload capability 

• Inherently robust design. 

Disadvantages of asynchronous machines: 

• Less efficient than synchronous machines with permanent 
magnets and high torque utilization 

• Low pullaway torque unless coupled to a frequency converter 
with run-up control. 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

41 

























42 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Current Inverters 

Circuits designed to convert electric energy in terms of the voltage 
waveform and the voltage and current levels are known as current 
converters. Distinctions are drawn between rectifiers, inverters and 
converters (often called transformers). 


A controlled rectifier needs a control voltage, a trigger that defined 
the time at which a given electronic switch has to be opened and 
closed in order to achieve the rectifying effect. Controlled rectifiers 
are implemented using electronic gates such as thyristors and 
MOSFETs. An uncontrolled rectifier rectifies the input AC voltage 
without extra control electronics. 


Rectifiers convert AC voltage to DC voltage. Conversely, a DC volt¬ 
age can also be changed into an AC voltage. Inverters are used for 
this purpose. Transforming a DC voltage to a higher or lower DC 
voltage is a job for a converter. Converters are also more frequently, 
but not necessarily accurately, called DC/DC transformers. AC con¬ 
verters (also known as AC transformers) are used to transform an 
AC voltage into a different AC voltage of a different amplitude. 
Frequency converters are used if the frequency of the AC voltage 
has to be changed. In hybrid cars the power electronics are used to 
convert direct current voltage into alternating current voltage and 
vice versa. Moreover, power electronics are also used for highly 
flexible adaptation of the operating points of electrical machines. 

Rectifiers 



Symbol used in circuit diagrams to represent a rectifier 

Rectifiers are used to transform AC voltage into DC voltage. A recti¬ 
fier consists of multiple diodes arranged in such a way as to func¬ 
tion as current rectifiers. The diodes deflect the corresponding half 
waves of the AC voltage to the same direction, producing a pulsat¬ 
ing direct current voltage. In order to obtain true constant-voltage 
DC, the voltage output by the rectifier has to be smoothed by 
capacitors or chokes. Rectification can be uncontrolled by semi¬ 
conductor diodes, or controlled by thyristors. 


Half-wave Rectifier 


o 

t 

r,-i 

1 

o 





A half-wave rectifier works by allowing one half of each AC wave to 
pass. The other half wave is blocked. The drawbacks of this circuit 
are the ripple at its output and the very poor degree of efficiency. 
The rectified voltage has to be smoothed before it can be used. 
The ripple is of the same frequency as the input voltage. 


Full-wave Rectifier Circuit 




The drawbacks of a half-wave rectifier can be overcome to a large 
extent by using full-wave rectifiers (also known as bridge rectifiers 
or - less commonly - two-pulse bridge connections). There are four 
diodes in the circuit. The AC voltage applied on the left is convert¬ 
ed into a pulsating direct current voltage (shown here on the right). 
This is a full-wave rectifying circuit, so the negative half-wave of the 
AC voltage always appears as exclusively positive in the DC circuit 
at consumer R. The ripple frequency is twice that of the input volt¬ 
age. Similarly, this circuit also has a better degree of efficiency. 




































Three-phase Full-wave Rectifier 


Inverters 



Three-phase current can also be rectified by what is known as a 
six-pulse bridge circuit. This circuit has six diodes, so all the half¬ 
waves of the three phases are used. The rectified direct current 
voltage evinces no more than slight ripple. In motor vehicles, 
circuits of this nature are used to rectify the alternator voltage, 
for example. 



The converters that convert direct current voltage into alternating 
current voltage are called inverters. 

Inverters can be designed to provide single-phase alternating cur¬ 
rent or three-phase AC. They are capable of very high degrees of 
efficiency in the region of 98 percent. Inverters are used in situa¬ 
tions in which electric consumers need an AC supply in order to 
operate, but only a DC source is available. In hybrid cards, for 
example, which store their electrical energy in high-voltage batter¬ 
ies but the electrical machine that provides propulsive power needs 
three-phase electricity. 

Another typical application is in a photovoltaic array. The power 
from the DC voltage source has to be fed into the AC or three- 
phase grid. 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

43 






























44 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


DC/DC Converter 



AC/AC Converter 



A DC/DC converter (often - though inaccurately - termed a trans¬ 
former in common parlance) is a converter that converts a con¬ 
stant-current input voltage to a higher or lower DC voltage by peri¬ 
odic switching. DC/DC converters are commonly used in electrical 
propulsion technology. The basic types are step-down transform¬ 
ers, step-up transformers and inverters. The switches are generally 
either power MOSFETs or thyristors. 

Direct current voltage as such cannot be transformed, so a DC/DC 
converter works much like an electronic switched-mode power 
supply, initially transforming the direct current voltage into an AC 
voltage. This AC voltage then passes through a transformer in 
which it is stepped up or down, as appropriate, and then trans¬ 
formed back into a direct current voltage and smoothed. On 
account of the principle involved, current can flow in only one 
direction through a DC/DC converter. 

In mild-hybrid and full-hybrid vehicles a DC/DC converter is needed 
to step the voltage of the high-voltage battery down to 12 volts. 

The DC/DC converter is a dual-mode implementation: it has to be 
bidirectional so that the high-voltage battery can be charged with 
jump leads or a charger in the event of it running flat. This means 
that the converter can handle direct current voltages and convert 
them in both directions. 


Symbol used in circuit diagrams to represent an AC/AC converter 


An AC/AC converter is used to convert an input AC voltage into an 
output AC voltage of a higher or lower level. It is also possible to 
convert alternating current voltages with transformers. But trans¬ 
formers are not included in the scope of power electronics. In other 
words, although an AC/AC converter does the same job as a trans¬ 
former it does not consist of coils with an iron core; instead, it is 
designed as a circuit comprising power-electronics components. 


Complete the legend for the following graphic 



CD 

-p&—/ 

Z pc 

I- r > 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 


3 


2 


4 






































Principles of Hybrid Technology. 

System components > Power electronics > Current inverters 



Complete the following graphic for different electrical powertrains. 


Mild-hybrid 



Full-hybrid 



Serial Plug-in 












-- 


— ; (g) —IOOOO 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

45 












































































46 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Electromechanical Switch Contactor 

An electromechanical switch contactor is an electric switch for 
high-power switching actions. A switch contactor operates on 
much the same principle as a relay. The main difference is that a 
switch contactor can switch effectively at much higher power rat¬ 
ings than a relay; switch contactors operate in ranges from 500 
watts up to several hundred kilowatts. 

Operating principle of a relay 



o 


o 


The actuating coils of contactors can be designed for AC or DC 
voltage. On account of the high-speed tripping of the solid switch 
contacts, a switch contactor can be a source of mechanical vibra¬ 
tion and noise when it throws. When a contactor switches off the 
actuating coil operating as an inductive load generates interference 
in the form of a voltage spike. An overvoltage protector has to be 
built into the circuitry to protect the control electronics. In alternat¬ 
ing-current circuits a combination of resistor and capacitor (RC) is 
used for this purpose. A freewheeling diode can be used in DC cir¬ 
cuits. RC combinations are also used to avoid breakaway sparking 
and electric arcs at the switch contacts. 


Symbol used in circuit diagrams to represent a switch contactor 
















































Principles of Hybrid Technology. 


System components > Electromechanical switch contactor 


In your on words, write down the difference between a relay and a contactor. 




nth' 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 

47 










































































































48 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Safety 


High Electric Voltage 

Electrical Field 

Every electrically charged object is surrounded by an electrical 
field. The effect is familiar and often experienced when a non-con- 
ductive object takes on an electrostatic charge. The electrical field 
is caused by the difference in potential between the electrically 
charged object and other objects in its vicinity. Instead of "differ¬ 
ence in potential", we can also use the terms "electric voltage", 
or "electric tension". 

Electrical fields of charged objects 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Electrical field of a positively charged sphere 

B 

Electrical field of two electric conductors 


Live electric conductors also generate an electrical field in their 
vicinity. The electric voltages encountered in the field of hybrid- 
auto engineering are in the order of magnitude of several hundred 
volts. 


Electric Voltage as a Cause of Current Flow 

As well as generating electrical fields in the vicinity of objects, 
electric voltage is also the reason why electric current flows in a 
circuit. The higher the voltage U the higher the current I for any 
given electrical resistance. In the high-voltage electrical system 
of a hybrid vehicle the voltages exceed those in the familiar 12-V 
systems by several orders of magnitude. 

Example: given a fixed resistance of R = 1,000 Q 

at 12 Volts, the current would be 12 mA 

at 120 Volts, the current would be 120 mA 

at 360 Volts, the current would be 360 mA 

Needless to say, the technical components of the high-voltage 
electrical system are designed to have the resistances needed for 
the higher voltages involved, so the current flowing through the 
system is also of the desired level. 

The resistance of the human body, however, is independent of the 
electrical voltage of any given external source to which it is 
exposed. Consequently, the current that would flow through the 
human body in the event of contact with live parts of a hybrid car's 
high-voltage electrical system would be much higher than in the 
case of a 12-V system. 

The effect of electric current on the human body is discussed in 
this section. 




However, the field generated in this way does not constitute a 
direct hazard. The electrical field of an electrostatically charged 
object can be considerably stronger by comparison. 





















Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Safe working practices > Hazards involved with electricity > Overview 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 

49 










































50 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Electrical Shock 

The cells in the human body are to a limited 
extent electrically conductive. The high pro¬ 
portion of liquid in the cells is one of the main 
reasons for this. If a person touches a live 
component, an electric current can flow 
through his or her body. The current invariably 
takes the shortest path through the body. 

The organs affected by the electricity depends on the path taken 
by the current through the body. In the graphic above, the heart and 
the respiratory organs are among those affected. 

Approximate resistances can be given for the various paths that 
current is likely to take through the human body. The human body's 
ohmic resistance to current can be dependant, but not limited to 
the following factors. 

• Clothing 

• Wetness of the skin 

• Length of and nature of the path through the body. 

The denser and drier the items of clothing at the parts of the body 
at which the electric current enters and exits the body, the higher 
the resistance. If the skin is wet from water or damp from perspira¬ 
tion, the body's electrical resistance is correspondingly lower. 


If the current follows a short path through the body resistance is 
higher than if the current takes a longer route. The table below lists 
guideline values for the electrical resistance of the human body. 


Path of Electrical Current (body) 

Approximate Ohmic Resistance 

From hand to hand 

Approx. 1000 Q 

From one hand to both feet 

Approx. 750 Q 

From both hands to both feet 

Approx. 500 Q 

From both hands to the torso 

Approx. 250 Q 


Electricity does not only have effects that can be used for technical 
purposes (heat, light, chemical and magnetic effects). Electricity is 
also capable of producing effects in living organisms, including the 
bodies of human beings. 

This is what is termed the physiological effect. The reason for this 
is that many functions of the human body are controlled by electri¬ 
cal processes. The movements of our muscles are produced by 
electrical impulses, and this also includes our heartbeat. 

Similarly, the information provided by the sensory organs is carried 
by electrical means through the nervous system to the brain. And 
the human brain itself operates with electrical signals. These sig¬ 
nals within the human body emit only minute voltages (mV) and 
currents (A). 

If an electric current from an external voltage source flows through 
the human body, it overlays the body's natural electrical signals. 
This can have a massively disruptive effect on the natural electrical 
processes that take place all the time in the human body. The 
effect is usually perceived as an electric shock, and the natural 
response is to jerk back, away from the source. 

If the current is strong the reactions of the muscles become 
uncontrollable. A muscular spasm can occur with the result that the 
live part is tightly clenched and cannot be released. This let-go limit 
is important, because once it is passed a very dangerous loop is 
closed: the longer the current is able to flow through the body the 
more damaging are its effects. 



















Safe working practices > Hazards involved with electricity > Effects of current flow on humans 


Principles of Hybrid Technology. 


Time is money??? Not only money, but in terms of electricity... 



Take notes about the areas and lines shown in the diagram: 

A 

B 

C _ 

D 

1 

2 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

51 


























































































52 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Principles of Hybrid Technology. 


Safe working practices > Hazards involved with electricity > Voltage used in hybrid cars 



Please note the different 
voltage levels. 


h 










What are the voltage limits, from which on they 
are hazardous (according to the ISO standard)? 
Is there a difference between alternating 
current (AC) and direct current (DC)? 


Alternating Current (AC): 


Direct Current (DC): 

































The most dangerous disruption of normal muscular activity affects 
the respiratory muscles and the cardiac muscle. This can cause 
apnoea, the cessation of movement of the respiratory muscles. 
Depending on current strength, the length of time during which 
current continues to flow, and the frequency (alternating current), 
ventricular fibrillation. This is a condition of feeble, high-frequency 
contractions of the heart muscle, which are insufficient to maintain 
the circulation of the blood. 

Apnoea and ventricular fibrillation both cause a breakdown of blood 
circulation, which means that the supply of oxygen to the body's 
vital organs is cut off. These are conditions of acute danger to life. 

Under these circumstances immediate first aid is absolutely essen¬ 
tial to rescue the victim from injury or fatality. 

Burns 

The heat developed by the electric current can also cause injury to 
and in the human body. External burns can be suffered, primarily 
due to arcing. Internally, the electric current heats up the tissue 
through which it flows. The body fluids in particular can become 
hot enough for evaporation to occur. 

Injuries of this nature are known as internal burns. The organs can 
cease to function within a very short time and the blood ceases to 
circulate. These are conditions of acute danger to life. 

These are the immediate effects of severe electric shock, but there 
are also others that might only emerge some time after the actual 
incident. Even then it is possible for mortally dangerous situations 
to develop. For example, it takes some time for body cells destroy¬ 
ed by an incident involving exposure to electricity to be broken 
down by natural processes. In fact, the process can take several 
days. 

The substances produced in this way have to be passed through 
the kidneys. If dead cells in very large numbers are present the kid¬ 
neys can become overloaded and kidney failure can be the result. 


Consequently, it is absolutely essential to ensure that after receiv¬ 
ing first aid, the victim of an electric shock is thoroughly examined 
and re-examined by a professional physician. 

Arc Flash 

An arc flash occurs when current flows between two conductors 
across a gap containing a gas (e.g. air). This gap is usually of an 
insulating or poorly conductive nature. 

An arc flash can occur when two conductors are initially brought 
into contact with each other and a current flows. Subsequent sepa¬ 
ration of the conductors initially produces only a very narrow gap 
between the two. Since the gap is narrow the electric field is 
extremely strong and might be higher than the breakdown strength 
of the gas occupying the gap. 

Under these circumstances sparkover occurs and gas molecules 
are ionized. Ions and electrons are violently released from the 
material of the two conductors, and the result is that after the 
sparkover the material evinces signs of wear and tear. Another 
result is that charge carriers capable of migrating are produced: 
positively charged ions and negatively charged electrons. Because 
of the presence of the electrical voltage, these charge carriers 
migrate across the gap to the corresponding conductors. They 
then react with the conductors. When charge carriers move, their 
movement means that electric current flows. This mode of produc¬ 
ing a current flux in gases is known as gas discharge. In the case of 
an arc flash this is a continuous process. New charge carriers are 
produced in succession and the current continues to flow. The 
gaseous matter between the conductors assumes the state in 
which it is known as plasma. 

A light arc cannot flash between two conductors unless the voltage 
reaches a certain minimum level and the current flows at a certain 
minimum strength (before the conductors are separated). These 
values cannot be positively stated because they depend on the 
material of which the conductors consist. 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

53 



54 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


In the plasma between the two conductors the migrating charge 
carriers collide and cause the gas to heat up. Depending on the 
material of the conductors and the surrounding gas in the plasma, 
temperatures can reach approximately 4000°C or higher. These 
extremely high temperatures can release other charge carriers from 
the material of the conductors. This sustains the arc and causes 
steady attrition of the conductor material as it is "burned up". 

This consumption of the material is an effect that has to be taken 
duly into account in terms of technical design: arcing that occurs at 
switch contacts as they open erodes the contacts. This is why the 
manufacturer generally guarantees the operation of relays or switch 
contactors for only a limited number of switching operations. 

Electric arcs are also a source of danger to humans: 

• Burns: the very high temperatures involved inevitably cause 
extremely severe burns if a person comes too close to an arc 
or penetrates directly into the arc. Keep well clear of electric 
arcs and use suitable protective gloves to hold the conductors. 

• Ultraviolet radiation: the colliding charge carriers produce not 
only heat but also light with ultraviolet (UV) components. This 
UV light can cause injury to the eyes, and more specifically to 
the retina. This causes the painful condition known among 
welders as "eyeflash" or simply "flash", otherwise often 
referred to as "welding flash". Never look directly into an 
electric arc - always wear a protective facemask. 


Electric arc between two conductors 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Conductor 

2 

Electric arc 

3 

Conductor 


• Flying particles: ions and electrons are constantly shed from 
the conductors in the high-temperature zone produced by the 
electric arc. The process can also cause small particles of the 
material to break off in an uncontrolled manner. These tiny 
particles are often tremendously hot. Keep well clear of elec¬ 
tric arcs unless you are wearing suitable protective clothing 
(including protective gloves and eye protection). 





















Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Safe working practices > First aid in case of electrical accidents 



How do you help a person who had an electrical accident? 

Build a survival chain and sort the actions to be taken 
into the correct sequence! 



Notes: 






Interrupt the circuit 


Think and secure 


Send out 
emergency call 


First aid 


Help by emergency Post-accident 

service medical treatment 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

55 



















































56 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Preventing Hazards 

Every individual working in the Service sector bears responsibility 
for the discharge of certain important duties with regard to health 
and safety at work: 

• Always comply with verbal instructions and written rules 
concerning health and safety. 

• Always make adequate use of the protective devices provided. 


High-voltage components are identified either by the warning label 
shown below or by a high-visibility orange color (as is the case with 
high-voltage cables). 


I 





Always use the facilities (tools, vehicles) in accordance with Example of a high-voltage warning label 
instructions. 


• If equipment is found to be defective, make sure that it is 
correctly restored to full working order. 

Each individual not qualified to undertake such repairs themselves 
must immediately notify their superior to have the repairs duly 
undertaken at the earliest possible opportunity. 

The ISO community has deemed the following voltage levels to be 
hazardous: 

• Alternating current (AC) voltages of 25 V or higher 

• Direct current (DC) voltages of 60 V or higher 

A voltage is defined as being hazardous on the basis of the conse¬ 
quences resulting when a person touches a live part. The voltage 
is defined as "hazardous" when the current flowing through the 
person's body can cause injury to health. In hybrid cars the compo¬ 
nents that work at hazardous voltages are referred to collectively 
as "high-voltage components". 



The principle health and safety rule is simple: 

Never work on live components! 


Consequently, before starting work it is essential to de-energize the 
system in question and make sure that it cannot be re-energized 
without the knowledge and consent of the person undertaking the 
work. 

Other, specific, more detailed health and safety rules are derived 
from this principal rule. Each and every individual involved in 
Service must always apply these rules before starting and while 
working on high-voltage components. Strict compliance with these 
rules is absolutely essential in order to ensure health and safety. 

The three safety rules for hybrid vehicles are as follow: 

1. De-energize the system 

2. Secure the system so that it cannot be re-energized 
without your knowledge and consent 

3. Check that the system is de-energized 






Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Safe working practices > Safety rules to prevent electrical hazards > Identify high voltage components 


How can high-voltage components be identified? 





Principles of Hybrid Technology 

57 











































Principles of Hybrid Technology 



When working on the BMW ActiveHybrid vehicles in the service 
center, the high-voltage system will be entirely de-energized. 


Under absolutely NO condition may a high-voltage system or 
component be worked on with the high-voltage enabled. 


Work on any vehicle’s high-voltage system may only be 
performed by a certified and trained service technician. 


The three safety rules MUST always be adhered to when 
working on a vehicle’s high-voltage system. 





Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Safe working practices > Safety rules to prevent electrical hazards > Main rule and sequence of actions 


Do nodftrork on 




high voltage parts! 


Please write down the three safety rules for working on high voltage components in the correct order. 


3 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

59 























60 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Safety Rule 1 - De-energize the System 

A service employee working on high-voltage components can 
come into contact with components such as the connections of 
the high-voltage cables. While the vehicle is in operation these live 
components carry hazardous voltages. Service employees must be 
able to work under conditions that do not entail risk to health and 
safety, so when work is to be undertaken all the high-voltage com¬ 
ponents must be "dead", in other words free of hazardous voltage. 
The simplest possible way of achieving this is to remove the energy 
source, in other words the high-voltage battery, by disconnecting it 
from the circuit. This can be accomplished as shown in the graphic 
below. 


This effectively pulls the plug on the series-connected battery 
cells. Once the voltage source has been disconnected in this way, 
the externally accessible poles of the high-voltage battery are no 
longer live. 

The connector, the plug at which the connection is broken, is 
called the "high-voltage safety switch" but in technical jargon it is 
also frequently referred to as the "Service Disconnect". 

In the vehicles, the current range of the high-voltage safety switch 
varies in appearance and configuration from model to model. By 
way of example, the illustration above shows the type used in the 
BMW ActiveHybrid X6. 


Safety rule 1: de-energize the system 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Housing of the high-voltage battery 

2 

External connections of the high-voltage battery 

3 

High-voltage safety switch pulled (disconnected) 

4 

High-voltage safety switch inserted (system is live) 


High-voltage safety switch for the BMW ActiveHybrid X6 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

High-voltage battery 

2 

High-voltage safety switch (Service Disconnect) 




































As an alternative to disconnection of the series-connected battery 
cells, there is another way in which the high-voltage safety switch 
can be used. In this respect, the high-voltage safety switch acts as 
control input for a control unit. The control unit immediately inter¬ 
rupts the supply to the switch contactors, as soon as it establishes 
that the high-voltage safety switch has been pulled. The contacts 
of the switch contactors respond by opening automatically. 

The effect is the same as disconnection of the series-connected 
battery cells: once the high-voltage safety switch has been pulled 
there is no longer a hazardous voltage present at the external poles 
of the high-voltage battery. 

When the high-voltage safety switch is pulled, several processes 
take place automatically and in parallel in the high-voltage system. 
This ensures that hazardous voltage is no longer present at the 
poles of the high-voltage battery, at electronic components, or at 
the electrical machine or machines: 

1. Disconnection of the series-connected battery cells or/and 
opening of the switch contactors in the high-voltage battery 

2. Discharge of the capacitors in the other high-voltage 
components 

3. Short-circuiting of the windings of the electrical machines. 

These measures, once implemented, avert the major hazards that 
could otherwise threaten Service employees. But what would hap¬ 
pen if someone else (intentionally or unintentionally) reinserts the 
high-voltage safety switch? If this were to happen there would be a 
possibility of a hazardous voltage being applied to components 
being worked on or about to be worked on, and this would of 
course constitute a major hazard to health and safety. 
Conseguently, not only does the high-voltage system have to be 
de-energized, it also has to be secured so that it cannot be re¬ 
energized without the knowledge and consent of the person 
undertaking the work. 


Safety rule 1: de-energize the system (via monitored safety circuit) 



i k 

—-- A 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Housing of the high-voltage battery 

2 

Two switch contactor contacts 

3 

Switch contactor solenoid 

4 

Control unit that evaluates the state (pulled/inserted) of the high-voltage 
safety switch and actuates the switch contactor accordingly 

5 

High-voltage connections of the high-voltage battery 

6 

Separate housing for the high-voltage safety switch 

7 

High-voltage safety switch inserted (system is live) 

8 

High-voltage safety switch pulled (disconnected) 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

61 















































62 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Safety Rule 2 - Secure the System (Lockout) 

Once the high-voltage safety switch has been pulled, the high-volt¬ 
age system can be secured at the switch to ensure that it not 
switched on again. This entails installing a conventional padlock. 
Once the high-voltage safety switch has been pulled and secured 
in this way, it cannot be reinserted until the padlock has been 
removed. The person working on the high-voltage system has the 
key of the padlock in safekeeping until all work on the high-voltage 
system is completed. 

Safety rule 2: Secure the system so that it cannot be re-energized 
without your knowledge and consent 



This simple precaution suffices to ensure that no-one else can 
switch on the high-voltage safety system until all work on the sys¬ 
tem has been completed. This rules out inadvertent endangerment 
of the persons working on the high-voltage system not only before 
work commences, but also for as long as it takes to complete all 
the work in question. 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Use an open padlock 

B 

Secure the high-voltage safety switch in its 

pulled position by engaging the padlock 

C 

Keep the key of the padlock in a safe place at all times 


























Safety Rule 3 - Ensure that the system is de-energized 

Once the person who is going to work on the high-voltage system 
has de-energized the system and locked the switch so that it can¬ 
not be switched on again without the key, there are still certain 
safety rules that have to be applied. 

The next step is a check to ensure that the high-voltage system is 
in fact de-energized and safe. In BMW vehicles, it is not necessary 
to use an external tester for this step in the procedure. The design 
of the high-voltage system is such that the system itself can tell 
that it has been de-energized. Several high-voltage components 
measure their own voltage, using integrated circuits for voltage 
measurement. 

The results of these measurements are transmitted via bus sys¬ 
tems to the instrument panel. When the results of all these meas¬ 
urements show a voltage that is below the hazard threshold, the 
instrument panel shows a symbol indicating that the high-voltage 
system has been successfully powered down and is no longer live. 

In this Check Control symbol, the danger symbol representing 
high-voltages (lighting flash) is struck through. The symbol is there¬ 
fore a visual indicator clearly emphasizing that there is no longer a 
hazardous voltage present in the system. Depending on the vehicle 
type, the symbol actually shown in the instrument panel might not 
necessarily be exactly as illustrated here. Consult the instructions in 
the repair manual or the training media for the vehicle type in ques¬ 
tion to ascertain precisely which symbol is used to indicate this 
state. 

This is the third safety rule and once again it is essential to apply it 
before starting work on high-voltage components. The procedure 
is a simple a check to ensure that the high-voltage system has 
been correctly switched off and has safely de-energized. The 
check ensures that the high-voltage system is not a source of dan¬ 
ger for persons working on the vehicle. 


Check Control symbol: high-voltage system is de-energized and safe 



Note: No external measuring equipment will be necessary. 
Various engineered safety measures have been 
implemented on the BMW ActiveHybrid vehicles 
that ensure safety. 


STOP 


Under NO condition should work on a high-voltage compo¬ 
nent be carried out if this check control message does not 
appear. The high-voltage system will be considered ener¬ 
gized. A PuMA case MUST be submitted. 

A 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

63 



64 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Safe working practices > Safety rules to prevent electrical hazards > First step: de-energize the high voltage system 


Use the high voltage safety connector (“service disconnect”) to 
de-energize the high voltage system! 

There are two different ways, how the high voltage safety connector 
works. Note similarities and differences. 

































































Principles of Hybrid Technology 



Safe working practices > Safety rules to prevent electrical hazards > Second step: secure the high voltage system 



Use a pad lock to secure the high voltage system, so that it cannot 
be re-energized without your consent! 

Where will you put the key, while you are working on the high-voltage 
system? 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 

65 










































































66 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Safe working practices > Safety rules to prevent electrical hazards > Third step: Check that the high voltage system is de-energized 


Check, that the high voltage system is de-energized! 

Will you need any special tools? Do you have to use the IMIB? 
Can you check it at the instrument cluster? Why/why not? 




BMW E72 KOMBI 


BMW F04 KOMBI 


















































Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Safe working practices > Safety rules to prevent electrical hazards > Main rule and sequence of actions 


Do nodftrork on 




high voltage parts! 


Please write down the three safety rules for working on high voltage components in the correct order. 


3 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

67 























68 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Nickel Metal Hydride Battery 

Nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries, if used correctly and kept 
free of damage, are not a direct source of endangerment. The cas¬ 
ing is designed to ensure that fluids (electrolyte, for example) can¬ 
not escape at any point in the entire usable lifespan of the battery. 

If the casing is damaged, as can happen for example in the event of 
an accident or if the battery is not used correctly in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions, NiMH batteries can be a 
source of endangerment as follows: 

• Chemical burns (electrolyte) 

• Injury to health (electrolyte, coolant) 

• Fire/explosion. 

A solution of potassium hydroxide is used as the electrolyte in 
NiMH batteries. This solution is classified as a caustic irritant. In the 
event of electrolyte escaping from a NiMH battery, it is important 
not to come into contact with the spilled liguid. Obtain medical 
assistance if a person is wetted by or swallows the electrolyte. 
Notify the fire service in the event of a spillage: the fire service has 
the special equipment needed to deal correctly with the spilled 
electrolyte. 

Comply with the instructions set down in the safety data sheet on 
how to proceed in the event of electrolyte escaping from a nickel 
metal hydride battery. 

NiMH batteries can develop full power only within a limited ambient 
temperature range. Consequently, the battery is connected to an 
on-board cooling circuit. The coolant is the same as that commonly 
used in BMW vehicles. It is hazardous to health and under no cir¬ 
cumstances should it be swallowed or allowed to come into con¬ 
tact with the skin. 

When NiMH batteries are charging or discharging, the chemical 
reactions involved produce gases (oxygen and hydrogen, respec¬ 
tively). These gases can escape through a breathe valve in the cas¬ 


ing of the nickel metal hydride battery. When the battery is used 
correctly in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions the 
concentration is low and poses no hazard (according to information 
provided by manufacturer). 

In order to diminish the possibility of explosion, always keep fire, 
sparks and all other sources of ignition well away from NiMH bat¬ 
teries. 

NiMH batteries bear labels showing hazard symbols to indicate the 
possible dangers. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 



Safe working practices > Hazards involved with electricity > Chemical dangers 

Write down the meanings of the symbols on the label of a 
nickel metal hydride battery: 

1 _ 

2 

3 _ 

4 

5 _ 

6 _ 

7 _ 

8 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 

69 































































































70 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Lithium-ion Battery 

Similarly, the Lithium-ion batteries in BMW vehicles are safe when 
used correctly in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions 
and kept free of damage. It is important to note, however, that 
restrictive conditions apply to correct usage. In particular it is very 
important to ensure that Lithium-ion batteries are not overcharged 
and not exposed to excessively high temperatures. 

Overcharging can cause metallic lithium to deposit on the positive 
electrode and destroy the negative electrode. If this is allowed to 
happen the temperatures at the battery rise and the Lithium-ion 
battery can catch fire. In BMW vehicles the control unit of the 
Lithium-ion battery ensures that charging and discharging cycles 
take place only within the specified boundary conditions. Sensors 
are used to monitor cell temperature and cell voltage. The control 
unit intervenes in the charging or discharging process as neces¬ 
sary. This applies both when the vehicle is in use and in circum¬ 
stances in which the high-voltage battery is charged off a charger 
connected to the 12-V system. 

Do not expose Lithium-ion batteries to excessively high tempera¬ 
tures. Operating temperatures higher than approx. 50°C suffice to 
accelerate the aging process and shorten battery life. If the cells are 
permitted to reach temperatures of 100°C or higher a short-circuit 
can occur between the cells. The high currents that flow if the cells 
short further increase temperature and a chain reaction can occur. 
The entire Lithium-ion battery would suffer irreversible damage and 
could catch fire. 


the air conditioning system. Consequently, it is essential to comply 
with the repair instructions and the instructions in the applicable 
safety data sheets for all work on Lithium-ion batteries and in par¬ 
ticular when opening the connections to the refrigerant circuit. 


Strict compliance with the repair instructions for work on the refrig¬ 
erant circuit - and this includes Lithium-ion batteries - is essential 
in order to preclude the possibility of a health hazard. 


The Lithium-ion batteries used in BMW vehicles have hermetically 
sealed casings. The only external connections are the high-voltage 
terminals and the coolant lines. Even so, special precautions also 
apply to using and working with high-voltage batteries of this kind. 


Note: Never attempt to open the casing of Lithium-ion bat¬ 
teries. Never attempt to operate or charge a battery 
of this kind unless it is connected to the appropriate 
control unit. Failure to comply with these precau¬ 
tions will result in a risk of fire 

Note: It is recommended that only a specially trained per¬ 
son attempt to extinguish a fire caused by a Lithium- 
ion battery. 


It is difficult to extinguish a Lithium-ion battery if it catches fire. 
However, there is no direct risk of the battery itself exploding. 
Nevertheless, the high temperatures produced by the fire could 
ignite objects, liquids or gases in proximity to the battery and this in 
turn could cause an explosion. 

The upper limit for operating temperature is very firmly defined, so 
Lithium-ion batteries in BMW ActiveHybrid vehicles are cooled. For 
example, they can be connected directly to the refrigerant circuit of 



Lithium-ion battery (F04) 



15 KifeItTrttSK 

1 .5 DL’Clnid £riffi;v SltTHjK Ij'p5115 - 
■Ge'i 1 i frilL-iFr frc Stechugr D £ihr;h Setfrkjjc 
!!^ r -1 i ‘isIn’M AJmjr.R r !fKl0f. IHnrraz GftctiKi 
Us= Wi C = fi^Ahnh ( ?r.Ti ?**q 


What are some reasons that a Lithium-ion battery 
can catch fire? 


What affect will one galvanic cell that catches fire 
have on a Lithium-ion battery? 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Warning label 

2 

Casing 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

71 


















































72 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Electrical Machines 

High output is a characteristic of the electric drive in every BMW 
ActiveHybrid, so the electrical machines operate with very strong 
magnetic fields. These fields are generated by permanent magnets 
or electromagnets. It is important to bear in mind that the magnetic 
fields of permanent magnets are also permanent, in other words 
they are present even if the high-voltage system is switched off or 
the electrical machine has been removed. 

These magnetic fields can interfere with electronic medical 
devices, particularly cardiac pacemakers. 

The components in question bear a prohibition label drawing atten¬ 
tion to this specific hazard. By way of example, the illustration to the 
right shows this label affixed to an electrical machine. 


T 1 

STOP 


Persons who need a cardiac pacemaker or other electronic 
medical device to maintain their health are not permitted to 
work on components bearing the prohibition label shown 
here. 




Prohibition: People with cardiac pacemakers should not approach 










Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 

1. What steps must be followed if a person is found on the floor and electric shock is suspected? 

2. What type of high-voltage battery is the BMW ActiveHybrid X6 equipped with? 


3. When working on a high-voltage component, what three safety rules MUST be followed? And why? 

4. What is the proper course of action if the high-voltage de-energized check control message does not appear on the KOMBI? 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

73 




74 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Engineered Safety Measures 

The BMW ActiveHybrid vehicles in general and the high-voltage 
components in particular are designed and built to be inherently 
safe. This means that faults that could lead to endangerment of the 
vehicle user are reliably detected and identified. Such detection 
and identification leads to immediate shutdown of the high-voltage 
system, with the result that there are no longer hazardous voltages 
present at active components of the system. Shutdown is initiated 
automatically for example if a cover of a high-voltage component is 
removed. 

The high-voltage system is also of fault-tolerant design in order to 
ensure that the vehicle user does not have to stop on account of 
every minor fault. This means that the occurrence of a single fault 
does not cause direct endangerment. Self-diagnosis of the high- 
voltage components ascertains the presence of these faults, how¬ 
ever, and logs them in fault memory. 

Nonetheless, the vehicle can proceed on its way without any risk. 

The list below provides an overview of the engineered-safety 
measures that are used in the high-voltage system of BMW 
ActiveHybrid vehicles. 

• Identification labelling 

• Guarding to prevent accidental contact 

• High-voltage interlock loop 

• Discharge of the high-voltage circuit 

• Galvanic separation of the high-voltage electrical 
system from the 12 V electrical system 

• Short-circuit monitoring 

• Shutdown in the event of an accident 


Identification/labelling of High-voltage Components 

Each high-voltage component has on its housing or casing an 
identifying label that enables service employees and vehicle users 
to identify intuitively the possible hazards that can result from the 
high electric voltages used. 

The warning labels are all based on the internationally standardized 
and universally familiar warning signs for hazardous electrical volt¬ 
age. On this basis, two different warning signs are currently used in 
BMW ActiveHybrid vehicles to identify high-voltage components. 

Both these labels contain an extra symbol prompting the service 
employee to consult the appropriate repair information. The docu¬ 
ment in guestion contains the information relevant to correct proce¬ 
dures for safety in handling and working with the high-voltage com¬ 
ponent in guestion. The labels of the second type also contain a 
third symbol drawing attention to the possibility of an electric shock 
hazard. 


lYanfrc'cr hvtvhhiu'tI, Type 2 

Vrtrninq hazarccui •=!=•:tlraJ vo+- 
ogc 




iHLKvon : 












The means of identifying high-voltage cables is a special instance. 
These cables can be several meters in length, so there would be 
little point in relying on one or two labels affixed at arbitrary points 
sufficing under all imaginable circumstances to identify a cable as 
carrying high-voltage. Labels of this nature would be easily over¬ 
looked. Instead, all high-voltage cables have bright orange sheaths. 
Some connectors for high-voltage cables and the high-voltage 
safety switch can also be bright orange. 


The manufacturers of hybrid vehicles have agreed on a unified 
system of identification for the high-voltage components based on 
the warning labels shown above and the use of orange as a warn¬ 
ing color for high-voltage cable. 


Orange coloring of the outer sheath identifies the high-voltage cables 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Orange coloring identifying cables and 
components in the engine compartment 

B 

Orange coloring identifying components at the high-voltage battery 

C 

Orange coloring identifying components at the active gearbox 

1 

High-voltage cables in the engine compartment 

2 

Connector on a high-voltage cable 

3 

Terminals on the high-voltage battery 

4 

High-voltage safety switch (Service Disconnect) 

5 

High-voltage cables at the high-voltage battery 

6 

High-voltage cables at the active gearbox 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

75 







































76 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Protection Against Direct Contact 

Guarding to prevent accidental contact is a term that covers a num¬ 
ber of basic technical measures for electrical systems that are 
adopted to ensure that no-one can inadvertently touch a live com¬ 
ponent carrying a hazardous voltage. There are two levels, namely 
basic protection (against direct contact) and fault protection 
(against indirect contact). 

Basic protection describes the level of protection under normal 
operating conditions, in other words in the absence of faults. The 
housings and covers of the high-voltage system are shaped and 
assembled such that it is not possible to insert a finger in such a 
way as to come into contact with a component carrying a haz¬ 
ardous voltage. 

There is an even higher classification of protection reguired at cer¬ 
tain other locations in the vehicle. The next level of protection 
states that the enclosure is such as not to permit contact to be 
made with a component carrying a hazardous voltage even by 
insertion of a wire. 

Basic protection also includes the insulation of active parts (live 
parts in other words) that can be inside or outside enclosures. 


Protection Against Indirect Contact 

The second level, fault protection, comprises additional protective 
measures over and above basic protection that prevent endanger- 
ment for humans even in the event of an electrical fault occurring. 
They include: 

• Insulation of the high-voltage cables 

• Network form of the high-voltage electrical system. 

The high-voltage cables invariably have an insulating plastic cover¬ 
ing. Outside this covering there is only a shield (wire braid/film) that 
is used for two purposes: to reduce electromagnetic interference 
and primarily for the purposes of insulation monitoring (see below). 
The shield is protected against mechanical damage (e.g. chafing) 
by a bright orange plastic outer sheath. The high-voltage cables are 
required to meet ultra-high requirements in terms of insulation 
resistance. Insulation resistance ratings in the order of magnitude 
of several megaohms is a must, and compliance is verified in post¬ 
production testing and monitored when the cables are in use. The 
implementation of these measures means that the high-voltage 
cables comply with the class II requirements for protection against 
direct contact. 



Isolation Monitoring 

The voltage source is not connected to earth (in automotive appli¬ 
cations: to vehicle ground), no shortcircuit current flows. 
Consequently, a fuse would not be tripped in this situation. This in 
turn means that if a fault of this nature occurs, the high-voltage sys¬ 
tem can initially remain in operation. This ensures the high availabil¬ 
ity of the high-voltage electrical system and this constitutes a sig¬ 
nificant advantage of this network form. IT networks can be used 
not only for three-phase systems but also for the direct-current 
configurations that are also used for the high-voltage systems of 
hybrid vehicles. 

If a person touches the enclosure (housing of the high-voltage bat¬ 
tery) current does not flow through his or her body because the cir¬ 
cuit to the voltage source is not closed. In fact, the circuit is not 
closed even if the person simultaneously contacts vehicle ground 
by touching the bodywork of the vehicle with some other part of 
the body. The only situation in which current could flow through the 
person's body would be if he or she were also to simultaneously 
touch a second live cable of the high-voltage electrical system. 

This clearly illustrates a second advantage of IT networks. 

But how can a fault of this kind be detected and, ultimately, how 
can it be rectified? This is the reason why isolation monitoring is 
implemented in the high-voltage electrical system. Its purpose is 
to detect hazardous isolation faults between any live high-voltage 
component and electrically conductive enclosures or housing or 
between a component and ground. A hazardous isolation fault is 
present when a hazardous voltage is applied between hous¬ 
ing/ground and another live high-voltage component. Or expressed 
in other terms, when the isolation resistance between a high-volt¬ 
age component and housing/ground drops below a defined thresh¬ 
old. 

The isolation monitoring circuitry in the high-voltage electrical sys¬ 
tem measures the system's isolation resistance, for example indi¬ 
rectly by a series of voltage measurements. Voltage is measured at 


precision resistors between live components (e.g. positive and 
negative poles of the high-voltage battery) and vehicle ground. 
These measurements take place both while the high-voltage sys¬ 
tem is live and after the high-voltage system has been switched off. 
Isolation monitoring is generally integrated into one or two high- 
voltage components, for example the power electronics and/or the 
control unit of the high-voltage battery. But how can isolation moni¬ 
toring detect an isolation fault in another high-voltage component, 
such as the electric A/C compressor, for example? 

Isolation monitoring at one or two central points can function only if 
all electrically conductive housings of the high-voltage components 
are galvanically (electrically) connected to ground, in other words to 
the body of the vehicle. This galvanic connection has to be present 
in order for example for the monitor implemented in the power 
electronics to reliably detect a short circuit in a high-voltage cable 
of the electric A/C compressor. In the absence of this galvanic con¬ 
nection between housing and ground the fault would remain unde¬ 
tected and would therefore constitute a potential hazard. The gal¬ 
vanic interconnection between the housings the connections from 
housing to ground is referred to as "equipotential bonding". The 
electrical connections established for this purpose are known as 
"equipotential bonding conductors" or simply "bonding conduc¬ 
tors". 

The electrically conductive housings of high-voltage components 
must be galvanically connected to ground. As regards repairs to 
high-voltage components, but also when body components are 
replaced, this has to be taken duly into consideration during 
assembly: it is essential to make sure that the galvanic connection 
between the housing and the body is correctly restored. In this 
respect too, it is very important to proceed precisely in accordance 
with the repair instructions. This applies most particularly to the use 
of the specified connecting elements (e.g. self-tapping screws) and 
compliance with the specifications for tightening torques. 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

77 



78 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


High-voltage Interlock Loop 

The live parts of the high-voltage components are protected 
against direct touch contact by covers or housings. Much the same 
applies to the conductors of the high-voltage cables: they are pro¬ 
tected against touch contact by their insulating sheaths or by insu¬ 
lating connector housings. Before working on a high-voltage com¬ 
ponent, you must apply the safety rules to shut down the high-volt¬ 
age system. 


the connection of the high-voltage cables is interrupted. 

This enhances touch-contact protection and reduces the risk of an 
arc flashing across the contacts when the connection is broken. 

The jumpers are connected in series in the entire circuit of the 
high-voltage interlock loop. Consequently, removing a single cover 
or pulling a single connector suffices to interrupt the interlock sig¬ 
nal. 


Once this has been accomplished according to procedure, the 
parts are no longer live and work can proceed in safety. There is of 
course a remote possibility that the correct shutdown procedure 
might be omitted, so an extra safety precaution is implemented as 
a means of imposing an automatic shutdown of the high-voltage 
system. 

Covers over touchable live parts and plugs that have touchable 
contacts are integrated into the high-voltage contact monitoring cir¬ 
cuit known as the high-voltage interlock loop. The principle of the 
high-voltage interlock loop is illustrated and explained below. 

The electronics of the high-voltage interlock loop discharge two 
primary functions. The first is to generate the interlock signal. This 
is an alternating voltage (or an alternating current) that is generally a 
square wave with low values and therefore safe. The interlock sig¬ 
nal is tapped into a circuit that runs over the covers of the high-volt¬ 
age components and/or the connectors of the high-voltage cables. 

There is a jumper in each cover or connector. When the cover is 
installed and secured, the jumper closes in the circuit of the high- 
voltage interlock loop. If the cover is removed and the jumper 
pulled, the circuit is interrupted. Much the same applies with the 
high-voltage connectors: if the high-voltage connector is inserted 
and locked the jumper closes in the circuit of the high-voltage 
interlock loop. If the connector is pulled, the jumper interrupts the 
circuit. The contacts of the high-voltage cables are recessed in the 
connectors. This means that when the connector is pulled the 
circuit of the high-voltage interlock loop is interrupted first, before 


Result of opening the HVIL circuit 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

High-voltage battery unit 

2 

HVIL electronics 

3 

Signal generator 

4 

Evaluation circuit 

5 

Switch contactors 

6 

High-voltage battery 

7 

High-voltage safety cover 

8 

Jumper - HV safety cover 

9 

Jumper - HV connector 

10 

12V connector 

A 

Removing HV connector 

B 

Switch contactors open 














































Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Safe working practices > Engineered safety measures > Insulation monitoring 




What happens if 

- an insulation failure at the high voltage system occurs 

- and a human touches the housing of the corresponding component? 



How does the insulation monitoring work in principle? 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

79 























































80 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Safe working practices > Engineered safety measures > Safety covers on high voltage components 


What‘s the purpose of the safety covers on high voltage components? 


What happens when you remove a safety cover? 



On which high voltage components can you find safety covers? 























































Principles of Hybrid Technology. 


Safe working practices > Engineered safety measures > High voltage interlock loop 




© © 


What are the major components of the 
high voltage interlock loop system? 



Under which conditions will the interlock signal be interrupted? 
What happens, when the interlock signal is interrupted? 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

81 




































































































82 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


The electronics can be integrated as part of a control unit of a 
high-voltage component (for example the high-voltage battery). The 
generator and the evaluation circuit for the interlock signal can be 
split across two high-voltage components (e.g. high-voltage battery 
and power electronics). 

Shutdown of the high-voltage system is automatic and takes place 
in several steps: 

• Cancellation of activation signal for the electrical machine(s) 

• Short-circuit of the coils of the electrical machines 

• Opening of the switch contactors in the high-voltage battery 

• Discharging of the high-voltage circuit. 

In this way all possible voltage sources in the high-voltage system 
are reliably shut down. This ensures that no later than five seconds 
after interruption of the high-voltage interlock loop circuit there is 
no longer a hazardous voltage present at any point in the entire 
high-voltage system. 


Discharge of the High-voltage Circuit 

In addition to the high-voltage battery there are two other voltage 
sources in the high-voltage electrical system: the capacitors in the 
power electronics (and other high-voltage components) and coils 
of the electrical machines. Even after the switch contactors of the 
high-voltage battery open in the power-down process, the capaci¬ 
tors or the electrical machines would be capable of keeping the 
voltage in the high-voltage electrical system at a level high enough 
to constitute a touch hazard. 

This is the reason why the high-voltage circuit is discharged each 
time the high-voltage system is powered down. The graphics on 
the next page uses a simplified circuit diagram of high-voltage 
components to illustrate how the discharge process takes place. 

As long as the switch contactors of the high-voltage battery remain 
closed, the voltage of the high-voltage battery is present in the 
high-voltage cables. The capacitor on the DC voltage side of the 
power electronics carries the same voltage and is charged. The 
power electronics supply the high-voltage components with electri¬ 
cal energy, current flows through the high-voltage cables. 

Before the switch contactors of the high-voltage battery are 
opened, the power electronics drive all the high-voltage consumers 
to assume a state in which they are unable to accept more current. 
In terms of the circuitry this state is equivalent to having no con¬ 
sumers connected to the high-voltage electrical system. 

The electrical machines could still generate a hazardous voltage in 
the high-voltage electrical system, even if the switch contactors of 
the high-voltage battery have already opened. If the electrical 
machines were still rotating a voltage would be induced in their 
coils. This voltage would be applied to the high-voltage cables and 
depending on the speed of the electrical machines it could be of a 
level that would constitute a touch-contact hazard. To prevent this 
from occurring the coils of the electrical machines are short-circuit¬ 
ed once the switch contactors of the high-voltage battery have 
opened. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Safe working practices > Engineered safety measures > Discharge of the high voltage circuit 


What happens and in which sequence does it happen, when the high voltage system automtically shuts down? 



HJ 

i 

—— i 

r 

1 

; d 



”1 






i 

i 

- ( 

7 


c_ 



/ 



□ 

d 





1 i 


<7-O 


T 

I 

i 

J 


Principles of Hybrid Technology 

83 




































































































84 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Galvanic Separation Between HV and LV System 

In hybrid vehicles the high-voltage electrical system and the 12 V 
vehicle electrical system are interconnected by a DC/DC converter. 
In this way it is possible for example to charge the 12-V battery 
using energy from the high-voltage electrical system. This means 
that a 12-V generator is no longer necessary. 

Despite the obvious advantages of this "energy-transfer" connec¬ 
tion between the two vehicle electrical systems, safeguards have to 
be in place to ensure that hazardous voltage from the high-voltage 
electrical system cannot be transferred to the 12-V system. If this 
were not the case the 12 V vehicle electrical system would be sub¬ 
ject to application of the same rules for electrical safety as apply to 
the high-voltage electrical system with regard to preparation for and 
work on the high-voltage electrics. 

The 12 V vehicle electrical system and the high-voltage electrical 
system are galvanically separated, in other words there is no con¬ 
ductive connection between the two systems. This is accom¬ 
plished by suitably insulating all the components and wiring. The 
DC/DC converter requires a circuit that ensures galvanic separation 
while sustaining the energy-transfer capability. 

A circuit such as a transformer circuit is suitable in this respect. 
Energy cannot be transferred between two DC networks by a 
transformer, so the direct current voltages have to be transformed 
into AC voltages and vice versa. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Safe working practices > Engineered safety measures > Galvanic separation of high voltage system and 12 V system 


There is an energy flow between the high voltage system and the 12V system. But by which component is the galvanic separation implemented? 


Take a look at the grounding of the 12 V system. Is there a chassis ground connection at the high voltage system? What are the consequences? 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 

85 
































































































86 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Short-circuit Monitoring 

Short circuits in the high-voltage electrical system, for example 
between the two high-voltage battery cables would lead to very 
high short-circuit currents. The reasons for this are: 

• High-voltage 

• Low internal resistance of the high-voltage battery 

• Low resistance of the high-voltage cables. 

The consequences of these very high short-circuit currents would 
be severe. They range from arcing through irreparable damage to 
high-voltage cables or the high-voltage battery to fire. In order to 
avoid consequences of this nature, technical measures for the 
detection of a short circuit are engineered into the high-voltage 
electrical systems of hybrid vehicles. As a general rule, these 
measures are integrated into the high-voltage battery. 


High-amperage safety fuses and electronic overcurrent trip break¬ 
ers are used. To reduce the response time in the event of a short 
circuit, current is electronically monitored by current sensors in the 
battery cables. 

If the control unit of the high-voltage battery unit detects an imper¬ 
missibly high current, it triggers opening of the contacts of the 
switch contactor in the high-voltage battery. The switch contacts 
are designed to open reliably even despite the high currents that 
occur in a short-circuit event. 

The downside of this design, however, is that the switch contacts 
are corresponding short-lived. Electronic short-circuit monitoring 
reduces response time with regard to conventional safety fuses, 
particularly when the currents involved are high. 



Principles of Hybrid Technology. 



Safe working practices > Engineered safety measures > Short circuit monitoring 


Why do we need a “short circuit monitoring” of the high voltage How does the “short circuit monitoring” work? 

system? 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 

87 















































88 

Principles of Hybrid Technology 


Shutdown in the Event of an Accident 

If the vehicle is involved in an accident the high-voltage cables 
below the floor could be sheared off and this could cause sparking 
or arcing, if the bottom of the vehicle comes into contact with 
sharp-edged obstacles (e.g. crash barriers). 

In order to minimize this risk the high-voltage system is deactivated 
in the event of an accident. In all current BMW vehicles and there¬ 
fore in the BMW ActiveHybrid models as well, accident detection 
and the co-ordination of the safety systems are handled by the 
Crash Safety Module (ACSM). 

If the Crash Safety Module detects a crash of corresponding sever¬ 
ity, the 12-V battery's positive lead (BST) is pyrotechnically discon¬ 
nected from the positive battery connection point. Along with the 
positive battery cable, in these vehicles the battery safety terminal 
interrupts another 12-V conductor. This conductor is used in two 
different ways to shut down the high-voltage system in hybrids: 

1. Opening the switch contactors in the high-voltage battery 

2. Active discharge of the high-voltage circuit. 

The switch contactor contacts are opened without additional action 
on the part of the control unit in the high-voltage battery unit. The 
supply voltage for the electromagnet of the electromechanical 
switch contactor in the high-voltage battery unit receives its operat¬ 
ing power directly from the BST circuit. If the supply voltage drops 
out, the contacts of the switch contactor automatically open. 


The power electronics uses the 12-V cable interrupted by the bat¬ 
tery safety terminal as a signal input for active discharge of the 
high-voltage circuit. Interruption of this cable triggers the control 
unit of the power electronics to: 

• short-circuit the coils of the electrical machines 

• initiate active discharge of the capacitors. 

Triggering of the battery safety terminal is a signal in response to 
which the high-voltage system is shut down in the event of a crash. 
The Crash Safety Module's bus telegrams are also processed: as 
soon as the Crash Safety Module signals a crash of corresponding 
severity by means of a bus telegram, the high-voltage system is 
shut down. 

These engineered-safety measures suffice to ensure that the high- 
voltage system is shut down reliably and in a very short space of 
time in the event of a crash. This virtually excludes the possibility of 
high-voltages presenting hazards in the course of orsubseguentto 
a crash. 

Nevertheless, it is important to bear in mind that special care 
always has to exercised when dealing with high-voltage compo¬ 
nents if the component housings have been damaged in a crash. 

In case of doubt, always contact BMW Group's Technical Support 
(PUMA). 



Principles of Hybrid Technology 



Safe working practices > Engineered safety measures > Automatic shutdown in case of an accident 


Why is it important that the high voltage system shuts down automatically in case of an accident? 


How is the shutdown triggered? How is the shutdown carried out? 






Principles of Hybrid Technology 

89 












































































