Table of Contents 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

Subject Page 

Introduction .7 

High Voltage Battery Pack (HV-ES).12 

Battery Modules .13 

NiMH Technology .13 

High Voltage Contactors .14 

Ventilation.14 

Battery Monitoring Control Module.15 

Cooling Circuit.18 

Battery Modules.18 

Service Disconnect.22 

Functions .24 

Starting the High-voltage System.24 

Shutting Down the High Voltage System .24 

Fast Shut-off of the High Voltage System.25 

High Voltage Interlock Loop.26 

Insulation Monitoring.27 

Charging Strategy and Operational Strategy .32 

Active Transmission.34 

Parking Lock and Direct Shift Module .36 

System Wiring Diagrams.39 

Distributed Functions.40 


Initial Print Date: 10/09 


Revision Date: 08/10 
























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Hybrid Control Processor.40 

Transmission Control Module .40 

Modes of Operation .43 

ECVT 1 Mode.43 

ECVT 2 Mode.45 

Fixed Basic Gears .46 

No Power Transmission .48 

Reverse Gear .48 

Starting and stopping the combustion engine.48 

Oil Supply.50 

Electric Machines.52 

Planetary Gear Sets .52 

Modifications to the N63 .54 

Belt Drive .54 

Cooling System.56 

Engine Cooling.56 

Charge Air Cooling.56 

Electric Coolant Pumps .56 

Additional 20 W Coolant Pump.56 

Bypass.56 

Electrical Connection .56 

After-run.56 

Temperatures .56 


























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Fuel Supply System.59 

Pressurized Tank.59 

Fuel Pressure Sensor .59 

Tank Isolation Valve.60 

Carbon Canister .60 

TFE Control Unit.60 

Refuelling Button.61 

Fuel Cap.61 

Refuelling .61 

Power Electronics.66 

APM.68 

Operating Modes of the APM.68 

Power Electronic Box (PEB) .70 

Power Distribution Box.72 

High Voltage Cables.74 

Voltage Supply .76 

12V Batteries .78 

Cut-off Relay .78 

Charging the Auxiliary Battery.78 

Reverse Polarity Protection.80 

Auxiliary Fuse Block .80 

Terminal Control .82 

"Ready to drive" Mode .82 

H-CAN and H-CAN2 .86 

Hybrid Interface Module (HIM) .88 

Waking up the Co-operation Control Units.88 





























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Electronic Power Steering.92 

Sensotronic Brake Actuation .96 

Distributed Functions.98 

Conventional Mode .100 

Brake by Wire Mode.100 

Active Brake Servo.102 

Solenoid Valve .102 

Diaphragm Travel Sensor.102 

Brake Vacuum-pressure Sensor.102 

Hybrid Brake Actuation Changeover.104 

Electrical Vacuum Pump.106 

Activation of the Electrical Vacuum Pump .106 

Dynamic Stability Control .106 

Displays.108 

Instrument Panel.108 

Indicators in the Central Information Display.110 

Hybrid-specific Check Control Messages.113 

Climate Control.114 

Electric A/C Compressor EKK.114 

EKK Control Unit and DC/AC Converter.116 

Three-phase Motor.116 

Compression Mechanism .116 

























Table of Contents 


Subject 


Page 



6 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

Model: E72 

Production: From Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the differences between the E71 and E72 

• Identify the components that make up the BMW ActiveHybrid X6 propulsion system 

• Explain the operation of the high voltage battery 

• Explain the power down procedure for the high voltage system 

• Explain the operation of the Kombi and CD hybrid displays 




Introduction 


The first stage of the BMW Group BMW EfficientDynamics was 
to develop a variety of measures to promote efficiency. These 
improvements were introduced through the entire model range 
via the normal series production vehicles. 

BMW ActiveHybrid is an important component within the second 
stage and development strategy of BMW EfficientDynamics. It is 
based on the concept "Best of Hybrid". This enables the integra¬ 
tion of each best component for different vehicle segments. 

This poses two seemingly opposing development goals. On the 
one hand, a considerable increase in efficiency, so a consumption 
reduction up to 20 percent while still fulfilling the legal emissions 
standards and with a decreased CO 2 emissions from BMW mod¬ 
els with conventional propulsion. On the other hand, the BMW 
Group must offer the most dynamic hybrid vehicles in the com¬ 
petitive environment. 

BMW launches its first series vehicle with hybrid technology to the 
market in December of 2009 as the BMW ActiveHybrid X6 (E72). 
Unlike all other hybrid vehicles currently on the market, this sets a 
record as the world's first sports activity Goupe with hybrid drive. 
This vehicle characterizes itself as having high efficiency, high 
power output and similar agility while reducing the average fuel 
consumption of the BMW X6 xDriveSOi 20 percent. 

The BMW EfficientDynamics results are achieved via the use of a 
full hybrid drive system which features a combination of V8 gaso¬ 
line engine (N63) and electric propulsion. The BMW ActiveHybrid 
Technology enables driving via the following three means: 

• purely electrical driving 

• powerful internal combustion engine 



ActiveHybrid X6 

Purely electric mode allows C02-free driving up to 40 mph. The 
internal combustion engine can then seemlessly start and take 
over the propulsion requirements. 

This Drive system of the BMW ActiveHybrid X6 consists of a 400 
hp strong V8 engine with BMW TwinPower Turbo technology and 
two electrical machines that are capable of creating 91 hp and 86 
hp. The maximum possible combined system performance is 480 
hp and the torque reaches a maximum of 575 Ib-ft of torque. 

The BMW ActiveHybrid X6 is characterized as the most powerful 
hybrid vehicle in the world. Its estimated acceleration time from 
0 - 60 mph is under 5.4 seconds. 


• combination of both. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

7 


















8 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Introduction > Recognition feature > Exterior 



What are the specific exterior design details of E72? 













































E72 Complete Vehicle 


Introduction > Recognition feature > Exterior 


1 ^ 

V 

% 



What are some of the specific underhood characteristics of the E72? 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

9 
































































10 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Introduction > Recognition feature > Interior 


What are the specific interior design details in E72? 


















































E72 Complete Vehicle 



High voltage battery unit > Overview 



Notes: 


Have a look at the installation location of the high voltage 
battery and take notes about the parts. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 


9 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

11 
























































12 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


High Voltage Battery Pack (HV-ES) 


One major component of the hybrid system is the high voltage 
battery pack or power supply (HV-ES). This component is located 
in the rear cargo area of the vehicle. Its approximate weight is 187 
lbs (85 kg). 

The battery pack is currently manufactured by Bosch GMbH but 
was originally developed by COBASYS. COBASYS was owned by 
GM before the 2008 financial crisis forced them to sell. The bat¬ 
tery pack’s development was a joint venture between the BMW 
Group, General Motors, DaimlerChrysler located in Troy Michigan. 

The hight voltage Battery Pack is composed of several key com¬ 
ponents for the hybrid system on the E72. These components 
are: 


• Battery modules x26 

• High Voltage Gontactors 

• Ventilation 

• Battery Monitoring Gontrol Module 

• Cooling Circuit 

• Service Disconnect 


Inside view of high voltage battery pack 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Batteries (source of energy) 

2 

Coolant line connections - Outlet 

3 

Coolant line connections - Inlet 

4 

Coolant pump 

5 

Coolant reservoir 

6 

Battery Monitoring Control Module (BCM ) 

7 

Vehicle harness (12 V connector) 

8 

Service Disconnect 

9 

Ventilation 

10 

High Voltage contacts controlled via relays and contacts 





























Battery Modules 

The electric propulsion system is powered by 26 Nickel Metal 
Hydride battery modules connected in series. In order to maintain a 
compact design, the batteries are mounted as two 13 module units 
mounted on top of each other. 

Each module is capable of 12 volts. This translates the total “static” 
voltage output of the battery pack Is 312 volts (12 volts x 26 mod¬ 
ules). Under various operating conditions, the actual battery output 
voltage Is between 312 - 422 volts. 

High Voltage Battery Packs (assembled) 



NiMH Technology 

Nickel Metal Hydride batteries were chosen as the battery technol¬ 
ogy on the E72. NIMH Is not only proven technology but It also 
allows for very rapid charging/discharging with very little memory 
effect. 

Battery cells in nickel metal hydride technology use water-diluted 
caustic potash (potassium hydroxide) as the electrolyte. Although 
this electrolyte used in liquid form exhibits hazardous characteris¬ 
tics, the battery modules are hermetically sealed so that electrolyte 
cannot leak either while driving or during service. However, if the 
housing of the high voltage battery and/or the modules are dam¬ 
aged due to an accident, for example, electrolyte can leak. 

Each row of battery cells houses two temperature sensors which 
help to monitor the cell temperature and adjust the cooling power 
as needed. The voltage of each module is also monitored to pre¬ 
vent individual battery cells from total discharge or overload. The 
current level Into and out of the high voltage battery is measured 
and electronically monitored using a current sensor. 

High demands are placed on the service life of the high voltage 
battery (service life of the vehicle). To meet these demands, it can¬ 
not be operated however one likes, as for example with nickel metal 
hydride battery cells for household devices. Depending on how the 
batteries in these are used, they are often no longer usable after a 
year. Therefore the high voltage battery is operated in an exactly 
defined range, so that Its service life is maximized. This includes 
the following marginal conditions: 


• Maintaining cell temperature in the optimum range between 
+25 and +55°C (by "heating" or cooling). 

• Not allowing charge current and discharge current to exceed 
temperature-dependent limits. 

• Not fully depleting the battery's amount of storable energy. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

13 













14 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


High Voltage Contactors 


Ventilation 


The high voltage safety switch, which also contains a high-current 
circuit breaker, is switched right in the middle of the battery cells 
switched in series. The series connection is interrupted both by 
pulling the high voltage safety switch and by activating the fuse. 
Consequently, the outer terminals of the high voltage battery are 
no longer live. The same thing is achieved if the contacts of the 
electromechanical switch contactors are opened. These contacts 
are located on the positive terminal and the negative terminal, 
before the terminals of the high voltage battery are routed out¬ 
wards. The electromechanical switch contactors are activated by 
the battery monitoring module. The supply voltage for the switch 
contactors is supplied through the safety battery terminal. 

The connection of the high voltage battery unit to the high voltage 
electrical system is located under a separate cover. This cover is a 
high voltage safety cover, which is integrated into the high voltage 
interlock loop. In order to access the high voltage connections, this 
cover must be removed. By doing this, the bridge built into the 
cover is pulled off and the circuit of the high voltage interlock loop 
is interrupted. As long as this cover is removed, accidental activa¬ 
tion of the high voltage system is impossible. 

Before beginning work on the high voltage connection of the high 
voltage battery unit, the high voltage system must be de-energized 
and the de-energized state must be checked. Securing the system 
against being switched on again is not possible during this repair 
work. When removing the cover that is over the high voltage con¬ 
nection, the high voltage safety switch which is inserted the oppo¬ 
site way must be removed for a short while. 


When charging or discharging nickel-metal hydride batteries, gases 
can result, including small quantities of hydrogen. The operational 
strategy reduces the generation of these gases to a minimum. If, 
despite this, larger quantities of gases arise, a vent valve in the high 
voltage battery unit is opened and the gases can escape to the 
outside via a vent hose. When the high voltage battery unit is 
removed, the vent hose must be disconnected from it. 


When the high voltage battery is reinstalled, the vent hose must be 
reinstalled properly on the high voltage battery unit. Otherwise, 
escaping gases can enter the passenger compartment. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Connection for low-voltage cables 

2 

Vent hose 

3 

High-voltage cables 

4 

HV Battery 



































Battery Monitoring Control Module 

The battery monitoring module (BCM) is housed within the high 
voltage battery unit and is not accessible from outside. The BCM Is 
responsible for the following functions: 

• Controlling the cooling circuit 

• Determining the state of charge (SoC) and the state of health 
(SoH) of the high voltage battery 

• Determining (and limiting, if necessary) the available power of 
the high voltage battery 

• Controlling the starting and shutting down of the high voltage 
system on request using the hybrid master control unit 

• Safety functions (e.g. high voltage interlock loop) 

• Monitoring the voltage and temperature of the battery cells 
and the current level 

• Communicating fault statuses to the hybrid master control unit 

The battery monitoring module does not have Its own fault memo¬ 
ry. Instead, any faults detected by the battery monitoring module 
are transmitted to the hybrid master control unit via the hybrid CAN. 
The faults belonging to the high voltage battery are also stored in 
the hybrid master control unit for diagnostic purposes. 

The electric connections of the BCM inside the high voltage bat¬ 
tery unit are distributed to two connectors, one for low-voltage 
cables and one for high voltage cables. In particular, the signals and 
cables important for the BCM are: 

• Its own 12 V voltage supply (terminal 30 switched and termi¬ 
nal 31, for control electronics and coolant pump respectively, 
terminal 30 from the safety battery terminal for supplying the 
switch contactors) 


• Hybrid CAN and wake-up line 

• High-voltage cables 

• Switch contactors (activation and read back) 

• Temperature signals for the battery cells (two pins per sensor, 
four temperature sensors in all) 

• Temperature signals for coolant (two pins per temperature 
sensor, one temperature sensor each for inlet and return) 

• Coolant pump supply/activation 

• High-voltage circuit current sensor 

• High-voltage Interlock loop (signal source and return wire). 

Towards the outside, in addition to the terminals for the high volt¬ 
age cables, there Is also a connector for low-voltage cables. The 
following are connected there: 

• 12 V supply voltage (terminal 30 switched and terminal 31, for 
control electronics and coolant pump respectively, terminal 30 
from the safety battery terminal for supplying the switch con¬ 
tactors) 

• Hybrid CAN 

• Two wake-up lines (from the hybrid interface module) 

• Control signal for closing/opening the contacts of the switch 
contactors (pulse-width modulated signal from the power 
electronic box) 

• Feed and return wire for high voltage interlock loop. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

15 





16 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


High voltage battery unit > Internal Components 


With the information provided by the facilitator, fill in the table below 





Index 

Explanation 

1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 


11 


12 














































































































E72 Complete Vehicle 


*\ 

J- 



_LJ. 

High voltage battery unit > Temperature control 


When and why is the power output of the high voltage battery limited? 


What can be done to increase the battery temperature if 
necessary? 



What can be done to stop the battery temperature from 
rising further? 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

17 






















































18 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Cooling Circuit 

To maximize the service life of the high voltage battery and obtain 
the greatest possible power, It is operated in a defined temperature 
range. 

In the low temperature range, the chemical reactions when charg¬ 
ing or discharging the battery cells take place slowly. The transport 
of the charge carriers is slower, so that the maximum current level 
and thus the maximum power is limited. In this low temperature 
range, the cooling system is inactive. Instead, the operational strat¬ 
egy attempts to warm up the high voltage battery. This takes place 
through continuously repeated charging and discharging cycles. 
The resulting current flows create thermal energy at the Internal 
resistor of the battery cells that increases the cell temperature. 

The constant charging and discharging of the NiMH batteries can 
cause the temperature of the battery modules to Increase. If the 
temperature of the batteries increase too much it will have several 
negative attributes on the battery. The major effect is that the 
charge capacity of the batteries will be impaired. 

In the medium temperature range, the maximum power of the bat¬ 
tery is purposely limited (using software in the battery monitoring 
module) to maximize the service life of the battery. The cooling sys¬ 
tem is already active here, and attempts to keep the cell tempera¬ 
ture in the optimal range between 35°C and 45°C. 

Particularly In the high temperature range, powerful cooling of the 
high voltage battery is required, while a great decrease in power is 
required at the same time. At high cell temperatures, the internal 
pressure would increase and the vent valve would have to be 
opened. This would also dissipate small amounts of the electrolyte, 
which, if occurring repeatedly, would result in rapid aging of the 
battery. 

Therefore, the battery power is limited, accepting the disadvantage 
that this restricts the hybrid functionality, e.g. with regard to driving 


in pure electric mode or brake energy 
recovery. 

The cooling system works with liquid 
coolant as the cooling medium. Here, the 
coolant flows through the battery mod¬ 
ules themselves, allowing effective dissi¬ 
pation of the excess thermal energy. 

In order to prevent a failure of the batter¬ 
ies due to high temperature, the battery 
pack is equipped with an independent 
cooling circuit. The coolant circuit is com¬ 
prised of: 

• battery modules 

• a coolant reservoir/pump 

• coolant lines 

• air to liquid cooler 

• liquid to A/C refrigerant chiller 

The cooling circuit utilizes the same type of fluid mixture known 
from the engine cooling system a (50% water and 50% glycol). 

Battery Modules 

The battery modules have been designed with internal coolant pas¬ 
sages built in. These passages allow the coolant to run through the 
inside of the battery for more efficient cooling. 

This is a major advantage over other manufacturers that require air 
vents in the passenger compartment for cooling. Those vents can 
be blocked by bags, clothing or any item left In the vehicle and 
cause the batteries to overheat. The E72 will not face this situation 
because of direct liquid cooling of the batteries. 



Cutaway view of battery 











Connections to the High Voltage Battery 



iir^iir 
n iHi -i. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Coolant lines 

2 

Quick connect coolant lines 

3 

Outlet line 

4 

Inlet line 

5 

Coolant reservoir cap 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

19 

















































20 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


High voltage battery unit > Cooling system 




By which means can the high voltage battery be cooled? 


How can the cooling system switch between the two 
cooling sources? 


Notes: 












































In order to start the cooling system functions, multiple communica¬ 
tion steps are required, which are listed briefly here: 

• BCM => IHKA: cooling power request (bus signal) 

• IHKA => EKK: switch on air conditioning compressor 
(bus signal) 

• IHKA => HIM: request to switch bypass valve, switch solenoid 
valve of the cooling unit, switch shut-off valve where applicable 
(bus signals) 

• HIM => Bypass valve: the bypass valve in the cooling circuit is 
supplied with current in order to redirect the cooling circuit 
from the coolant/air heat exchanger to the coolant/refrigerant 
heat exchanger 

• HIM => Solenoid valve in the cooling unit: the solenoid valve is 
activated so that refrigerant flows through the cooling unit 

• HIM => Shut-off valve: if the driver does not want any climate 
control of the passenger compartment, the shut-off valve must 
be triggered so that no refrigerant flows to the heat exchanger 
for the passenger compartment. 

Thus the hybrid interface module activates the valves. However, the 
nominal values for this purpose come from the integrated automat¬ 
ic heating / air conditioning system via bus signals. By using the 
refrigerant circuit, regardless of the ambient temperature, a cooling 
power of multiple hundred watts can be dissipated. 


Exploded view of Connection between cooling and refrigerant circuits 

0 0 0 0 © © © 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Refrigerant line from the cooling unit (return line) 

2 

Combined expansion and shut-off valve in the refrigerant circuit 

3 

Cooling unit (coolant/refrigerant heat exchanger) 

4 

Coolant line to the cooling unit (feed line) 

5 

Coolant line to the coolant/air heat exchanger 

6 

Bypass valve 

7 

Coolant line from the high voltage battery unit 

8 

Coolant line to the high voltage battery unit 

9 

Coolant line from the cooling unit (return line) 

10 

Refrigerant line to the cooling unit (feed line) 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

21 






















































Service Disconnect 


22 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


The high voltage safety connector of the E72 is installed on the top 
of the housing of the high voltage battery unit. 


The high voltage safety connector fulfils multiple tasks: 

• De-energizing the high voltage system 

• Securing the system against being switched on again 

• Holding the high voltage fuse of the high voltage battery 

The fuse in the high voltage safety connector is plugged in directly 
between the battery cells switched in series and thus is a high volt¬ 
age component. For this reason, it is identified by its orange color. 




® @ (5 ® ® 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Screws and nuts for mounting the high voltage safety cover 

2 

High-voltage Service Disconnect (inserted the opposite way) 

3 

High-voltage safety cover 

4 

Bridge for the circuit of the high voltage interlock 
loop in the high voltage safety cover 

5 

High-voltage cables 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Housing of the high voltage battery unit 

2 

High-voltage safety connector (in plugged-in state) 

3 

Fuse 




































Perform a manual shutdown of the high voltage system, secure it and verify, that high voltage is off. 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


High voltage battery unit > Manual shutdown using the high voltage safety connector 





Notes: 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

23 






































































24 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Functions 

Starting the High-voltage System 

The start of the high voltage system is requested by the hybrid 
master control unit via messages on the hybrid CAN and via an 
additional separate signal line (PWM-encoded). The execution of 
the start is then controlled by the battery monitoring module. The 
start takes place in three steps, each of which takes place only 
if the previous step has been completed successfully. 

The three steps are: 

1. Testing the high voltage electrical system 

2. Raising the voltage 

3. Closing the contacts of the switch contactors. 

In the first step, testing the high voltage system, the system checks 
the following: 

• Whether the high voltage cables are connected to the high 
voltage battery unit and a connection to the power electronic 
box has been made. 

• Whether the circuit of the high voltage interlock loop is closed. 

• Whether the high-current circuit breaker is intact. 

• Whether the high voltage battery is operational. 

Even after the tests have been completed successfully, the con¬ 
tacts of the switch contactors still cannot be closed. Due to the 
capacitance values in the high voltage circuit (link capacitor), a very 
high switch-on current flow would result that would damage both 
the capacitors and the switch contactors over the long term. 
Therefore, the voltage is raised slowly beforehand. To do so, the 
contact of the switch contactor for the negative lead is initially 
closed. Via a relay with clock activation and a dropping resistor in 
the positive wire, the voltage in the high voltage system is 


increased slowly. Whenever the relay contact is closed, a current 
flows, which is limited by the dropping resistor and charges the 
capacitors in the high voltage electrical system. After approximately 
300 ms, the voltage in the high voltage electrical system is only 
slightly below the battery voltage. Then, the contact of the switch 
contactor for the positive wire of the start is also closed. 

The battery monitoring module communicates the successful start 
to the other hybrid components via the hybrid CAN, and particularly 
to the hybrid master control unit. In the same way, fault states are 
signalled if the start was not successful. 

Shutting Down the High Voltage System 

When shutting down the high voltage system, we distinguish 
between the regular shut-off and the fast shut-off. The regular shut¬ 
off described here protects the electrical components. In addition, 
monitoring functions are carried out to check safety-related com¬ 
ponents and characteristics of the high voltage system. The steps 
during the regular shut-off are as follows: 

1. Terminal 15 is switched off. 

2. The current levels in the high voltage electrical system are 
reduced to null (by the control units in the power electronic 
box). 

3. The hybrid master control unit sends a request to open the 
switch contactors in the high voltage battery unit via a bus 
signal on the hybrid CAN and via a separate line (PWM sig¬ 
nal). 

4. The battery monitoring module opens the contacts of the 
switch contactors in the high voltage battery unit. 



5. Controlled by the battery monitoring module, the insulation 
resistance of the high voltage cables Is measured and moni¬ 
tored to ensure that the values fall within the permitted 
range. If an unacceptably low insulation resistance is detect¬ 
ed, an entry is stored in the fault memory. The driver is 
informed about this fault status by a Check Control mes¬ 
sage. Despite this status, the high voltage system can usual¬ 
ly be restarted, as there Is no direct danger to any person. 

6. The battery monitoring module checks whether the contacts 
of the switch contactors have actually been opened. This 
ensures that hazardous voltage Is no longer present at the 
high voltage connections of the high voltage battery unit. If 
the system detects that the contacts have not been opened 
properly, the high voltage system Is prevented from restart¬ 
ing. Otherwise, safe operation of the high voltage system 
would no longer be guaranteed. 

7. After successfully checking that the contacts of the switch 
contactors have been opened, the battery monitoring mod¬ 
ule communicates this state of the switch contactors. 

8. The high voltage circuit is actively discharged and the coils 
of the electric machines are short-circuited. This is con¬ 
trolled by the control units of the power electronic box. 

This regular shut-off can take up to two minutes. In particular, 
measuring the insulation resistance and checking the opened con¬ 
tacts take a certain amount of time, which is responsible for this 
lengthy period. The shut-off is interrupted if a start up is initiated in 
the mean time (e. g. because the driver switches terminal 15 back 
on). The regular shut-off is also interrupted if a situation arises that 
requires a fast shut-off of the high voltage system. 


Fast Shut-off of the High Voltage System 

The fast shut-off of the high voltage system is carried out whenever 
states arise in which, for safety reasons, the voltage In the high volt¬ 
age system must be reduced to a safe value as quickly as possible. 
The following list describes these states and the consequences for 
the shut-off of the high voltage system: 

• High-voltage interlock loop: if an interruption of the circuit of 
the high voltage interlock loop is detected and there is a pos¬ 
sibility that a person is touching active parts of the high volt¬ 
age system, the contacts of the switch contactor are opened 
immediately. Such a possibility is assumed if the vehicle is at a 
standstill or the engine compartment lid or tailgate are open. 
The contacts of the switch contactor are opened immediately 
without first reducing the current to null. This places a high 
load on the contacts of the switch contactors; as a result, this 
process must be carried out as rarely as possible. 
Simultaneously, the high voltage circuit is actively discharged 
and the coils of the electric machines are short-circuited. 

• Accident: if the crash safety module detects an accident of 
corresponding severity, the safety battery terminal is discon¬ 
nected from the positive terminal of the 12V battery. In the 
E72, the electromechanical switch contactors are supplied by 
terminal 30 of the safety battery terminal. Therefore, the con¬ 
tacts of the switch contactors are opened at the same time as 
the safety battery terminal Is disconnected. The battery moni¬ 
toring module and the hybrid master control unit also evaluate 
the status of terminal 30 of the safety battery terminal. If both 
of these control units detect that the safety battery terminal 
has been disconnected, they carry out additional measures to 
switch off the high voltage system (active discharge, short-cir¬ 
cuiting the coils). 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

25 



26 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Short circuit monitoring: if the current sensors detect that the 
current level in the high voltage cables is too high, the battery 
monitoring module also triggers a fast shut off to protect the 
components. In extreme cases, the fuse (in the high voltage 
safety connector) is also tripped, thus causing a hard interrup¬ 
tion of the high voltage circuit. The battery monitoring module 
monitors the state of the fuse. In the event of a switch-off due 
to short circuit, the battery monitoring module communicates 
this state, so that active discharge can take place and the coils 
can be short-circuited. 

Failure of the 12V voltage supply of the high voltage bat¬ 
tery unit: as in all other high voltage components, the control 
electronics (battery monitoring module) are supplied with 12 
V. To ensure the maximum possible safety, a fast shut-off of 
the high voltage system takes place if the 12 V voltage supply 
fails, as in this case the battery monitoring module is also no 
longer working. Therefore, the fast shut-off in this case is also 
carried out by means of a hardware switch-off and not by soft¬ 
ware functions. 


High Voltage Interlock Loop 

Many monitoring functions exist in which the high voltage battery 
unit and/or the battery monitoring module play a critical role. They 
include: 

• Monitoring functions to ensure the safety of the high voltage 
system 

• Monitoring functions to ensure optimal operating conditions of 
the high voltage battery 

For the safety-related monitoring functions, we will specifically dis¬ 
cuss the role of the high voltage battery unit in the high voltage 
interlock loop and the insulation monitoring. 

The principle of the high voltage interlock loop is familiar from the 
"Basics of hybrid technology" information bulletin. In the E72, the 
high voltage interlock loop consists of high voltage components 
shown. 

The electronics for controlling and generating the test signal for the 
high voltage interlock loop are integrated into the battery monitor¬ 
ing module in the E72. Generating the test signal starts when the 
high voltage system is to be started and ends when the high volt¬ 
age system has been shut down. As the test signal, the battery 
monitoring module generates a square AC signal and feeds it into 
the test lead. The test lead has a ring topology (similar to that of the 
MOST bus). The signal of the test lead is evaluated at two points in 
the ring: in the power electronic box and at the very end of the ring, 
in the battery monitoring module. The signal must have a current 
level between 12 mA and 35 mA. If the current level is outside this 
range, an interruption of the circuit or a short circuit in the test lead 
is detected. As described above in the section on "fast shut-off of 
the high voltage system," high voltage system is shut down imme¬ 
diately whenever a situation is present in which a person can touch 
active, electrically live parts. Both the power electronic box and the 
battery monitoring module can initiate this shut-off. 



Insulation Monitoring 

The insulation monitoring determines whether the insulation resist¬ 
ance between active high voltage components (e.g. high voltage 
cables) and earth is above or below a required minimum value. If 
the insulation resistance falls below the minimum value, the danger 
exists that the vehicle parts will be energized with hazardous volt¬ 
age. If a person were to touch a second active high voltage compo¬ 
nent, he or she would be at risk of electric shock. Therefore, the 
high voltage system of the E72 has a fully automatic insulation 
monitoring system. It is divided into two high voltage components: 

• Battery monitoring module: there are precision resistors 
between the two high voltage cables and the housing of the 
high voltage battery unit. These can be activated individually 
for insulation monitoring. The voltages at the precision resis¬ 
tors are measured electronically. The insulation resistance val¬ 
ues of the high voltage cable to the housing can be calculated 
from the voltage values. By doing so, it is possible to deter¬ 
mine whether one or both high voltage cables have an unac¬ 
ceptably small insulation resistance. This process can be car¬ 
ried out only if the high voltage system is not active. 

• Power electronic box: based on voltage measurements that are 
carried out continuously when the high voltage system is 
active, the power electronic box likewise measures the insula¬ 
tion resistance values between the high voltage cables and 
the housing. More precisely, the ratio of the insulation resist¬ 
ance values to each other is calculated. This means that the 
insulation monitoring system in the power electronic box can 
detect insulation faults of one high voltage cable only. Thus an 
insulation fault of both wires cannot be identified. 

As described here, the insulation monitoring takes place via voltage 
measurement, using the potential of the housing of a high voltage 
component as a reference. Without additional measures, only local 
insulation faults can be identified in the battery monitoring module 
and the power electronic box. However, it is equally important to 


identify insulation faults from the high voltage cables in the vehicle 
to earth. For this reason, all electrically conductive housings of high 
voltage component are galvanically connected to earth. Thus insu¬ 
lation faults in the entire high voltage electrical system can be iden¬ 
tified by insulation monitoring at two central points. 

The proper electrical connection of all high voltage compo¬ 
nent housings to earth is an important prerequisite for 
proper function of the insulation monitoring. Accordingly, 
this electrical connection must be restored carefully if it has 
been interrupted during repair work. 

Additional monitoring functions in the high voltage battery ensure 
that the voltage, the state of charge and the temperature of the bat¬ 
tery cells are in the range that enables optimum power develop¬ 
ment and maximum service life of the high voltage battery. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

27 



28 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 



High voltage battery unit > Powering up and powering down the high voltage system 



Several actions are carried out while powering up and powering down the high voltage system. Please sort the actions in the correct order. 


Powering up 

No. 

Action 


Precharge the 

high voltage circuit (by BCM) 


Check if high voltage 
interlock loop is intact? 


Check if fuse is ok? 


Cable-off check 


Close electromechanical 
switch contactors 


Check if high voltage 
battery is "healthy" 


Hybrid Controller Processor 
requests power up 


BCM reports 
"power up succesful" 


Powering down 

No. 

Action 


Discharge the 

high voltage circuit (by PEB) 


Hybrid Controller Processor 
requests opening of 
the switch contactors 


BCM double-checks if switch 
contactors are open 


Current in the high voltage 
wires "is controlled to be zero" 
(by PEB) 


BCM reports "switch 
contactors open" 


BCM opens switch contactors 


BCM measures and checks the 
insulation resistance 









































































E72 Complete Vehicle. 

High voltage battery unit > Regular or fast shutdown of the high voltage system 




No shutdown 


Regular shutdown 


Fast shutdown 


Terminal 15 off 


High voltage 
interlock loop 
interrupted 


Crash detected 


Driver's seatbelt 
unbuckled and 
driver's door opened 


Short circuit 
detected 



12V power supply 
gone from BCM 


Draw lines and hereby match the conditions in the boxes to the shutdown variants above. 
What are the consequences of a fast shutdown? 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

29 


















30 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


High voltage battery unit > High voltage interlock loop 



Where are the jumpers of the high voltage interlock loop located on the E72? 


Which control unit generates the interlock signal and at which control unit is it evaluated 
on the E72? 


II 



L 


tKK 

* 





II 


II 



II 


II 

















E72 Complete Vehicle. 


High voltage battery unit > Replacement > Removing 




Please note the necessary steps, when you remove the 
high voltage battery from an E72 below. 



The electrical safety rules must be observed and implemented before any 
work is carried out on high voltage components of the E72: 


1 The high voltage system must be de-energized. 

2 The high voltage system must be secured against being switched on 
again. 

3 The de-energized state of the high voltage system must be verified. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

31 




















32 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Charging Strategy and Operational Strategy 

The objectives of the charging strategy for the high voltage battery 
are to maximize the service life of the high voltage battery and to 
maintain reserves, both in terms of additional energy consumption 
(brake energy recovery) and energy output (e.g. boost function). 

The primary goal of the operational strategy of the hybrid drive is to 
use the hybrid drive to increase efficiency and dynamics in as many 
situations as possible. Whether boost function, driving in electric 
mode, automatic engine start-stop function or brake energy recov¬ 
ery - all of these functions are to be provided over the widest pos¬ 
sible range of the state of charge of the high voltage battery. As the 
following graphic shows, this has also been implemented techni¬ 
cally in the E72. The individual functions have to be restricted only 
if the limits of the state of charge are exceeded such that the serv¬ 
ice life of the high voltage battery would be decreased. 

If the combustion engine is running anyway (e.g. at a driving speed 
of over 60 km/h), the high voltage battery is charged to the marked 
optimum level. At this state of charge, there is a sufficient reserve 
so that if, for example, the driver exits a highway, additional energy 
can be stored in the high voltage battery during the ensuing brak¬ 
ing. However, the distinguishing feature of this optimal state of 
charge is primarily that the battery has enough energy to provide 
support from the electric machine or driving in pure electric mode. 

The automatic engine start-stop function is not available all the way 
down to the very lower limit of the state of charge. An example to 
illustrate this: when the vehicle decelerates all the way to a stand¬ 
still, the combustion engine is usually shut off while driving and the 
high voltage battery charged during deceleration. While the vehicle 
is at a standstill, energy is drawn from the high voltage battery to 
operate the electric A/C compressor and supply power to the 14V 
vehicle electrical system. The combustion engine remains shut off 
almost all the way down to the lower limit of the state of charge. 
Once the limit is reached, the combustion engine has to be started 
to again provide electrical energy via the electric machines. This is 
then used to supply power to the consumers and to charge the 


high voltage battery. To prevent continuous starting and stopping of 
the combustion engine, the high voltage battery must reach a high¬ 
er state of charge before the combustion engine can be shut down 
again. 

Therefore, a hysteresis ensures that the energy reserve will be suf¬ 
ficient while the combustion engine is at a standstill. 



E72 Complete Vehicle. 


High voltage battery unit > Charging and discharging while driving 



The bars show, at which state of charge (SoC) a hybrid 
function is available. 

Please select the hybrid functions from the list below 
and assign them to the bars. 



• CHARGE 
•eBOOST 

• eDRIVE 

• Engine start/stop 


Target SoC 



0 % 36 % 50 % 72 % 100 % 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

33 




































34 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Active Transmission 


The active gearbox of the E72 was developed in a co-operative 
effort between General Motors, Daimler Chrysler (currently 
Daimler) and BMW. Like a conventional automatic transmission, it 
makes different ratios between the gearbox input and gearbox 
output available. 

From the driver's perspective, there are seven forward gears. 
Within the transmission, these seven forward gears are imple¬ 
mented by means of four fixed basic gears and two modes with 
variable gear ratio. In the four fixed basic gears, the speed of the 
combustion engine and transmission output shaft are in a fixed 
relationship to each other. This is not true of the modes with vari¬ 
able gear ratio: in these modes, the ratio between the speed of 
the combustion engine and the transmission output speed can be 
adjusted continuously, which is why the abbreviation "CVT" (for 
"continuously variable transmission") is used for these modes. 

Because the active gearbox in the E72 provides two CVT modes, 
it is frequently also referred to as "two-mode active transmission" 
in the literature. The gear ratio is adjusted electrically using two 
electric machines integrated into the active gearbox. Therefore, 
these two modes are also referred to as "ECVT", where the "E" 
stands for electrical. As an integral part of the hybrid drive, the 
electric machines also serve to support the combustion engine 
and to recover the brake energy. The four fixed basic gears and 
the two ECVT modes are implemented and switched using three 
planetary gear trains and four multidisc clutches. 

Therefore, the active gearbox in the narrower sense consists of: 

• Two electric machines 

• Three planetary gear sets 

• Four multidisc clutches 


Sectional view of E72 active gearbox 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Planetary gear set 1 

2 

Planetary gear set 2 

3 

Electric machine B 

4 

Planetary gear set 3 

5 

Multidisc clutch 2 

6 

Multidisc clutch 1 

7 

Multidisc clutch 3 

8 

Multidisc clutch 4 

9 

Electric machine A 































A dual-mass flywheel is used as the torsional vibration damper. It is 
located between the combustion engine and active gearbox. It has 
a similar design to those in vehicles with a manual transmission. 
The combustion engine of the E72 is not started via a conventional 
starter motor. Despite this, the toothed ring gear on the flywheel Is 
present only for measuring the crankshaft speed. 

Despite the fact that the active gearbox does not have a hydrody¬ 
namic converter, the gearbox components naturally have to be 
lubricated. Because of this, and to actuate the multidisc clutches, 
there is an oil pump on the gearbox input, which can be driven 
either by the combustion engine or by the electric motor installed 
specifically for this purpose. The oil circuit is also used to cool the 
gearbox components. The cooling circuit for the transmission oil in 
the E72 is the same as in the E71 xDrive 50i. 

The electronic hybrid gearbox control unit - as in other current 
automatic transmissions - is part of the electro-hydraulic control 
module and is housed in the transmission oil sump. The electronic 
hybrid gearbox control unit in E72 is referred to using the abbrevia¬ 
tion "TCM", derived from the "Transmission Control Module" des¬ 
ignation used in the development co-operation. 

The active gearbox also does not Include an automatically actuated 
clutch, as In a sequential manual gearbox (SMG). The electric 
machines can compensate for this by creating a speed differential 
between the Input and output shafts. When driving off with the 
combustion engine, the combustion engine initially powers only 
one of the two electric machines. This generates electrical energy 
with which the second electric machine is operated and generates 
a torque at the transmission output shaft. This ultimately sets the 
vehicle in motion. 

The electric machines are also used when changing gears, for 
example to support the torque of the combustion engine and pro¬ 
vide a comfortable shifting sequence while the multidisc clutches 
are opened and closed. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Transmission fluid-to-coolant heat exchanger 

2 

Transmission oil lines 

3 

Dual-mass flywheel 

4 

High-voltage cables 

5 

Housing of the active gearbox 

6 

Hybrid parking lock (direct shift module) 

7 

Electro-hydraulic control module 

8 

Electrically/mechanically driven transmission oil pump 



Overview of active gearbox components 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

35 




















36 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Parking Lock and Direct Shift Module 

The hybrid parking lock of the active gearbox is not hydraulically 
actuated. Instead, it is actuated via an electric motor. This motor 
and the associated control unit are combined in one housing and 
called the "Direct Shift Module" (DSM). It is on the outer side of the 
transmission housing. 

The parking lock mechanism is similar to that used in other auto¬ 
matic transmissions in BMW vehicles: the parking lock blocks the 
transmission output shaft via a parking lock pawl that meshes with 
the gearing of the parking lock gear. 

In conventional automatic transmissions, the parking lock is 
engaged by spring force and disengaged hydraulically. This proven 
concept could not be implemented in the active gearbox, as the 
requirements that apply for engaging the parking lock could not 
have been fulfilled in this way. Therefore, the active gearbox of the 
E72 has an electromechanical actuator for engaging and disengag¬ 
ing the parking lock. This actuator and the corresponding control 
unit are integrated into one housing. This unit is called the "Direct 
Shift Module", or "DSM" for short. 


Direct Shift Module (interior view) 








The direct shift module, which is installed on the outside of the 
transmission housing, is connected to the parking lock mechanism 
in the active gearbox via a splined shaft. Using this shaft, the direct 
shift module can turn a notched disc inside the active gearbox, as 
is familiar from automatic transmissions with a mechanical selector 
lever. In the active gearbox of the E72, the notched disc is used 
only to distinguish between the engaged and disengaged parking 
lock. Accordingly, only the "park" (R parking lock engaged) and 
"neutral" (N, parking lock not engaged) positions are used. The 
rotation of the notched disc moves the parking lock lever in the lon¬ 
gitudinal direction. When the parking lock is engaged, the parking 
lock lever pushes the parking lock pawl into the parking lock gear 
via a conical sleeve. When the parking lock is disengaged, the 
parking lock lever is retracted and the parking lock pawl is released. 
A spring pulls the parking lock pawl out of the parking lock gear. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Belt drive 

2 

Electric motor 

3 

Additional electric motor (Not used on E72) 

4 

Printed circuit board of the control unit 

5 

Mechanical connection to the active gearbox 

6 

Connector 

7 

Adjusting mechanism 

8 

Connection for tank ventilation line 


Note: BMW does not use the additional motor (3). The 

additional motor is used by Diamler in their applica¬ 
tion as a backup. 










































E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Active transmission > Parking lock 




How is the parking lock in the E72 actuated? 

Take notes about the components of the parking lock below. 


How is the Direct Shift Module connected to the transmission? 


Why does the Direct Shift Module need a venting line? 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

37 

































38 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Active transmission > Direct Shift Module DSM 



How is the Direct Shift Module supplied with electrical power? 


How can you perform an emergency release of the parking lock? 









































System Wiring Diagrams 

The electrical networking of the active gearbox and the hybrid parking lock is shown in the system wiring diagrams. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Power electronic box (PEB) 

2 

Hybrid master control unit (HCP) 

3 

Hybrid electric machine control unit B (Machine Controller Pack B, MCPB) 

4 

Hybrid oil pump control unit (Electrical Motor Pump Inverter, EMPI) 

5 

Hybrid electric machine control unit A (Machine Controller Pack B, MCPB) 

6 

High-voltage cables from PEB - hybrid oil pump, shielded 

7 

High-voltage cables from PEB - electric machine A, individually shielded 

8 

High-voltage cables from PEB - electric machine B, individually shielded 

9 

High-voltage cables from PEB - high voltage battery, individually shielded 

10 

Hybrid Interface Module (HIM) 

11 

Electronic gear selector switch (GWS) 

12 

Hybrid active gearbox 

13 

Hybrid oil pump 

14 

Transmission Control Module (TCM) 

15 

Electric machine A 

16 

Electric machine B 

17 

High-voltage battery unit 

18 

Battery monitoring module (BCM) 

19 

High-voltage battery 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

39 





























































































40 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Distributed Functions 

Because parts of the hybrid active gearbox and its functions have 
been developed by the co-operation partners, BMW had to agree 
to compromises regarding distributing the gearbox functions to the 
control units. 

In previous BMW vehicles, the electronic transmission control 
(EGS) has authority over most gearbox functions, such as gear 
selection, engaging and disengaging the parking lock or selecting 
the shift program. Important input signals here are those from actu¬ 
ation of the accelerator pedal or brake pedal, information about the 
movement of the vehicle (speed, acceleration etc.), the engine 
speed and the operation of the gear selector switch. Based on this, 
the suitable shift program is used and the correct gear for the driv¬ 
ing situation determined and engaged. 

Hybrid Control Processor 

As the name indicates, the hybrid master control unit (Hybrid 
Controller Processor, HCP) plays a central role in the controlling 
the hybrid drive and thus also in controlling the active gearbox. 

The following is a list of the functions of the hybrid master control 
unit that are relevant for the active gearbox: 

• Evaluating the driver's choice and determining the gear 
(R R, N, D, S, M) 

• Selecting the shift program 

• Determining the correct gear 

• Adaptive transmission control 

• Calculating the necessary torque at the internal multidisc 
clutches 

• Calculating the setpoint torque at the gearbox output 


Transmission Control Module 

The hybrid gearbox control unit translates the nominal values of the 
hybrid master control unit (setpoint torque at the clutches and at 
the gearbox output). Thus the hybrid gearbox control unit, unlike 
the electronic transmission controls of other automatic transmis¬ 
sions, is no longer the primary controller for the gearbox functions, 
but an intelligent actuator control unit. 

Some of responsibilities of the hybrid gearbox control unit are: 

• Controlling the transmission oil circuit 

• Operating and monitoring the multidisc clutches 

• Ensuring cooling of the electric machines 

• Reading sensor signals (output speed, transmission oil tem¬ 
perature and position of the parking lock) 

• Monitoring the gearbox status and activating emergency pro¬ 
grams if necessary 

• Electronic immobilizer 



E72 Complete Vehicle. 

Active transmission > Distributed functions 


Assign the transmission related functions to the control units. 



Function 


HCP 

Hybrid Controller 
Processor 


TCM 

Transmission Control 
Module 


DSM 

Direct Shift Module 


GWS 

Gear selector switch 


Operation and evaluation of gear selector switch 
Determine the gear position (P, N, R, D, S, Mx) 

Adaptive transmission control 
Select the required gear (1 ...7) 

Calculate the output torque of the transmission 
Calculate the torque command value of the electric machines 
Control the transmission oil circuit 
Actuate the multidisc clutches 

Read and communicate transmission related sensor signals 

Monitor the transmission state and 
activate emergency programs if necessary 

Engage and disengage the parking lock 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

41 












42 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Sectional view and skeleton view of the active gearbox in the E72 






EM A 


V 





rl 






EMB 






Wim 


M 


1 



/3V777777: 


~1 . pfe 

'77 


w 


//////^// 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Transmission input shaft 

2 

Dual-mass flywheel 

3 

Electric motor for driving the transmission oil pump 

4 

Transmission oil pump 

5 

Planetary gear set 1 

6 

Electric machine A 

7 

Planetary gear set 2 

8 

Multidisc clutch 3 

9 

Multidisc clutch 4 

10 

Electric machine B 

11 

Planetary gear set 3 

12 

Multidisc clutch 1 

13 

Multidisc clutch 2 

14 

Transmission output shaft 






























































































































































































































Modes of Operation 

The Advance Hybrid System - Car variant (AHS-C) contains three 
planetary carriers that provide four fixed forward gears (4-spd trans¬ 
mission) that with the aid of two electric machines (E-Machine A 
and E-Machine B provides an additional three virtual gears. For the 
driver, the indicator on the cluster displays 7 forward gears. 

A mechanical reverse does not exist in the transmission. Reverse is 
only possible by electrically energizing E-Machine B. 

The E72 is not equiped with a conventional starter motor. E- 
Machine A is used as the ICE (Internal Combustion Engine) starter. 

Technically the Active transmission is capable of the following 
modes of operation: 

• Electric Continuous Variable Transmission Mode 1 (ECVT 1) 

• Electric Continuous Variable Transmission Mode 2 (ECVT 2) 

• Fixed Gear 1 

• Fixed Gear 2 

• Fixed Gear 3 

• Fixed Gear 4 

• Neutral 

• Reverse 


ECVT 1 Mode 

The first mode with variable ratio (ECVT 1 mode) is designed for 
low speeds and maximum tractive force. In this mode, the vehicle 
can be powered in the following ways: 

• Solely by electric machine B 

• Solely by the combustion engine 

• By electric machine B and the combustion engine. 

The gear ratio for powering the vehicle using the combustion 
engine can be calculated as follows: 

i = speed of the combustion engine / speed of the transmission 
output shaft 

This gear ratio ranges from infinite to 1.800. The value "infinite" 
indicates that the combustion engine can run, despite the fact that 
the transmission output shaft is not moving. Thus driving off is 
reproduced in a similar manner as with a hydrodynamic torque con¬ 
verter. The gear ratio can be adjusted by controlling the speeds of 
the two electric machines: the higher the speed of electric machine 
A, the greater this gear ratio will be. 

Electric machine B is connected to the transmission output shaft 
with a ratio of approximately four. 

To implement ECVT 1 mode, only the multidisc clutch 1 in the 
active gearbox is closed; all others are opened. 

When the vehicle is powered purely electrically, the electric 
machine A rotates without load, at the same time and in the oppo¬ 
site direction as electric machine B. This allows the transmission 
input shaft and thus the combustion engine to remain at a stand¬ 
still. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

43 




44 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Power flow while driving in pure electric mode in ECVT1 



When the vehicle is powered by a combination of the combustion 
engine and electric machine B, the power of the combustion 
engine is divided into two portions. One could say that the power 
of the combustion engine branches offer "splits." This is the origin 
of the term "power-split hybrid drive." The two portions are: 

• A mechanical portion, which is used to propel the vehicle. 

• An electrical portion, because electric machine A works as a 
generator and generates electrical energy. 

Power flow when the vehicle is powered by a combination of the 
combustion engine and the electric machine in ECVT 1 mode 


Some or all of the electrical energy generated in generator mode 
can be stored in the high voltage battery. Electric machine B con¬ 
sumes electrical energy as a motor. Some or all of this comes from 
electric machine A or from the high voltage battery. How large the 
individual amounts of energy are depends on a number of factors 
and Is recalculated and reset by the hybrid master control unit at all 
times. 

The characteristic feature of both ECVT modes is that in addition 
to the mechanical drive path of the combustion engine, there is 
also an electrical drive path. This electrical drive path Is identified 
by the fact that the combustion engine generates electrical energy 
using a generator, some or all of which is used by an electric 
machine to power the vehicle. The arrangement of this electrical 
drive path corresponds to that of a serial hybrid drive. 

If we consider the sum of the energy flows, the electric machine 
can support the combustion engine. However, it is also possible to 
charge the high voltage battery in this mode. In this case, the com¬ 
bustion engine must provide a higher output and uses somewhat 
more fuel. However, this only appears to be a disadvantage. The 
hybrid operational strategy carries out this "load point increase" pri¬ 
marily when doing so Increases the efficiency of the combustion 
engine. For example, the efficiency is better under full load than 
under partial load. Thus the energy stored in this way is obtained 
with a relatively low extra energy input and can be used later, for 
example for driving in pure electric mode. 
































































































































































ECVT 2 Mode 

Unlike the first ECVT mode, the second is designed for higher driv¬ 
ing speeds. In ECVT 2 mode, both driving in pure electric mode 
and driving with the combustion engine switched on are possible. 
The gear ratio for the combustion engine can be adjusted in a 
range from 1.800 to 0.723. As in ECVT 1 mode, the electric 
machine speeds are the control variables used here. Based on the 
numerical values, we see a longer ratio than in ECVT 1 mode and 
thus the suitability for higher speeds. However, the electric 
machines also have a longer ratio. This means that their usable 
speed range is shifted towards higher speeds. 

The electric machines can support the combustion engine or be 
used to charge the high voltage batteries. As in the first ECVT 
mode, one electric machine is typically operated as a motor (here, 
electric machine A), the other as a generator (here, electric 
machine B). 

In ECVT 2 mode, multidisc clutch 2 is closed; all others are 
opened. 


In the second ECVT mode, the electrical energy flow can be con¬ 
trolled such that when the sum is considered, the high voltage bat¬ 
tery is charged (load point increase of the combustion engine) or 
discharged (support of the combustion engine). The operational 
strategy sets the suitable energy flow that will attain the best possi¬ 
ble efficiency. 


Power flow in ECVT 2 mode 



I i 

I 


I 

_l 

~i 

—^ 






BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

45 







































46 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Fixed Basic Gears 

Unlike the two ECVT modes, the fixed basic gears of the active 
gearbox are characterized by a fixed gear ratio of the transmission 
input shaft to the transmission output shaft. Thus a change in 
speed of the combustion engine results in a proportionate change 
in driving speed. This fixed gear ratio would be a disadvantage only 
if the combustion engine were not in the optimum efficiency range. 
However, it is selected by the operational strategy specifically when 
a high torque of the combustion engine is required anyway. In that 
case, its efficiency is already very good. Compared to the ECVT 
modes, the advantage of the fixed gears is that the double energy 
conversion in the electric machine is omitted. Losses are also 
associated with the generation of electrical energy by the one elec¬ 
tric machine and the use of electrical energy by the other. 

In all fixed basic gears, the electric machines can do the following 
(with the exception of basic gear four): 

• Rotate without load 


Power flow in basic gear 1 




Power flow in basic gear 2 

li 


Vi. 






M 


f77 



• Be operated as a motor to support the combustion engine 

• Be operated as a generator to charge the high voltage battery 

Exception: in fixed basic gear four, electric machine B is at a stand¬ 
still, so that only electric machine A can be used as flexibly as 
described. 

The generator mode is used particularly in overrun phases or when 
decelerating the vehicle in order to convert the kinetic energy into 
electrical energy and store it in the high voltage battery. 

If we ignore for a moment the different ratios in the fixed basic 
gears, the active gearbox acts as if the electric machines and the 
combustion engine were installed on the same shaft. This arrange¬ 
ment corresponds exactly to that of a parallel hybrid drive. 

All fixed basic gears are implemented in the active gearbox by clos¬ 
ing two multidisc clutches. 


Power flow in basic gear 3 





Power flow in basic gear 4 






















































































































































































































E72 Complete Vehicle 


i 




Active transmission > Modes and fixed gears 


Mode / fixed Gear Characteristics 

Transmission ratio 

Electric Continuous Variable 

Transmission Mode 1 (ECVT 1) 

Infinite... 1.800 

Electric Continuous Variable 

Transmission Mode 2 (ECVT 2) 

1.800 ... 0.723 

Fixed gear 1 

3.889 

Fixed gear 2 

1.800 

Fixed gear 3 

1.000 

Fixed gear 4 

0.723 

Neutral 

0.000 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

47 











48 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


No Power Transmission 

Because there is no central clutch between the combustion engine 
and active gearbox, the active gearbox must offer a state in which 
there is no power transmission between the transmission input 
shaft and transmission output shaft. This makes it possible, for 
example, for the combustion engine to rotate freely without moving 
the vehicle. Conversely, the vehicle can roll freely without torque 
being output or absorbed by the combustion engine. 

The "no power transmission" state is attained by opening all four 
multidisc clutches. When the combustion engine is running the 
electric machines also rotate at the same time, in this case without 
load, thus operating as neither a generator nor as a motor. At a 
combustion engine speed of 4000 rpm or higher, the electric 
machines would reach speeds higher than those for which they are 
designed. Therefore, in this transmission state, the speed of the 
combustion engine is regulated electronically to a value below 
4000 rpm. 

Reverse Gear 

The active gearbox does not have a mechanical reverse gear. 
Instead, reverse is made possible in ECVT 1 mode. To do, the 
electric machine B is activated as a motor, in the opposite direction 
of rotation as for forward driving. Depending on the state of charge 
of the high voltage battery, driving backwards in pure electric mode 
is possible. If necessary, the combustion engine can also be acti¬ 
vated to provide, with the help of electric machine A, sufficient 
electrical energy for electric machine B. During reverse, there is 
also a mechanical drive path from the combustion engine to the 
gearbox output. However, the torque of the combustion engine 
transmitted through this path would propel the vehicle forwards. 
Therefore, it is compensated for by electric machine B. Thus dur¬ 
ing reverse with the combustion engine switched on, the active 
gearbox behaves like a power-split hybrid drive. 


■ Starting and stopping the combustion engine 

When the prerequisites for driving in pure electric mode are no 
longer met, for example because the driver presses down harder on 
the accelerator, the combustion engine must be started. To accel¬ 
erate it to the starting speed, electric machine A is braked and thus 
works as a generator. In the meantime, electric machine B contin¬ 
ues to power the vehicle and also has to supply extra torque: this 
additional torque compensates for the torque generated by electric 
machine A to start the combustion engine. During the start while 
driving, the power flow in the gearbox skeleton looks like this: 


Power flow while starting the combustion engine 



If the combustion engine is to be started while the vehicle is at a 
standstill, electric machine A is activated as a motor. Electric 
machine B supports the torque. However, for this purpose, the 
transmission must be in the "no power transmission" state, as only 
then is the transmission output shaft torque-free. 

As soon as the combustion engine reaches the starting speed, the 
ignition and fuel injection are activated. Of course, the engine then 
no longer absorbs any torque, but feeds torque into the active 
gearbox. As described earlier in the chapter on "ECVT 1 mode", 
both the combustion engine and electric machine B power the 
vehicle. 






















The combustion engine does not have to be started at a certain 
driving speed. It can be started throughout the entire speed range 
at which driving in electric mode is possible. 

Starting the combustion engine 


n f l/mim] 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

2nd gear 

2 

3rd gear, border between ECVT modes 1 and 2 

3 

Possible engine speed-vehicle speed range for ECVT mode 1 

4 

Possible engine speed-vehicle speed range for ECVT mode 2 

5 

Example for starting operation at driving speed of approx. 40 km/h 

6 

Maximum driving speed at which the combustion engine must be started 

7 

Speed range in which the combustion engine can be started 


The combustion engine can be shut off not only when the vehicle 
is at a standstill, but also while driving. After the fuel injection and 
ignition are shut off, the combustion engine is brought to zero 
speed, controlled by electric machine A. 


Stoping the combustion engine 

n [1/mln| 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

3rd gear, border between ECVT modes 1 and 2 

2 

Possible engine speed-vehicle speed range for ECVT mode 1 

3 

Possible engine speed-vehicle speed range for ECVT mode 2 

4 

Short-term spike in the speed of the combustion engine while changing 

from ECVT mode 2 to ECVT mode 1 

5 

Example of shutting off the combustion engine during deceleration phase 

6 

Speed range in which the combustion engine can be shut off 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

49 
















































50 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Oil Supply 

To lubricate and cool the components of the active gearbox and to 
actuate the multidisc clutches, sufficient pressure and volumetric 
flow of the transmission oil must be provided in each operating 
state. The transmission oil supply must be ensured even when the 
combustion engine is at a standstill. 

Therefore, the transmission oil pump is driven in two ways: 

• Mechanically by the combustion engine via the transmission 
input shaft 

• Electrically by an electric motor installed specifically for this 
purpose 

The actual transmission oil pump is connected to the transmission 
input shaft via a freewheel. When the transmission input shaft 
rotates (while the combustion engine is running), the transmission 
oil pump is also driven. If the speed of the combustion engine is 
sufficient, this type of drive is adequate. However, it must be driven 
by the electric motor if the speed of the combustion engine is not 
adequate or the combustion engine is at a standstill. The electric 
motor is connected to the actual transmission oil pump via a free¬ 
wheel. When the transmission input shaft rotates (while the com¬ 
bustion engine is running), the electric motor also rotates. However, 
in this case, it is activated such that it can rotate without load. If the 
transmission input shaft is at a standstill (when the combustion 
engine is also at a standstill), the electric motor must power the 
transmission oil pump. The electric motor is then activated such 
that the transmission oil pump rotates at an adequate speed and 
the transmission oil supply is ensured. 

The maximum speed of the electric motor corresponds to that of 
the combustion engine (6500 rpm), but it is operated actively only 
at a significantly lower speed range (approx. 0 to 2000 rpm). At 
higher speeds, the combustion engine drives the transmission oil 
pump and the electric motor only has to rotate at the same speed. 


The electric motor of the transmission oil pump does not have any 
sensors (such as motor position sensors or temperature sensors). 

"Dexron-VI" is used as the transmission oil. 

Electric motor for driving the oil pump 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

EMPI 

B 

Detailed view of the electrical connection 

1 

Electrical connector 

2 

Coils of the stator 

3 

Rotor equipped with permanent magnets 

4 

Contacts of the high voltage interlock loop 

5 

Housing of the connector for connection to the power electronic box 

6 

Contacts for three phases 
























E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Active transmission > Transmission oil supply 




For which purposes is oil flow and/or oil pressure used in the active 
transmission? 


How is the transmission oil pump driven, especially when the internal 
combustion engine is off? 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

51 






























52 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Electric Machines 

Electric machines A and B together make up the electrical part of 
the hybrid drive in the E72. They are both integrated into the active 
gearbox and are not accessible for Service employees. To make the 
operating principle of the active gearbox and the hybrid drive easier 
to understand, we will describe a few characteristics of these elec¬ 
tric machines here. 

Sectional view of active gearbox with highlighted electric machines 



Index 

■ • * —P.WP.W—w —— .. 

Explanation 

1 

Electric machine A 

2 

Electric machine B 

3 

Rotor of electric machine B 

4 

Main shaft of the active gearbox 

5 

Connection for the position sensor of electric machine B 

6 

Coils on stator of electric machine B 

7 

High-voltage connection for three phases of electric machine A 

8 

Coils on stator of electric machine A 


Variable 

Value for E-Machine A 

Value for E-Machine B 

Maximum power 

67 kW at 3000 rpm 

63 kW at 2500 rpm 

Maximum torque 

260 Nm at 0 to 2500 rpm 

280 Nm at 0 to 2000 rpm 

Maximum speed 

10,500 rpm 

13,500 rpm 

Nominal voltage 

300 V 

300 V 

Nominal current level 

300 A 

300 A 


Planetary Gear Sets 


The active gearbox contains three planetary gear sets, which like¬ 
wise move in the transmission oil. The planetary gear sets serve to 
generate the various basic gears and states in the active gearbox. 

Sectional view of active gearbox with highlighted planetary gear sets 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Planetary gear set 1 

2 

Planetary gear set 2 

3 

Planetary gear set 3 






































BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

53 





























54 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Modifications to the N63 


There are few changes to the N63 engine primarily to the cooling 
system and belt drives. 

Belt Drive 

One of the most outstanding characteristics of the E72 is driving 
in pure electric mode. Functions like hydraulic steering and air 
conditioning are also to be available in this case. Since the com¬ 
bustion engine does not run during this operating condition, it 
cannot drive the power steering pump and the air conditioning 
compressor. 

Consequently, both of these systems are operated electrically and 
omitted from the belt drive. Since the E72 also has no conven¬ 
tional alternator on the engine, this is also omitted from the belt 
drive. 

Thus the belt drive is designed with the highest possible simplici¬ 
ty. Only the coolant pump required for the electric machines is 
driven. A tensioning pulley is not required since an elastomer belt 
is used, which is installed using the "turret clamping system" 
known since the N63. The elastomer belt is, as usual, a poly-V belt 
with 4 ribs. 




E72 Complete Vehicle. 


N63 engine modifications > Overview and belt drive 




What are the major modifications of the N63 engine used on E72? 


What is special or different about the belt drive in comparison to the E71 ? 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

55 



























56 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Cooling System 

Also in the E72, the N63 engine has two separate cooling circuits. 
One takes care of engine cooling, the second charge air cooling. 
The vehicle also has a third cooling circuit for the high voltage bat¬ 
tery. It will be discussed in the corresponding chapter, since it does 
not belong to the engine. 

Engine Cooling 

The cooling circuit for engine cooling also supplies the bearing 
seats of the exhaust turbocharger with coolant. The electric auxil¬ 
iary water pump with a power of 20 W supports the mechanical 
main coolant pump and ensures cooling of the exhaust turbocharg¬ 
er even after the engine has been stopped. 

The electric auxiliary water pump is arranged in the engine cooling 
circuit so that when the combustion engine is at a standstill, 
coolant flows through the transmission fluid-to-coolant heat 
exchanger. This guarantees that the gearbox and its two electric 
machines are cooled when driving in pure electric mode. 

As with the other models with an N63 engine, this pump also 
continues running after the combustion engine has been stopped 
in order to dissipate the residual heat away from the exhaust tur¬ 
bocharger (this can be for 15 to 20 minutes). 

Charge Air Cooling 

In the E72, the engine control unit is not cooled by coolant, but by 
two additional control units, the Power Electronic Box (PEB) and 
the Auxiliary Power Module (APM). This led to other changes in the 
low temperature cooling circuit. 

Electric Coolant Pumps 

Due to the additional components that have to be cooled and the 
associated pressure loss, a second electric coolant pump connect¬ 
ed in series with a power of 50 W is used. Only one 50 W pump 
would not be able to maintain the required volumetric flow. 


■ Additional 20 W Coolant Pump 

An additional electric coolant pump with a power of 20 W balances 
the different pressure losses between the APM and PEB. Coolant 
flows through the APM and PEB in parallel with one another but 
because the PEB generates more heat than the APM, this means 
that a larger cooling surface needs to be made available in the 
PEB, which brings with it a higher flow resistance and higher pres¬ 
sure losses. Without special measures, the coolant would mainly 
flow via the lower flow resistance of the APM. A restriction in the 
APM partly balances this, but not completely. The additional 20 W 
coolant pump is responsible for the rest. 

■ Bypass 

Another task of the 20 W coolant pump is to generate a small 
"bypass". At low ambient temperatures, the two 50 W pumps can 
be shut down, since e.g. cooling output is not required. 
Downstream of the PEB, there is a temperature sensor which is 
used to control this. However, the temperature sensor in the PEB is 
also accessed. 

■ Electrical Connection 

The two electric 50 W coolant pumps are connected to the digital 
engine electrical system via a LIN bus, while all 20 W pumps in the 
vehicle are activated by a pulse-width modulated signal. 

■ After-run 

To enable the heat from the PEB and APM to be dissipated even 
after parking, now there is also an after-run function for the low 
temperature cooling circuit. All three coolant pumps always contin¬ 
ue running for this purpose. 

■ Temperatures 

The set temperature for the low temperature cooling circuit is 65°C 
at the temperature sensor downstream of the PEB. As of 70°C, 
reduction of the controlled power in the PEB and at the APM 
begins in order to reduce the heat generation. 




E72 Complete Vehicle. 


N63 engine modifications > Engine cooling 



Compare the engine cooling circuits of E71 and E72. What are the modifications and why were they made? 



Reasons: 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

57 















































































































































58 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


N63 engine modifications > Low temperature cooling circuit 



Compare the low temperature cooling circuits of E71 and E72. What are the modifications and why were they made? 




Reasons: 

















































































































































Fuel Supply System 


The E72 has a pressurized fuel tank made of stainless steel with 
two chambers and a tank capacity of 85 liters. The reasons for 
introducing the pressurized fuel tank are based on US legislation, 
which provides very strict limit values for HC emissions. 

In a vehicle with a conventional tank, the fuel vapors collect in the 
carbon canister. While driving, fresh air is sucked through the car¬ 
bon canister for purging and burned in the engine. In the E72, 
there are driving situations in which the combustion engine does 
not run (driving is supported only by the electric machines). This 
means that in such cases, the fuel vapors could not be guided out 
of the carbon canister to the combustion engine for burning. 
Therefore, the pressurized fuel tank is used in the E72 to prevent 
vapors from exiting the pressurized fuel tank. This pressurized fuel 
tank is designed for an excess pressure of 350 millibars while 
stopped and 100 millibars while driving. 

Pressurized Tank 

The pressurized fuel tank in the E72 has a shape similar to the 
fuel tank in the E71. However, the pressurized fuel tank in the E72 
is not made of plastic, but of uncoated stainless steel. This way, 
the pressurized fuel tank can be distinguished even better from a 
"normal" fuel tank made of plastic. The weight of the pressurized 
fuel tank is approx. 25 kg and thus is 11 kg heavier than the fuel 
tank in the E71. The pressurized fuel tank is designed for a pres¬ 
sure range between -150 millibars and +350 millibars. While driv¬ 
ing the pressure range is reduced and lies between -90 and + 

100 millibars. 

The fuel tank capacity has the same volume as that of the E71 
and holds 85 liters. 


Pressurized tank 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Pressurized fuel tank 

2 

Fuel pressure sensor 


Fuel Pressure Sensor 

The pressure and temperature in the pressurized fuel tank are 
measured by a combined pressure/temperature sensor. The sen¬ 
sor measures the temperatures in the range from -40°C to +85°C 
and the pressure in the range from -150 millibars to 400 millibars. 
The measured values are sent to the control unit of the hybrid 
pressure refuelling electronic control unit via the LIN bus. The 
hybrid pressure refuelling electronic control unit evaluates the sig¬ 
nals of the pressure/temperature sensor and, if necessary, acti¬ 
vates the fuel tank isolation valve. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

59 











60 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Tank Isolation Valve 

The fuel tank isolation valve is installed on the carbon canister. The 
fuel tank isolation valve is activated by the hybrid pressure refuelling 
electronic control unit (TFE). The fuel tank isolation valve is normal¬ 
ly closed when de-energized. 

While driving, the pressure is limited to the permissible values by 
briefly activating the fuel tank isolation valve. The fuel tank isolation 
valve is also activated in order to relieve the pressure in the pres¬ 
surized fuel tank before refuelling. 

As keeping the valve open would require some power consump¬ 
tion, the activation time is limited depending on the fuel filler flap. 
The length of activation is 10 minutes if the filler flap is not opened 
and 15 minutes if the filler flap is opened. 

During phases of standstill, the excess pressure and vacuum are 
limited by two non-return valves that are integrated in the fuel tank 
isolation valve. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Tank isolation valve 

2 

Carbon canister 


Carbon Canister 

The carbon canister (AKF) in the E72 has been made larger 
(capacity of 3.4 liters). For comparison: the volume of the carbon 
canister in the E71 is 2.8 liters. 

TFE Control Unit 

The hybrid pressure refuelling electronic control unit is installed in 
the luggage compartment floor to the right of the high voltage bat¬ 
tery. 

The task of the hybrid pressure refuelling electronic control unit is 
to limit the internal pressure of the fuel tank. To do so, the hybrid 
pressure refuelling electronic control unit reads in the data from the 
sensors and buttons, evaluates it and, if necessary, activates the 
fuel tank isolation valve. In addition, it controls the refuelling proce¬ 
dure. Information is exchanged with other control units via the PT- 
CAN. Power is supplied to the hybrid pressure refuelling electronic 
control unit via the auxiliary fuse block (terminal 30g). 


Installation location of the TFE control unit 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

TFE control unit 

















Refuelling Button 

To introduce the refuelling procedure, 
the button for "refuelling" must first be 
operated. The refuelling button is locat¬ 
ed in the area of the A-pillar on the dri¬ 
ver's side. The control unit of the hybrid 
pressure refuelling electronic control 
unit evaluates the status of the button. 

The button receives the signal for the 
backlighting from the footwell module. 

Fuel Cap 

The fuel filler cap in the E72 bears the "ActiveHybrid" label. The 
fuel filler cap must not be exchanged with the "normal" fuel filler 
cap. Due to the increased pressure level in the E72 pressurized 
fuel tank, the opening pressure of the safety valve in the fuel filler 
cap is also increased. 

Refuelling 

The driver's desire to refuel is indicated by the refuelling button. 
The vehicle must be at rest. 

The hybrid pressure refuelling electronic control unit receives the 
request from the refueling button and starts reducing the pressure 
in the pressurized fuel tank (via activating fuel tank isolation valve). 
The hybrid pressure refuelling electronic control unit gets the infor¬ 
mation about the pressure from the fuel pressure sensor. 



Displays for tank readiness 

© 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

Check Control message in the instrument panel 

2 

Refuelling is possible 


The driver simultaneously receives information about the tank 
readiness status in the instrument panel as well as the CID. Then 
the fuel filler flap and cap can be opened and refuelling can take 
place. The refuelling should take place within 10 to 15 minutes. 

A hall effect sensor detects when the fuel filler flap is closed after 
refuelling. After about 2 seconds, the hybrid pressure refuelling 
electronic control unit activates the actuator drive for locking the 
fuel filler flap. The fuel tank isolation valve is no longer activated 
(is closed) and the displays in the instrument panel and CID 
disappear. This concludes the refuelling process. 


If any fuel vapors are present, they are released into the atmos¬ 
phere via the carbon canister and dust filter. After the pressure has 
been reduced, the fuel filler flap is unlocked by the filler flap actua¬ 
tor. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

61 











62 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Fuel supply system 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hybrid pressure refuelling electronic control unit (TFE) 

2 

Airfilter of the combustion engine 

3 

Differentiated air intake system of the combustion engine 

4 

Fuel injectors 

5 

Digital motor electronics (DME) 

6 

Diagnostic Module for Tank Leaks (DMTL) 

7 

Dust filter 

8 

Fuel tank vent valve (TEV) 

9 

Carbon canister (AKF) 

10 

Tank isolation valve 

11 

Fuel filter 

12 

Fuel level sensor 

13 

Suction jet pump 

14 

Intake mesh filter 

15 

First filling valve 

16 

Non-return valve 

17 

Electric fuel pump (EKP) 

18 

Expansion line 

19 

Return pipe 

20 

Feed line 

21 

Suction jet pump 

22 

Fuel level sensor 

23 

Non-return valve 

24 

Fuel pressure sensor 

25 

Pressure regulator 

26 

Service vent valves 

27 

Feed line to the combustion engine 

28 

Central pressure-retaining valve (Z-DHV) 

29 

Purge air line 

30 

Fuel tank vent valve 









































































































































































































E72 Complete Vehicle 


Fuel supply system > System overview 


1 ^ 

V 

% 



Compare the fuel supply systems from E71/N63 to E72. Note the differences. 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

63 





















































































































































































































64 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Fuel supply system > Wiring diagram 


Note the connections and functions of TFE. 




































































































E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Fuel supply system > Refuelling 


Note the procedure for refuelling of E72. 







BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

65 


























66 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Power Electronics 


The hybrid-relevant power electronics of the E72 are divided into 
two control units: 

• Auxiliary Power Module APM 

• Power Electronic Box PEB 

Both control units are installed above the combustion engine in 
the engine compartment. The safety cover protects against touch¬ 
ing the high voltage connections directly. Both control units are 
high voltage components. 

There is a bridge on the safety cover, which closes the circuit of 
the high voltage interlock loop. Four easily accessible screws 
must first be unscrewed in order to remove the safety cover. The 
safety cover is still attached via a fifth screw that cannot be seen 
initially. The bridge must be unlocked and pulled out so that this 
screw can be unscrewed. This interrupts the circuit of the high 
voltage interlock loop and de-energizes the high voltage electrical 
system. Only now, the fifth screw can be unscrewed and the safe¬ 
ty cover can be removed. 


Installation location of the APM and PEB 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Bridge for high voltage interlock loop 

2 

Power Electronic Box PEB 

3 

Safety cover 

4 

Auxiliary Power Module APM 















































E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Power electronics > Auxiliary Power Module > System overview 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

67 



Complete the following table and explain why the APM needs 
the connection to these components. 

1 Auxiliary Power Module 

2 _ 

3 _ 

4 _ 

5 _ 

6 Electric A/C compressor 

7 Power Distribution Box 


8 Power Electronic Box 



























































































68 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


APM 

The APM is a DC/DC converter that enables energy transfer 
between the two voltage levels of the hybrid car. One voltage level 
is the high voltage electrical system with approx. 300 V and the 
other is the familiar 14 V vehicle electrical system. The DC/DC con¬ 
verter replaces the alternator, which was previously used for the 
voltage supply of the 14V vehicle electrical system. Thus the elec¬ 
trical voltage supply of the 14V vehicle electrical system while driv¬ 
ing is no longer dependent on the engine speed of the combustion 
engine. 

The APM control unit is used in the E72 only. It is designed as a 
bidirectional converter. This means that the APM transfers the elec¬ 
trical energy in both directions between the high voltage electrical 
system and the 14V vehicle electrical system. The APM has been 
developed as part of the hybrid co-operation along with GM, 
DaimlerChrysler (later Daimler and Chrysler) and is based in part on 
the DC/DC converter of a predecessor project in which BMW did 
not participate. The developer and manufacturer of APM is Delphi 
Electronics & Safety. 

The APM is activated by the NCR which is part of the PEB. The 
APM does not switch on the voltage conversion on its own. 

The HCP sends the following commands to the APM: 

• Switch conversion on or off 

• Conversion direction 

(high voltage to 14 V or 14 V to high voltage) 

• The nominal voltage 

The APM then decides, based on the data from the self-diagnosis 
and the values it has detected itself, whether the conversion can be 
switched on. During operation, the APM attempts to adjust the 
nominal voltage to the corresponding voltage level by increasing 
the current up to the technically possible limit value. The APM 


cannot decrease the voltage in the vehicle electrical system, for 
example by lowering the voltage in the 14 V vehicle electrical sys¬ 
tem to 11 V. However, if the current voltage in the respective volt¬ 
age level is higher than the nominal voltage of the APM, the APM 
reduces the current to 0 A. Thus no energy transfer takes place. 
The APM has a passive discharge circuit that discharges the 
capacitors in the APM to a voltage value of less than 60 volts 
within five seconds. If a fault is detected, the APM switches off 
the conversion automatically. 

Operating Modes of the APM 

Depending on the direction in which the APM converts the voltage, 
two operating modes exist: downward conversion and upward con¬ 
version. 

Although the E72 cannot be jump started, the high voltage battery 
can be charged via the 12 Volt side. One responsibility of the APM 
is to upconvert the voltage to charge the high voltage battery. 



E72 Complete Vehicle 



Power electronics > Auxiliary Power Module > Operating modes 


U[V] 1 


300 





What are the two operating modes of the APM? 
Fill in the Boxes. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

69 

















































70 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Power Electronic Box (PEB) 

The abbreviation PEB stands for Power Electronic Box and refers 
to the control unit used in the E72 to activate and control the 
hybrid-specific components. 

The PEB controls the high voltage electrical system in all operating 
conditions, the bidirectional energy flow of the electric machines, 
the speed and torque of the two electric machines and the electri¬ 
cal hybrid oil pump control unit (electrical motor pump inverter). 

The PEB has been developed as part of the hybrid co-operation 
along with GM, DaimlerChrysler (later Daimler and Chrysler) and 
is based in part on the developments of a predecessor project in 
which BMW did not participate. The manufacturer and developer 
of the PEB is Hitachi, Ltd., Automotive Systems Japan. 

The PEB is the central bidirectional high voltage hybrid control unit, 
consisting of four microcontrollers (control units). These four con¬ 
trol units are the HCR MCPA, MCPB and EMPI. 

During diagnostics, each control unit sends its signals individually, 
where the fault entries of the EMPI and MCP are stored in the fault 
memory of the HCPThe communication of the control units in the 
PEB with other control units in the vehicle takes place independ¬ 
ently via the H-CAN and the H-CAN2. 

The following are the functions of the four control units in the PEB: 

• HCP: co-ordinates all central functions of the hybrid system, 
selects the gear, calculates the torque distribution between 
the combustion engine, electric machines, chassis and sus¬ 
pension and monitors the complete system. 

• MCPA: calculates the control of electric machine A depending 
on the requirement of the HCP 

• MCPB: calculates the control of electric machine B depending 
on the requirement of the HCP 

• EMPI: controls the electric motor of the hybrid oil pump. 


In addition to these four control units, the PEB contains the power 
electronics of the two impulse converters (AC/DC converters) to 
control the two electric machines, one impulse converter (AC/DC 
converter) to control the electrical hybrid oil pump control unit and 
a capacitor (1 mF) as the intermediate voltage circuit as well as the 
external hardware for all four control units. 

Other functions: 

• Control of the high voltage electrical system 

• Bidirectional distribution and transfer of the energy between 
the electric machines of the drive system and the high voltage 
system 

• Controlled discharge of the high voltage in the vehicle 

• Filtering of the high voltage electrical system 

• Insulation and insulation monitoring of the high voltage to 
earth 

• Diagnostic functions and self-protection of the components 

• Control of the electric machines in torque, speed 

• Activation and control of the hybrid oil pump 

• Pre-charge mode, which allows the high voltage system to 
be started 

The energy operational strategy in the hybrid master control unit 
HCP continuously adjusts the energy distribution depending on the 
environmental conditions, vehicle condition and driver's choice. 

The most important input and control variable for the operational 
strategy is the state of charge of the high voltage battery. 




E72 Complete Vehicle 


Power electronics > Power Electronic Box > System overview 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

71 



Complete the following table. 


1 Power Electronic Box 

2 _ 

3 _ 

4 _ 

5 _ 

6 _ 

7 _ 

8 _ 

9 _ 

10 12 V, H-CAN, H-CAN2, ... 


11 Power Distribution Box 














































































































72 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Power Distribution Box 

The PEB can be diagnosed and programmed. It is important that 
after the PEB is replaced, all four control units are programmed to 
bring them up to date. 

The 20 A fuse serves to protect the high voltage cable to the APM 
and the 40 A fuse serves to protect the high voltage cable to the 
EKK. Each of the high voltage fuses protects the high voltage posi¬ 
tive wire. 

If the high voltage fuses are defective, the entire PDB must be 
replaced. 



E72 Complete Vehicle. 

Power electronics > Power Distribution Box 



Complete the following table. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 



1 

Complete the following table. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

73 







































































74 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


High Voltage Cables screw type connectors at PEB 

The high voltage cables connect the high voltage components to 
each other and are identified by the orange cable sheath. The man¬ 
ufacturers of hybrid cars have agreed on uniform identification of 
high voltage cables using orange as a warning color. 

High voltage cables can be connected in one of two ways: 

• Screwed/bolted on 

• Quick connector 

Screws/Nuts/bolts are used to connect the High Voltage cables to 
the high voltage battery, and PEB. 

All other connections are made with round high voltage connectors 
with “quick-connect” locking mechanism. 

These round high voltage connectors have, until now, primarily 
been used in military applications. 

When contacting round high voltage connectors, it is particularly 
important to ensure correct locking. For locking, a locking ring is 
used, which can be pushed forwards and backwards. 




Round high voltage connectors 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

The round high voltage connector is locked when the locking ring (1) 
is pushed forwards. 

B 

The round high voltage safety connector is unlocked if the locking 
ring is pushed backwards. The red mark (2) is visible. Before the 
round high voltage connector is plugged in, the locking ring must 
be pushed backwards. 

















































E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Power electronics > High voltage cable 




Complete the following table: Identify the component and write 
the kind of voltage that goes accross the cable (AC/DC). 

1 _ _ 

2 Auxiliary Power Module (DC) 

3 _ _ 

4 _ _ 

5 Power Electronic Box (AC/DC) 

6 _ _ 

7 _ _ 

8 _ _ 

9 _ _ 

10 _ _ 

11 Electric A/C compressor 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

75 





































76 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Voltage Supply 


The vehicle electrical system of the E72 can be divided into three 
areas: 

• Driven with electric machines (high voltage with AC voltage) 

• High-voltage electrical system with DC voltage 

• 14 V vehicle electrical system. 

The electric drive consists of two electric machines, which can be 
operated as a generator (power source) or as a motor, and the 
power electronics (PEB). An AC/DC converter (coupling the elec¬ 
tric drive and the high voltage electrical system) and a DC/DC 
converter (high voltage electrical system and 14 V vehicle electri¬ 
cal system) are used as coupling elements. Both converters can 
be operated bi-directionally. 

The high voltage battery is the main element of the high voltage 
electrical system. In the E72, a nickel metal hydride battery (NiMH) 
is used for this purpose. This high voltage battery ensures, among 
other things, voltage supply when the vehicle is at a standstill or 
when "driving in electric mode". The electric A/C compressor 
EKKand the transmission oil pump EMPI are other vehicle electri¬ 
cal system components in the high voltage electrical system. 

The 14 V vehicle electrical system is similar to the vehicle 
electrical power system in existing vehicles; however, with the 
DC/DC converter (APM) being responsible for its voltage supply. 
The DC/DC converter has replaced the generator previously used 
for this purpose. The electric voltage supply of the 14 V vehicle 
electrical system is thus no longer dependent on the engine 
speed of the combustion engine when driving. 

For the E72, the combustion engine is started via an electric 
machine. As a result, the E72 does not require a conventional 
starter motor. 


System circuit diagram for low voltage supply 







































































































































































E72 Complete Vehicle. 



14V system > Voltage levels in E72 


Assign the components to the terms in the legend. Write the related numbers/letters in the graphic. 



A HV system, alternating current (AC) 

B HV system, direct current 
C 14 V system, direct current 

1 Power Electronic Box 

2 High-voltage battery 

3 Auxiliary Power Module 

4 Two 12 V batteries 

5 Electric Power Steering 

6 Electric A/C compressor 

7 Electrical Motor for transmission oil pump 

8 Electrical machines A / B 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

77 




















































78 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


12V Batteries 

To ensure the stability of the vehicle voltage and the redundant 
voltage supply of the hybrid parking lock (DSM), the E72 has an 
auxiliary battery which is connected in parallel to the 12 V battery 
present in the E70 and E71. In addition to ensuring vehicle voltage 
stability, the auxiliary battery is also used for the redundant supply 
of the DSM control unit. Both 12 V batteries are AGM batteries 
with 70 Ah. 

The use of auxiliary batteries reduces the internal resistance of the 
"standard battery". This allows current output on short notice. In 
order to prevent equalizing current while the vehicle is immobilized, 
both 12 V batteries are disconnected via a cut-off relay after the 
"ready to drive" mode has been switched off. While the vehicle is at 
a standstill, the 14 Vvehicle electrical system is supplied by the 
"standard battery" only. The Hybrid Interface Module (HIM) controls 
a cut-off relay and monitors the battery condition through voltage 
measurements at the positive terminal of the auxiliary battery. 

Cut-off Relay 

The cut-off relay is opened 5 s after the vehicle is parked and the 
high voltage system is switched off. 

The cut-off relay is closed under the following conditions: 

• The vehicle is "ready to drive" (CAN message from hybrid 
master control unit HCP) 

• The hybrid DC/DC converter has set the vehicle supply volt¬ 
age of the 14 V vehicle electrical system close to the battery 
voltage of the auxiliary battery 

• The difference between the battery voltage of the system bat¬ 
tery and the auxiliary battery is smaller than the threshold value 
of 1.2 V (preventing high currents to protect the cut-off relay). 


Charging the Auxiliary Battery 

The cut-off relay can only be closed if a charger is connected to 
the jump start terminal point of the vehicle. In order to recharge the 
auxiliary battery, first connect the charger to the jump start terminal 
point and then close the cut-off relay using the corresponding serv¬ 
ice function. 

The following service function for the auxiliary battery (second 12 V 
battery) is available via the BMW diagnosis system: 

• Charge second 12 V battery. 

Path: service functions > Body > Voltage supply > Hybrid car > 12 
V battery 

The auxiliary battery must be charged by activating the service 
function in order to prevent a timed cutoff of terminal 15. 



E72 Complete Vehicle. 



14V system > Two 12V batteries 


Write the names of the numbered components. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

79 
















































80 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Reverse Polarity Protection 

Reverse polarity protection is used to prevent the subsequent dam¬ 
age to the vehicle electrical system and electronic components 
connected to it which would result from a polarity reversal on the 
customer side during an external start. The diodes in the alternator 
are generally used to fulfil this task. Since the E72 does not have 
the conventional alternator (electric machine in the transmission), 
reverse polarity protection must be provided via a new component 
(reverse polarity protection module). 

The reverse polarity protection module is installed in the engine 
compartment near the jump start terminal point. The module is 
connected to the positive battery wire on one side and to earth on 
the other side. There are three Zener diodes inside the reverse 
polarity protection module; they limit the applied reversed voltage 
for at least six seconds to below -3.2 V. A polarity reversal that lasts 
a longer period of time may damage the module without causing 
damage to the neighboring components. The current carrying 
capacity is 650 A. 


Auxiliary Fuse Block 

A rear auxiliary fuse block with slots for 16 fuses supplies the fol¬ 
lowing control units and components with 14 V vehicle supply volt¬ 
age: 

• Hybrid brake actuation changeover SBA 

• Power electronic box 

• Hybrid pressure refuelling electronic control unitTFE 

• Hybrid Interface Module HIM 

• Electronics for the electric A/C compressor EKK 

• Direct Shift Module DSM 

• Transmission Control Module TCM 

• Coolant pump for the high voltage battery 

• Electrical vacuum pump 

• Electric coolant pump for PEB/APM 

The terminal 30g for the auxiliary fuse block is switched via the 
hybrid load relay. The hybrid load relay is controlled by the CAS. 




E72 Complete Vehicle. 


14V system > components in engine / luggage compartment 



Write the names of the numbered components. 




1 


1 


2 


2 


3 

4 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

81 













































Terminal Control 


82 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


The terminal assignments for all components taken over from the 
E71 have remained the same. The following terminal assignments 
are defined for the hybrid components: 

• Terminal 30: ARM, EPS and DSM 

• Terminal 30g: BCM, EKK, HIM, PEB, SBA, TCM, TEE 

• Terminal 30g_f: HIM 

"Ready to drive" Mode 

"Ready to drive" is a vehicle mode in which wheel torque is provid¬ 
ed by selecting a gear and actuating the accelerator pedal. Unlike 
in conventional vehicles, "ready to drive" mode in hybrid cars can¬ 
not be identified by a running combustion engine. 

The "ready to drive" mode is managed by the HCR The vehicle is 
put into "ready to drive" mode as soon as terminal 50 is switched 
on. The information "Terminal 50 = ON" is generated by CAS and 
transmitted to the HOP by the HIM via H-CAN. The logic in the 
CAS for controlling terminal 50 corresponds to the logic in the E72 
for a conventional starter control. Depending on various parameters 
(state of charge of the high voltage battery, temperature of the 
combustion engine, etc.), the HCP decides whether the subse¬ 
quent journey is driven with support of the combustion engine or 
the electric machines. 



A: display indicating "ready to drive" is deactivated 
B: display indicating "ready to drive" is activated 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Needle cf the engine speed display is in 
"OFF" pcsiticn —> "ready tc drive" is net activated. 

2 

Needle fer state cf charge cf the high vcitage 
battery pcints tc null. 

3 

Needle cf the engine speed display is in 
"READY" pcsiticn —> "ready tc drive" is activated. 

4 

Needle fer state cf charge cf the high vcitage 
battery indicates the current state cf charge 


In the E72, the voltage supply of the 12 V vehicle electrical system 
during "ready to drive" mode is ensured by the DC/DC converter 
(APM). 
















E72 Complete Vehicle 



14V system > Energy management > Terminal control 


Note the changes with regard to the terminal control for the E72. 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

83 

























































84 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 



Bus systems > Bus overiew 


Compare the E72 and the E71 bus systems. Try to answer following questions: Which bus systems are new? Which control units are new? 
Which control units and bus system are not in E72? Which control units are in your opinion changed? 



■ r ■)■■■■ ■■■■■ ■■■■■ ■■■■rBBBBB BBBBB BBBBrBBBBTBBBBVBBBBVBBBBTBBBBTBBBBTBBBB-1IBBBBVBBBBVBBBB*rBBBBVBBBB FBBBBBIBBBBVBBBBrBBBB VBBBB BBBBB BBBBB’VBBBB BBBBB BBBBB BBBB1 B 












































































































































































































































































































































































E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Bus systems > Bus overiew 



Compare the E72 and the E71 bus systems. Try to answer following questions: Which bus systems are new? Which control units are new? 
Which control units and bus system are not in E72? Which control units are in your opinion changed? 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

85 


















































































86 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


H-CAN and H-CAN2 

As additional bus systems, the E72 uses two additional CAN buses 
for networking the hybrid components together and directly con¬ 
necting to BMW control units with a high communication overhead 
(DME and SBA). 

The HIM ensures that these two bus systems connect to the 
remaining BMW bus systems. These hybrid bus systems are des¬ 
ignated H-CAN and H-CAN2. They have been taken over from the 
development co-operation and are specified by it. 

Both data buses have a data transfer rate of 500 kilobits per sec¬ 
ond. As with previously used CAN bus systems, H-CAN and H- 
CAN2 are also designed as twisted two-wire connections. Using 
twisted two wire connections achieves better electromagnetic 
compatibility of the bus systems. 

The signal levels on the H-CAN and H-CAN2 with an active data 
bus are: 

• CAN-H: 3.5 V 

• CAN-L: 1.5 V. 

In an inactive data bus, the low and high bus level is 2.5 V (logical 
zero). A logical 1 is transmitted with a voltage difference of 2 V. 

Both data buses have emergency running properties, i.e. if one of 
the two bus wires (CAN-H, CAN-L) has been interrupted, the data 
are then transmitted over the remaining intact wire. Some control 
units are connected to both the H-CAN and the H-CAN2. In this 
respect, the data buses are not redundant. Different messages are 
transmitted on both data buses. 

The terminating resistors on the H-CAN are in the BCM and DME 
(each 120 ohms). On the H-CAN2, the terminating resistors are 
installed in the PEB connector and in the DME (also each 120 
ohms). The total resistance, which comes from the parallel circuit of 
two 120-ohm resistors, is therefore 60 ohms. This resistance can 


be measured between two bus wires. Both bus systems are event- 
driven, i.e. messages are transmitted only if there is something to 
report. 

These two CAN buses have the following characteristics, which 
deviate from the BMW standards: 

• No network management is implemented. This means that 
the H-CAN and H-CAN2 cannot be wakened. The control 
units on these data buses are wakened via a separate wake- 
up line. 

• "Normal addressing" for diagnosis reports. The BMW standard 
is "extended addressing". With extended addressing, the 
amount of user data for each CAN message is 1 byte smaller 
than with normal addressing. Therefore a "translator" is 
required to correctly format the CAN messages from the H- 
CAN and H-CAN2 to the PT-CAN and vice versa. This task is 
assumed by the HIM as gateway. 

• 1 -bit signals, no invalid signal detection. At BMW, the signals 
on the PT-CAN are safeguarded with a checksum. The corre¬ 
sponding signals on the H-CAN and H-CAN2 are either not 
safeguarded or are safeguarded differently. The checksum is 
not recalculated in the HIM. 

• Varying cycle times. The message format on the H-CAN and 
H-CAN2 is that from Motorola. The BMW standard is that from 
Intel. 



E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Bus systems > Hybrid-CAN 



What is the voltage level on the Hybid-CAN? What are the characteristics of H-CAN / H-CAN2? Which control units are connected to H-CAN / H-CAN2? 




BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

87 








































































































88 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Hybrid Interface Module (HIM) 

The HIM has a gateway function between the control units of the 
BMW vehicle electrical system and the control units that have been 
developed as part of the co-operation. Thus the control units 
known from the E71 vehicle electrical system can be used In the 
E72 and the control units from the co-operation can also be inte¬ 
grated into the newly developed vehicle electrical system. Here, 
the HIM acts a "translator" and enables the control units on the 
PT-CAN to exchange information with the control units on the 
H-CAN and H-CAN2. 

The installation location and the dimensions of the HIM are exactly 
the same as those of the ARS control unit in the E71. The ARS is 
omitted in the E72. 

In addition to the gateway function, the HIM has the following func¬ 
tions: 

• Waking up the co-operation control units 

• Evaluating the temperature sensor for the cooling circuit 
of the hybrid components (PBM and APM) 

• Activating the valves for cooling the high voltage battery 

• Reading in the shift paddles on the steering wheel 

• Measuring the voltage of the auxiliary battery 

• Controlling the cut-off relay for the auxiliary battery 


■ Waking up the Co-operation Control Units 

Since the H-CAN and H-CAN2 have no network management, the 
HIM has to control the activation and going to sleep of both data 
buses as master by activating wake-up lines. To do so, the HIM has 
two wake-up lines and itself is connected to terminal 15. 

If the HIM Is woken up via the PT-CAN network management 
(once the bus is active), the HIM activates the wake-up lines for the 
H-CAN and H-CAN2. If a co-operation control unit does not wake 
up after a defined waiting period when the corresponding wake-up 
line is activated, a fault entry is made in the HIM. This wake-up 
mechanism is unidirectional. It is not possible to wake up the HIM 
via the co-operation control units. 

The HIM wakes up the following control units: APM, BCM, HCR 
MCPA, MCPB, TCM and EMPI. Terminal 15 is controlled as usual 
by the CAS. 

The only exception relating to waking up the data buses or the 
control units is the DSM control unit. The DSM (Direct Shift 
Module) is a control unit taken over from Daimler and, unlike other 
control units on the H-CAN / H-CAN2, does not have a wake-up 
line, but a CAN transceiver that can be wakened, i.e. the DSM is 
woken up as soon as the H-CAN is active. 

Since there is no network management on the H-CAN, the DSM 
has to evaluate certain messages for Identifying the bus sleep 
mode. The wake-up mechanism described has been selected to 
integrate the DSM into the vehicle electrical system without a hard¬ 
ware change and may be used only by the DSM. If another control 
unit on the H-CAN were to use the same wake-up mechanism, the 
control units could never go to sleep due to the absence of net¬ 
work management. 




E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Bus systems > Hybrid-Interface-Module 



What is the installation location of the HIM? What are the functions of the HIM? 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

89 






















































































































































90 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Wake-up mechanism of the co-operation control units 

FT-CtiM-VWJP 


H-MUP1 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

BCM battery monitoring module 

7 

HIM Hybrid Interface Module 

2 

ARM Auxiliary Power Module 

8 

DME Digital Motor Electronics 

3 

HCP Hybrid Controller Processor 

9 

SBA Sensotronic Brake Actuation 

4 

EMPI Electrical Motor Pump Inverter (hybrid oil pump control unit) 

10 

DSM Direct Shift Module 

5 

MCP A/B Machine Controller Pack A/B 

11 

Direct connection between the HCP and BCM for closing 
and opening the contacts of the switch contactors 

6 

TCM Transmission Control Module 























































































































































































E72 Complete Vehicle. 

Chassis and Drive Dynamics > Overview 


Please fill in the available features. 


Feature 

E71 

X6 xDrive 50i 

Standard Option 

E72 

ActiveHybrid X6 

Standard Option 

xDrive all wheel drive 

X 


X 


Dynamic Performance Control 





Power Steering 





Power Steering with Servotronic function 





Active Steering 


X 



Integral Active Steering (incl. rear wheel steering) 





Dynamic Drive 


X 

Package 
"Adaptive Drive" 



Vertical Dynamic Control (Electronic Damper Control) 

Self-levelling air suspension 



X 


Flat tire monitor (RPA) 

X (ECE) 




Tire Pressure Monitor (TPM/RDC) 

X(US) 






BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

91 




































92 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Electronic Power Steering 


The optional equipment "active steering" is not offered for the 
E72. The E72 is only available with electromechanical power 
steering. This is also referred to as "Electric Power Steering EPS". 

Since power steering must also be available while the vehicle Is 
driven in pure electric mode it was decided in development that 
the E72 would use electromechanical power steering instead of 
hydraulic steering. 

The electric motor which generates the steering servo is arranged 
axially parallel to the rack and pinion power steering gear. The 
design principle and the functions of the electromechanical power 
steering In the E72 are largely Identical to the steering implement¬ 
ed In the E89. 

The most important changes are: 

• Design adaptation to the axle geometry of the E72 

• Increase In power of the electric motor based on greater 
track-rod forces 

• Integration into the on-board communication system and 
the onboard energy system of the E72. 

Although a power Increase was necessary for the electromechani¬ 
cal power steering for the E72, it is not a high voltage component, 
but rather a 14 V component. This is the primary purpose for the 
second 12 Volt battery. 


The general characteristics of electromechanical power steering 
systems are as follows: 

• Damping disturbances which originate from the road surface 
(increased ride comfort) 

• Active steering wheel return (Increased ride comfort) 

• Speed-dependent steering servo "Servotronic" (increased 
ride comfort and improved driving safety) 

• No hydraulic circuit (easier vehicle integration and improved 
environmental compatibility) 

• Requirements-based activation of the electric motor (contri¬ 
bution to lower fuel co sumption) 

• Steering servo independent of the speed of the combustion 
engine. 

The EPS steering system consists of the following main compo¬ 
nents: 

• Steering-torque sensor 

• EPS control unit 

• Electric motor with motor position sensor 

• Speed reducer 

• Rack-and-pinion steering box 

These components form a unit (the "EPS rack-and-pinion steer¬ 
ing box") which can only be replaced as a complete assembly dur¬ 
ing service. 

After a new EPS rack-and-pinion steering box is installed, a wheel 
alignment with toe adjustment must be carried out. In the course 
of the start-up, a service function must be run to teach in the end 
stops. 





E72 Complete Vehicle 


Electric Power Steering EPS > Overview 




Hydraulic power steering Feature Electric power steering 


Driven by 


Energy source 


Power consumption (peak) 


Power consumption 

(combustion engine at idle speed, but no steering) 


Power consumption 

(combustion engine at max. speed, but no steering) 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

93 



















94 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Electric Power Steering EPS > Interfaces 



The mechanical interfaces of an HPS and an EPS are basically the same. Which electrical interfaces does the EPS have? 



Write down the electric connections at the EPS motor. 


Where are the power lines for the EPS connected? 

Do the power lines need "special treatment"? 1 

_ _ _ _ 2 


3 






























E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Electric Power Steering EPS > Repairs 



Which parts of the EPS can you replace separately? 



What do you have to do after replacing the EPS rack? 

Write down the necessary steps in the correct order below. 

1 _ 

2 _ 

3 _ _ 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

95 




















96 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Sensotronic Brake Actuation 


The brake system of E72 serves not only to decelerate the vehicle 
in a safe and stable manner. It also enables the braking energy of 
the vehicle to be not converted Into heat, but instead recovered 
and converted into electrical energy using the electric machines in 
the active gearbox. To attain maximum fuel economy in conjunc¬ 
tion with the full hybrid drive of the E72, the brake system must be 
able to recover as much brake energy as possible. At the same 
time, the customer has the right to expect the typical BMW brake 
pedal feeling, exact controllability of the brake force and, of course, 
outstanding deceleration values In all speed ranges and driving 
situations. Of course, the hybrid brake system of the E72 meets 
all of these requirements, thus proving the technological expertise 
of the BMW Group In this area. 


To meet these requirements, a brake system has been developed 
in which there is not a permanent mechanical connection 
between the brake pedal and the rest of the brake system (brake 
servo). Instead, It is a brake-by-wire system, which detects the dri¬ 
ver's braking request electronically. Then, the braking request is 
split into an electrical portion and a hydraulic portion. The electri¬ 
cal portion is converted to electrical energy by the electric 
machines of the active gearbox and stored in the high voltage bat¬ 
tery. The hydraulic portion generates deceleration via the conven¬ 
tional service brake. The braking request is split according to its 
strength, the driving situation and the state of the hybrid compo¬ 
nents. In this way, the hybrid brake system can implement decel¬ 
erations of up to 3 m/s^ In pure electric mode. However, a much 
more Important parameter is the percentage of brake energy that 
can be recovered, across all driving situations. Here, the complex 
brake system of the E72 attains a very high value of between 80% 
and 90% - conversely, this means that only 10% to 20% of the 
entire brake energy is converted into useless heat via the service 
brake. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Brake pedal 

2 

Active brake servo 

3 

Brake fluid expansion tank 

4 

Vacuum line 

5 

Mechanical vacuum pump 

6 

Electrical vacuum pump 

7 

Dynamic stability control 

8 

Hybrid brake actuation changeover 
(Sensotronic Brake Actuation SBA) 























System wiring diagram of hybrid brake system 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hybrid brake actuation changeover (Sensotronic Brake Actuation SBA) 

2 

Sensor for brake vacuum 

3 

Solenoid valve for activating the active brake servo 

4 

Sensor for diaphragm travel 

5 

Brake pressure sensor, pressure chamber 

6 

Brake pressure sensor, floating circuit 

7 

Pressure sensor of the shut-off unit 

8 

Valve in the shut-off unit 

9 

Sensor for brake pedal angle 

10 

Lines for controlling and monitoring the electrical vacuum pump 

11 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

12 

Electrical vacuum pump 

13 

Hybrid Interface Module HIM 

14 

Junction box electronics 

15 

Electromechanical relay for activating the electrical vacuum pump 

16 

Semiconductor relay for activating the electrical vacuum pump 

17 

Hybrid fuse block 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

97 
































































































98 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Distributed Functions 

The SBA control unit is the primary control unit of the hybrid brake 
system. It controls all processes, from detecting the braking 
request to activating the actuators of the brake system. 

The actuator for regenerative braking is the drive train: using the 
power electronic box, the electric machines are activated such that 
they work as generators. So that they can generate electrical ener¬ 
gy, they have to be driven mechanically. Thus they absorb torque, 
which acts as braking torque on the drive train. Therefore, with the 
possible decelerations of up to 3 m/s^, unstable driving situations 
could result if the braking torque acted on the rear axle only. 
Therefore, In regenerative braking, the multidisc clutch in the trans¬ 
fer box is also closed. Then, the speeds at the front axle and rear 
axle are the same, which is the prerequisite for splitting the braking 
torque almost equally between the two axles. 

In this "by-wire" mode, as much brake energy as possible Is recov¬ 
ered, I.e. fed to this first, electrical path. The conventional service 
brake is used for the remaining amount of energy only for decelera¬ 
tions greater than 3 m/s^ or If the hybrid drive cannot convert the 
full brake energy. For this purpose, the SBA control unit activates 
the active brake servo. The servo generates the brake pressure for 
both brake circuits, which is distributed to the four wheel brakes by 
the dynamic stability control. 

Only In fault situations or special situations are there emergency 
functions in which the SBA control unit does not assume the mas¬ 
ter role. For example, in situations with unstable dynamic handling 
characteristics, the dynamic stability control assumes the master 
role, taking higher priority in order to stabilize the vehicle. In that 
case, regenerative braking is no longer possible. 


If one of the components required for regenerative braking fails or 
the power supply is interrupted, the hybrid brake system switches 
from "by-wire" mode to a conventional mode. In conventional 
mode, the mechanical connection between the brake pedal and 
service brake is once again made. This allows the vehicle to be 
decelerated safely using the conventional hydraulic brake system. 



Implementation of the brake request by the hybrid brake system 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Pressing the brake pedal (force, distance) 

2 

Brake pedal unit 

3 

Electrical transmission of the braking request 

4 

Hybrid brake actuation changeover (Sensotronic Brake Actuation SBA) 

5 

Nominal value of the regenerative portion 

6 

Power electronic box 

7 

Activation of the electric machines as a generator 

8 

Electric machines in the active gearbox 

9 

Electrical energy generated by the electric machines 

10 

Electrical energy to be stored 

11 

High-voltage battery 

12 

Electrical activation of the solenoid valve in the brake servo 

13 

Active brake servo 

14 

Hydraulic pressure in the two brake circuits 

15 

Dynamic stability control 

16 

Hydraulic pressure in the brake lines to the wheel brakes 

17 

Four wheel brakes 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

99 



























100 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Conventional Mode 

The conventional mode is the mechanical fallback level of the 
hybrid brake system. In this mode, there is again a mechanical con¬ 
nection between the brake pedal and brake servo. Thus the driver 
can generate a brake pressure in the hydraulic brake system just as 
in conventional vehicles with brake power assistance, safely decel¬ 
erating the vehicle. In conventional mode, regenerative braking is 
no longer possible. Instead, the full braking power is provided by 
the hydraulic brake system. 

If the driver presses the brake pedal in conventional mode, the 
solenoid valve in the active brake servo is not activated. Thus the 
push rod initially does not move. As a result, when the brake pedal 
is pressed, the gap between the bolt and limit position at the end 
of the push rod is closed, and the mechanical connection men¬ 
tioned above is created. 

From the driver's perspective, this manifests itself as an increase in 
the free travel. The driver feels hardly any counterforce until the bolt 
touches the limit position. In conventional mode, the solenoid valve 
in the shut-off unit is open. Thus the brake fluid in the shut-off unit 
can flow upwards into the chamber. There, a moving piston is 
located that can move upwards against a spring force. The spring 
in the shut-off unit generates a significantly lower counterforce than 
that in the pedal force simulator. Thus in this case, the spring in the 
pedal force simulator is barely compressed at all. One could also 
say that the pedal force simulator is not relevant here. The only 
remaining counterforce is the spring force of the spring in the shut¬ 
off unit, which is very low. 


Brake by Wire Mode 

After the voltage supply is switched on, the hybrid brake system 
carries out a self-test of all system components required for proper 
function of the by-wire mode. If this self-test is completed success¬ 
fully, by-wire mode is activated. Otherwise, the hybrid brake system 
remains in conventional mode. 

In by-wire mode, the brake pedal is mechanically decoupled from 
the brake servo. The driver's brake request is evaluated by the SBA 
control unit using the brake pedal angle sensor. Depending on the 
driving situation and the state of the hybrid components, this brak¬ 
ing request is split into a regenerative portion and a hydraulic por¬ 
tion. To do so, the SBA control unit sends a nominal value to the 
hybrid master control unit to implement the regenerative portion. 
The hybrid master control unit then implements this nominal value 
via the hybrid electric machine control unit A and B control units. 
The electrical energy generated by the electric machines in this 
way is stored in the high voltage battery. Here, too, the control units 
of the power electronic box are involved (converting voltage and 
current level). 

To transmit the hydraulic portion, the SBA control unit supplies cur¬ 
rent to the solenoid valve in the active brake servo. This allows air 
to flow into the work chamber, and due to the prevailing vacuum, a 
force is generated on the pistons in the tandem brake master cylin¬ 
der. Thus pulls the push rod into the brake servo. As a result, the 
bolt of the brake pedal, which is plugged through the fork-shaped 
end of the push rod, cannot reach the mechanical limit position. 
Thus there is no counterforce when the brake pedal is actuated. 

Instead, the counterforce is generated by the pedal force simulator. 
A force curve has been implemented that is practically identical to 
that of a conventional brake system. The shut-off unit acts as a 
rigid element in by-wire mode. The enclosed brake fluid cannot be 
compressed. Here, it cannot escape into the expansion chamber 
with the spring, as the chamber is blocked by a solenoid valve. 



E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Hybrid braking system > Operation modes 



Compare the operation modes. How is the brake force created in each mode? 


Conventional mode 



■ V 


Cut-off device 
active 


Brake-by-wire mode 




Brake pedal force 
simulator active 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

101 






























































































102 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Active Brake Servo 

In the E72, a brake servo with dimensions of 9.5 inches is used. 
The outwardly visible special feature is the fork-shaped end of the 
push rod, which holds the bolt of the brake in an elongated hole. 
The movement of the bolt In the elongated hole reproduces the 
decoupling of the brake pedal from the hydraulic brake system. 

This is used in by-wire mode. At the same time, however, a 
mechanical connection between the brake pedal and hydraulic 
brake system is also possible, as is necessary for conventional 
mode. 

During service, the components listed below can be replaced indi¬ 
vidually: 

• Active brake servo with push rod and fork 

• Brake vacuum-pressure sensor incl. gasket 

• Diaphragm travel sensor 

Solenoid Valve 

The active element of the brake servo is the solenoid valve, which 
is supplied with current by the SBA control unit in by-wire mode. 
The activation of the solenoid valve allows air to flow into the work 
chamber of the active brake servo, which moves the linkage and 
exerts a force on the tandem brake master cylinder. Thus brake 
force can be built up In the hydraulic brake system without 
mechanical actuation by the driver. 

Diaphragm Travel Sensor 

To enable continuous monitoring of the function of the electrical 
activation of the active brake servo, it has a diaphragm travel sensor. 
This is a tracer pin that follows the movement of the diaphragm. 
Specifically, this sensor signal enables air pockets in the brake fluid 
to be found and leaks In the hydraulic system to be discovered. In 
the case of these problems, the travel distance of the diaphragm is 
less than expected for the corresponding supply of current to the 


diaphragm valve. The SBA control unit evaluates the signal of the 
diaphragm travel sensor and carries out the monitoring. If a fault is 
detected, the SBA control unit exits by-wire mode and changes to 
conventional mode. At the same time, it triggers the output of a 
Check Control message. 

Brake Vacuum-pressure Sensor 

In both by-wire mode and conventional mode, a brake vacuum is 
required to reinforce the brake pressure. Therefore, the brake servo 
has a redundantly designed brake vacuum-pressure sensor. The 
SBA control unit uses these signals to continuously monitor the 
available brake vacuum. If the brake vacuum Is too low, the electri¬ 
cal vacuum pump is activated. If the SBA control unit determines a 
fault in the brake vacuum supply, it sends a command to the digital 
motor electronics to start the combustion engine. When the com¬ 
bustion engine runs, the mechanical vacuum pump also works, 
thus ensuring the brake vacuum supply. 



E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Hybrid braking system > Active brake servo and SBA unit 



Take notes about sensors in and connectors at these units below. 




BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

103 






























104 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Hybrid Brake Actuation Changeover 

The "hybrid brake actuation changeover" designates the unit com¬ 
posed of the control unit and hydraulic unit. It is also referred to as 
the Sensotronic Brake Actuation SBA. The installation location of 
the SBA unit is to the left of the brake servo. It can only be replaced 
as a complete unit. 

The SBA control unit assumes the master role for brake activation. 

It measures the driver's braking request and splits this total braking 
torque into a regenerative portion and a hydraulic portion. For this 
purpose, the SBA control unit has the following electrical inter¬ 
faces: 

• Brake pedal angle sensor 

• Shut-off valve of the shut-off unit 

• Pressure sensor of the shut-off unit 

• Solenoid valve in the brake servo 

• Diaphragm travel sensor in the brake servo 

• Brake vacuum-pressure sensor in the brake servo 

• Electrical vacuum pump (activation and monitoring) 

• Voltage supply 

• PT-CAN and H-CAN 2 bus systems 


To implement the regenerative portion, the SBA control unit com¬ 
municates with the hybrid master control unit via the hybrid CAN 2, 
hybrid interface module and hybrid CAN. The SBA control unit 
transmits the hydraulic portion by directly activating the solenoid 
valve in the brake servo. Here, as with all interventions into the 
hydraulic brake system, the DSC control unit is an important com¬ 
munication partner for the SBA control unit. The following is a sum¬ 
mary of important input and output variables of the SBA control 
unit that are transmitted via bus systems: 


Information 

Direction 

Source/sink 

Request regenerative 
braking torque 

Output 

SBA > HCR SBA > DSC > VTG 

Request hydraulic brake 
power assistance 

Output 

SBA > DSC 

Maximum possible 
regenerative braking torque 

Input 

DSC > SBA, HCP > SBA 

Driving speed and wheel 
speeds, longitudinal 
acceleration 

Input 

DSC > SBA 

Stability of the driving 
situation 

Input 

DSC > SBA 

Status of operating 
readiness 

Input/output 

DSC > SBA, HCP > SBA, 

DME > SBA 

SBA > DSC, SBA > HCR SBA > DME 





SBA unit 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Electrical connector 

2 

Hydraulic part 

3 

Bracket 

4 

Connection for rear brake circuit brake line, 
input from tandem brake master cylinder 

5 

Connection for rear brake circuit brake line, output to DSC unit 

6 

Connection for front brake line, output to DSC unit 

7 

Connection for front brake line, input from tandem brake master cylinder 

8 

Control unit 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

105 





















106 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Electrical Vacuum Pump 

During phases of driving in pure electric mode, the combustion 
engine is at a standstill and thus does not power the mechanical 
vacuum pump. To ensure the brake vacuum supply even during 
these phases, the E72 has an additional electrical vacuum pump. 

It is installed in the engine compartment, on the right as seen in 
the direction of travel, on the front end of the crankcase. 

The pump element is a double diaphragm pump. The inner struc¬ 
ture is almost symmetric, so that one intake valve and one dis¬ 
charge valve are installed on each of the two end faces. The two 
valves can be identified by the shape of the housing cover. The 
pump input is connected to the vacuum line. The pump draws in 
air at the input, thus generating a vacuum. The air that is drawn in 
is fed to the outside via discharge holes on one housing cover. 

The electrical vacuum pump can be replaced during service only 
as a complete unit. 

The motor of the electrical vacuum pump is supplied with current 
using the SBA control unit and two relays. The relays are: 

• One electromechanical relay installed in the spare wheel well 
just to the right of the second 12 V battery. 

• One semiconductor relay installed in the area of the right rear 
light. 

The two relays for activating the electrical vacuum pump are 
switched in series. In normal operation, the SBA control unit 
switches on the electromechanical relay as soon as terminal 30g is 
switched on. However, the actual switching on and off of the elec¬ 
trical vacuum pump is carried out by the semiconductor relay. This 
provides the advantage of a gear shift that is free of wear and noise. 

Activation of the Electrical Vacuum Pump 

Of course, the semiconductor relay used here is also designed to 
last the service life of the vehicle. If, despite this, there should be a 


component defect of the semiconductor relay, measures must be 
taken so that the hybrid brake system still functions reliably. 

If, after the combustion engine is started, the brake vacuum supply 
from the mechanical vacuum pump is working properly, the hybrid 
brake system remains in by-wire mode even in the event of a fault 
of the electrical vacuum pump. Otherwise, the hybrid brake system 
switches to conventional mode. 

The SBA control unit can identify any component defects using 
the monitoring line, which branches off between the output of the 
semiconductor relay and the switching contact of the electro¬ 
mechanical relay. The SBA control unit measures the current at 
this monitoring line and compares it to the expected value, which 
depends on the required switching modes (relay on or off). 

The SBA control unit controls the demand-based switching on and 
off of the electrical vacuum pump based on the information regard¬ 
ing whether the combustion engine is running and the brake vacu¬ 
um, measured at the brake servo. If the brake vacuum is too low, it 
activates the electrical vacuum pump. 

Dynamic Stability Control 

With regard to its hardware, the dynamic stability control has the 
same structure as that of the E70 or E71. However, the range of 
functions of the software had to be adapted to the system network 
of the hybrid brake system. 

Following is a brief list of these changes: 

• Providing the hydraulic brake power assistance 

• Activating the multidisc clutch in the transfer box for regenera¬ 
tive braking 

• Evaluating the stability of the driving condition and providing it 
as a bus signal 



E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Hybrid braking system > Electric vacuum pump 



Mark the inlet and the outlet of the electric vacuum pump at 
the graphic. 




What is the purpose of the electromechanic relay and the 
semiconductor relay in terms of the electric vacuum pump? 


In which driving situations will the electric vacuum pump be 
activated? 


Where are the relays located in the car. 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

107 













































108 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Displays 


The hybrid-specific operating conditions and the charge state of 
the high voltage battery are displayed in the instrument panel and, 
if desired, in the central information display. The following hybrid- 
specific operating conditions are displayed: 

• "Ready to drive" display 

• Display for driving in electric mode 

• Display for boost function 

• Energy recovery 

They are displayed in the instrument panel at all times in the bot¬ 
tom section of the engine speed display. The display for hybrid is 
called up in the CID via the "Vehicle info > Hybrid" menu. Both the 
display in the CID and in the instrument panel are activated when 
terminal 15 is switched on. 

Instrument Panel 

If terminal R is switched off, the needle of the engine speed dis¬ 
play points to "OFF". This signals to the driver that both the com¬ 
bustion engine and the electric machines are switched off. The 
needle for the state of charge of the high voltage battery likewise 
points to null. 




Index 

Explanation 

A 

Display indicating "ready to drive" is not activated 

B 

Display indicating "ready to drive" is activated 

C 

Display for driving in electric mode 

D 

Display when the vehicle is powered solely by the combustion engine 

E 

Display during the boost function 

F 

Display during coasting (overrun) mode or braking (energy recovery) 






























E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Displays, Indicators and Controls > Instrumentcluster 



Write the terms for the display of hybrid functions in the boxes below. Which driving situation is displayed? 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

109 


























110 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Indicators in the Central Information Display 

In all operating conditions of the vehicle, the energy/power flows 
and the state of charge of the high voltage battery can be shown in 
the CD. This allows the driver to have an overview of the operating 
principle of the hybrid system in various driving conditions. The 
displays for hybrid are called up in the CD via the "Vehicle info > 
Hybrid" menu. 

The display of the energy/power flows works according to the 
following principle: 

• Blue: electrical energy 

• Red: energy of the combustion engine 

• Arrow: direction of the energy/power flow 

During sharp acceleration (boost function), power for the vehicle is 
drawn simultaneously from the combustion engine and both elec¬ 
tric machines. This is indicated by a red arrow (portion drawn from 
the combustion engine) and a slightly smaller blue arrow (portion 
drawn from the electric machines). When the combustion engine is 
activated, it appears in red (otherwise, it is gray). The activity of the 
electric machines in the active gearbox is signalled by a blue color 
of the gearbox. The five segments symbolize the state of charge of 
the high voltage battery. In the example above, 4 segments are 
filled. This corresponds to a state of charge of 80%. 

Because the power is drawn from both the combustion engine and 
the electric machines, the power flow to the output shaft is divided 
in two and indicated in two colors. Red corresponds to the portion 
drawn from the combustion engine and blue, the portion drawn 
from the electric machines. The arrow points in the direction of the 
drive gears. In the same way, the power flow to the front and rear 
axle is displayed. The energy flow from the high voltage battery to 
the electric machines is indicated by two blue lines. 


Hybrid menu on Central Information Display 

























E72 Complete Vehicle 



Displays, Indicators and Controls > Central Information Display 


Write the terms for the display of hybrid functions in the boxes below. Which driving situation is displayed? 



Notes: 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

111 































112 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Displays, Indicators and Controls > Central Information Display 



Write the terms for the display of hybrid functions in the boxes below. Which driving situation is displayed? 



Notes: 
























Hybrid-specific Check Control Messages Although there are two different power sources and two different 

energy accumulators, there are no differences in operating an 

If faults occur in the E72, the driver is informed of these by means ActiveHybrid X6 compared to a conventional vehicle. Depending on 

of the Check Control messages. The following table summarizes various parameters, the hybrid system automatically configures the 

the hybrid-specific Check Control messages. best settings for driving dynamically and effectively. 



Meaning 

Cause 


Refuelling is possible in... s 

Hybrid pressurized fuel tank Refuelling 
request detected 

Q 

HYBRID 

Hybrid battery is charging, charg¬ 
ing procedure finished, etc. 

These Check Control messages can 
have various causes, such as charging 
source connected, driver must switch on 
ignition, charging procedure in progress, 

etc. 

I 

HYBRID 

Engine malfunctioning Power loss 
or Engine Engine does not shut 
off or hybrid system malfunction¬ 
ing. Engine malfunctioning 

E-machine fault, BPCM fault, TCM fault. 
E-machine has failed, ELUP fault, vehicle 
can only be driven conventionally using 
combustion engine 


Engine Cannot continue driving 

Hybrid system shut down 


Hybrid system malfunctioning 

Insulation fault, HV interlock fault or HV 
battery fault 


Hybrid system shut down. 

HV system shut down 


BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

113 













114 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


Climate Control 


The E72 is the first BMW production vehicle to use an electrically 
driven air conditioning compressor. Because the air conditioning 
compressor has an electric motor, it is possible to operate the air 
conditioning independently of the combustion engine. Thus the 
customer can enjoy the cooling effect of the air conditioning even 
while driving in pure electric mode and while stopped. 


Electric A/C Compressor EKK 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

High-vcitage ccnnectcrfcr EKK 

2 

EKK central unit and DC/AC cenverter 

3 

Electric A/C cempresser 

4 

Silencer 


Note: The electric A/C compressor is a high voltage 
component! 


Before working on a high voltage component, you must apply the 
safety rules to shut down the high voltage system. Once this has 
been accomplished according to procedure, all high voltage com¬ 
ponents are no longer live and work can proceed in safety. 

There is an extra safety precaution is implemented as a means of 
imposing an automatic shutdown of the high voltage system. The 
plug connections on the electric A/C compressor are designed 
such that the 12 V connector always has to be disconnected first. 
Only then is it possible to disconnect the high voltage connector. 

Disconnecting the 12 V connector interrupts the circuit of the high 
voltage interlock loop (HVIL) and de-energizes the high voltage 
electrical system. 

The electric A/C compressor in the E72 is installed in the same 
location as the belt-driven air conditioning compressor of the E71. 
Because the electric A/C compressor in the E72 is not driven via 
the drive belt, it could theoretically have been installed anywhere 
in the vehicle, but for space reasons and to use the existing con¬ 
nections to the condenser, the installation location has not 
changed. 


Note: The only Service employees permitted to work 
on the high voltage components identified in this 
way are those who satisfy all the requirements for 
undertaking work of this nature: qualification, 
compliance with the safety rules, procedure 
strictly in accordance with the repair instructions. 




















E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Climate Control System > Overview 




Write the new components of the 
climate control system below. 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

115 

























116 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


EKK Control Unit and DC/AC Converter 

The EKK control unit controls the speed of the air conditioning 
compressor depending on the requirements of the IHKA (integrat¬ 
ed heater and air conditioner). In addition, It carries out the diag¬ 
nostics for the EKK and communicates with other control units via 
PT-CAN. The DC/AC converter converts the direct current voltage 
Into the alternating current that is required to operate the three- 
phase motor. 

The control unit and the DC/AC converter are Integrated Into the 
aluminum housing of the entire air conditioning compressor and 
are cooled by the flow of gaseous refrigerant. If the temperature of 
the DC/AC converter exceeds 110°C, it is shut off by the EKK con¬ 
trol unit. Various measures, such as increasing the speed for self- 
cooling, are implemented to prevent the temperature from reaching 
such a level where possible. The temperature is monitored by the 
EKK. 

Three-phase Motor 

A three-phase synchronous motor is used as the drive for the air 
conditioning compressor. It is an internal rotor motor. The magnetic 
field of the rotor is provided by six permanent magnets. The syn¬ 
chronous motor is operated in the speed range between 2000 
and 9000 rpm and is infinitely variable. It consumes up to 5 kW 
of electric power. 

Compression Mechanism 

To compress the refrigerant, the spiral compressor (also known as 
the scroll compressor) Is used. 

After three revolutions, the refrigerant drawn in is compressed and 
heated and can escape in a gaseous state through an opening in 
the center of the outer disk. From here, gaseous refrigerant with 
high temperature and high pressure escapes via an oil separator at 
the connection of the air conditioning compressor towards the con¬ 
denser. 



A: Comparison of the cooling power of a belt-driven and an electric A/C 
compressor 

B: Comparison of the mechanical and electrical power consumption of a 
belt-driven and an electric A/C compressor 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Cooling power of a belt-driven air conditioning compressor 
as a function of the speed of the combustion engine 

2 

Cooling power of an electric A/C compressor as a 
function of the speed of the electric motor 

3 

Mechanical power consumption of a belt-driven air conditioning 
compressor as a function of the speed of the combustion engine 

4 

Electrical power consumption of the electric air conditioning 
compressor as a function of the speed of the synchronous motor 























E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Climate Control System > Electric A/C compressor 




Fill out the following table with the information 
provided by the facilitator. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 



BMW ActiveHybrid X6 

117 










































































































































































118 

BMW ActiveHybrid X6 


E72 Complete Vehicle. 


Climate Control System > Electric A/C compressor > Function 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

Inner disk with spiral profile 

2 

Outer disk with spiral profile 

3 

Intake openings for the refrigerant 



Explain the scroll-principle. 





































