Table of Contents 

Telephone Diagnostics 

Subject Page 

Telematics. 

Frequently Asked Questions 
Glossary . 

Workshop Exercise - Telephone.16 


Initial Print Date: 02/04 


Revision Date: 


CO 00 CO 







Telephone Diagnostics 


Model: All with Motorola CPT 9000 
Production: 

■biictihis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain Telematics and how it applies to BMW 

• Understand the communication between the TCU and mobile phone 

• Understand eject box operation 

• Diagnose eject box problems 


2 

Telephone Diagnostics 


Telematics 


Frequently Asked Questions 

1. What is telematics? 

Telematics combines wireless voice and data to provide location-specific security, 
information, productivity, and in-vehicle entertainment services to drivers and their 
passengers. 


2. How does a telematics system work? 

The heart of a telematics system within the car is a telematics Communications Unit 
(TCU) that is connected (wirelessly) to a central service center. The TCU serves as 
the central platform of a telematics system, where all telematics-related technologies 
are deeply integrated. It communicates location-specific information to a central ser¬ 
vice center and in turn the center helps deliver telematics services to a driver via the 
cellular phone. 

These services can include dispatching ambulance services to a driver in an emer¬ 
gency situation, or sending roadside assistance to a driver whose car has broken 
down. Other services include the ability of a central server to deliver navigation assis¬ 
tance and real-time traffic information, among others. What's more, the TCU is also 
connected to the engine control unit (or the onboard computer) which enables 
enhanced services such as remote engine diagnostics and automatic airbag notifi¬ 
cation.^!) 


3. What is the difference between telematics and navigation systems? 

A telematics system provides numerous services to drivers, and navigation is simply 
one of the services offered. Navigation systems that are starting to appear in high- 
end cars today are referred to as autonomous navigation systems. Here, the naviga¬ 
tion database resides in the car on a CD. These systems are relatively expensive, 
telematics systems provide navigation assistance "off-board". This means that the 
database resides outside the car, making the service far more affordable to a wider 
number of people. 


4. Where does the word "telematics" come from? 

The term originated in Europe and remains widely used in the European automotive 
industry to describe automotive communications technologies. 


3 

Telephone Diagnostics 



5. Can you explain a telematics system in technological detail? What are its compo¬ 
nents? 

The main component in a telematics system is the telematics Communications Unit 
(TCU). In North America, aTCU contains a Motorola GPS receiver, cellular transceiv¬ 
er, and modem/transceiver control board. In Europe, a TCU contains a Motorola GPS 
receiver and GSM transceiver. Motorola’s European telematics systems do not 
require a modem due to the already existing digital data transfer services, such as 
SMS (short message service) available with GSM. 


Every telematics system developed by Motorola contains Motorola’s automotive- 
grade telematics software, which is uniquely programmed to deeply integrate the 
components of a TCU, enabling simplified delivery of telematics services from one 
centralized area. 


6. What services does a telematics system offer today? 

Today, telematics systems offer drivers emergency and roadside assistance, air bag 
deployment notification, navigation, remote door unlock, vehicle security notification 
and stolen vehicle tracking services.(01)(02) 


7. What services will telematics offer in the future? 

Just as today’s telematics safety and security features are a direct result of initial 
consumer demand, future telematics services will also be a direct result of what dri¬ 
vers want in their cars. These systems may provide customized services such as 
travel information (traffic updates, parking availability, airline status), messaging (voice 
mail and email retrieval), information (sports, weather, stock market updates and 
Internet access) and entertainment (audio games, books, magazines and newspa¬ 
pers). These are only a few of the applications which will evolve with telematics to 
keep drivers and their passengers in touch. 

Eventually, telematics will even reach outside the car and communicate with the 
office and home, extending far beyond voice conversations. Drivers will be able to 
turn on home lights, start and stop the sprinkler system, set their office security sys¬ 
tem — all via their telematics systems. 


4 

Telephone Diagnostics 



8. How does a driver interact with a telematics system? 

Drivers activate telematics systems via buttons located on the dashboard or the 
overhead console of the car. Motorola works with each automaker to help develop a 
purpose-built system for the projected ergonomic desires of drivers. The BMW 
Mayday telematics system has an emergency and roadside assistance button locat¬ 
ed on a cellular handset. The Mercedes TeleAid system has an S.O.S. button locat¬ 
ed behind the rearview mirror and "Information" and "Roadside Assistance" buttons 
located in the armrest. 


9. Can a Global Positioning System (GPS) phone handle telematics services? 

We have several concerns about integrating GPS functionality into a phone handset, 
instead of the vehicle itself. 

Our first issue is the ability of a GPS phone to operate inside of the automobile with¬ 
out an external GPS or cellular antenna. GPS antennas must have an unrestricted 
view of the sky to track satellites. So the decision must be made whether it's more 
cost-effective to have the GPS in the phone or in the car. 

Furthermore, integrating telematics into a portable phone may be very attractive from 
a cost and convenience perspective, but does not support the stolen vehicle alarm, 
door lock/unlock, and other features that require the device to remain in the car when 
the occupants have left. 

Finally, GPS is only one part of the locating solution. In addition, cellular infrastructure 
positioning, such as cell tower triangulation, can help. Given current technology, GPS 
does not operate as effectively inside multiple story, concrete or metal buildings, 
where many emergency calls originate. 

All of these issues, and many others, are taken into account when designing telem¬ 
atics systems and service. 


10. How does the airbag deployment notification feature work? 

The TCU is constantly "listening" or on the lookout for any sign of emergency. 
Because the TCU is connected to the engine control unit, when the airbag sensor 
sends a message to the engine controller to deploy the airbag, the controller alerts 
the TCU as well. Automotive-grade software that enables these functions and 
assures their reliability. 

Once the TCU is alerted, it automatically makes a cellular call to the response center. 
The call gets priority call status and jumps ahead of other telematics calls, and the 
operator is alerted that a call has been received from an airbag deployment. That 
way, emergency crews can be sent immediately to the scene.(OI) 


5 

Telephone Diagnostics 



11. What services do consumers really want in their cars? 

Initially, autonomous navigation-only systems caught the fancy of drivers in Europe 
and Japan, while in North America, consumers were more interested in emergency 
response or emergency call systems. Increasingly, consumers are attracted to the 
broader spectrum of telematics services, such as the delivery of personalized infor¬ 
mation and entertainment. 


12. Do Motorola's systems use digital cellular technology? 

Yes. In Europe, Motorola’s telematics systems use the European digital standard, 
GSM. 

In North America, however, only AMPS offers the broad geographic coverage essen¬ 
tial for reliable emergency response services. That's why it's the system being uti¬ 
lized in North American telematics right now. 


13. What do telematics systems cost? 

While each automotive company determines its own pricing, system prices currently 
range from $500 to $2000 in Europe and North America. Some GM vehicles 
include the OnStar system at no additional equipment charge, and require only a low 
monthly service fee. Monthly service costs vary, depending on the services offered. 
Like other new technologies, we anticipate that consumer demand will ultimately 
drive these costs down. 


14. Do European and North American drivers expect different features? 

It's clear that Europeans and Americans are all interested in navigation, safety and 
security services. But the degree to which they prioritize these services varies. 

In Europe, there is a greater emphasis on navigation. At the same time, frequent 
cross-border travel creates language barriers, making familiar navigation and security 
services even more welcome. In the United States and Canada, safety and security 
are the most desired services. North Americans are also interested in navigation, but 
the need for it is not as great. All drivers are interested in getting real-time traffic 
information. 


15. When will North American telematics make the shift to digital? 

In North America, the growth of telematics depends on digital cellular standards pro¬ 
viding service over a larger geographic area, especially in cities. 


6 

Telephone Diagnostics 



Unlike the European-wide GSM standard, North America has multiple standards 
including AMPS, TDMA, CDMA, GSM and iDEN®. 

Today, only AMPS offers wide enough geographic cellular coverage for emergency 
response services. That's why it is utilized in the Motorola telematics systems 
Motorola currently installed in North America. For data transmission on analog 
AMPS, modems can be added to the telematics hardware and central service cen¬ 
ter. In the future, systems will be based on digital wireless, to allow a richer array of 
features in metropolitan areas. 

In addition, as the industry endeavors to deliver comprehensive data services such 
as Internet access and customized entertainment services, the migration to digital 
communications technology will be even more essential. 

Companies such as Motorola, Nokia, Ericsson and Unwired Planet are addressing 
these issues for a wide variety of wireless devices. Through the Wireless 
Applications Protocol (WAP) consortium, we are working together to ensure a reli¬ 
able and standard method of transferring data over wireless networks worldwide. 


16. What new technologies will help deliver greater telematics services? 

An important, ongoing initiative that will help drive telematics growth is the ITS Data 
Bus, or IDB. IDB is based on an open protocol for networking car audio, video, com¬ 
munication and computing devices. Lead by the Society of Automotive Engineers 
(SAE) and supported by several corporations (including Motorola), IDB will allow 
seamless integration of multiple technologies inside the car. 

IDB will allow simple plug-and-play use of any consumer electronics, regardless of 
the manufacturer. In addition, a firewall contained in the IDB will allow all electronics 
in the car to operate independently of each other, eliminating signal interference. 


17. How will IDB specifically impact telematics? 

Many companies are expected to integrate IDB into their telematics components 
and other electronics systems. Motorola, for example, plans to integrate IDBs into 
our telematics Communications Units, enabling the system to act as the central hub 
for all electronics interacting within the car. This will allow consumers to simply plug 
and play various electronics via their TCU, and take advantage of additional telemat¬ 
ics services, without requiring multiple wires and cables overlapping in different 
areas of their vehicle. Not only will IDB allow easier installations, but it enable drivers 
to add new services without being concerned about propriety systems and wiring. 
With IDB, consumers will have greater choice, resulting in greater market growth. 


7 

Telephone Diagnostics 



Automatic airbag deployment notification, information services and other telamatics 
services must be supported by your carrier’s network, depend on service availability 
and coverage, and require a subscription. These services are not available in all 
areas. Check with your service provider for availability. All location based services are 
subject to the availability of GPS signal or alternative location tracking means. GPS 
coverage is not available in all areas. 


The use of wireless devices and their accessories may be prohibited or restricted in 
certain areas. Always obey the laws and regulations on the use of these products. All 
navigation systems select routes based on several criteria: geographic distance, type 
of route, and in some cases dynamic traffic information. While these systems usually 
opt for the shortest travel time to your destination, it is important that you take into 
account factors including road and driving conditions, terrain and local environments, 
some of which may contain hazards to you or your vehicle. Always use your best 
judgment when deciding on a route. As the driver of your vehicle, you are always the 
final decision-maker, and despite the many advantages of using any Telematics sys¬ 
tem, you are ultimately responsible for ensuring your safety. 


Glossary 


AMPS Advanced Mobile Phone System 

The first-generation analog cellular phone system that originated in the United States. 


APCO 

Association of Public Communications Officials 


CDMA Code Division Multiple Access 

An advanced digital cellular and PCS platform that converts audio signals into a stream of 
digital information (made up of Is and Os). This "digital speech packet" is transmitted via 
a wide-band channel consisting of several radio frequencies. CDMA differs from the other 
popular digital cellular platform, TDMA, in that it uses several frequencies instead of just 
one. These digital platforms ensure greater call clarity and security, prevent cloning fraud 
and allow a greater number of calls to be handled by a tower or response center at one 
time. 


8 

Telephone Diagnostics 



CDPD Cellular Digital Packet Data 

Using the existing AMPS system to carry digital data, by transmitting dense packets of 
information across vacant analog channels. 


CTIA 

Cellular Telephone Industry Association 


Data Bus 

The central collection of wires that carry instructions to electronic components through¬ 
out the vehicle. 


DCS-1800 

The low-power variant of GSM (the European digital standard). Uses a 1.8 GHz carrier. 
Example: Mercury One-2-One. 


DCS-1900 

The proposed use of GSM (the European digital standard) with a 1.9 GHz carrier for PCS 
applications. 


DCTU Digital Cordless Telephone U.S. 

A standard based on a micro-cellular radio system that provides low-power cordless 
access between a subscriber and a base station up to a few hundred meters away. 
DCTU is a version of its European counterpart, DECT. 


DECT Digital European Cordless Telephone 

A standard based on a micro-cellular radio system that provides low-power cordless 
access between a subscriber and a base station up to a few hundred meters away. 


ETACS Enhanced TACS (Total Access Communication System) 

European analog cellular. 


9 

Telephone Diagnostics 



ETSI European Telecommunications Standards Institute 

The standards body responsible for GSM. 


FDMA Frequency Division Multiple Access 

Used for AMPS and TACS, the two key analog systems and their variants, this system 
gives each conversation its own unigue radio channel. 


FLEX® Protocol 

Created by Motorola, FLEX is the global de facto standard for high-speed, one-way 
alphanumeric paging. With its ability to handle more robust code transport messages 
effectively, Motorola's FLEX protocol is laying the foundation for graceful growth from 
1600 to 6400 bits per second (bps) transmission rates. 


Gateway 

A device that allows consumer products to interface with the communication system in 
vehicles, while protecting the vehicle's system from defective devices or inappropriate 
messages. 


GPS Global Positioning System 

Also refers to Global Positioning Satellite. A system using satellites, receivers and soft¬ 
ware to allow users to determine their exact geographic position. 

GSM Global System for Mobiles 

A European digital standard. 


Half-Rate 

A variant of GSM, Half-Rate doubles system capacity by more efficient speech coding. 


IDB ITS Data Bus 

A medium-speed multiplexed bus intended for command and control of devices in vehi¬ 
cles. It has been proposed by Motorola and the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) 
as an industry standard. Should this happen, IDB will allow device manufacturers to cre¬ 
ate products that will be compatible with all vehicles -- versus today's data bus systems 
which differ by automobile manufacturer. The IDB would interface with an existing vehicle 
bus through a gateway. 


10 

Telephone Diagnostics 



iDEN® Integrated Digital Enhanced Network 

A new generation of digital wireless technology developed by Motorola to enable multiple 
services to be delivered from a single, integrated wireless communications system. iDEN 
is the backbone of the Nextel all-digital cellular service. 


InFLEXion® 

A Motorola protocol which enables transmission and storage of voice messages and 
offers enhanced privacy, channel efficiency and ease of use. What's more, InFLEXion 
allows greater detail and expression to come through. 


IS-41 

The protocol for "roaming" within the U.S., describing how services should "hand over" 
between operators. 


IS-54 

The TDMA standard for U.S. digital cellular. 


IS-95 

The CDMA standard for U.S. digital cellular. 


ISO 9000 

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) published the ISO 9000 series of 
quality management and quality assurance standards in 1987 as a means to rationalize 
the many various national approaches to the subject of product quality. The ISO 9000 
series has been widely recognized as an aid in developing manufacturing and service 
organizations' quality management as an additional assurance to product purchasers that 
the products and services they buy will consistently meet quality objectives. 


ISO 9001 

This standard is used when conformance with specific requirements is to be assured by 
the supplier during several product stages including design and development, production, 
testing, inspection and servicing. 


11 

Telephone Diagnostics 



ITS Intelligent Transportation Systems 

A broad range of diverse technologies, including information processing, communica¬ 
tions, control and electronics, which, when applied to our transportation system, can save 
time, money and lives. 


ITS America Intelligent Transportation Systems of America 

An organization mandated by the U.S. Congress in 1991 to foster public and private part¬ 
nerships to increase the safety and efficiency of surface transportation through the appli¬ 
cation of advanced ITS technologies. 


JDC Japanese Digital Cellular 

Now renamed PDC. 


JTAC Japanese Total Access Communication 

Like the European TACS, JTAC is the Japanese analog cellular system. 

LMR Land Mobile Radio 

Wireless communication for specialized applications, such as taxis and emergency ser¬ 
vices. 


MMI Man/Machine Interface 

Also known as User Interface. The means by which the user interacts with a machine or 
device. In the past, knobs, dials and displays manipulated by a user's hand were common 
interfaces on technical devices. Today, MMI includes more advanced functions such as 
Voice Dialing, speech synthesis and touch screens. 


NAM PS Narrowband AMPS 


PCS Personal Communications Service 

Service that bundles voice communications, numeric and text messaging, voice mail and 
other features into one device, service or bill. 


12 

Telephone Diagnostics 



PCS-1900 

Like DCS-1900, this refers to the proposed use of a 1.9 GHz carrier for PCS applications. 


PDC Personal Digital Cellular 

The Japanese cellular standard. 


PHS Personal Handy System 

The Japanese cordless phone standard. 


Protocol 

A standard set of rules that governs how computers or other electronics communicate 
with one another. Protocols define a message's format as well as how they are 
exchanged. Agreeing to a standard protocol allows different types of computer systems to 
communicate with one another in spite of their differences. 


PSAP Public Safety Answering Point 

PSTN Public Switched Telephone Network 


QS 9000 

The quality system standard established by Chrysler, Ford, General Motors, truck manu¬ 
facturers and other subscribing companies. This standard includes the ISO 9000 require¬ 
ments, plus additional requirements for all aspects of the business. QS 9000 includes a 
detailed Advanced Product Quality Planning, Control Plan, Continuous Improvement, 
Production Part Approval Process, Manufacturing Capabilities methodologies and more. 

ReFLEX® 

The world's first two-way alphanumeric paging protocol, created by Motorola. ReFLEX 
enables pagers to confirm receipt, respond to and initiate messages. 


13 

Telephone Diagnostics 



SAE Society of Automotive Engineers 

A one-stop resource for technical information and expertise used in designing, building, 
maintaining and operating self-propelled vehicles for use on land or sea, in air or space. 


SIM Subscriber Identification Module 

A card used in GSM to personalize a handset. 


TACS Total Access Communication System 

European analog cellular. 


TCU Telematics Control Unit 

The embedded vehicle control unit that communicates with the automobile controls, 
GPS satellite and customer service center to provide Telematics features to a driver. 


TDMATime Division Multiple Access 

An advanced digital cellular platform that converts audio signals into a stream of digital 
information (made up of Is and Os) and divides it into "digital speech packets" according 
to time. The packets are then transmitted one a single radio frequency. TDMA differs 
from the other popular digital cellular platform, CDMA, in that it uses one channel instead 
of many. These digital platforms ensure greater call clarity and security, prevent cloning 
fraud and allow a greater number of calls to be handled by a tower or response center at 
one time. 


TETRATErrestrial Trunked RAdio 

European digital cellular land mobile radio system. 


TIA Telecommunications Industry Association 

The United States' telecommunications standards making body. 


User Interface 

Also known as Man/Machine Interface (MMI). The means by which the user interacts with 
a machine or device. In the past, knobs, dials and displays manipulated by a user's hand 
were common interfaces on technical devices. Today, User Interfaces include more 
advanced functions such as Voice Dialing, speech synthesis and touch screens. 


14 

Telephone Diagnostics 



VR Virtual Reality 

Used in a variety of Motorola products and services, it is a type of computer-generated 
environment in which the user interacts with the environment in three dimensions that 
provide sensory information to make an individual feel that they are in a different place. 


WAP Wireless Application Protocol 

A standard that aims to align industry efforts to bring advanced applications and Internet 
content to digital cellular phones. 


15 

Telephone Diagnostics 



Workshop Exercise - Telephone 


Vehicle does not recognize the portable phone. Customer places Handset in eject 
box but display continues to read Car Phone. It is not possible to make a phone call 
from the CID. 

1. List the four parts of a good diagnostic plan. _ 


2. Can the complaint be verified? 

3. Perform a Short Test and list the relevant faults? _ 

4. What is the next diagnostic step? _ 

5. Is there a wiring diagram available in the DISplus or GT1? _ 

6. What is the part number of the correct adapter for diagnosing eject box 

problems ? _ 

Which breakout box is used? _ 

7. Perform a pin-out test of the eject box, with and without the mobile phone 
installed? 


Terminal 

Terminal Use 

With Mobile installed 

Without Mobile installed 

1 . 




2 . 




3 . 




4 . 




5 . 




6 . 




7 . 




8 . 




9 . 




10 . 




11 . 




12 . 




13 . 




14 . 




15 . 




16 . 




17 . 




18 . 





16 

Telephone Diagnostics 





8. Compare the pin-out just performed with the wiring diagram handed-out. 

Is there a signal or voltage reading that is incorrect? _ 

9. Repair the problem and retest that circuit. _ 

7 0. While scoping pin #13 speak into the microphone. 

What happens? _ 

7 7 . How could this be used in situations where the customer states the other party 
can not here them? _ 

12. Is it possible for the person in the vehicle to speak to loud? 

Too soft? _ 

7 3. Are there any solutions for either of these problems? 


14. Install device #5 and re-perform the scope procedure? 


15. Install device #1 and re-perform the scope procedure? 


16. Did you see a difference in the scope pattern ? 


17 

Telephone Diagnostics 



Eject Box 


Pin 

# 

Everest 54 ELO MOST US 
Pin Name 

Description 

Wiring 

Requirements 

Ejectbox front 
18 pin ELO 

Phoenix cradle E65 
26 pin ELO 

Cradle for BT 
portable 

1 

MIC1 + 

Microphone 1 Positive 

24AWG 




2 

MIC2+ 

Microphone 2 Positive 

24AWG 




3 

Gnd 



14 


13 

4 

Gnd 






5 

Gnd 






6 

Gnd 






7 

Gnd 






8 

Gnd 






9 

P2K RXAudioOn/Off 

Wired Portable Analog Audio From Phone 

22AWG 

15 

6 


10 

P2K Audio Ground 

Wired Portable Audio Ground 

22AWG 

4 

4 


11 

P2KTX Audio 

Wired Portable Analog Audio To Phone 

22AWG 

13 

13 


12 

CAN-H 

Tel-Commander Interface, for E65 only 

22AWG 




13 

CAN-L 

Tel-Commander Interface, for E65 only 

22AWG 




14 

MDI 

Motorola Diag Interface (MOT Use Only) 

24AWG 




15 

BUS 

IBUS Interface (for Airbag) 

22AWG 




16 

AuxBattery+ 

Auxiliary Battery Positive Terminal 

18AWG 




17 

Battery+ 

Main Battery Positive (KL30) 

18AWG 

5 

1 

5 

18 

Battery+ 

Main Battery Positive (KL30) 

18AWG 




19 

MIC1- 

Microphone 1 Negative 

24AWG 




20 

MIC2- 

Microphone Negative 

24AWG 




21 

MIC Shield 

Microphone Shield 

24AWG 




22 

Hookswitch Portable 

Hookswitch to detect portable phone 

24AWG 

10 



23 

Gnd 






24 

DFAFL 

Wheelspeed, Front Left 

22AWG 




25 

DFAFR 

Wheelspeed, Front Right 

22AWG 




26 

Gnd 






27 

RS232 RTS 

Serial Debug Port RTS 

24AWG 




28 

RS232 Ground 

Serial Debug Port Ground 

24AWG 




29 

P2KTXD 

Wired Portable Serial IF TxD 

22AWG 

9 

25 


30 

P2KRXD 

Wired Portable Serial IF RxD 

22AWG 

18 

26 


31 

Ecall Button 

Emergency Call Button 

24AWG 




32 

Charger On Off 

Charger: on if+12V, off if Gnd 

24AWG 

1 

5 


33 

MOSTWakeup 

MOSTWakeup Output 

24AWG 




34 

TEL ON 

Telephone On Indicator for compensator 

24AWG 




35 

Gnd 






36 

Battery Ground (KL31) 

Main Battery Ground 

18AWG 

2 


2 

37 

Vehicle Speaker+ (emergency) 

Vehicle Speaker Positive 

24AWG 




38 

Vehicle Speaker- (emergency) 

Vehicle Speaker negative 

24AWG 




39 

P2K Shield 

Wired Portable Serial IF Shield 

22AWG 




40 

Gnd 






41 

Gnd 






42 

Gnd 






43 

RS232TX 

Serial Debug Port TxD 

24AWG 




44 

RS232 RX 

Serial Debug Port RxD 

24AWG 




45 

RS232 CTS 

Serial Debug Port CTS 

24AWG 




46 

Gnd 



16 


1 

47 

Gnd 






48 

Gnd 






49 

P2K Ground 

Wired Portable Serial IF Phone Ground 

22AWG 




50 

MAYDAY LED 

MAYDAY LED Output 

24AWG 




51 

Gnd 






52 

58g 

Lighting Intensity Dimming Signal; signal 
via bluetooth to handset (not for Japan) 

22AWG 

3 



mm 

Aux Battery Ground 

Auxiliary Battery Ground 

20AWG 




El 

Battery Ground (Klemme31) 

Main Battery Ground 

20AWG 


2 



□ E60, E63/64 □ E65 


18 

Telephone Diagnostics 
















Eject Box Schematic 


X695 


X4545S 



10 


9 

£ 

■ 

18 

a 

i 

16 

00 

14 

X 

15 

o 

13 

n 

4 

o 

1 

5 

a> 

LET 

2 


3 


Hookswitch Portable 


P2KTXD _ 

P2K RXD 
Cradle Key+ 

Cradle On 

P2KRX Audio On/Off 


P2KTX Audio/Cradle On 
P2K Audio Ground 
Charger On Off/Cradle Key+ 


KL 30g f 
KL 31 
KL 58g 


XI3793 
X1019 


■ 22 


■ 29 


■ 30 


■ 46 

£ 

■ 

■ 3 

a 

■ 

■ 9 


■ 11 
■ 10 

m 

O 

■ 32 

LU 


U400 


TCU 


19 

Telephone Diagnostics 



















