Table of Contents 

BMW Universal Bluetooth™ 

Subject Page 

BMW Universal Bluetooth™ .3 

Introduction.3 

What is Bluetooth™? .3 

Communication/Security .4 

Data and Voice .4 

Bluetooth™ Enabled Phones.4 

Advantages of the ULF System.4 

System Overview.5 

ULF Control Module.5 

OddmentTray.6 

Pairing Button.6 

Bluetooth™ Antenna.6 

System Operation.6 

Initial Operation.6 

Pairing Procedure.7 

Indicator Lamps.10 

Adopting Telephone Book.10 

Placing a Call .10 

Receiving/Accepting a Call .11 

Conducting a Call .12 

Ending a Call .13 

Transfer Active Call From Phone to ULF .13 

Transfer Active Call from ULF to Phone .14 

Linking Several Bluetooth™ Mobile Phones .14 

Deleting Devices .14 

Technical Information.15 

System Overview .16 

Voice Recognition .16 

Coding ULF Control Module to Vehicle .16 

Function Test .17 


Initial Print Date: 02/04 


Revision Date: 

































Subject Page 

Troubleshooting.18 

Connector Pin Assignments.19 





BMW Universal Bluetooth™ 


Introduction 

The BMW Universal Bluetooth™ Hands- 
Free System (ULF) utilizes Bluetooth™ wire¬ 
less technology to enable a wireless con¬ 
nection to be established between a 
Bluetooth™ enabled mobile phone and the 
ULF Control Module installed in the vehicle. 

The combination of these components 
results in a new generation of in-vehicle 
phone system. 

The ULF Control Module forms an interface 
that allows a mobile phone with the embed¬ 
ded Bluetooth™ wireless technology feature 
to be wirelessly integrated into the vehicle. 

For the first time BMW is introducing a new generation hands-free telephone system kit 
that provides the customer with the option of using various Bluetooth™ enabled mobile 
phones (a list of recommended phones is available from your BMW Center). 



5 Series (E39) - With Oddment Tray 


What is Bluetooth™? 


The name Bluetooth™ is derived from the Danish King Harald Bluetooth who lived in the 
10th century. He was well known for his ability to unify his kingdom and today lends his 
name to a wireless technology standard that can connect/unify various electronic devices 
that are Bluetooth™ enabled and located within a short range (approx. 10 m or 32.8 ft) of 
each other. 


Bluetooth™ wireless technology is 
a short-range radio frequency tech¬ 
nology standard that allows several 
devices to communicate with each 
other simultaneously. The standard 
indicates that up to seven simulta¬ 
neous connections can be estab¬ 
lished and maintained at one time, 
as long as the connected devices 
are within a range of 10 m (32.8 ft). 

Note: The ULF system will 
allow four phones to be paired 
to the system at a time and only 
allow one phone to be connect¬ 
ed at a time. 



3 


Bluetooth™ 

















Communication/Security 

The system uses the license-free, global Industrial Scientific Medical band (ISM) at 2.45 
GHz. This frequency range from 2.402 GHz to 2.480 GHz is subdivided into 79 channels 
with a 1 MHz bandwidth. 

Signals transmitted through the airways can be scrambled and unscrambled to enhance 
communication security. With Bluetooth™ technology, communication frequencies are 
changed 1600 times per second to reduce the risk of interference or interception of the 
transmitted signal. The relatively small operating range of approx. 10 m (32.8 ft) also 
enhances the security of this technology, since tampering with the transmitted data is 
only possible when inside the 10 m (32.8 ft) wireless "network". 

To further enhance the security of this short-range wireless network the ULF system 
requires a pairing procedure to be carried out for each device that will be introduced into 
the network. As part of this procedure a required passkey must be entered once (during 
the initial pairing procedure) to establish a secure connection between the phone and the 
ULF Control Module. 

Data and Voice 

Bluetooth™ was developed for the transmission of both voice as well as data. A band¬ 
width of approx. 1 MB/s is available for this purpose. 

Bluetooth™ Enabled Phones 

Ideally all phones that are Bluetooth™ enabled should work with the ULF system, howev¬ 
er not all phones utilize the same profiles and therefore may not be recognized by the 
ULF System. A list of recommended Bluetooth™ enabled phones is available from your 
BMW Center. 

Advantages of the ULF System 

• Once a phone is paired to the system it will be able to automatically connect to the 
Bluetooth™ wireless network of the vehicle, the next time it is introduced into the 
vehicle and the vehicle ignition is on. 

• Up to four different Bluetooth™ phones can be paired to the system at one time, 
although only one phone can be wirelessly connected at any time. 

• The phone does not need to be inserted into a phone specific cradle in order to be 
integrated into the vehicle. 

• The phone can remain in a briefcase, purse, glove box, etc.; as long as it is turned on 
and located within the interior of the vehicle. 

• The MFL buttons on the steering wheel can be utilized to place or receive a call, to 
scroll the phone book and select a number or activate voice recognition in order to 
dial a number via voice command. 


4 


Bluetooth™ 



• A voice recognition system is integrated into the ULF control module and can be 
activated by depressing the send/receive L i button. 

• The communications protocol of Bluetooth™ wireless technology is standardized 
irrespective of the manufacturer, this therefore allows various mobile telephones that 
utilize Bluetooth™ wireless technology and a recognized profile to be connected to 
the ULF System. 


System Overview 


A ULF system consists of a control module, microphone, Bluetooth™ antenna, a stand¬ 
alone pairing (send/receive) button, or eject box with a coin tray insert. 



ULF Control Module 


The ULF module forms the interface between the Bluetooth™ mobile phone and the 
electronic system in the vehicle. The mobile phone with the embedded Bluetooth™ 
wireless technology is the transceiver, this requires that the phone be activated, paired 
and present within the vehicle network in order to place or receive a call in the vehicle. 


5 


Bluetooth™ 




















OddmentTray 

The odd merit tray, which is connected to the 
ULF control module via the vehicles wiring har¬ 
ness, serves the purpose of: 

Housing the send/receive [_: or pairing 

button, which must be depressed to activate 
the pairing procedure between the phone and 
the control module. 


Pairing Button 

A stand-alone send/receive HI or pairing 
button is supplied for the 3 Series in order to 
retain the cup holders. The button provid es the 
same function as the send/receive | | but¬ 

ton on the steering wheel, plus is the button 
that must be depressed to activate the pairing 
procedure between the phone and the control 
module. 


Bluetooth™ Antenna 

The Bluetooth™ antenna operates on a frequency of 2.45 GHZ and is installed in the 
interior compartment of the vehicle. This antenna provides the wireless interface 
between the Bluetooth™ enabled phone and the ULF Control Module. 

System Operation 

Initial Operation 

Prior to using the system for the first time, the Bluetooth™ mobile phone that is to be 
used must be paired with the ULF control module. This pairing procedure is necessary 
in order to assign the digital code of the mobile phone to the ULF control module 
installed in the vehicle. The pairing procedure is only required when a new phone is 
introduced to the ULF system for the very first time or the list of paired devices is cleared 
form the memory of the ULF module, it does not need to be performed every time the 
phone is used with the system. 

After pairing, the mobile phone is recognized automatically by the ULF control module 
within 45 seconds after it is introduced into the vehicle and the ignition is turned on. 


6 



Bluetooth™ 


Note: Depending on the mobile phone manufacturer, particular care must be 
taken prior to initial operation to ensure that no headset is coupled with the 
mobile phone. Various devices may interpret the ULF control module as a 
headset and request deactivation of the headset. Please refer to the operating 
instructions of the mobile phone for detailed information. 

Pairing Procedure 

The pairing procedure that must be initiated through the phone will differ corresponding 
to the different menu configurations of the various Bluetooth™ mobile phones on the 
market. The user's manual of the phone manufacturer should always be referenced for 
specific steps on how to activate the Bluetooth™ feature and to pair/link devices. 

The following steps are generalized steps that should help in activating the Bluetooth™ 
function of most phones: 

IN VEHICLE: 

1. Depress the send /receive (pairing) button located in the center console, for at 
least 1 second prior to switching on the ignition and continue to hold the button 
down for approximately 2-3 seconds after the ignition is turned on. 

2. Release the button. 

Note: The send/receive (pairing) button in 5 Series and X5 SAV is 
located on the oddment tray assembly in the center console. 



7 


Bluetooth™ 





3. Shortly after releasing the button on the 
Radio or Display Screen, the following 
message should be displayed: 

a. Display Screen: 


c. Radio Display (3 Series with CD 
or Cassette) 

"BT Pairing" display which indicates 
that the ULF is searching for available 
Bluetooth™ devices. 

4. Activate the search function of the 
phone as indicated below. 

ON PHONE: 




"Bluetooth Pairing" displayed. 

Green, Yellow and Red LEDs on the right 
side of the unit are flashing which indi¬ 
cates that the ULF is waiting for a signal 
from the Bluetooth™ device to be paired. 

b. Radio Display (5 Series and X5 SAV) 

"Bluetooth Pairing" display which indi¬ 
cates that the ULF is searching for 
available Bluetooth™ devices. 

Green, Yellow and Red LEDs on the right 
side of the unit are flashing which indi¬ 
cates that the ULF is waiting for a signal 
from the Bluetooth™ device to be 
paired. 


1. Locate the connection/settings menu and select Bluetooth™. 

2. Select the response that will activate the Bluetooth™ feature of the phone. 

3. Next select a menu option that will allow you to "Discover" or "Search" for active 
Bluetooth™ devices. 

4. If the phone identifies/finds a device (named "BMW" followed by 5 digits) select it 
and follow the indicated steps to complete the pairing process. 

5. Once the phone is successfully paired to the device cycle the vehicle ignition 
switch off and back on and the devices should wirelessly connect within 30 
seconds. When the connection is established the phone will display a connection 
symbol. 


8 


Bluetooth™ 









The following steps are an example of the pairing procedure that must be initi¬ 
ated to pair the Sony Ericsson T68i phone to the ULF Control Module. 

1. Press the menu button. 

2. Select "Connect". 

3. Select option 3: "Bluetooth". 

4. Select option 4: "Options". 

5. Select option 1: "Operation mode" and set to "On" or "Automatic". 

6. Go back one step by pressing the red phone button several times. 

7. Select option 3: "Discover". 

8. Mobile phone display shows 'Searching' 

9. Select "BMW." in upcoming list. 

10. Select option 1: "Add to paired". 

11. Enter the password (= ULF passkey) located on ULF Control Module that 
is in the rear of the vehicle or on the Passkey Reference Card. 

• Mobile phone display shows 'BMW.Pairing' 

• Mobile phone display shows 'Pairing Successful' 

• Display screen shows 'Pairing succeeded' for 3 seconds 

12. Enter device name or accept the name that is automatically displayed. 

13. Mobile phone display shows "Added to paired devices". 

14. Exit menu by pressing the red phone/NO button. 

15. Once the phone is successfully paired to the device cycle the ignition switch off 
and back on. 

16. The devices should wirelessly connect within 30 seconds. The connection is 
established when the phone displays the symbols indicated, on the right side of 
the screen. 

Note: Shortly after turning on the ignition and the 
Bluetooth™ connection is identified, the phone may dis¬ 
play a message asking if the connection should be estab¬ 
lished/accepted. The connection authorization request 
will always occur unless the setting on the phone is modi¬ 
fied to allow automatic connection every time, please refer 
to the user's manual of the phone to determine how to 
change this setting. 



9 


Bluetooth™ 





System Functions 

The mobile phone must always be activated, paired and present within the Bluetooth™ 
network in order to place or receive a call through the vehicle. 

Indicator Lamps 

The indicator lamps show the following: 

Active call (green light) 

No mobile phone in range 
(steady red light) 

No network (flashing red light) 




Adopting Telephone Book 

Depending on the type of Bluetooth™ mobile phone, the telephone book is either trans¬ 
ferred automatically (ex. Nokia 6310, Sony Ericsson T68i) or manually (depending on 
software version of phone) by the user to the ULF control module. The address book is 
stored temporarily for the purpose of accessing/displaying stored phonebook information 
using the steering wheel controls or telephone menu selections available on the display 
screen or some radio displays. 

If a manual transfer of the address book must be made, the ULF must be in setup mode 
for manual transfer. The corresponding data can then be transferred. If phonebook data is 
modified while the phone is wirelessly connected to the vehicle the changes will not be 
displayed in the vehicle if the phonebook is scrolled via the steering wheel or display 
screen, changes will only be transferred the next time the ignition is cycled. 

Placing a Call 

A call can be placed in several different ways: 

1. Using the keypad or address book of the mobile phone and depressing the send 
button on the phone. 


Note: Some phones may ask if the call is to remain within the phone. Refer to 
the users manual of the phone for specific instructions on disabling this fea¬ 
ture. 


2. Depressing the R/T button on the steering wheel, then scrolling (using the <f> or *4' 
buttons) through the address book of the phone that is linked to the ULF, until the 
desired number is displayed on the radio or display screen and then depressing 


the send/receive 
the call. 


button on the steering wheel or center console to place 


10 


Bluetooth™ 




3. Depressing the Uif&J button on the steering wheel until an audible "beep" is 
heard through the vehicle speakers, at this point a call can be placed by using the 
following voice commands: 

• "Dial number" or "Dial phone" 

• After the system asks for a number say the number. 

Example: "123 456 7890"; the system will repeat the number requested 
once you stop speaking momentarily, the number may also be displayed 
depending on the vehicle and equipment/accessories installed. 

• "Dial" 

Note: Once the dial command is given the number will be displayed on the dis 
play screen or radio; plus it will always be displayed on the mobile phone 
after a call is placed. 

4. Briefly depressing the | . button on the steering wheel will redial the last 
number dialed. 

For more information on using voice commands refer to the "Owner's Manual for Voice 
Input System. The Convenient Alternative to Manual Control" (P/N 84 11 027 942) 

Receiving/Accepting a Call 

The call ringer in the Bluetooth™ mobile phone is audible when an incoming call signal is 
received. At the same time, the signal is sent via the Bluetooth™ interface in the mobile 
phone to the Bluetooth™ antenna in the vehicle. The ULF receives the incoming ring/call 
signal via the Bluetooth™ antenna and mutes the radio. The incoming ring/tone signal is 
then also transmitted to the vehicle speakers. 

The following options are available for accepting a call: 

3 Series without Display Screen: 

• Press send/receive 11. . _ I button on MFL (Steering Wheel) 

• Press send/receive U!MJ button in the center console 

• Press send/receive key on mobile phone 
5 Series andX5 SAV without Display Screen: 

• Press send/receive LiamJ button on MFL (Steering Wheel) 

• Press send/receive key on radio 

• Press send/receive L^&l button on the oddment tray (Center Console) 

• Press send/receive key on mobile phone 


11 


Bluetooth™ 



Vehicles with Display Screen: 

button on MFL (Steering Wheel) 
button on the oddrment tray (Center Console) 
Select the green phone symbol on the Display Screen 
Press send/receive key on mobile phone 


• Press send/receive 

• Press send/receive 


Conducting a Call 

If the call is accepted by pressing the send/receive key I^.J : on the Radio (5 series and 
X5 SAV), Display Screen, steering wheel or center console, it will be conducted via the 
hands free microphone and vehicle speakers. 

If a call is accepted by pressing the send/receive key on the mobile phone, the reaction 
will depend on the type of handset. In the majority of cases, however, the question 
appears: 

"Do you wish to use the mobile phone?" 

Please refer to the operating instructions of the mobile phone for a detailed description of 
the operating procedure of the phone. 

The hands-free function is activated after pressing the send/receive key. The incoming 
call is encoded (scrambled) via the Bluetooth™ interface in the mobile phone and sent to 
the Bluetooth™ antenna in the vehicle. The call is received by the ULF control module 
and output via the radio to the audio speakers. 



Since the ULF system provides a digital full-duplex hands-free operation, it is possible to 
simultaneously speak and listen to calls. An echo cancellation function prevents feedback 
when speaking into the microphone. The microphone audio signal is sent via a hardwire 
connection to the ULF control module. In the ULF module the received audio signal is 
scrambled via the Bluetooth™ module and transferred via the Bluetooth™ antenna to the 
mobile phone. The mobile phone then transmits the call via the phone antenna. 


12 


Bluetooth™ 

















Microphone 


ULF Control Bluetooth 

Module Antenna 



Outgoing 
i Signal 


S84 03 U69 


Ending a Call 

The following options are available for ending a call: 

3 Series without Display Screen: 

• Press send/receive button on MFL (Steering Wheel) 

• Press send/receive 1_ button in the center console 

• Press send/receive key on mobile phone 
5 Series and X5 SAV without Display Screen: 

• Press send/receive button on MFL (Steering Wheel) 

• Press send/receive key on radio 

• Press send/receive I _J button on the oddment tray (Center Console) 

• Press send/receive key on mobile phone 
Vehicles with Display Screen: 

• Press send/receive LTTJ button on MFL (Steering Wheel) 

• Press send/receive i lhmi button on the oddment tray (Center Console) 

• Select the green phone symbol on the Display Screen 

• Press send/receive key on mobile phone 


Transfer Active Call From Phone to ULF 

If a call is received or placed via the handset, it can be transferred into the vehicle once 
the phone is within the active Bluetooth™ network of the vehicle. 

Call transfer procedure: 

1. Ignition must be on. 

2. Bluetooth™ connection must be established. 

3. Briefly depress the send/receive button uflj located in the center console. 


13 


Bluetooth™ 
















NOTE: Some phones may automatically display a statement asking the user 
if the active call should be transferred to the ULF system shortly after the 
Bluetooth™ connection is established. If the request is acknowledged the 
call is automatically transferred into the vehicle/ULF system without having to 
depress the send/receive button 


Transfer Active Call from ULF to Phone 

If you are currently in an active call and you need to leave the vehicle the call can be 
transferred into the handset in several ways. 

1. Ignition is turned off and you walk away from the vehicle. Once outside the 10 m 
(32.8 ft) range a message may be displayed on the phone asking if the current call 
should be maintained or ended, by maintaining the call it will be transferred to the 
handset. 

2. Depending on the model of phone being used the call can be transferred to the 
handset by manually disconnecting from the Bluetooth™ network via the connec¬ 
tions menu or selecting a transfer function in the settings menu of the phone (refer 
to the user's manual of the phone for more information). 

Linking Several Bluetooth™ Mobile Phones 

Up to four Bluetooth™ mobile phones can be paired one after the other to the ULF con¬ 
trol module. The pairing operation corresponds to the procedure described above. 

The handset paired last has the highest priority. The telephone paired first will drop out 
of the list if a fifth Bluetooth™ mobile phone is paired. 

Note: For incoming and outgoing calls, only the user connected first to the system can 
speak via the hands-free facility. 

If two users enter the network or connection range simultaneously, only the user with the 
highest priority (the user last paired during the initial pairing procedure) will be able to use 
the hands-free function for incoming & outgoing calls. If the highest priority phone is 
turned off the phone with the next highest priority will be connected. 


Deleting Devices 


The paired Bluetooth™ mobile phones can only be deleted as a single group from the 
ULF control module. 


The pairing procedure must first be activated, and then the send/receive button 

on the installed eject-box or the pairing button located at the rear of the center console 
must again be depressed for an additional 10 seconds after the "Bluetooth Pairing" mes¬ 
sage is displayed on the radio in order to clear the list of paired devices from the control 
module and the message "paired devices deleted" is displayed. 


14 


Bluetooth™ 



Technical Information 


Not only does the Universal Bluetooth™ Hands-Free System offer a means to wirelessly 
integrate a mobile phone into the vehicle, it also can be diagnosed using the DISplus or 
GT1. 


The control module should always be coded to the specific vehicle that it is installed into 
to ensure optimum system performance. Coding of the module can be done using the 
DISplus or GT1 with CD33 or higher installed. 

The ULF control module contains several controllers that provide the following functions: 

1. Bluetooth™ Control Circuit 


The Bluetooth™ control circuit is physically connected to the Bluetooth™ antenna. 
It establishes the connection between the Bluetooth™ mobile phone and the 
vehicle, de-scrambles the incoming call/signal from the phone, scrambles the 
outgoing signal from the microphone for transmission to the phone, plus controls 
all communication to paired Bluetooth™ devices. 

2. Hands-free Control Circuit 


The hands-free control circuit in the ULF controls the input/output of audio 
frequency signals in hands-free mode. The hands-free mode is designed for 
full-duplex transmission. This means the user can listen and speak 
simultaneously. Voice transmission takes place via a microphone located in the 
interior of the vehicle. 


Pressing and holding the send/receive 


_- button until an audible beep is 

heard will activate the integrated voice recognition system and place the system 
into a hands-free mode. 


3. Audio Output Control 

The incoming signal from the Bluetooth™ phone is processed, sent through the 
radio and to the speakers. 

4. Audio Input Control 

The outgoing audio received from the vehicle microphone is processed and 
transmitted to the Bluetooth™ phone. 

5. I/K-Bus Interface 


The interface in the ULF control module for the l/K-bus controls the procedure for 
transmitting and receiving data telegrams via the l/K-bus in connection with other 
components on the bus. 


15 


Bluetooth™ 



6. Power Module 

The power module in the ULF control module regulates the voltage supply and 
monitors system shutdown in the event of an under voltage situation in the vehicle. 


System Overview 



Voice Recognition 


The voice recognition for the this system is integrated into the ULF Control Module and 
utilizes the same voice commands as those used with the TEMIC Voice Recognition 
Module used with the CPT8000 phone system. The "Owner's Manual for the Voice 
Input System" P/N 84 11 0 027 942 should be referenced for more detailed information 
regarding voice command features. 


Coding ULF Control Module to Vehicle 

After installing the ULF Kit, the vehicle should be re-coded with DISPIus/GTI SW 33 or 
higher, using the "Retrofit" path to ensure that the system works properly with the sys¬ 
tems currently installed in the vehicle. The recoding is done automatically when using 
the following "retrofit" procedure: 

Example for coding E46 with ULF installed: 

• Connect DIS or GT1 to vehicle (with SW 33 or higher installed). 

• Turn on ignition 
16 


Bluetooth™ 




















• Select "Coding ZCS" 

• Series: "E46 Series" 

• Path: "2 Retrofit" 

• System: "ULF Universal charging and Handsfree facility". 

• Follow the on screen requests to activate the coding procedure. 

Function Test 

Upon completion of the recoding, verify that the BMW Universal BluetoothTM Hands- 
Free System is working correctly by going through the following action steps. After com¬ 
pleting each step ensure that the desired result is obtained: 


Action 

Response 

Pair phone to vehicle (refer to section for 
pairing instructions). 

Phone and or Radio/MID/Board Computer 
should display statement indicating Pairing 
succeeded. 

Turn on radio and initiate a call using voice 
recognition commands by 
depressing/holding the Voice recognition 
button on steering wheel until an audible 
beep is heard 

Radio should mute and an audible beep is 
heard through vehicle speakers. 

Say "Dial number" 

System states "Please speak the number" 

Say phone number to be dialed 
ex"1234567890" 

System states "1234567890" 

If number is correct say "Dial" 

Call is placed and number being dialed is 
displayed on phone as well as on 
Radio/MID/Board Computer. 


17 


Bluetooth™ 





Troubleshooting 


Situation 

Correction 

No audio output through vehicle speakers 

Check SES module jumper plug 

Radio does not mute after placing a call 

Check connections at rear of radio for Tel On and Tel Mute 
signal. Verify that connectors and pins are properly seated. 

Audio quality in vehicle may not sound very 
good 

Recode ULF Control Module.- NOTE: Audio quality in 
vehicle or at person being contacted, is dependent on the 
quality and signal strength of the wireless service provider in 
the area traveled. 

Customer complains that the person being 
contacted hears a "Buzzing" noise, at times 
during their conversation or on voice mail 
message that he/she has left. 

Intermittently a "Buzzing" noise is noticeable to the person 
being called from the vehicle. The "Buzzing" noise is a 
result of the GSM signal being feedback through the micro¬ 
phone, this usually occurs if the GSM phone is located too 
close to the microphone. The customer should change the 
location of where the phone is placed/stored. 

Driver is told that the person being contact¬ 
ed complains that there is an echo/reverber¬ 
ation in the audio; person can hear his/her 
voice back through the phone. 

Audio volume in vehicle during a call may be a bit to loud, 
causing the other person to hear his/her voice coming back 
through the phone. 

A second call is received while in a call, and 
call cannot be accepted using MFL con¬ 
trols. 

Use handset to expect second call and place previous called 
on hold. Call waiting is functional only via the handset. 

The radio audio does not come back imme¬ 
diately if the "other" person hangs up first. 

It takes approximately 15 seconds for the ULF system to 
recognize that the call was terminated from outside the 
vehicle.If the call is terminated from outside the vehicle first, 
the driver can depress the button on the steering wheel to 
terminate the call from the vehicle and un-mute the radio 
quicker. 

Customer is not able to pair phone to sys¬ 
tem, not able to locate ULF passkey/pass- 
word reference card. 

The "BluetoothTM Passkey" is identified on the label of the 
ULF Control Module located in the rear of the vehicle.- 
The "BluetoothTM Passkey" for the installed control module 
can be obtained by connecting the DISPIus or GT1 and 
accessing the diagnostics for the ULF system:- select 
"Diagnostic requests"- select "Bluetooth code" 

Intermittently a popping noise is audible 
through the vehicles speaker and there is 
no BluetoothTM wireless communication 
established between the ULF module and 
the phone. 

Vehicle and /or ULF Control Module are not correctly 
coded.- Recode module and vehicle (refer to Coding ULF 
Control Module to Vehicle) 

E46 Only:After installation of ULF system 
the speedometer and odometer do not 
work. 

Remove pin 7 & 8 from the 54-pin connector going to the 
ULF Control Module. Refer to the E46 installation instruc¬ 
tions. 


18 


Bluetooth™ 




Connector Pin Assignments 

The 54-pin connector of the ULF Control Module utilizes the following pins on X01185 


PIN 

Description 

1 

Microphone + 

11 

Cradle On/Enable 

15 

1-Bus 

17 

KL 30 

19 

Microphone - 

21 

Microphone Shield 

22 

Hook 

27 

Programming 

28 

Programming 

32 

Cradle Key + 

33 

Telephone On 

34 

Telephone On (pin 33) 

35 

KL R (Ignition) 

36 

KL 31 (Ground) 

43 

Programming 

44 

Programming 

45 

Programming 

51 

Telephone Mute 

52 

KL 58g (illumination) 


The following pins on X4545 are utilized when the eject box is connected 
PIN Description 

1 Cradle Key + 

2 KL 31 

3 58G 

5 KL 30 

13 Cradle On/Enable 

Note: The pairing button used on the E46 only utilizes pin 1, 2 & 3 of X4545 


19 


Bluetooth™ 





ULF Wiring Schematic for the E53 
with Boardmonitor 


c 

o 



CD 

03 

0 

Q_ 

C/) 


20 


Bluetooth™ 


j Schematic information 

i Xi 301 6 obtained / developed using 

schematics from DIS v 32.0 
































































































ULF Wiring Schematic for the E53 
with Multi Information Display 



■H 


21 


Bluetooth™ 


Schematic information 
obtained / developed using 
schematics from DIS v 32.0 






























































































ULF Wiring Schematic for the E39 
with Boardmonitor 


c 

o 

E 

"D 



CO 

CD 

Q_ 

C/D 


22 


Bluetooth™ 


Schematic information 

i xi 301 6 obtained / developed using 

schematics from DIS v 32.0 






























































































ULF Wiring Schematic for the E39 
with Multi Information Display 



Bluetooth™ 


Schematic information 
obtained / developed using 
schematics from DIS v 32.0 

























































































ULF Wiring Schematic for the E46 
with Boardmonitor 


c 

o 

E 

~o 

CO 

o 

CO 



24 


Bluetooth™ 


j Schematic information 

a Xi 3016 obtained / developed using 

schematics from DIS v 32.0 












































































































ULF Wiring Schematic for the E46 
without the Boardmonitor 


o ® 
5 = ^ 



25 


Bluetooth™ 


Schematic information 
obtained / developed using 
schematics from DIS v 32.0 



































































































