Welcome to ST055 Engine 


ST055 Engine Electronics is 5 days in length. 

This handout is representative of selected 4, 6, 8, and 12 cylinder Engine Management 
Systems from 1996 to present. The handout serves two purposes; Instructor lead training 
and “stand alone” system reference material for the BMW Technician. 

Obviously, all of the material in the handout can not be covered in 5 days, therefore a sys¬ 
tem will be selected to cover the basic required information. The information from other sys¬ 
tems will cover the differences or variants that make them unique. Where possible, use the 
latest diagnostic equipment and DISplus/MoDIC software programs. 

Objectives 

The Instructor will familiarize the BMW Technicians with an understanding of the current 
Engine Electronics Systems and diagnostic skills. Also the Technicians will perform hands 
on practicals in the shop to ensure participation in diagnosis and component testing. 

Objectives are provided on page 2 of each system to guide you to the key learning points 
of each module. Review questions are provided at the conclusion of each module to verify 
that you achieve the learning objectives during the course. A final test will be given at the 
end of the course. 


It is very important to study the content which will assist you with important “on 
the job” information and successful completion of this course. 


As a Mention ... 

Please visit our website at Http://www.bmwtis.net for the latest information about: 


• Service Information 

Bulletins 

• Technical Training Information 

Courses 

• Repair Information 

Manuals 

• Electrical Troubleshooting Manual Information 

Wiring Schematics 


i ■ i— ¥ ■■ 


± L _■ j Jt rf Lh i 

LH WJ “ Bl U 1 VUIJ "W U JBI « 



Technician Feedback Systems 

Quality Control Information Reports 





The chart shown below is a quick reference of BMW Engine Management Systems by 
application to BMW models, engines and model years. This will help you to get familiar with 
the systems by identifying the correct version that you are diagnosing. 


Engine Management Control Versions 


VERSIONS 

MODEL 

ENGINE 

MODELYEAR 

Bosch = M 

Siemens = MS 




Ml.2 

E32 / M5 

M70 / S38 

M70 = 1988 - 1999 

S38 =1991 - 1993 

Ml.7 

E31 / E32 

M70 

1991 - 1994 

Ml.7 

E30 

M42 

1990 - 1993 

Ml.7 

E36 

M42 

1992 

Ml.7 

E36 

M42 / DISA 

1992 - 1995 

Ml.7.1 

E31 

S70 

1994 - 1995 

* Ml.7.2 

E36 

M42 / DISA 

1995 

M3.1 

E34 

M50 

1991 - 1992 

M3.1 

E36 

M50 

1992 

M3.3 

E32 

M60 

1993 - 1994 

M3.3 

E31 / E34 

M60 

1994 - 1995 

M3.3.1 

E34 / E36 

M50 TU 

1993 - 1995 

M5.2 

E36 / Z3 

M44 

1996 - 1998 

M5.2 

E31 / E38 / E39 

M62 / M73 

1995- 1997 

* MS41.1 

E36 / E39 / Z3 

M52 

1996 - 1998 

* MS41.2 

E36 M3 

S52 

1996 - 1998 

* M5.2.1 

E38 / E39 

M62 / M73 

> 1998 

* MS42 

E46 / E39 / Z3 

M52TU 

1998 - 2000 

* MS43 

E46 / E39 / E53 / Z3 

M54 

>2001 

* ME 7.2 

E39 / E38 / E53 

M62TU 

> 1999 

* MS S52 

E39 (M5) E52 (Z8) 

S62 

>1999 

* MS S54 

E46 (M3) 

S54 

> 2001 

* = Systems covered in this course 


















































Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Ml.7.2 .2 

Objectives of the Module .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components .4 

Power Supply .5 

Principle of Operation.6 

Workshop Hints.7 

Tools and Equipment .8 

Air Management .9 

Principle of Operation.13 

Workshop Hints.16 

Tools and Equipment .21 

Fuel Management.22 

Principle of Operation.31 

Workshop Hints.37 

Tools and Equipment .44 

Ignition Management .47 

Principle of Operation.54 

Workshop Hints.57 

Tools and Equipment .63 

Emissions Management .65 

Evaporative Emissions .65 

Exhaust Emissions.67 

Principle of Operation.71 

Workshop Hints.75 

Tools and Equipment.77 

Performance Controls.78 

Variant Coding.83 

Workshop Hints.84 

Tools and Equipment.85 


Review Questions 


86 


































Ml.7.2 


Model: E36-M42 Engine 
Production Date: 1995 
Manufacturer: Bosch 
Pin Connector: 88 Pins 


Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Describe the Power Supply for the Fuel Injectors 

• Name the Components of the Fuel Supply System 

• List the Inputs Required for Ignition Operation 

• Decribe the Knock Sensor Function 

• Name Two Types of Emissions the ECM Controls 

• List Two Reasons for the “CHECK ENGINE” Light to Illuminate 

• Describe Semi-Sequential Fuel Injection 

• Understand How EWS Affects ECM Output Functions to Deter Vehicle Theft 


2 


ST055 Ml.7.2 





Ml. 7.2 


Purpose of the System 

The Ml .7.2 system manages the following functions: 


Air: 

• Idle Speed Valve 

• Throttle Position 

• Air Flow Meter 

• DISA 


Fuel: 

• Fuel Supply 

• Fuel Injection 


Ignition: 

• Direct Ignition 

• Knock Control 

• Primary Ignition Monitoring 


Emissions: 

• Lambda Adaptation 

• Oxygen Sensor Heating 

• Primary Ignition Monitoring 

• Evaporator Purge Valve Control 

• CHECK ENGINE Light 


Performance Controls: 

• Output of Injection Signal (Ti) for MPG Gage 

• Interaction with EGS (ignition timing inter 
vention) 

• Throttle position (DKV) for EGS 

• Output of Engine RPM for Tachometer 

• A/C Compressor Control 

• EWS I and EWS II 


3 


ST055 Ml.7.2 














System Components: INPUTS - PROCESSING - OUTPUTS 


KL 15 


MEMORY B+POWER 




AUX KL 31 ►- 






MAIN KL 31 


ECM 

RELAY — — 
OPERATING POWER 


INTAKE AIR TEMP 



AIR FLOW 
SIGNAL 



THROTTLE 

POSITION 



ENGINE 

TEMPERATURE 


ENGINE SPEED 
/ REF SIGNAL 


12550012.eps 





PIN 
SELECTED 


/ o• 


CYLINDER 
ID SIGNAL 



O 2 SENSOR SIGNAL 




EGS 


TORQUE 


REDUCTION 



SPEEDO SIGNAL “A” 



F 


m 


■BIT 

l=f 

- 



llill 

1 1 


CODE FUNCTION 


A/C SWITCH ON 


COMPRESSOR ‘ON’ 
REQUEST 



9 


INDIVIDUAL SERIAL 
NUMBER FROM 1-95 


_nuru~ur. 


Ml.7.2 


POWER 

SUPPLY 


AIR 

MANAGEMENT 


/ 


FUEL 

MANAGEMENT 


IGNITION 

MANAGEMENT 


EMISSIONS 

MANAGEMENT 


PERFORMANCE 

CONTROLS 


ECM RELAY 



CONTROL 


CHANGEOVER 
VALVE SOLENOID 


KL 15 



DISA 

VACUUM 

MOTOR 


IDLE SPEED 




CONTROL VALVE 


FUEL PUMP 


RELAY CONTROL 


T“ 

f 

S' 

J 1 

L 


O-L 


SEMI-SEQUENTIAL 


FUEL INJECTOR 
CONTROL 




# 




4X 


IGNITION COILS 


CONTROL (4X) 



O 2 SENSOR HEATER 


f 


3 


RELAY CONTROL 

PURGE VALVE CONTROL 


'l-- 


LAMP CONTROL f check 

ENGINE 


Ti 



A/C COMP RELAY CONTROL 


TD 


DK 




4 


ST055 Ml.7.2 






















































































































































Power Supply 


12550011 .eps 



ECM RELAY 

CONTROL 



KL30 - Battery Voltage: It supplies the operating voltage to the ECM. Battery voltage also 
sustains system memory for fault codes and adaptation values. 

KL15 - Ignition Switch: When the ignition is switched “on” the ECM is informed that the 
engine is about to be started. KL15 also supplies voltage to the Engine Control Module 
Relay. Switching KL15 “off” removes the ECM operating voltage. 


Engine Control Module Relay: It provides the operating voltage for: 


• ECM 

• Fuel Pump Relay 

• Fuel Injectors 

• Oxygen Sensor Heating 

• Idle Speed Valve 

• Intake Air Resonance Changeover Valve 

• Purge Valve 

• EGS “wakeup” Call (Terminal 87a) 


Ground: Multiple ground paths are necessary to complete current flow through the ECM. 
The ECM ground pin numbers and functions are: 


Pin# 

Ground 

06 

Fuel Injection 

28 

Electronics and Sensor Shielding 

34 

Remaining Output Stages (Except Ignition & Injection) 

43 

Sensors 

55 

Ignition 

71 

Oxygen Sensor Signal 


5 

ST055 Ml .7..2 Power Supply 


























































Principle of Operation 

Battery Voltage is monitored by the ECM for fluctuations. It will adjust the output func¬ 
tions to compensate for a lower (11,7v) and higher (14v) voltage value. For example, the 
ECM will: 


• Modify Pulse Width Duration of Fuel Injection 

• Modify Dwell Time of Ignition 


When KL15 is switched “on” the ECM is ready for engine management. The ECM will acti¬ 
vate ground to energize the Engine Control Module Relay. The Engine Control Module 
Relay supplies operating voltage to the ECM and the previously mentioned operating com¬ 
ponents. 


When KL15 is switched “off” the ECM operating voltage is removed. The ECM will main¬ 
tain a ground to the Engine Control Module Relay for a few seconds to hold the Evaporative 
Purge Valve closed (to prevent engine run on). 


Ground is required to complete the current 
path through the ECM. The ECM also: 

• Internally links a constant ground (1) to the 
engine sensors. 

• Switches ground (2) to activate components 



6 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Power Supply 





































Workshop Hints 


Power Supply - Testing 

Inadequate power and ground supply can result 
in: 

• No Start 

• Hard Starting (Long Crank Times) 

• Inaccurate Diagnostic Status or ECM 
Not Found 

• Intermittant/Constant Check Engine Light 

• Intermittant/Constant Driveability 
Problems 

Power supply including fuses should be tested 
for: 



• Visual (1) Blown Fuse 

• Available Voltage 2 

• Voltage Drop (Dynamic Resistance) (2) 

• Resistance of Cables and Wires (2) 


The ignition (KL15) must be switched 
off when removing or installing the 
ECM connector to prevent voltage 
spikes (arcing) that can damage the 
Control Module! 

The Engine Control Module Relay (located in the 
fuse box) should be tested for: 

• Battery Voltage and Switch Ground (1) 

• Resistance (1) 

• Battery Voltage and Voltage Drop (2) 



12550006.bmp 




7 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Power Supply 




































































































































































Tools and Equipment 


Power Supply 

When testing power supply to an ECM, the 
DIS/MoDIC multimeter function as well as a rep¬ 
utable hand held multimeter can be used. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the Ml.7.2 
application should be used (#88 88 6 614 410). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

The interior of this Universal Adapter is shielded, 
therefore it is vital that the ground cable is con¬ 
nected to the vehicle chassis whenever the 
adapter is used. 

The adapter uses a Printed Circuit board inside 
keeping the capacitive and inductive load to a 
minimum. 




When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located below the windshield on the pas¬ 
senger side of the engine compartment), make 
sure the ignition is switched off. 


The Engine Control Module Relay should be 
tested using the relay test kit (P/N 88 88 6 613 
010) shown on the right. 

This kit allows testing of relays from a remote 
position. 

Always consult the ETM for proper relay con¬ 
nections. 




8 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Power Supply 





















Air Management 



Throttle Valve: The mechanical throttle valve 
regulates the intake air flow and it is linked by a 
cable to the accelerator pedal. 

The throttle valve is a two stage (progressive 
linkage) plate arrangement with integral closing 
springs. This allows a smaller primary opening 
(1) for low to mid-range rpm and a larger sec¬ 
ondary opening (2) that opens for the higher 
rpm range. 

The throttle valve is heated by engine coolant to 
prevent condensation from “icing”. The throttle 
valve is “preset” and should not be adjusted. 



13550000.jpg 





Throttle Position Sensor: A potentiometer is 
mounted on the throttle housing which provides 
the ECM with a voltage value (0-5v) that repre¬ 
sents throttle angle position and rate of move¬ 
ment. The sensor receives its power supply 
from the ECM. 

The Potentiometer is non-adjustable because 
the ECM “learns” the throttle angle voltage at 
idle speed. If the throttle position sensor is 
replaced, the ECM must be disconnected from 
the power supply for at least one minute (to 
clear memory). 



Ml.7.2 

Control 

Module 


43 


12 


59 



9 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 

























































































Idle Speed Control Valve: This is a two wire 
control valve that regulates air by-passing the 
throttle valve to control the engine idle speed. 


<1 


The idle speed control valve is spring loaded 
closed. It will “failsafe” to a fixed opening (21%) 
to allow the engine to idle in the event of a 
power failure. 

The valve is supplied with battery voltage from 
the Engine Control Module Relay. The valve 
opening is controlled by the ECM modulating 
the ground signal which opens the valve against 
spring tension. 



M1.7/M42 


13550001 .eps 


Air Flow Volume Sensor: This sensor measures the 
total volume of air drawn into the engine. 

The ECM provides the power supply for the Air Flow 
Volume Sensor. A potentiometer is connected to the 
sensing flap and as air flow causes the sensing flap to 
move, a varying voltage signal (0-5v) is sent to the 
ECM that “represents” the inducted air volume. 

Attached to the sensing flap is a “compensation flap” 
that moves within a closed chamber. This creates a 
dampening effect on flap movement for pulsations in 
the intake system caused by cylinder filling and intake 
valve operation. 



NOTE: The Air Flow Volume Sensor is non-adjustable. 


10 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 









































Air Temperature Signal: The Air Flow Volume Sensor 
contains an integral air temperature sensor. This signal 
is needed by the ECM to correct the air volume input 
for changes in the intake air temperature (air density). 

The sensor is located in front of the measuring flap. 
The ECM provides the power supply to this compo¬ 
nent. The sensor decreases in resistance as the tem¬ 
perature rises and vice versa (NTC). The ECM monitors 
an applied voltage to the sensor (5v) that will vary as air 
temperature changes the resistance value (0-5v). 



Differential Air Intake System (DISA): DISA 
allows the dynamics of varied intake manifold 
tuning. This feature provides necessary intake 
air “velocity” producing good mid-range torque. 
Additionally, DISA can divert intake air flow pro¬ 
viding “volume” for higher rpm requirements. 


The ECM closes the changeover valve to take 
advantage of a long single intake runner at mid¬ 
range RPM. This produces air velocity that 
increases engine torque at mid-range. 


At high rpm, the ECM opens the changeover 
valve allowing the engine breathing dynamics 
to change to the dual short air pipes (volume). 
This change enables additional power output at 
the higher RPM range. 



13550003.jpg 



13550004.jpg 


11 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 




To accomplish this function, the M42 intake 
manifold incorporates a non-replaceable brass 
change over valve. 

The DISA system vacuum components are: 

• Motor (actuator) • Reservoir 

• Solenoid • Check Valve 


The solenoid receives voltage from the Engine 
Control Module Relay and the ECM controls the 
ground supply to activate the solenoid. 


13550005.jpg 



Pressure Control Valve: The pressure control 
valve varies the vacuum applied to the 
crankcase ventilation depending on engine 
load. The valve is balanced between spring 
pressure and the amount of manifold vacuum. 

The oil vapors exit the separator labyrinth in the 
cylinder head cover (1). The oil vapors are 
drawn into the intake manifold (3) regulated by 
the pressure control valve (2). 

At idle when the intake manifold vacuum is high, 
the vacuum decrease the valve opening and 
only allows a small amount of crankcase vapors 
to be drawn into the intake manifold. 

At part to full load conditions when intake man¬ 
ifold vacuum is lower, the spring opens the 
valve and additional crankcase vapors are 
drawn into the intake manifold. 




12 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 



Principle of Operation 

Air flow into the engine is regulated by the Throttle Valve or the Idle Speed Control Valve. 
Both of these air “passages” are necessary for smooth engine operation from idle to full 
load. On the Ml.7.2 system, the Throttle Valve is mechanically controlled and the Idle 
Speed Control Valve is electrically controlled. All of the ECM monitoring, processing and 
output functions are a result of regulated air flow. 



The Throttle Position Sensor is monitored by the ECM for throttle angle position and rate 
of movement. As the throttle plate is opened, a rising voltage signal (up to 5v) requests 
acceleration and at what rate. The ECM will increase the volume of fuel injected into the 
engine, advance the ignition timing and decrease the Idle Speed Valve opening (air is now 
going by the throttle plate). The “full throttle” position indicates maximum acceleration to 
the ECM, this will have an effect on the A/C compressor (covered in Performance Controls). 

As the throttle plate is closed (integral springs), a decrease in voltage signals the ECM to 
activate fuel shut off if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). The Idle Speed Control Valve 
will then be opened to maintain idle speed. 

The ECM monitors the engine idle speed in addition the Throttle Position Sensor voltage. 
The voltage value is “learned” at the correct idle speed and if the voltage value has changed 
(mechanical wear of throttle plate or linkage), the ECM will adjust the Idle Speed Control 
Valve to maintain the correct idle speed based on the “new” voltage. To clear this “learned” 
value, disconnect the ECM for at least one minute. If the Throttle Position input is defec¬ 
tive, a fault code will be set and the “CHECK ENGINE” Light will illuminate. The ECM will 
maintain engine operation based on the Air Flow Volume Sensor and the Engine RPM 
Sensor. 

The Idle Speed Control Valve is controlled by the ECM modulating the ground signal to 
the valve, opening it against spring pressure. By varying the duty cycle applied to the wind¬ 
ing, the valve can be progressively opened, or held steady to maintain the idle speed. If the 
Idle Speed Control Valve circuit is defective, a fault code will be set and the “CHECK 
ENGINE” Light will illuminate. The valve will spring to the fixed opening, allowing the engine 
to idle. 


13 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 




































There are additional factors that influence the ECM in regulating idle speed: 


• The RPM sensor input allows the ECM to 
monitor engine speed because of loads that 
cause idle fluctuations due to drag on the 
engine: power steering, thick oil (fractional 
forces), etc. 

• Cold engine temperature (coolant NTC) provides 
higher idle speed to raise temperature sooner. 

• Vehicle speed informs ECM when the vehicle 
is stationary and requires idle maintenance 

• A/C on request from the climate control system 
(arming the ECM) and compressor engage 
(stabilize idle speed) acknowlegment. 

• Range selector provides a Park/Neutral input to 
the ECM identifying when the vehicle is in a 
drive gear. This signal allows idle stabilization 
for the increased load on the engine. 



The Air Flow Volume Sensor sends a varying voltage (0-5v) to the ECM representing the 
measured amount of intake air volume. This input is used by the ECM to determine the 
amount of fuel to be injected. If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“CHECK ENGINE” Light will illuminate. The ECM will maintain engine operation based on 
the Throttle Position Sensor and Engine RPM Sensor. 


The Air Temperature Signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The vary¬ 
ing voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found in 
cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the amount 
of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on oxygen sensing ratio. 

The ignition timing is also affected by air temperature. If the intake air is hot the ECM retards 
the base igniton timing to reduce the risk of detonation. If the intake air is cooler, the base 
ignition timing will be advanced. If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“CHECK ENGINE” Light will illuminate. 


14 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 





































DISA is controlled by the ECM activating the Change Over Solenoid below 4,840 RPM. 


When activated the solenoid applies vacuum 
to the change over valve and the valve closes, 
providing the long pipe effect. 


Above the RPM, the solenoid is switched off 
and the Change Over Valve springs opens, 
providing the short pipe effect. 

On decel, the solenoid will not be activated 
until 4,760 RPM. This over lap prevents 
repeated opening and closing of the valve while 
driving at a constant engine speed of 4800 
rpm. 


jj- 1 H>.<i PT.JV- 



-.uri iru ■[irri'.TM 


■/JI'.T 



HDFHU^IU 


13550006. jpg 



CHANGEOVER 
VALVE CLOSED 


|_.l, ■ 



ON DECELERATION, CHANGEOVER 
VALVE WILL NOT CLOSE UNTIL 
ENGINE RPM REACHES 4760. 


! 

| DECELERATION 


ACCELERATION c 


o 


RPM $■ 


£000 


3000 


4000 


13550007.jpg 



CHANGEOVER 
VALVE OPEN 

Vi> _r. 





DURING AOCFI FRATION 
CHANGEOVER VALVE 
OPENS AT <3845 RPM r 


5000 


6000 


If there is a defect in this system, the Changeover Valve will be opened to ensure intake air 
availability for maximum power (short pipe affect). The Vacuum Motor and valve shaft are 
both spring loaded to open the Changeover Valve if vacuum is not applied. 


15 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 












Workshop Hints 

Air Management 

Unmetered air leaks can be misleading when diagnosing faults causing Check Engine 
Light/driveability complaints. Refer to S.l. # 11 03 92 (3500) for testing intake vacuum 
leaks. 


Crankcase Ventilation System 

A fault in this system can often “mislead” diagnosis. This type of fault can produce: 

• Mixture/Misfire Defect Codes 

• Whistling Noises 

• Performance/Driveabiltity Complaints 


Please refer to the following Service Information Bulletins for details on the Crankcase 
Ventilation System: 

• Crankcase Ventilation System Check S.l. #11 05 98 

• Throttle Housing Recall Campaign (Crankcase Ventilation Routing) S.l. #13 06 91 (3440) 


Throttle Valve and Throttle Position Sensor 

These components are non-adjustable and tampering is not permitted. However, the 
attaching throttle and cruise control cables should be adjusted (refer to Repair Instru¬ 
ctions). 

Please refer to the following Service Information Bulletins for details on the Throttle Valve 
Housing and Throttle Position Sensor: 


• Increase Pedal Effort S.l. #13 03 94 (4042) 

• Throttle Body Recall Campaign (Throttle Body Heater) S.l. #13 02 94 (3980) 

• Throttle Potentiometer - Fault code 12 S.l. #13 09 90 (3141) 


16 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 
















Throttle Position Sensor - Testing 


The Throttle Position Sensor (potetiometer) can 
be tested with the following methods: 


• DIS Status Page (approx. 0.6v idle to 4.2v full 
throttle. 

• DIS Oscilloscope - Select from the Preset 
Measurements which requires taking the 
measurement with the ECM and Universal 
Adapter connected to the circuit. 

• Resistance check of the entire circuit, using 
the Universal Adapter with the ECM 
disconnected (approx. 1-4 K ohms). 



Ml.7.2 
Control 
Module 


43 


12 


59 




13550005.eps 


Idle Speed Control Valve - Testing 


• The Idle Speed Control Valve and idle air circuit 
(passage ways) should be checked for physical 
obstructions. 

• The resistance of the valve winding should be 
checked (8 +/-2 ohms). 

• The ECM output and Idle Speed Control Valve 
operation can be tested by “Component 
Activation” on the DIS/MoDIC. 

• The Pulse Width Modulated ground output 
from the ECM can be tested using the DIS/ 
MoDIC Oscilloscope. 

• Consult Technical Data for specified idle speed. 


13550008.jpg 




17 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 






















































































































































































































Air Flow Volume Sensor 


This component is non-adjustable and tampering is not permitted. 

A faulty Air Flow Volume Sensor can produce the following complaints: 


• Difficult To Restart When Engine Is Hot 

• Engine Starts Then Stalls 

» “CHECK ENGINE” Light Illuminated 

• Engine Starts And Runs Only With 
Accelerator Pedal Depressed 


Please refer to the following Service Information Bulletin for details on the Air Flow Volume 
Sensor: 


• Fault Code “41” S.l. #12 09 95 


Some early versions have been modified with an 
additional harness. This is a BMW approved 
modification, refer to S.l. #13 03 91 (3290) for 
details. 



The Air Flow Volume Sensor should be checked 
for: 

• Code Number (1) 

• Production Date (2) 



13550010.jpg 


18 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 







Air Flow Volume Sensor - Testing 


The Air Flow Volume Sensor (pot¬ 
entiometer) can be tested with 
the following methods: 

• DIS Status Page (Up/Uv Ratio 
0.1 - 0.3 at idle speed). 

• DIS Oscilloscope - Select from 
the Preset Measurements which 
requires taking the 
measurements with the ECM 
disconnected and the Universal 
Adapter connected to the 
circuit. 

• Resistance check of the entire 
circuit, using the Universal 
Adapter with the ECM 
disconnected. 


Air Temperature Signal - 
Testing 






13550004.eps 


NTC sensors decrease in resis¬ 
tance as the temperature rises and 
vice versa. The ECM monitors the 
sensor voltage which varies as 
temperature changes the resis¬ 
tance value. For example, as tem¬ 
perature rises: 

• Resistance through the sensor 
decreases. 

• Voltage drop across the sensor 
decreases. 

• Input signal voltage also 
decreases (5-0v). 


This Sensor should be tested 
using: 

• DIS/Modic Status page. 

• DIS/Modic Multimeter 
At 20° C 2.2 - 2.7 k ohms 



13550005. 


eps 



19 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 

















DISA - Testing 


The DISA System can be tested by raising the RPM to 4,840 (briefly) and visually checking 
the Vacuum Motor Actuator Arm for movement. 

If the Actuator Arm does not move, repeat test and check for vacuum at: 



Repeat the test to verify the ECM is providing a ground signal to the Solenoid Valve. 


CHEOC VALVE 



13550011 .jpg 


20 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 















Tools and Equipment 


The DIS/Modic as well as a reputable hand held 
multimeter can be used when testing inputs/ 
components. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the Ml .7.2 
application should be used (#88 88 6 614 410). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

The interior of this Universal Adapter is shielded, 
therefore it is vital that the ground cable is con¬ 
nected to the vehicle chassis whenever the 
adapter is used. 

The adapter uses a Printed Circuit board inside 
keeping the capacitive and inductive load to a 
minimum. 




12550010.eps 


88 Pin 
Adapter 


When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located below the windshield on the pas¬ 
senger side of the engine compartment), make 
sure the ignition is switched off. 


The Slack Tube Manometer Test Tool (#99 00 0 
001 410) should be used to troubleshoot 
crankcase ventilation valves. 




12550002.ipq 


21 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Air Management 








































































Fuel Management 



Fuel Tank: The fuel tank is made of 
high density polyethylene (reduced 
weight) which is manufactured to 
meet safety requirements. 


A “saddle” type tank is used which 
provides a tunnel for the driveshaft but 
creates two separate low spots in the 
tank. 


A Syphon jet is required with this type 
of tank to transfer fuel from the left 
side, linked to the fuel return line. 


Running Losses 
3/2 Way Valve 
Assembly 




As fuel moves through the return, the 
siphon jet creates a low pressure (suc¬ 
tion) to pick up fuel from the left side 
of the tank and transfer it to the right 
side at the fuel pick up. 



13550006.eps 


Lw 


22 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 












































































































Fuel Pump: The electric fuel pump supplies constant 
fuel volume to the injection system. This system uses a 
single submersible (in the fuel tank) pump. The inlet is 
protected by a mesh screen. 

When the fuel pump is powered, the armature will 
rotate the impeller disk creating low pressure at the 
inlet. The fuel will be drawn into the inlet and passed 
through the fuel pump housing (around the armature). 
The fuel lubricates and cools the internals of the pump 
motor. 

The fuel will exit through a non-return check valve to 
supply the injection system. The non-return check 
valve is opened by fuel exiting the pump and will close 
when the pump is deactivated. This maintains a 
“prime” of fuel in the filter, lines, hoses and fuel rail. 

The pump contains an internal overpressure relief valve 
that will open (reducing roller cell pressure) if there is a 
restriction in the fuel supply hardware. 

Fuel Supply Hardware: The fuel is transfered from 
the fuel pump to the fuel filter then on to the fuel rail. 
This is accomplished by a combination of steel lines (2) 
and high pressure hoses (1). 

The fuel pump delivers more volume than the injection 
system requires. The unused fuel is routed through a 
return line to the tank. The fuel is constantly circulated 
in this manner. 

The fuel filter “traps” contaminents before they reach 
the fuel injectors and should be replaced at the speci¬ 
fied interval. The arrow (on the filter) denotes the in¬ 
stallation direction. The large filter size also serves as a 
volume reservoir for pressurized fuel (dampening fuel 
pump pulsations). 

The fuel rail distributes an even supply of fuel to all of 
the injectors, and also serves as a volume reservoir. 



23 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 




Fuel Pressure Regulator: The Fuel Pressure Reg¬ 
ulator maintains a constant “pressure differential" for 
the fuel injectors. 

The fuel pressure is set to 3.0 bar (+/- 0.2) by internal 
spring tension on the restriction valve. 

The vacuum chamber is sealed off by a diaphragm 
which is connected by a hose to the intake manifold. 
Intake manifold vacuum regulates the fuel pressure by 
assisting to compress the spring (lowering fuel pressure). 

When the restriction valve opens, unused fuel returns 
back to the fuel tank. 



aCuum 


Hs3(ricl»gp 
Valve 

13550025.jpg M&niKH' 


Examples of “pressure differential” are: 

• At low to part throttle, intake manifold vacuum is available at the tip of the fuel injectors 
to enhance fuel “flow through”. Vacuum is also applied to the fuel pressure regulator 
vacuum chamber, causing the diaphragm to compress the spring which opens the 
restriction valve. This lowers the fuel pressure available to the fuel injectors. 


Vacuum Compresses Spring 
Opening Restriction Valve 
(Lowering Fuel Pressure) 



ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 

































































• Wide open throttle depletes intake manifold vacuum at the tip of the fuel injectors and in 
the fuel pressure regulator vacuum chamber. The spring closes the restriction valve to 
raise fuel pressure available to the fuel injectors. This maintains pressure differential (fuel 
flow through) for the fuel injectors. 



By maintaining constant Fuel Pressure Differential through vacuum sensing (engine load), 
the ECM can then regulate volume and mixture by the length of time the injectors are open 
(duration). 


The Fuel Pressure Regulator is mounted on the 
fuel rail (arrow). 



1355QQ14.jpg 


25 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 








1 . 

Fuel Strainer 

2. 

Electrical Connector 

3. 

Solenoid Winding 

4. 

Closing Spring 

5. 

Solenoid Armature 

6. 

Needle Valve 

7. 

Pintle 


Fuel is supplied from the fuel rail to the injector body. 
The fuel is channeled through the injector body to the 
needle valve and seat at the tip of the injector. 

Without electrical current, the needle valve is sprung 
closed against the seat. 

The Fuel Injectors receive voltage from the Engine 
Control Module Relay. The ECM activates current flow 
through the injector solenoid creating a magnetic field 
that pulls the needle “up” off of its seat. 

The pressurized fuel flows through the opening and 
deflects off of the pintle. 

The pintle (tip of the needle) is a cone shaped deflec¬ 
tor that “fans out” the fuel spray into an angled pattern 
which helps to atomize the fuel. 

When the ECM deactivates current flow, the needle 
valve is sprung closed against the seat and fuel flow 
through the injector is stopped. 

The length of time that the ECM activates the Fuel 
Injectors is very brief, the duration is in milli-seconds 
(ms). This affects the mount of fuel volume flowing 
through the Fuel Injectors. 

The ECM will vary the length of time (ms) to regulate 
the air/fuel ratio (mixture). 



Bosch Fuel Injectors: The Fuel Injectors are electronically controlled solenoid valves that 
provide precise metered and atomized fuel into the engine intake ports. The Fuel Injector 
Valve consists of: 


13550075.jpg 



26 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 























































The Fuel Injectors are mounted in rubber “o- 
rings” between the fuel rail and the intake man¬ 
ifold to insulate them from heat and vibration. 
This insulation also reduces the injector noise 
from being transmitted through the engine 
compartment. The Fuel Injectors are held to the 
fuel rail by securing clips (arrow). 

If a Fuel Injector is faulty (mechanical or electri¬ 
cal), it can produce the following complaints: 



• “CHECK ENGINE” Light • Misfire/Rough Idle (Leaking or Blocked) 


• Excessive Tailpipe Smoke (leaking) • Long Crank Time (leaking) 


• Engine Hydrolock (leaking) 


• Oxygen Sensor/Mixture/Injector Related Fault Codes 



Air Shroud Injector: To comply with emission regulations, Air Shrouded Injectors have 
been fitted on the M42 engine since 1994 MY. There is an air gap between the inner and 
outer body of the fuel injector which allows additional metered air to be drawn in. This air 
disperses and mixes with the injected fuel which improves fuel atomization as it enters the 
combustion chamber thus lowering CO/HC emissions. 



The Air Shrouded Injectors incorporate a hose fitting on the outer injector body which con¬ 
nects each injector via a rubber hose, to the molded Idle Speed Control Valve hose, under 
the intake manifold. 


27 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 
















The metered air is taken from a fitting located in 
the intake bellows boot in front of the throttle 
valve (ported vacuum). The system is self regu¬ 
lating with greater air flow at idle and low load 
engine ranges (intake manifold vacuum drawing 
air in). 


The Air Shrouded supply components are: 


1 . 

Idle Speed Control Valve 

2. 

Connection to Intake Bellows Boot 

3. 

Connection to Intake Manifold 

4. 

Hoses for Air Shrouded Injectors 



1550046.bmp 


Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor: This sensor pro¬ 
vides the crankshaft position and engine speed (RPM) 
signal to the ECM for Fuel Pump and Injector opera¬ 
tion. This is an inductive pulse type sensor. The ECM 
provides the power supply to this component. 

The sensor scans an incremental impulse/gear wheel 
that has a total of 58 teeth and a gap of two missing 
teeth. The rotation of the impulse wheel generates an 
A/C voltage signal in the sensor where-by each tooth 
of the wheel produces one pulse. The ECM counts the 
pulses and determines engine rpm. 

The gap of two missing teeth provides a reference 
point that the ECM recognizes as crankshaft position. 



The impulse wheel is mounted behind the 
crankshaft pulley. The Sensor is mounted on 
the front timing cover (housing). 

A fault with this input will produce the following 
complaints: 

• No Start 

• Intermitant Misfire / Driveability 

• Engine Stalling 



28 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 































Camshaft Position Sensor (Cylinder Identification): The cylinder ID sensor (inductive 
pulse) input allows the ECM to determine camshaft position in relation to crankshaft posi¬ 
tion. It is used by the ECM to establish the firing order for the direct ignition system and the 
semi-sequential fuel injection timing. 


The sensor scans a tooth mounted on the 
intake camshaft drive gear (mounted in the front 
of the cylinder head). The ECM provides the 
power supply for this component and monitors 
the A/C voltage generated when the tooth 
passes the sensor tip. This input provides one 
pulse per revolution of the camshaft. 

This input is only checked by the ECM during 
“start up”. The camshaft position is referenced 
to the crankshaft position, and is not monitored 
until the next engine start up. 



If the ECM detects a fault with the Cylinder ID Sensor, the “CHECK ENGINE” Light will be 
illuminated and the system will still operate based on the Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. 
Upon a restart, a slight change in driveability could occur because the ECM will activate 
Parallel Fuel Injection, all of the injectors will be activated at the same time. 


Engine Coolant Temperature: The Engine Coolant Temperature is provided to the ECM 
from a Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) type sensor. The ECM determines the cor¬ 
rect fuel mixture and base ignition timing required for the engine temperature. 


The sensor decreases in resistance as the tem¬ 
perature rises and vice versa. 

The ECM monitors an applied voltage to the 
sensor (5v). This voltage will vary (0-5v) as 
coolant temperature changes the resistance 
value. 

This sensor is located in the coolant jacket of 
the cylinder head (1). 



If the Coolant Temperature Sensor input is faulty, the “CHECK ENGINE” Light will be illumi¬ 
nated and the ECM will assume a substitute value (80° C) to maintain engine operation. 


29 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 























Throttle Position Sensor: The potentiometer is mon¬ 
itored by the ECM for throttle angle position and rate of 
movement. For details about the sensor, refer to the Air 
Management section. 

As the throttle is opened, the ECM will increase the vol¬ 
ume of fuel injected into the engine. As the throttle 
plate is closed, the ECM activates fuel shut off if the 
rpm is above idle speed (coasting). 

If the Throttle Position input is defective, a fault code 
will be set and the “CHECK ENGINE” Light will illumi¬ 
nate. The ECM will maintain fuel injection operation 
based on the Air Flow Volume Sensor and the 
Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. 

Air Flow Volume Sensor: This potentiometer sends a 
signal to the ECM representing the measured amount 
of intake air volume. This input is used by the ECM to 
determine the amount of fuel to be injected for correct 
air/fuel ratio. For details about the sensor, refer to the 
Air Management section. 

If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“CHECK ENGINE” Light will illuminate. The ECM will 
maintain fuel injection operation based on the Throttle 
Position Sensor and Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. 

Air Temperature: This signal allows the ECM to make 
a calculation of air density. The sensor is located in 
front of the measuring flap. For details about the sen¬ 
sor, refer to the Air Management section. 

The varying voltage input from the NTC sensor indi¬ 
cates the larger proportion of oxygen found in cold air, 
as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The 
ECM will adjust the amount of injected fuel because the 
quality of combustion depends on oxygen sensing 
ratio. 

If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“CHECK ENGINE” Light will illuminate. 



Ml .7.2 

Control 

Module 



13550002-1 .eps 



.eps 






13550001 .jpg 


30 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 



























































Principle of Operation 


Fuel Management delivers fuel from the tank to the intake ports of the engine. To accom¬ 
plish this, fuel supply must be available to the fuel injectors. Then the fuel must be inject¬ 
ed in the precise amount and at the correct time. The ECM does not directly monitor fuel 
supply, although it does control fuel supply. The Fuel Pump supplies fuel when it receives 
operating voltage from the Engine Control Module Relay supplying the Fuel Pump Relay. 
The ECM controls and monitors fuel injection. 



The Fuel Pump will be activated when 
the igniton (KL15) is switched “on” and 
the ECM supplies a ground circuit to 
activate the Fuel Pump Relay. The Fuel 
Pump Relay supplies operating power to 
the in-tank mounted fuel pump. This is a 
momentary activation to “pressurize” 
(prime) the fuel system. 

The ECM then requires an engine RPM 
signal from the Crankshaft Position/RPM 
Sensor to maintain continuous Fuel 
Pump Relay activation. 

If the engine RPM signal is not present, 
the ECM will deactivate the Fuel Pump 
Relay. 


Operating Power 



1355Q012.eps 


The Fuel Injectors will be opened by the ECM to inject pressurized fuel into the intake 
ports. The Fuel Injectors receive voltage from the Engine Control Module Relay. The ECM 
controls the opening by activating the ground circuit for the Solenoid Windings. The ECM 
will vary the duration (in milli-seconds) of “opening” time to regulate the air/fuel ratio. 


31 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 




















































































The ECM has two Final Stage output transistors 
that switch ground to the four injector solenoids. 
The Injector “triggering” is first established from 
the Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor. 

The ECM is programmed to activate the Final 
Stage output transistors once for every revolu¬ 
tion of the crankshaft (Parallel Injection). The 
ECM calculates the total milli-second time to 
open the injectors and cuts that value in half. 


ECM Rela 



The injectors are all opened at the same time (in 
parallel) for every complete crankshaft revolu¬ 
tion. This delivers half of the fuel charge at each 
injection so that the engine receives the full fuel 
charge during a complete working cycle. This 
process enhances fuel atomization during start 
up. 


During start up, the ECM recognizes the 
Camshaft Position (Cylinder ID) input. It then 
switches the injection to Semi-Sequential. This 
process “times” the injection closer to the intake 
valve opening for increased efficiency. 


13550013. eos 


Parallel Injection 

— i 

3 ■ 

4 ■ 





lo 


180 


360 


540 


720 


Injector Open 
Intake Valve Open 


When activated, each group (grouped in pairs) 
delivers the full fuel charge at separate times for 
each engine working cycle. 


The Camshaft Position input is only checked by 
the ECM during start up. The camshaft position 
is referenced to the crankshaft position, and is 
not monitored until the next engine start up. 
Therefore, if this input is lost when the engine is 
already running, there will be no effect. There will 
only be an effect if this input is missing when the 
engine is started. For this condition, the ECM 
will continue operating the injectors in Parallel. 


Semi-Sequential Injection 




lo 


180 


36 

>0 


540 


720 


Injector Open 


Intake Valve Open 


32 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 





































































































































The Injector “open” Time to maintain engine operation after it has been started is det¬ 
ermined by the ECM (programming). The ECM will calculate the engine “load” based on a 
combination of the following inputs: 


• Battery Voltage 

• Throttle Position 

• Air Flow Volume 

• Air Temperature 

• Crankshaft Position/RPM 

• Crankshaft Position (Cylinder ID) 

• Engine Coolant 

• Oxygen Sensor 
(Detail in Emissions) 



The injection ms value will be regulated based on battery voltage. When cranking, the volt¬ 
age is low and the ECM will increase the ms value to compensate for injector “lag time”. 
When the engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the 
injection ms value due to faster injector reaction time. 


Cold starting requires additional fuel to compensate for poor mixture and the loss of fuel as 
it condenses onto cold intake ports, valves and cylinder walls. The cold start fuel quantity 
is determined by the ECM based on the Engine Coolant Temperature Sensor input during 
start up. 

During cranking, additional fuel is injected (in Parallel) for the first few crankshaft revolutions. 
After the first few crankshaft revolutions, the injected quantity is metered down as the 
engine comes up to speed. When the engine speed approaches idle rpm, the ECM rec¬ 
ognizes the Camshaft Position and switches to Semi-Sequential injection. 

When the engine is cold, optimum fuel metering is not possible due to poor air/fuel mixing 
and an enriched mixture is required. The Coolant Temperature input allows the ECM to 
adjust the injection ms value to compensate during warm up and minimize the the inject¬ 
ed fuel at engine operating temperature. 


33 

St055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 
















































When the engine is at idle, minimum injection is required. Additional fuel will be added if the 
ECM observes low engine rpm and increasing throttle/air volume inputs (acceleration 
enrichment). As the throttle is opened, the ECM monitors acceleration and rate of move¬ 
ment. The ECM will increase the volume of fuel injected into the engine by increasing the 
injection ms value. The “full throttle” position indicates maximum acceleration and the ECM 
will add more fuel (full load enrichment). 

As the throttle is closed, the ECM decreases the injection ms value (fuel shut off) if the rpm 
is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreases fuel consumption and lowers emis¬ 
sions. When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the injection ms value is increased 
(cut-in) to prevent the engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon the engine 
temperature and the rate of deceleration. 

The Air Flow Volume signal provides the measured amount of intake air volume. This input 
is used by the ECM to determine the amount of fuel to be injected to “balance” the air/fuel 
ratio. 

The Air Temperature Signal allows the ECM to make a calculation of air density. The vary¬ 
ing voltage input from the NTC sensor indicates the larger proportion of oxygen found in 
cold air, as compared to less oxygen found in warmer air. The ECM will adjust the amount 
of injected fuel because the quality of combustion depends on oxygen sensing ratio (details 
in Emissions). 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECM to start injection as well as providing infor¬ 
mation about the engine operation. This input is used in combination with other inputs to 
determine engine load which increases/decreases the injection ms value. Without this in¬ 
put, the ECM will not activate the injectors. 

The Camshaft Postion (Cylinder ID) affects the injection ms value (half= Parallel Injection or 
full= Semi-Sequential Injection) and the timing when it is injected to the engine. To accom¬ 
plish this, the ECM contains two Final Stage output transistors that activate the injectors in 
two groups. The engine operates sufficiently on Parallel Injection, but more efficiently on 
Semi-Sequential Injection. If one of the circuits faulted, the engine can still operate on lim¬ 
ited power from the remaining circuit. 


34 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 



Injection “Reduction” Time is required to control fuel economy, emissions, engine and 
vehicle speed limitation. The ECM will “trim” back or deactivate the fuel injection as neces¬ 
sary while maintaining optimum engine operation. 



As the throttle is closed during deceleration, the ECM decreases the injection ms value (fuel 
shut off) if the rpm is above idle speed (coasting). This feature decreases fuel consumption 
and lowers emissions. 


When the engine rpm approaches idle speed, the 
injection ms value is increased (cut-in) to prevent the 
engine from stalling. The cut-in rpm is dependent upon 
the engine temperature and the rate of deceleration. 
This function can be observed as displayed on the Fuel 
Economy (MPG) gage. 

The ECM will deactivate the injectors to control maxi¬ 
mum engine rpm (regardless of vehicle speed). When 
the engine speed reaches 6500 rpm, the injectors will 
be deactvated to protect the engine from over-rev. As 
the engine speed drops below 6500 rpm, injector acti¬ 
vation will be resumed. This feature does not pro¬ 
tect the engine from a forced over-rev such as 
improperly downshifting a manual transmission 
equipped vehicle (driver error). 



12550023.eps 


Maximum vehicle speed is limited by the ECM reducing the injection ms value (regardless 
of engine rpm). This limitation is based on the vehicle dimensions, specifications and in¬ 
stalled tires (speed rating). 


35 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 


















The ECM will also protect the Catalytic Converter by deactivating the injectors. 

If the ECM detects a fault in the primary ignition system, it can selectively deactivate the 
Final Stage output transistor for that cylinder. 

The injector will not open, preventing unburned fuel from entering the exhaust system. 

On the Ml .7.2 system, there are two injectors per circuit resulting in deactivation of both. 
This will limit engine power, but protect the Catalytic Converter. 


Primary Activaton and Monitor 




36 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 



























Workshop Hints 

Before any service work is performed on any fuel system related component, 
always adhere to the following: 

• Observe relevent safety legislation pertaining to your area. 

• Ensure adequate ventilation. 

• Use exhaust extraction system where applicable (alleviate fumes). 

• DO NOT OPERATE THE FUEL PUMP unless it is properly installed in the fuel tank and 
is submersed in the fuel (fuel lubricates the pump). 

• DO NOT SMOKE while performing fuel system repairs. 

• Always wear adequate protective clothing including eye protection. 


• Use caution when working around a HOT engine compartment. 

• During fuel system repairs that involve “sealing rings”, always replace them with new copper 
sealing rings only. 

• BMW does not recommend any UNAUTHORIZED MODIFICATIONS to the fuel system. 
The fuel system are designed to comply with strict federal safety and emissions regulations. 
In the concern of product liability, it is unauthorized to sell or perform modifications to 
customer vehicles, particularly in safety related areas. 

• Always consult the REPAIR INSTRUCTIONS on the specific model you are working on 
before attempting a repair. 


Fuel 

Fuel quality should always be considered when diagnosing a driveability complaint. The 
type of fuel, proper AKI rating, impurities and moisture are not factored by the ECM. 

Please refer to the Owner’s Manual and following Service Information Bulletins regarding 
fuel: 

• Gasoline Fuel Quality S.l. #13 01 88 (1564) • Gasoline Additive S.l. #13 04 88 (1591) 


37 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 


















Fuel Supply 

The fuel supply hardware should be visually inspected for damage that can affect pick- up, 
transfer, pressure and return. 

Please refer to the Repair Instructions and the following Service Information Bulletins details 
on fuel supply hardware: 

• Engine Compartment Return Fuel Hose S.l. #13 03 92 (3589) 

• Feed Fuel Hose Recall Campaign S.l. #13 04 92 (3657) 

• Refueling S.l. #16 01 92 (3553) 

• Fuel System Modifications S.l. #16 01 81 


Fuel Pump and Sending Unit Access 


All BMW vehicles have access plates to service 
the fuel pump and sending units without 
removing the fuel tank. 

The access plates are located under the rear 
seat. 

The “saddle” type fuel tank (under rear seat) 
has two access plates. 



The passenger side allows access to the fuel 
pump/sending unit. 

The driver side allows access to the sending 
unit. 



38 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 


























Draining the Fuel Tank 

In order to remove the fuel tank it must be drained first 
to avoid fuel spills and handling excessive weight. In 
some cases depending on the fuel tank dimensions 
(vehicle specific), it is also necessary to drain the fuel 
tank to replace the sending units and/or fuel pump. 

CAUTION: In some vehicles, the sending units/fuel 
pump is mounted lower than the top of the fuel tank. 

A fuel spill will be encountered if the fuel is not drained. 

NOTE: Consult the BMW Service Workshop Equip¬ 
ment for the proper evacuation equipment. 

The saddle type tank requires an additional step to 
drain the fuel from the driver side. The evacuation 
equipment should be attached to the tank compensat¬ 
ing hose (arrow) to drain out the remaining fuel. 

Fuel Pump/Pressure Regulator - Testing 

The fuel pump should be tested for delivery pressure 
and volume. Caution when disconnecting fuel hoses 
because there is the possibility of residual fuel pres¬ 
sure! Install the fuel pressure gage between the fuel fil¬ 
ter and and pressure regulator. 

Remove the fuel pump relay (see relay testing in the 
power supply section) and connect the Relay Bypass 
Switch to pin 87b and 30 of the relay socket. This will 
activate the fuel pump without running the engine. 

If the 3 bar fuel pressure is not achieved or bleed off is 
more than 0.5 bar, refer to 13 31 of the Repair 
instructions for further diagnosis. The Fuel Hose 
Clamp Tool can be used to isolate bleed off from the 
pump (non-return check valve) or the pressure regula¬ 
tor (restriction valve). Also verify power supply to the 
fuel pump. 



39 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 




Fuel volume must be tested to verify: 


• Fuel Pump Output 

• Restriction are not present in the pump pickup 
lines/hoses and fuel filter 



Fuel Injectors 

When inspecting the fuel injectors, consider the 
following: 

• O-rings should be replaced, lubricated with 
vaseline or SAE 90 gear oil for installation. 

• Verify the code number 

• Plastic spacer washer is not damaged 

• Color code of nozzle hosing 

• Color code injector housing 



Fuel injectors can leak which bleeds off fuel 
pressure and increases emissions. The injectors 
can be tested using the Fuel Injector Leakage 
Tester. 

The fuel injectors can be cleaned, refer to 
Service Information Bulletin S.l. #04 07 86. 



40 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 



















The Fuel Injectors should also be tested using the DIS/MoDIC for: 


• Resistance (15-17 ohms) 

• Power Supply 

• Status Display - Fuel Injection Signal 

(approximate 3.5 - 5 ms) 

• ECM Final Stage transistor activation. This test 

function is found under the Oscilloscope 
Preset list - “Ti Injection Signal”. Install the 
88 pin adapter, Diagnostic cable, MFK 2 
negative lead to ECM ground and MFK 2 
positive lead to the ground activation cicuit 
for the injector. This test is performed with 
the engine running. 



Negative 

13550010.eps 


MFK 2 
Positive 



13550018.eps 


41 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Fuel Management 







































































































































































































Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor 

This sensor should be tested using the DIS/MoDIC for: 

• Resistance (540 ohms +/-10%) • Power Supply • AC Voltage • Status Display 

• Oscilloscope Display found under Preset list - “Rotation Speed Sensor Signal” 



Print 


Change 


End 


Services 


BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 
v 



Camshaft Position Sensor (Cylinder ID) 


ms 


MM 

CQ3Bs 

- ^ 

Document 

A 

Test 

Module 

A 




-p* 

Test 

System 


This sensor should be tested using the DIS / MoDic for 

• Resistance (0.1 -1 ohm) • Power Supply • AC Voltage • Status Display - “ON” 

• Oscilloscope Display found under Preset list - “Rotation Speed Sensor Signal” 




42 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Fuel Management 






































































































































































































































































































































Engine Coolant Temperature 


NTC sensors decrease in resistance as the temperature rises and vice versa. The ECM 
monitors the sensor voltage which varies as temperature changes the resistance value. For 
example, as temperature rises: 



43 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 





















































































































































Tools and Equipment 


The DIS/Modic as well as a reputable hand held 
multimeter can be used when testing inputs/ 
components. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the Ml.7.2 
application should be used (#88 88 6 614 410). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

The interior of this Universal Adapter is shielded, 
therefore it is vital that the ground cable is con¬ 
nected to the vehicle chassis whenever the 
adapter is used. 

The adapter uses a Printed Circuit board inside 
keeping the capacitive and inductive load to a 
minimum. 

When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located below the windshield on the pas¬ 
senger side of the engine compartment), make 
sure the ignition is switched off. 





The Fuel Hose Clamp Tool (#13 3 010) can be 
used for isolating pressure faults. In addition, 
fuel loss can be reduced when changing the 
fuel filter while losening clamps (1 and 2). 

The Relay Bypass Switch (#61 3 050) must be 
used especially when fuel vapors are pre¬ 
sent! The switch eliminates the risk of electrical 
arcing. 



44 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 






































































































When testing fuel pressure, the hand held fuel pressure 
gage (#13 3 060) can be used. 

Caution: Residual fuel pressure may be present! 

The DIS is equipped with a pressure measuring func¬ 
tion, found in Measurement testing. The following 
adapters (Special Tool numbers) will be necessary: 

• #13 6 051 • #13 6 055 • #13 6 057 


These adapters install “in line” in the fuel pressure 
hose. 



i 



For vehicles equipped with “quick-release” couplings, 
install special tool (#13 5 270) between the fuel filter (1) 
and pressure supply hose (2). This tool will couple to 
the DIS Pressure Adapter (3). 


Later fuel rails are equipped with a threaded adapter 
fitting (1). 


This threaded adapter fitting allows Adapter #13 5 220 
to be threaded on to the fuel rail and coupled to the 
DIS Pressure Adapter. 



45 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Fuel Management 














































When testing the fuel injectors for leakage, use Special Tool #88 88 5 000 362. Leak test¬ 
ing the fuel injectors is one of the diagnostic steps listed in “Long Cranking Times” S.l. #13 
08 90 (3096). This tool pressurizes the injectors with air and the injector tips are submersed 
in water. If air bubles are present, this indicates the leaking injector(s). 



13550032.jpg 


46 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Fuel Management 




Ignition Management 


13550015.eps 



Ignition Coils: The high voltage supply required to ignite the mixture in the combustion 
chambers is determined by the stored energy in the ignition coils. The stored energy con¬ 
tributes to the ignition duration, ignition current and rate of high voltage increase. The Coil 
circuit including primary and secondary components consists of: 


1. Coil Assembly 

• Primary Winding 

• Secondary Winding (with diode) 

2. Resistor (Boot Connector) 

3. Spark Plug 

4. ECM Final Stage Transistor 

5. Secondary Coil Ground 



The Coil Assembly contains two copper windings insulated from each other. One winding 
is the primary winding, formed by a few turns of thick wire. The secondary winding is 
formed by a great many turns of thin wire. 


The primary winding receives battery voltage from the ignition switch (Terminal 15). The 
ECM provides a ground path for the primary coil (Terminal 1) by activating a Final Stage 
transistor. The length of time that current flows through the primary winding is the “dwell” 
which allows the coil to “saturate” or build up a magnetic field. After this storage process, 
the ECM will interupt the primary circuit at the point of ignition by deactivating the Final 
Stage transistor. The magnetic field built up within the primary winding collapses and 
induces the ignition voltage in the secondary winding. 


47 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 




























































































The voltage generated in the secondary winding is capable of 30,000 volts (30 KV). The 
high voltage is discharged (Terminal 4) through the secondary ignition cable and resistor 
(boot connector) to the spark plug. 


The primary and secondary windings are un¬ 
coupled, therefore, the secondary winding 
requies a ground supply (Terminal 4a). 

The secondary winding connects to a cascade 
diode which suppresses any unwanted induced 
voltages as the primary circuit is switched on 
and off. This permits a clean, high voltage dis¬ 
charge from the secondary winding. 

There is an individual ignition circuit and coil for 
each cylinder on the Ml .7.2 system 


The four ignition coils are combined into a single com¬ 
ponent (coil pack) located on the right front strut tower. 

The ignition primary circuits are fault monitored by the 
ECM. If a fault is present, the “CHECK ENGINE” Light 
will illuminate and the ECM will deactivate the corres¬ 
ponding fuel injector for that cylinder and engine oper¬ 
ation will still be possible. 

Ignition Leads: The secondary ignition cables (high 
tension leads) direct the high voltage from the ignition 
coils to the spark plugs. The ignition lead assembly 
consists of: 




Connector Socket 


Ignition Cable 



Resistive Adapter 
Boot 


13550026.eps 


• Connector Socket 

• Ignition Cable 

• Resistive Adaptive Boot 


The ignition cables are routed into a covered 
cable tray located on the top of the cylinder 
head, which contains the boot connector 
removal tool (arrow). 



48 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 



















































































































Spark Plugs: The spark plugs introduce the 
ignition energy into the combustion chamber. 
The high voltage “arcs” across the air gap in the 
spark plug from the positive electrode to the 
negative electrode. This creates a spark which 
ignites the combustable air/fuel mixture. 

The spark plugs are located in the center of the 
combustion area (on the top of the cylinder 
head) which is the most suitable point for ignit¬ 
ing the compressed air/fuel mixture. 

The correct spark plugs (as seen above right) for 
this system are: 

• Bosch F7LDCR (dual electrode, non-adjustable gap) 

• NGK BKR7EK (dual electrode, non-adjustable gap) 



Note: The High Performance Platinum Spark Plugs are also approved for use. 


Faults with the Ignition Output Components are not monitored by the ECM, with the 
exception of the primary ignition circuit. If there are faults with the igniton coil(s) output, igni¬ 
tion leads and/or spark plugs, the following complaints could be encountered: 


• “CHECK ENGINE” Light With Mixture Related Fault Codes 

• Poor Engine Performance 

• Engine Misfire 

• No Start / Hard Starting 

• Excessive Exhaust Emissions / Black Smoke 


The Ignition Output Components must be individually tested (see Workshop Hints) 


49 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 





Knock Sensors: are required to prevent detonation (pinging) from damaging the engine. 
The Knock Sensor is a piezoelectric conductor-sound microphone. The ECM will retard the 
ignition timing (cylinder selective) based on the input of these sensors. Detonation can 
occur due to: 

• High Compression Ratio • Maximum Timing Advance Curve 

• Poor Quality Fuel (Octane Rating) • High Intake Air and Engine Temperature 

• High Level of Cylinder Filling • Carbon Build-Up (Combustion Chamber) 


The Knock Sensor consists of: 


1. Shielded Wire 

2. Cup Spring 

3. Seismic Mass 

4. Housing 

5. Inner Sleeve 

6. Piezo-Ceramic Element 



13550005.bmp 


A piezo-ceramic ring is clamped between a seismic mass and the sensor body. When the 
seismic mass senses vibration (flexing), it exerts a force on the peizo-ceramic element. 
Opposed electrical charges build up on the upper and lower ceramic surfaces which gen¬ 
erates a voltage signal. The acoustic vibrations are converted into electrical signals. These 
low voltage signals are transmitted to the ECM for processing. 


There are two Knock Sensors bolted to the 
engine block (1) between cylinders 1 & 2 and (2) 
between cylinders 3 & 4. If the signal value 
exceeds the threshold, the ECM identifies the 
“knock” and retards the ignition timing for that 
cylinder. 

If a fault is detected with the sensors, the ECM 
deactivates Knock Control. The “CHECK ENG¬ 
INE” Light will be illuminated, the ignition timing 
will be set to a conservative basic setting and a 
fault will be stored. 


rv 






13550001 .bmp 


50 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 





















Crankshaft Position/RPM Sensor: This sensor provides the crankshaft position and 
engine speed (RPM) signal to the ECM for ignition activation and correct timing. For details 
about the sensor, refer to the Fuel Management section. 


A fault with this input will produce the following com 
plaints: 


• No Start 

• Intermitant Misfire/Driveabilty 

• Engine Stalling 





13550027.eps 


Camshaft Position Sensor (Cylinder Identification): The cylinder ID sensor (inductive 
pulse) input allows the ECM to determine camshaft position in relation to crankshaft posi¬ 
tion. It is used by the ECM to establish the “working cycle” of the engine for precise igni¬ 
tion timing. For details about the sensor, refer to the Fuel Management section. 

If the ECM detects a fault with the Cylinder ID Sensor, 
the “CHECK ENGINE” Light will be illuminated and the 
system will still operate based on the Crankshaft 
Position/RPM Sensor. 


Upon a restart, a slight change in driveability could 
occur because the ECM will activate “double igni¬ 
tion”. The ignition coils will be activated on both the 
compression and exhaust strokes to maintain engine 
operation. 



51 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 










































Engine Coolant Temperature: The ECM determines 
the correct ignition timing required for the engine tem¬ 
perature. For details about the sensor, refer to the Fuel 
Management section. This sensor is located in the 
coolant jacket of the cylinder head (1). 

If the Coolant Temperature Sensor input is faulty, the 
“CHECK ENGINE” Light will be illuminated and the 
ECM will assume a substitute value (80° C) to maintain 
engine operation. The ignition timing will be set to a 
conservative basic setting. 

Throttle Position Sensor: This sensor provides the 
ECM with throttle angle position and rate of movement. 
For details about the sensor, refer to the Air Mana¬ 
gement section. 

As the throttle plate is opened, this requests accelera¬ 
tion and at what rate. The ECM will advance the igni¬ 
tion timing. The “full throttle” position indicates maxi¬ 
mum acceleration to the ECM, the ignition will be 
advanced for maximum torque. 

If the Throttle Position input is defective, a fault code 
will be set and the “Check Engine” Light will illuminate. 
The ECM will maintain engine operation based on the 
Air Flow Volume Sensor and the Engine Speed Sensor, 
and the ignition timing will be set to a conservative 
basic setting. 

Air Flow Volume Sensor: This signal to the ECM rep¬ 
resents the measured amount of intake air volume. 
This input is used by the ECM to determine the amount 
of ignition timing advance. For details about the sensor, 
refer to the Air Management section. 

If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“Check Engine” Light will illuminate. The ECM will 
maintain engine operation based on the Throttle 
Position Sensor and Engine Speed Sensor, and the 
ignition timing will be set to a conservative basic set¬ 
ting. 




ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 






Air Temperature: This signal allows the ECM to make 
a calculation of air density. The sensor is located in 
front of the measuring flap. For details about the sen¬ 
sor, refer to the Air Management section. 

The ECM will adjust the ignition timing based on air 
temperature. If the intake air is hot the ECM retards the 
ignition timing to reduce the risk of detonation. If the 
intake air is cooler, the ignition timing will be adv¬ 
anced. 

If this input is defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“Check Engine” Light will illuminate. The ignition timing 
will be set to a conservative basic setting. 



53 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 




Principle of Operation 


Ignition Management provides ignition to the combustion chambers with the required volt¬ 
age at the correct time. Based on the combination of inputs, the ECM calculates and con¬ 
trols the ignition timing and secondary output voltage by regulating the activation and 
dwell of the primary ignition circuit. The ECM does not directly monitor secondary igni¬ 
tion output, although it does control and monitor the primary ignition circuit. 


12550015.eps 



The ECM has a very “broad” range of ignition timing. This is possible by using a Direct 
Ignition System, or sometimes refered to as “Static Ignition System”. Reliability is also 
increased by having separate individual ignition circuits. 


The Ignition Control is determined by the ECM (load dependant). The ECM will calculate 
the engine “load” based on a combination of the following inputs: 


• Battery Voltage 

• Throttle Position 

• Air Flow Volume 

• Air Temperature 

• Engine Coolant 

• Crankshaft Position/RPM 

• Camshaft Position (Cylinder ID) 

• Knock Sensors 



The dwell time will be regulated based on battery voltage. When cranking, the voltage is 
low and the ECM will increase the dwell to compensate for saturation “lag time”. When the 
engine is running and the battery voltage is higher, the ECM will decrease the dwell due to 
faster saturation time. 

The Crankshaft Position/RPM signals the ECM to start ignition in firing order (1 -3-4-2) as 
well as providing information about the engine operation. This input is used in combination 
with other inputs to determine engine load which advances/retards the ignition timing. 
Without this input, the ECM will not activate the ignition. 


54 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 







































Cold start is determined by the ECM based on the engine coolant temperature and rpm 
during start up. A cold engine will crank over slower than a warm engine, the ignition tim¬ 
ing will range between top dead center to slightly retarded providing optimum starting. 

When starting a warm engine, the rpm is higher which results in slightly advanced timing. 
If the engine coolant and intake air temperature is hot, the ignition timing will not be ad¬ 
vanced reducing starter motor “load”. 

During cranking, the ECM recog¬ 
nizes the Camshaft Position 
(compression stroke) and acti¬ 
vates a single ignition per cylin¬ 
der. 

If this signal is not recognized, the 
ECM will activate “Double Ign¬ 
ition”. The ignition coils will be 
activated on both the compres¬ 
sion and exhaust strokes to 
maintain engine operation. The 
ignition timing will be progressive¬ 
ly ad-vanced asisting the engine 
in coming up to speed. 


As the engine speed approaches 
idle rpm, the timing remains sligh¬ 
tly advanced to boost torque. 

When the engine is at idle speed, 
minimum timing advance is re¬ 
quired. This will allow faster eng¬ 
ine and catalyst warm up. 

The timing will be advanced when the ECM observes low engine rpm and increasing throt¬ 
tle/air volume inputs (acceleration torque). As the throttle is opened, the ECM advances the 
timing based on engine acceleration and at what rate. The ECM will fully advance timing for 
the “full throttle” position indicating maximum acceleration (torque). 

The Air Flow Volume signal provides the measured amount of intake air volume. This input 
is used by the ECM to determine the amount of timing advance to properly combust the 
air/fuel mixture. 



55 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 




























































The Air Temperature Signal assists the ECM in reducing the risk of detonation (ping). If the 
intake air is hot the ECM retards the igniton timing. If the intake air is cooler, the ignition tim¬ 
ing will be advanced. 

As the throttle is closed, the ECM decreases the ignition timing if the rpm is above idle 
speed (coasting). This feature lowers the engine torque for deceleration. When the engine 
rpm approaches idle speed, the timing is slightly advanced to prevent the engine from 
stalling. The amount of advance is dependent upon the engine temperature and the rate of 
deceleration. 

Knock Control 

The use of Knock Control allows the ECM to further advance the ignition timing under load 
for increased torque. This system uses two Knock Sensors located between cylinders 1 & 
2 and between cylinders 3 & 4. 

Knock Control is only in affect when the engine temperature is greater than 35 °C and there 
is a load on the engine. This will disregard false signals while idling or from a cold engine. 


Based on the firing order, the 
ECM monitors the Knock 
Sensors after each ignition for a 
normal (low) signal. 


If the signal value exceeds the 
threshold, the ECM identifies the 
“knock” and retards the ignition 
timing (3°) for that cylinder the 
next time it is fired. 

This process is repeated in 3° 
increments until the knock ceas¬ 
es. The ignition timing will be 
advanced again in increments 
right up to the knock limit and 
maintain the timing at that point. 


If a fault is detected with the Knock Sensor(s) or circuits, the ECM deactivates Knock 
Control. The “CHECK ENGINE” Light will be illuminated, the ignition timing will be set to a 
conservative basic setting (to reduce the risk of detonation) and a fault will be stored. 



13550010.jpg 


56 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 





Workshop Hints 


Before any service work is performed on any ignition system related component, 
always adhere to the following: 

• Observe relevent safety legislation pertaining to your area 

• Always wear adequate protection clothing including eye protection. 

• Use caution when working around a HOT engine compartment. 

• Always consult the REPAIR INSTRUCTIONS on the specific model you are working on before 
attempting a repair. 

• Always SWITCH OFF THE IGNITION (KL15) before working on the ignition system. 

• Use only BMW approved test leads. 

• NEVER TOUCH COMPONENTS CONDUCTING CURRENT with the engine running. 

• Do not connect suppression devices or a “test light” to terminal 1 of the ignition coils. 

• Terminal 1 from the ignition coil to the ECM (High Voltage approximately 350 V) 


HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER! 

Caution! Hazardous voltages occur at: 

• Ignition Leads 

• Spark Plug Connector 

• Spark Plug 

• Ignition Coil (High Voltage at terminal 4 is approximately 30 KV) 

• Terminal 1 from the ignition coil to the ECM (High Voltage approximately 350V) 


57 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 




















Ignition System Diagnosis 

A fault survey should first be performed using the DIS/MoDIC to determine if there is a fault 
in the primary ignition or secondary ignition. 

If there is a fault in the primary ignition, testing should include: 


• Power Supply at the Coil (KL15) 

• Resistance of the harness and ignition coil primary winding (terminal 15 to 1 approximate 0.8 
ohms) - using the 88 Pin Adapter with the ECM Disconnected 


• ECM Primary Circuit Final Stage Transistor 

• ECM Ignition Coil (one of four) 

• Secondary Coil Ground 



• ECM Final Stage transistor activation. This 
test function is found under the Oscilloscope 
Preset list - “Ignition Signal Primary” (normal 
Terminal 1 Signal shown on the right). 

Install the 88 Pin Adapter, Diagnostic cable, 
MFK 2 negative lead to ECM ground and 
MFK 2 positive lead to the ground activation 
circuit for Terminal 1 of the ignition coil. This 
test is performed with the engine running. 






J 

| 


H 



r _—_ i_1 

13550017.bmp 


58 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 












































If there is a fault in the secondary ignition, testing should include: 


• Primary Ignition 


• Evaluation of Secondary Oscilloscope Patterns 


The Following are Examples of Secondary 
Oscilloscope Patterns: 


This is a normal pattern for one ignition circuit 
with the engine at idle speed. 


1. Normal Combustion Period 


2. Normal Ignition Voltage Peak 


19 


10 








© 




30 


20 


10 


© 


II l| jH l|<lllfll II 1 11 1 1 | m >| nn |lll 1 1 


1W 

07550001 .bmp 


IQ W 


« -P? 


1 * 0 


Long Spark Period (1) with Low Ignition Voltage 
Peak (2) 


Indicates Low Compression 


1_1 

If Spark Period is Fluctuating: 

r. 

j 

i —* 


3 



r 

• Contamination on Spark Plug or Defective 

Spark Plug 

l 

u 

©i 

i 

i 


n ■ ■ j. i 

■ ■ i 

ifUMflllM 



jLl_I_I_■ 1 ■_*■ ■ J _J_ri_I_I_k_I_ri_I_I_■_ 


30 


20 


to 


W » 70 

075500Q2.bmp 


» m 


M Ifl 0 


Short Spark Period (1) with High Ignition 
Voltage Peak (2). 

’ Defective Ignition Cable, Connector, or 
Resistive Adapter Boot 
























Evaluation of Ignition Voltage Peaks at Idle 
Speed (All Cylinders Displayed). 

• Normal Attenuation (Voltage Reduction) Process 

• Shorten Attenuation Process-Defective Ignition 
Coil 

• Abscence of Attenuation - Defective Ignition Coil 



No Sparking Voltage Line (Single Cylinder 
Displayed) 

• Defective Ignition Coil 




Evaluation of Ignition Voltage Peaks under 
Sudden Loads (All Cylinders Displayed). 

• Decaying Process is not much Higher than 
Ignition Voltage Peak - System is Ok. 

• Decaying Process is considerably Higher 
than Ignition Voltage Peak: 

• Lean Mixture 

• Defective Fuel Injector 

• Low Compression 



60 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 




















The Repair Instructions should be consulted for additional Oscilloscope Patterns under var¬ 
ious engine speeds. 

In Summary, 

If the Secondary Ignition Voltage is Too High (Excessive Resistance for Ignition): 

• Spark Plug Gap is to Large (Worn or Burned) 

• Incorrect Heat Range Spark Plug 

• Compression is too High (Carbon, etc.) 

• Lean Mixture (Vacuum Leak, etc.) 

• Interruption in the Secondary Ignition Cable, Connector, or Resistive Adapter Boot 


If the Secondary Ignition Voltage is Too Low (Low Resistance for Ignition): 

• Spark Plug Gap is Too Small (Mishandled on Installation) 

• Incorrect Heat Range Spark Plug 

• Compression is Too Low 

• Voltage Leak in the Secondary Ignition Cable, Connector, or Resistive Boot to Ground 


Spark Plugs 

The Spark Plugs should be inspected for the 
proper type, gap and replaced at the specified 
intervals. 


Refer to the Service Information Bulletin S.l. #12 
01 99 for the proper type and a visual of the 
spark plug (showing effects of combustion, 
fouling, etc.) 


61 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 
















Ignition Leads 


The secondary ignition cable (high tension lead) 
assembly includes the Connector Socket, Ign¬ 
ition Cable and Resistive Adapter Boot. These 
components should be visually inspected and 
checked for resistance. 

For example, the Resistive Adapter Boot has a 
different ohmic value depending on the manu¬ 
facturer: 

• Bosch - Ik ohm +/- 20% 

• Bremi -1.8k ohm +/- 20% 



13550035.eps 


Knock Sensors 

The Knock Sensors should be tested using the 
DIS/MoDIC for: _ 

• Fault Codes 

• Status Display - Knock Control 
(active / not active) 

• Oscilloscope Display (Low DC Voltage - mV 
setting) 



13550010.jpg 


When installing Knock Sensors: 

DO NOT MIX THE CONNECTORS: Engine 
Damage will result! - the connector is critical to 
sensor location (1) cylinder 1 & 2 and (2) cylinder 
3 & 4. 

Do Not Over Tighten attaching bolt! - Piezo 
ceramic will be cracked. Torque to 20 nm. 

Do Not Under Tighten attaching bolt, a lose 
sensor can vibrate producing a similar signal to 
a knock. 



62 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 





























Tools and Equipment 


The DIS/Modic as well as a reputable hand held 
multimeter can be used when testing 
inputs/components. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the Ml.7.2 
application should be used (#88 88 6 614 410). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

The interior of this Universal Adapter is shielded, 
therefore it is vital that the ground cable is con¬ 
nected to the vehicle chassis whenever the 
adapter is used. 

The adapter uses a Printed Circuit board inside 
keeping the capacitive and inductive load to a 
minimum. 






When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located below the windshield on the pas¬ 
senger side of the engine compartment), make 
sure the ignition is switched off. 



When Testing the Secondary Ignition System, 
use the High Tenision clip of the DIS. Refer to 
the HELP button for additional (on screen) con¬ 
nections. 

Caution! 

Observe Safety Precautions, High Voltage 
is Present with the Engine Running. 



13550016.bmp 


63 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 
























































































The secondary ignition cables, connectors and 
sockets can be replaced separately. 

New connectors can be “crimped” on using 
Special Tool #12 1 081. This tool provides a two 
stage crimp, crimping the core conductor (1) 
and the insulator (2). 



13550018.bmp 


The connector with ignition cable should be 
installed into the Resistive Adapter Boot with 
Special Tools #12 1 087 and #12 1 086 to 
ensure the connector properly “seats”. 



13550019.bmp 


The Spark Plugs should be properly installed 
and torqued using the following Special Tools: 


• 12 1 200 Torque Adapter 
(prevents over tightening) 

• 12 1 171 Spark Plug Socket 


NOTE: NEVER USE AIR TOOLS FOR RE¬ 
MOVAL OR INSTALLATION! 







13550020.bmp 


64 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Ignition Management 








Emissions Management - HCII Compliant (as of 96 MY) 






▼ 


< 


18550000eps 



1. Liquid/Vapor Seperator 

3. ECM Relay 

5.ECM 

2. Active Carbon Canister 

4. Evaporative Emission Valve 



Evaporative Emissions: The control of the evaporative fuel vapors (Hydrocarbons) from 
the fuel tank is important for the overall reduction in vehicle emissions. The evaporative sys¬ 
tem has been combined with the ventilation of the fuel tank, which allows the tank to breath 
(equalization). The overall operation provides: 

• An inlet vent, to an otherwise “sealed” fuel tank, for the entry of air to replace the fuel 
consumed during engine operation. 

• An outlet vent with a storage canister to “trap and hold” fuel vapors that are produced 
by the expansion/evaporation of fuel in the tank, when the vehicle is stationary. 


The canister is then "purged" using the engine vacuum to draw the fuel vapors into the 
combustion chamber. This "cleans" the canister allowing for additional storage. Like any 
other form of combustible fuel, the introduction of these vapors on a running engine must 
be controlled. The ECM controls the Evaporative Emission Valve which regulates purging of 
evaporative vapors. 


65 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Emissions Management 

































































































































Liquid/Vapor Separator: Fuel vapors are rout¬ 
ed from the fuel tank filler neck through a hose 
to the Liquid/Vapor Separator (located in the 
right rear wheel well behind the trim). The 
vapors cool when exiting the fuel tank, the con¬ 
densates separate and drain back to the fuel 
tank through a return hose (1). The remaining 
vapors exit the Liquid/ Vapor Separator to the 
Active Carbon Canister. 

Active Carbon Cannister: As the hydrocar¬ 
bon vapors enter the canister, they will be 
absorbed by the active carbon. The remaining 
air will be vented to the atmosphere through the 
end of the canister allowing the fuel tank to 
“breath”. 

When the engine is running, the canister is then 
"purged" using intake manifold vacuum to draw 
air through the canister which extracts the 
hydrocarbon vapors into the combustion cham¬ 
ber. The Active Carbon Canister is located in the 
engine compartment on the left strut tower 
(spare tire well on late 95 MY). 



135500147.eps 


Active Carbon Canister 


Evaporative 

Emission 

Valve 



Liquid/Vapor 

Separator 


135500147.eps 


Evaporative Emission Valve: This ECM con¬ 
trolled solenoid valve regulates the purge flow 
from the Active Carbon Canister into the intake 
manifold (located next to the Air Volume Mass 
Meter). 

The ECM Relay provides operating voltage, and 
the ECM controls the valve by regulating the 
ground circuit. The valve is powered closed and 
opened by an internal spring. 

If the Evaporative Emission Valve circuit is 
defective, a fault code will be set and the 
“CHECK ENGINE” Light will illuminate. If the 
valve is “mechanically” defective, a driveability 
complaint could be encountered and a mixture 
related fault code will be set. 





18550001 .eps 


66 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Emissions Management 









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































12550016.eps 

Exhaust Emissions: The combustion process of a gasoline powered engine produces 
Carbon Monoxide (CO), Hydrocarbons (HC) and Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx). 

• Carbon Monoxide is a product of incomplete combustion under conditions of air deficiency. 

CO emissions are strongly dependent on the air/fuel ratio. 

• Hydrocarbon are also a product of incomplete combustion which results in unburned fuel. HC 
emissions are dependent on air/fuel ratio and the ignition of the mixture. 

• Oxides of Nitrogen are a product of peak combustion temperature (and temperature duration). 
NOx emissions are dependent on internal cylinder temperature affected by the air/fuel ratio 
and ignition of the mixture. 


Control of exhaust emissions is accomplished by the engine and engine management 
design as well as after-treatment. 

• The ECM manages exhaust emissions by controlling the air/fuel ratio and ignition. 

• The Catalytic Converter further reduces exhaust emissions leaving the engine. 


67 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Emissions Management 





































Bosch Oxygen Sensor: The oxygen sensor measures the residual oxygen content of the 
exhaust gas. The sensor produces a low voltage (0-1000 mV) proportional to the oxygen 
content that allows the ECM to monitor the air/fuel ratio. If necessary, the ECM will “cor¬ 
rect” the air/fuel ratio by regulating the ms injection time. The sensor is mounted in the hot 
exhaust stream directly in front of the catalytic converter. 


Exhaust 

Stream 


Ambient Air 

9 / 10 



12550017.eps 


1. Electrode (+) 

7. External Body (Ventilated) 

2. Electrode (-) 

8. Contact Spring 

3. Porous Ceramic Coating (Encasing Electrolyte) 

9. Vent Opening 

4. Protective Metal Cage (Ventilated) 

10. Output Lead 

5. Casing 

11. Insulator 

6. Contact Sleeve 

12. Exhaust 


The “tip” of the sensor contains a microporous platinum coating (electrodes) which conduct 
current. The platinum electrodes are separated by solid electrolyte which conducts oxygen 
ions. 

The platinum conductors are covered with a highly porous ceramic coating and the entire 
tip is encased in a ventilated metal “cage”. This assembly is submersed in the exhaust 
stream. The sensor body (external) has a small vent opening in the housing that allows 
ambient air to enter the inside of the tip. 

The ambient air contains a constant level of oxygen content (21 %) and the exhaust stream 
has a much lower oxygen content. The oxygen ions (which contain small electrical charges) 
are “purged” through the solid electrolyte by the hot exhaust gas flow. The electrical 
charges (low voltage) are conducted by the platinum electrodes to the sensor signal wire 
that is monitored by the ECM. 


68 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Emissions Management 












3 


2 

1 


W.V 


Outside Air 



.V.V.V. 


4 

5 


6 

7 


Functional Layout 
of Oxygen Sensor 

1. Solid Electrolyte 

2. Electrode Exhaust Side 

3. Border Zone Exhaust Side. 

4. Partition Wall (Exhaust Pipe) 

5. Electrode, Air Side 

6. Border Zone, Air Side 

7.Oxygen Ion With Double 
Negative. 


18550002.eps 

If the exhaust has a lower oxygen content (rich mixture), there will be a large ion “migration” 
through the sensor generating a higher voltage (950 mV). If the exhaust has a higher oxy¬ 
gen content (lean mixture), there will be a small ion “migration” through the sensor gener¬ 
ating a lower voltage (080 mV). 


This voltage signal is constantly changing due 
to combustion variations and normal exhaust 
pulsations. 

The ECM monitors the length of time the sensor 
is operating in the lean, rich and rest conditions. 
The evaluation period of the sensor is over a 
predefined number of oscillation cycles. 


1 

0.9 
0.8 
0.7 
cd 0.6 

05 

B 0.5 
o 

> 0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0 


Rest Time 



This conductivity is efficient when the oxygen 
sensor is hot (250° - 300° C). For this reason, 
the sensor contains a heating element. This 
“heated” sensor reduces warm up time, and 
retains the heat during low engine speed when 
the exhaust temperature is cooler. 


13550011.eps 



69 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Emissions Management 





















































































































































































Catalytic Converter: The three-way catalyst after-treats exhaust emissions leaving the 
engine. A properly operating catalyst consumes most of the oxygen that is present in the 
exhaust gas which is a result of burning the remaining pollutants. The oxygen sensor mon¬ 
itors the air/fuel mixture which allows the ECM to maintain the correct mixture for catalyst 
efficiency. The gases that flow into the catalyst are converted from CO, HC and NOx to 
C02, H20 and N2 respectively. 

The catalytic converter (monolith) is made of 
thousands of small ceramic blocks that the 
exhaust must flow through. The entire ceramic 
structure is supported in the shell by a flexible 
mat and wire mesh layer. 


The ceramic is coated with the precious metals 
Platinum which speeds up oxidation of HC and 
CO and Rhodium which speeds up the reduc¬ 
tion of NOx. 


The exhaust flow heats the catalyst and with the 
remaining oxygen, the exhaust pollutants are 
further reduced by burning. The temperature 
operating range for the highest efficiency is 
400° - 800° C which is also influenced by the 
air/fuel mixture. 

The Ml .7.2 system uses the redesign catalytic 
converter which distributes the exhaust gas uni¬ 
formly as it enters the converter through a later¬ 
al discharge inlet. 

This design allows the exhaust gas to strike the 
entire surface of the monolith to ensure that 
emissions from the exhaust system are reduced 
to a consistenly low level. 




70 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Emissions Management 













































































































Principle of Operation 


Emissions Management controls evaporative and exhaust emissions. The ECM controls 
the purging of evaporative fuel. The ECM monitors and controls the exhaust emissions by 
regulating the combustable mixture. The catalytic converter after-treats by further break¬ 
ing down remaining combustable exhaust gasses. 


INTAKE AIR TEMP 

sCjf 

SIGNAL 





THROTTLE 

POSITION 




ENGINE 

TEMPERATURE 



ENGINE SPEED 
/ REF SIGNAL 



12550016.eps 


Evaporative Emission Purging is regultated by the ECM controlling the Evaporative 
Emission Valve. The Evaporative Emission Valve is a solenoid that regulates purge flow from 
the Active Carbon Cannister into the intake manifold. The ECM Relay provides operating 
voltage and the ECM controls the valve by regulating the ground circuit. The valve is pow¬ 
ered closed and opened by an internal spring. The “purging” process takes place when: 


* Oxygen Sensor Control is active 

* Engine Coolant Temperature is >60°C 

* Engine Load is present 


The Evaporative Emission Valve is opened in stages to moderate the purging. 


* Stage 1 opens the valve for 10 ms (milli-seconds) and then closes for 150 ms. 

* The Stages continue with increasing opening times (up to 16 stages) until the valve is 
completely open. 

* The Valve now starts to close in 16 stages in reverse order. 

* This staged process takes 6 minutes to complete. The function is inactive for 1 minute 
then starts the process all over again. 

* During the purging process the valve is completely opened during full throttle operation 
and is completely closed during deceleration fuel cutoff. 


Evaporative Purge System Flow Check (1996 MY - HC II Emission Compliance) is 

performed by the ECM when the oxygen sensor control and purging is active. When the 
Evaporative Emission Valve is open the ECM detects a lean/rich shift as monitored by the 
oxygen sensors indicating the valve is functioning properly. If the ECM does not detect a 
lean/rich shift, a second step is performed when the vehicle is stationary and the engine is 
at idle speed. The ECM opens and close the valve (abruptly) several times and monitors 
the engine rpm for changes. If there are no changes, a fault code will be set. 


71 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Emissions Management 




















































Fuel System Monitoring is per¬ 
formed by the ECM which verifies 
the calculated injection time (ti) in 
relation to engine speed, load 
and the oxygen sensor signal as 
a result of the residual oxygen in 
the exhaust stream. 

The ECM uses the oxygen sensor 
signal as a correction factor for 
adjusting and optimizing the mix¬ 
ture pilot control under all engine 
operating conditions. 



WHERE MULTIPLICATIVE ADAPTATION OCCURS 



A 





Engine Speed Sensor 135500144.eps 


Adaptation Values are stored by the ECM iln order to maintain an "ideal" air/fuel ratio. 
The ECM is capable of adapting to various environmental conditions encountered while the 
vehicle is in operation (changes in altitude, humidity, ambient temperature, fuel quality, etc.). 


The adaptation can only make slight corrections and can not compensate for large 
changes which may be encountered as a result of incorrect airflow or incorrect fuel supply 
to the engine. 

Within the areas of adjustable adaption, the ECM modifies the injection rate under two 
areas of engine operation: 

• During idle and low load mid range engine speeds (Additive Adaptation). 

• During operation under a normal to higher load when at highter engine speeds 
(Multiplicative Adaptation). 


These values indicate how the ECM is compensating for a less than ideal initial air/fuel ratio. 


NOTE: If the adaptation value is greater than "0.0 ms" the ECM is trying to richen the mix¬ 
ture. If the adaptation value is less then "0.0 ms” the ECM is trying to lean-out the mixture. 


72 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Emissions Management 



































































Oxygen Sensor Heating is con¬ 
trolled by the ECM to reduce 
warm up time and retain heat 
during low engine rpm when the 
exhaust temperature is cooler. 

Voltage is supplied from the 
Oxygen Sensor Heater Relay and 
the ground circuit for the relay is 
provided by the ECM when 
engine rpm is present. 

During full throttle operation elec¬ 
trical heating is not required and 
is deactivated by the ECM. 





Oxygen Sensor Heater Relay Monitoring is checked separately for electrical integrity 
and operation. The Heater Relay function is monitored continuously while the vehicle is in 
closed loop operation, during activation by the ECM. 

An improperly/non operating Heater Relay will not allow the sensor signal to reach its pre¬ 
defined maximum and minimum thresholds which can: 

• Result in delayed closed loop operation causing an impact on emission levels. 

• Result in increased emission levels while in closed loop operation. 


As part of the monitoring function for Heater Relay current and voltage, the circuit is also 
checked for an open, short to ground and short to B+ depending on the values of the cur¬ 
rent or voltage being monitored. If the power of the Heater Relay is not within a specified 
range, a fault will be set and the “CHECK ENGINE" light will be illuminated. 


73 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Emissions Management 












The “CHECK ENGINE” Light required for OBD is located in the instrument cluster and is 
activated by the ECM under the following conditions: 


• Ignition “on” (KL15) and engine not running- 
bulb check function. 

• A component malfunction that affects the 
vechicle emissions. 

• An Implausible input signal is generated 

• Manufacturer-defined specifications are 
exceeded. 

• ECM fails to enter oxygen sensor closed-loop 
control within a specified time interval. 



135500146.eps 


The ECM illuminates the “CHECK ENGINE” Light by activating a final stage transistor to 
supply a ground circuit (arrow). The light has voltage supplied whenever KL15 is switched 



74 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Emissions Management 





























































Workshop Hints 


Before any service work is performed on any fuel sys¬ 
tem related component, always adhere to the following: 


• Observe relevent safety legislation pertaining to your area. 

• Ensure adequate ventilation. 

• Use exhaust extraction system where applicable (alleviate 
fumes). 

• DO NOT SMOKE while performing fuel system repairs. 

• Always wear adequate protection clothing including eye 
protection. 

• Use caution when working around a HOT engine compartment. 


• BMW does not recommend any UNAUTHORIZED 
MODIFICATIONS to the fuel system. The fuel systems are 
designed to comply with strict Federal Safety and Emissions 
Regulations. In the concern of product liabilty, it is 
unauthorized to sell or perform modifications to customer 
vehicles, particularly in safety related areas. 

• Always consult the REPAIR INSTRUCTIONS on the specific 
model you are working on before attempting a repair. 



The “CHECK ENGINE” Light also has flash code readouts 
that allows Technicians without BMW Special Tools or 
Equipment to Diagnose an emission system failure. 

For more information and ordering procedure for the On- 
Board Emission System Diagnostic Guide refer to Service 
Information Bulletin SI #13 08 88 (1718). 


CHECK 

ENGINE 


75 

ST055 Ml .7.2 Emissions Management 









Oxygen Sensor Wiring Harness Voluntary Recall Campaign No. 98E-A02 pertains to 
oxygen sensor harness breakage due to the retainer clips (1 and 2). For more information 
and details, refer to Service Information Bulletin SI # 11 03 98. 





h EMISSIONS RECALL 
* COMPLETED 


Oxygen Sensor Harness 


CAMPAIGN NO. 98E-A02 

DEALER CODE NO. 


BMW of North America, Inc. 
Woodcliff Lake, N.J. 07675 r 


04550002.bmp 



Testing the Oxygen Sensor should be performed using the DIS Oscilloscope from the 
“Preset” List. The scope pattern should appear as below for a normal operating sensor. 


If the signal remains high (rich 
condition) the following should be 
checked: 

• Fuel Injectors 

• Fuel Pressure 

• Ignition System 

• Input Sensors that influence 
air/fuel mixture 

• Engine Mechanical 


If the signal remains low (lean 
condition) the following should be 
checked: 

• Air/Vacuum Leaks 

• Fuel Pressure 

• Input Sensor that influence 
air/fuel mixture 

• Engine Mechanical 


Cl) 

CD 

CD 

H —’ 

3 


1 

0.9 

0.8 

0.7 

0.6 

0.5 

0.4 

0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0 


t Rest Rich 

K >1 


Rest Time 






"N 

















s 

v 



\ 







\ V 












< 




























I L 












\ 

A 

























/— 



—\ 

















/a 



l N 

\ 














1 / 


/ ^ 




\ 

V 















/ 

/ 

\ \ 



























0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2 5 3 35 

tRest Leanl 



13550011 .eps 


NOTE: A MIXTURE RELATED FAULT CODE SHOULD BE INVESTIGATED FIRST AND DOES NOT 
ALWAYS INDICATE A DEFECTIVE OXYGEN SENSOR! 

76 

ST055 Ml.7.2 Emissions Management 





















































































































































Tools and Equipment 


The DIS/Modic as well as a reputable hand held 
multimeter can be used when testing inputs/ 
components. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the Ml.7.2 
application should be used (#88 88 6 614 410). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

The interior of this Universal Adapter is shielded, 
therefore it is vital that the ground cable is con¬ 
nected to the vehicle chassis whenever the 
adapter is used. 

The adapter uses a Printed Circuit board inside 
keeping the capacitive and inductive load to a 
minimum. 


When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located below the windshield on the pas¬ 
senger side of the engine compartment), make 
sure the ignition is switched off. 




07550003.eps 




Troubleshooting the closed-loop oxygen sensor 
control should be performed using Special Tool 
# 90 88 6 117 450 (operational instruction book 
included). 

Refer to Repair Information 13 00 060 for 
detailed information on checking exhaust con¬ 
tents. 



77 


ST055 Ml .7.2 Emissions Management 




















































































Performance Controls 


EGS 


TORQUE 


REDUCTION 



SPEEDO SIGNAL “A” 


PERFORMANCE 
CONTROLS 



CODE FUNCTION 


A/C SWITCH ON 


COMPRESSOR ‘ON’ 
REQUEST 



INDIVIDUAL SERIAL 
NUMBER FROM 1-95 

jituttl 


12550017.eps 


A/C COMP RELAY CONTROL 


TD 


Ti 



DK 


EGS 


DIAGNOSIS 



H 


* 

JjP 



Engine Speed Signal (TD): is produced by the 
ECM as an output function. The TD signal is a 
processed square wave signal that indicates 
engine rpm. The signal is made available to 
other control modules including the Instrument 
Cluster, EWS and the 20 pin Diagnostic Socket. 

The TD output is a square wave modulated sig¬ 
nal. The frequency of the signal is directly pro¬ 
portional to RPM. The receiving control module 
detects RPM by the number of pulses. 


Load Signal (Ti): is produced by the ECM as 
an output function that represents the actual 
amount of fuel injected. It is made available to 
other control modules as an input for operation. 
These control modules include: 


The Ti output is a processed square wave sig¬ 
nal. The frequency of the signal is proportional to 
engine RPM. The pulse width and duty cycle will 
vary to reflect the injection quantity. 


78 








UBRHJ6314PTE21161 

1748122 

1738735 

1744048 




1 


74 





1/ min 
x 1000 



• OBC=Fuel consumption for MPG and Range. 

J 

(L 

• Instrument Cluster = MPG Gauge 

c 


• EGS = Load signal for shift points 
(If Equipped) 

5 



17 





71 




St’OlP'fc'ZT 

!S£28£2T 

zzxavu 

I91I33idM£9THBan 






1 


12550019.eps 


ST055 Ml .7.2 Performance Controls 







































































































































Engine Speed (TR) for EGS: is an additional 
variation of the engine speed signal. The “TR” 
signal is produced ECM as an additional output 
function. Like TD, “TR” is a processed signal 
that indicates engine rpm for the EGS (if equip¬ 
ped) to determine shift points. 

The TR signal is a pulse wave signal. The fre¬ 
quency of the signal directly proportional to 
RPM. The signal is overlapped on the fuel pump 
relay control signal from the ECM. 



ruuuuuum. 

1 


TR Signal 


62550001 .eps 


Throttle Position (DKV) for EGS: is the out¬ 
put signal to the EGS Control Module (if equip¬ 
ped). The DKV signal is a pulse width modulat¬ 
ed signal directly proportional to the linear throt¬ 
tle position sensor input signal. 

This output signal is used by the EGS Control 
Module for determining shift points. 



62550002.eps 


EGS Ignition Timing Intervention Signal: 

The ECM receives an input signal from the EGS 
Control Module (if equipped) that will retard the 
ignition timing. This is a momentary ground sig¬ 
nal from the EGS during a gear change to 
reduce engine torque for smoother shifts. 

The EGS releases the ground so the ECM will 
resume ignition timing advance at the comple¬ 
tion of the “shift”. 




ST055 Ml .7.2 Performance Controls 





























































































A/C Compressor Control: is an output of the ECM. The ECM controls the A/C 
Compressor Relay based on signals from the IHKA/IHKR Control Modules. 

When the driver selects the “snow flake” button, the IHKA/IHKR Control Module signals 
the ECM (AC) which “arms” it for compressor activation. 

The ECM prepares for the additional load of the compressor by modifying the ignition tim¬ 
ing and stabilizing idle speed. 

When A/C compressor activation is required the IHKA/IHKS signals the ECM through the 
high/low refrigerant pressure switches (KO). The ECM will provide a ground circuit for the 
A/C Compressor Relay. 

The A/C Compressor Relay is deactivated during wide open throttle acceleration at low 
speeds to allow the engine to quickly achieve maximum power. 


AC = IHKA "ON" 

KO = COMPRESSOR 
ON REQUEST 



AC 


KO 



COMPRESSOR 

RELAY 




62550004.eps 



ST055 Ml .7.2 Performance Controls 





































































































Driveaway Protection System Interface EWS I (1-94 thru 12-94 production): was 

added to all vehicles in January 1994. It is controlled by the Central Locking System of ZKE 
and by the On-Board Computer code function (if equipped). 

The Starter Immobilization Relay is activated when: 

• The vehicle is locked from the outside (Central Locking - GM output to Relay). 

• The On-Board Code function is set. 


An activated relay performs two functions to deter vehicle theft: 

• Ignition and Injection functions of DME are disabled (switched high output signal.) 

• The KL 50 start signal circuit is opened to prevent starter operation. 


* Conventional troubleshooting using the ETM. 




ST055 Ml .7.2 Performance Controls 



































































































Driveaway Protection System Interface EWS II (from 1-95 production): and ECM 

Control Modules are synchronized through an individual serial number (ISN). The ISN is 
a unique code number that is permanently assigned to the ECM and also stored in the 
EWS II Control Module. The ISN must match every time the ignition is switched “ON”, 
before the ECM drive away protection feature will be cancelled. 


• Engine Control Modules designed to operate with the EWS II system will not interchange 
with ECMs from previous models. 

• The ISN replaces the BC Code input to the ECM. 


• The ISN is unique to each ECM and cannot be changed or overwritten. The ISN is transferred / 
stored in the EWS II Control Module using the DIS/MoDIC (including diagnosis). 

• Everything the ignition is switched “ON” the ISN number is sent from the EWS Control Module 
to the ECM, as a digital coded signal. The numbers must match before the ECM will release 
the driveaway protection. 

• The ISN is continuously sent to the ECM as long as the ignition is switched on (KL15). 

• The ECM will disregard the loss of the ISN after the engine is running. 



ST055 Ml .7.2 Performance Controls 






























































Variant Coding 

The ECM used in the Ml .7.2 system is a codeable module that requires Variant Coding if 
it is replaced. The control module is programmed with “resident data” stored in the EPROM 
and Variant Coding simply means that one of the “data sets” will be activated for the 
engine/vehicle. 

DME (ECM) Variant Coding is performed with the DIS/MoDIC using the latest software: 


• DME Varient Coding uses a 4 
Digit code to determine which 
of the internal maps (data sets) 
to utilize. 

• The 4 digit code describes which 
maps to use. 

• The proper variant code can be 
found on the cover of the old 
ECM or Modic variant coding 
software. 

• The actual program software 
can be found for DME variant 
coding can be found only in 
DME Programing software. 

• A codeable DME can only be 
coded 8 times. 


Modic III 



Unique Code 


Resident Coding ID 
Data Segment 




\ 



(Uncoded Control) 
Module 


12550003.eps 


Please refer to the following Service Information Bulletins for updated information on the 
ECM regarding coding: 

• SI #09 Group for the latest on Programing/Coding Explanation 

• SI #12 14 97 M42 Fault Code 200/333 

• SI #12 15 97 M42 Acceleration Jot in 2nd and 3rd Gear 

• SI #12 09 95 M42 ECM (DME) 1.7.2 Fault Code 41 



ST055 Ml .7.2 Performance Controls 






































Workshop Hints 

The following signals are “manufactured” by the ECM for 
other control modules and are not the “raw” inputs to the 
ECM. 

These signals should be tested if another Control Module, 
gauge or function is inoperative due to a lack of the signal(s). 

With the 88 Pin adapter and the DIS Oscil- loscope (Preset 
Measurements) the following signals can be observed with 
the ECM installed and engine running: 

1. TD = Engine RPM 

2. Ti = Fuel Injection 

3. TR = Engine RPM (for EGS if equipped) 

4. DKV = Throttle Postion (for EGS if equipped) 



2 . 



The waveform on the scope should be even, continuous, 
without interference and of sufficient heigth (indicates signal 
strength). Examples of “good” patterns are shown to the right. 

The test should be performed at the ECM and at the output 
Controle Module/component. 


3. 



07550004.eps 

4. 



84 


ST055 Ml .7.2 Performance Controls 




Tools and Equipment 


The DIS/Modic as well as a reputable hand held 
multimeter can be used when testing inputs/ 
components. 

It is best to make the checks at the ECM con¬ 
nection, this method includes testing the wiring 
harness. 

The correct Universal Adapter for the Ml.7.2 
application should be used (#88 88 6 614 410). 
This will ensure the pin connectors and the har¬ 
ness will not be damaged. 

The interior of this Universal Adapter is shielded, 
therefore it is vital that the ground cable is con¬ 
nected to the vehicle chassis whenever the 
adapter is used. 

The adapter uses a Printed Circuit board inside 
keeping the capacitive and inductive load to a 
minimum. 

When installing the Universal Adapter to the 
ECM (located below the windshield on the pas¬ 
senger side of the engine compartment), make 
sure the ignition is switched off. 





ST055 Ml .7.2 Performance Controls 


















































































Review Questions 


1. Describe the Power Supply for the Fuel Injectors: 


2. Name the Components of the Fuel Supply System: 


3. List the inputs required for igniton operation: 


4. Describe the Knock Sensor Function: 


5. Name two types of Emissions the ECM controls:_ 

6. List two reasons for the “CHECK ENGINE” Light to illuminate: 


7. List four different tests that can be performed on the fuel injectors: 


8. Describe Semi-Sequential Injection: 


9. EWS (I or II) affects what ECM output functions to deter vehicle theft? 



ST055 Ml .7.2 Performance Controls 










