Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

EML Ills .2 

Objectives of the Module .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components.5 

Throttle Valve (DK) Motors .7 

Throttle Position Sensor.10 

External Safety Path.12 

Basic Adaption of the PWG .13 

EML Ills Control Module.13 

Cruise Control Operation.16 

Cylinder Bank Synchronization.17 

Fault Recognition/Diagnosis.17 

Review Questions .20 
















EML Ills 

Model: E38 - M73 Engine 
E31 - M73 Engine 

Production Date: E38 1995 - Present 

E31 1996 - End of Production 

Manufacturer: Siemens 

Pin Connector: 88 Pins 

Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Name the Components that are Contained in the DK motors 

• Explain the Stepper Motor Functions that are Monitored 

• List the Inputs Required for EML Operation 

• Decribe How the Throttle Valves are Synchronized 

• List What Control Modules Require a Throttle Input Signal 

• Understand What Type of Signal is Generated by the PWG 


2 


ST055 EML Ills 




EML Ills 


Purpose of the System 

The EML Ills is an electronic throttle control system for the M73 V-12 engine. The EML Ills 
was designed and developed by Siemens to BMW specifications. 

The EML Ills system uses two throttle valves and one pedal position sensor (PWG). The 
EML Ills control module regulates the position of the throttle valves based on the input from 
the pedal position sensor. 

In addition to throttle control, the main functions of the EML Ills include: 

• Idle stabilization by regulating the throttle openings at idle. 

• Throttle valve positioning for optimum starting. 

• Synchronization of the cylinder banks. 

• Air volume control for ASC/DSC operation. 

• Cruise control regulation (the EML Ills control module contains the GR II logic introduced 
on the E38 740). 

• Maximum road speed limiting 

The operation of the EML Ills is enhanced with additional backup (redundancy) features. 
This helps ensure reliable operation while maintaining a high level of operational safety. 

The fault memory of the EML Ills control module is stored in an EEPROM so that 
disconnection of the battery will not erase any stored faults. 

The EML Ills system is incorporated into the driving management system and is connected 
to the CAN line for signal interfacing with the ECM, ASC+T and AGS control modules. 


3 

ST055 EML Ills 



The EML III system includes: 


• The EML Ills control module contains two separate processors for redundant checking of 
inputs and output controls. 

• Each throttle valve is controlled by two separate stepper motors driving one rotor 

• The external safety path. 

• E38 EML fault indication is handled by the Check Control Module, through the instrument 
cluster matrix display. 

• The hall sensor brake pedal switch is used for the brake pedal input. 

• Logic monitoring of pedal/throttle valve operation 



ST055 EML Ills 



COMPONENTS 


The main components of the EML Ills 
system include: 


• The EML Ills control module - 
located in the E-box. 



EML Ills 
CONTROL 
MODULE 


• Two throttle (DK) assemblies - 
mounted on each intake 
manifold. 



• One pedal position sensor (PWG) - 
connected to the accelerator pedal 
(with a separate kick-down switch). 


• Electronic brake light switch. 



5 

ST055 EML Ills 



























• Cruise control main switch - mounted on the instrument panel. 
Provides a switched ground input to the EML control module 
(Early E38 only, incorporated in the steering wheel control switch 
on later models). 



• Multi-Function Steering Wheel - cruise control switch pad and the MFL control module. 









(E38 only) 

• Check control module - for activation of the 
fault warning display. 



6 


ST055 EML Ills 






















































































































































THROTTLE VALVE (DK) MOTORS 


The throttle valve assembly consists of the DK housing with the throttle valve plate, return 
spring, drive motor and feedback potentiometers. The EML Ills throttle valve plate is driven 
directly by the motor shaft which allows for a precise control of the throttle plate positioning. 

A dual stepper motor configuration is used to drive the throttle plate. Both stepper motors 
are controlled through separate final stages in the EML control module and operate on the 
one armature. The final stages for one stepper motor windings are controlled by one micro 
processor while the second motor windings are controlled by the second processor. The 
control of the stepper motors takes place simultaneously by each processor. 


ROTOR DUAL POTENTIOMETER 



The dual feedback potentiometers signal the movement and position of the throttle plate to 
each processor. The two potentiometers have separate power and ground circuits to 
ensure the reliability of their operation. 


This dual redundancy system allows the EML Ills to continue operation, without driver 
inconvenience, if one stepper motor or control circuit malfunctions. If the self diagnosis of 
the EML Ills detects a fault with one of the stepper motor controls, it will switch off the 
affected circuit and continue operation from one motor control circuit. The fault will be 
logged and the EML fault warning will be displayed in the cluster matrix. 

If a fault occurs that cannot allow continued operation of the throttle valve, the control for 
that bank of cylinders will be switched off. 


7 


ST055 EML Ills 














Stepper Motor Control 


A digital square wave signal is used to drive the stepper motor of the DK assembly. The 
duty cycle of the frequency and trigger of the signal are changed to produce the magnetic 
field required to move the stepper motor rotor. 

Each set of stepper motor windings are controlled by four final stages. Each final stage has 
the ability to switch between power and ground to reverse the direction of current flow 
through the windings (trigger). This switching allows the magnetic field of the coils to be 
reversed allowing the rotor to be driven in either direction to position the throttle plate at the 
precise setting called for by the PWG input request. 

The final stage control varies the duty cycle to control the speed of movement and position 
of the throttle plate. 



Self Diagnosis: The scope of EML self diagnosis for stepper motor operation includes: 


• Checking 


- Both throttle valves are checked dynamically prior to engine starting (part 
of pre-start check with KL 15 on). 

- All eight final stage controls per stepper motor when KL 15 is switched on. 


• Monitoring 


8 


The supply voltages for all potentiometers. 

Throttle valve set position with the feedback potentiometers position. 
Comparing the two potentiometer signals. 

Comparing the set points calculated by each individual processor. 
The throttle valve operation for OBD II checking requirements. 


ST055 EML Ills 






CONDITIONS OF STEPPER MOTOR CONTROL 


Starting: The EML Ills control module will position the throttle valves to the optimum 
opening for engine start when it receives the KL 50 input over the CAN line. 

Idle: The EML Ills programming will maintain a stable idle by adjusting the opening of the 
throttle valves when the vehicle is at a standstill. The EML receives the engine RPM signal 
from the ECM over the CAN line. 

The idle will be stabilized for A/C compressor activation to compensate for the load of the 
compressor. 


The EML receives TD and AC on signals over the can line. 


Decel Fuel Cutoff: Decel fuel cutoff is activated based on the input from the pedal position 
sensor and the engine RPM signals. A high signal is supplied from the EML control module 
to the ECM control modules for the purpose of activating decel fuel cut off. 


These input signals to the ECM control modules are separate hard wire lines that are also 
used for the “safety fuel cut off” feature of the EML control. 



A 



] 


ASC+T 


[ 


V 



AGS 


[ ] 




DME II 


[ ] 


DME I 


9 

ST055 EML Ills 



































































THROTTLE POSITION SENSOR (PWG) 


The throttle position sensor uses an inductive coil “oscillator” principle for accelerator 
position recognition input. The PWG consists of: 

• Three separate inductive coils. 

• One soft iron core eccentric, attached to the accelerator pedal through the PWG shaft. 

• One 4° switch, for the external safety path function. 

Each coil is supplied with an AC voltage signal, at a specific frequency, from the EML Ills 
control module. As the pedal is moved, the eccentric shape of the iron core moves closer 
to the PWG coils. 

This causes the inductance of the coils to increase due to the concentration of the magnetic 
field. The increasing inductance in the coil causes the amplitude of the AC frequency to be 
reduced. 





ST055 EML Ills 







The amplitude is decreased as the pedal is pressed down. 

The EML control module monitors and processes the changing amplitude as the input 
request for throttle opening/closing. 



The changing amplitude value is a measure of accelerator pedal movement. The EML 
control module is programmed to recognize pedal movement from 0° (idle) to 99° (WOT) 
based on the changing voltage signal. 

The three inductive coils are used for redundancy purposes. All three signals from the PWG 
are input and evaluated by both processors of the EML Ills control module. 

If one signal were to fail, the operation of the EML system, from the driver’s perspective, 
would not be affected. The EML Ills control module would continue to function from the 
remaining two signals. The fault will be recognized and stored in the fault memory and a 
failure warning message would be posted in the display matrix. If a second signal were to 
fail, the system would go into the failsafe operation and the EML Ills control module would 
stop responding to the throttle input. The engine will start but not run above idle. This 
second fault would also be stored in the fault memory. 

11 


ST055 EML Ills 



EXTERNAL SAFETY PATH 


The external safety path circuit is maintained to ensure that the decel fuel cutoff is activated 
if a fault occurs with the output control of the throttle motors causing the engine not to 
return to idle. 

The external safety path exists from the electronic brake light switch, through the 4° switch, 
to the decel fuel cutoff inputs of the ECM control modules. 

With the accelerator pedal released (4° switch closed) and the brake pedal pressed, a high 
signal is supplied (bypassing the EML control module) to the DME control modules to 
activate decel fuel cutoff. 



A special tool is not required to test the safety path circuit for proper operation. A procedure 
is listed in the diagnostic pages for this purpose. 

It requires stepping on the accelerator < 4° but far enough to display an off idle condition. 
With this displayed on the DIS/MoDIC screen, stepping on the brake pedal will display the 
decel fuel cut off request to the ECM. 

12 


ST055 EML Ills 





BASIC ADAPTION OF THE PWG 

The PWG adaption allows the EML control module to learn the idle and wide open throttle 
limit positions. This adaption procedure must be carried out in the following instances: 

• The EML control module is replaced 

• The pedal position sensor is replaced 

• The PWG is disconnected with the ignition “ON” 

• A new variant code is installed in the EML control module 

• The DIS/MoDIC diagnostic procedures request an adaption be carried out as part of the 
troubleshooting 

NOTE: The engine will start but the throttle control system will not respond to inputs from 
the PWG until this basic adaption has been completed. The procedure for the basic 
adaption is listed in the “SPECIAL FUNCTIONS” section of the DIS/MoDIC - EML test 
pages. 

The adaption procedure is carried out with KL 15 switched “ON” and the engine “OFF”. 
Driving the vehicle is not required for pedal adaption. 


13 

ST055 EML Ills 




EML III S CONTROL MODULE 


The EML Ills control module is located in the E-Box. All control and safety monitoring 
functions of the EML are backed up by redundant processing. Each pair of the output 
control final stages of the DK motors is controlled by a separate processor. The EML control 
module communicates with the ECM, ASC+T and EGS control modules over the CAN line 
for the following inputs/outputs: 

ECM Control Modules AGS Control Module 

• Engine coolant temperature • Kickdown 

• Throttle position • Transmission range/program 

• A/C status (ON/OFF) • Shift Characteristics 

• Load signal (ti) for each DME 

• Engine speed (TD) 

ASC+T Control Module 

• Throttle valve angle 

• Throttle valve increase 

• Throttle valve decrease 

• Vehicle speed 


DME I DME II 

i , AGS 



14 


ST055 EML Ills 









ECM RELAY 
(DME MAIN 



OPERATING 

POWER 


PEDAL POSITION SIGNALS 


IDLE SIGNAL 
SAFTEY PATH 

TO DME I ◄—v Ul 
TO DME II 



CRUISE 

CONTROL 

INPUTS: 

E31 OR 


$ 


/* 


E38 SYSTEMS 



CRUISE CONTROL 
SWITCHES 


MFL CONTROL! 
_ .MODULE _ J 

Early Model E-38 only 


Siemens 

EML Ills 

-88 PINS 

Throttle Motor Control 
Throttle Valve Optimum Position 
For Starting 
Idle Speed Control 
Throttle Valve Synchronization 
Cruise Control (FGR) 
Adjustment of Throttle(s) during 
Decelto reduce 
High Manifold Vacuum 
Engine Speed Limit 
Vehicle Speed Limit 
Drive Torque Reduction (ASC) 
Drag Torque Reduction (MSR) 
Safety Monitoring 
Fail Safe Functions 
Fault Monitoring With Memory 
Diagnostic Communication 
OBD II Compliant 




POTENTIOMETER 1 
POWER & GROUND 


THROTTLE 
HOUSING 1 






STEPPER 
MOTOR 1 


-Tt 


POTENTIOMETER 2 
POWER & GROUND 







STEPPER 
MOTOR 2 


-Ttp 


POTENTIOMETER 1 
POWER & GROUND 


THROTTLE 
HOUSING 2 


f\k\\J 




STEPPER 
MOTOR 1 




POTENTIOMETER 2 
POWER & GROUND 


liiMSL 

P 

/ 

1 (m) 

§ 

§ 

nraW 




STEPPER 
MOTOR 2 


CRUISE CONTROL 
INDICATOR 


FAULT 

DISPLAY 


IDLE SIGNAL TO DME I 



SAFETY PATH ► 
HIGH SIGNAL 
FROM PWG ► 


IDLE SIGNAL TO DME II 


CAN BUS 



15 

ST055 EML Ills 





















































































































































































CRUISE CONTROL OPERATION 


All functions of the cruise control system are incorporated in the EML Ills control module. 
The cruise control main switch is wired directly to the EML Ills control module. The multi¬ 
function steering wheel inputs are direct to the EML through a separate serial data bus. 

The EML control module regulates the operation of the cruise control by regulating the 
position of the throttle valves as it did in the past. The new cruise control logic adopted with 
the GR II E38 7401 are incorporated in the EML control logic. 



The EML controls the cruise control indicator lamp in the instrument cluster. When the main 
switch is pressed, the indicator lamp is illuminated. 

The switching “OFF” priorities for cruise operation are carried over from the GR II system. 
The commands for cruise control operation are carried out according to the highest priority 
as follows: 

5 - brake light switch - directly from EML control module 

4 - transmission in neutral - from AGS control module over CAN 

3 - “OFF” request - from MFL steering wheel 

2 - Set/Accelerate - from MFL steering wheel 

1 - Resume - from MFL steering wheel 

The new logic incorporated into the cruise control include: 

• Smoother acceleration under the Resume feature. 

• Downshift on decel (down hill) to provide engine braking effect. 



ST055 EML Ills 

























CYLINDER BANK SYNCHRONIZATION 


The throttle valves are synchronized automatically on the EML Ills system. This ensures that 
both cylinder banks receive the same air charge and creates a smooth running engine. The 
synchronization takes place at an idle during the purge system shut off time. The 
synchronization process last approx. 100 seconds. 

The total conditions for synchronization to take place are: 


• Idling 

• Engine speed between 560 - 720 RPM 

• Throttle valve stops recognized (DK idle position) 

• Load difference side-to-side no more than .04 to 10 % 

• No faults in DME/EML control modules 

• Purge system shut down 



CAN BUS SIGNAL: 

LOAD SIGNAL FOR 
DME I IS 5% MORE 
THAN THAT OF DME 



[ ] 





DME II 


[ ] 


V 



DME I 


The EML control module processes the load signals from the two DME control modules. If 
a difference exists, the EML will adjust the DK motors to achieve equal air throughput on 
both banks. If the load difference is greater than 10%, the synchronization will not take 
place and a fault is stored in the memory. 



ST055 EML Ills 


























































































FAULT RECOGNITION/DIAGNOSIS 


The OBD II regulations require that any fault with the EML Ills system that can affect 
emissions must turn on the “Check Engine Lamp” and be accessible through the OBD II 
read out connector. These faults will also be stored in the fault memory of the EML Ills 
control module for access through the DIS test programs. 

The failure warning of the EML Ills system is through the check control system (COM) of the 
E38. A fault message from the EML control module is sent to the CCM and the message 
will be posted in the matrix display of the instrument cluster. 

The diagnosis program of the DIS includes the “Fault Symptom” troubleshooting paths as 
well as the Test Modules, Service Functions and Expert Modes introduced with the E38 
740i. 

Diagnosis and troubleshooting should always begin with the fault symptom troubleshooting 
mode. Follow the test modules and diagnostic path provided by the DIS Tester. 




ST055 EML Ills 





























































































BASIC TROUBLESHOOTING 


• Always personally verify the customer complaint. 

• Perform a Quick Test to determine if the vehicle systems have logged fault codes. 

• Call up the faulted system or appropriate test schedule to verify the correct control 
module is installed in the car. 

• Follow the DIS/MoDIC on screen instructions and perform all tests as specified. 

• Use the DIS and fault symptom diagnostic procedures as trained. 

• Follow the appropriate test module procedures for systems that malfunction but fail to 
set faults in memory. 

• System problems which elude diagnostic procedures must be brought to the attention 
of BMW of North America, Inc. 

• BMW Technical Assistance Hotline 1-800-472-7222 


19 

ST055 EML Ills 




Review Questions 


1. Why are faults not erased when the battery is not disconnected? 


2. What components are contained in the DK motors? 


3. What Stepper Motor Functions are Monitored? 


4. What happens to the AC frequency when the accelerator pedal is depressed? 


5. If the engine does not respond after the PWG is replaced, what should you do? 


6. How are the throttle valves synchronized? 


7. What control modules require a throttle input signal? 


8. How many final stage transistors are required to control one stepper motor? 



ST055 EML Ills 










