Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Emissions Overview .2 

Objectives of the Module .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

Most Common Problems Detected.4 

Engine Misfire Diagnosis.5 

OBD History.8 

Overview of National Low Emission Vehicle Program.10 

OBD II Emission Compliance Chart.11 

System Monitoring.12 

Drive Cycle.13 

Malfunction Indicator Light. 14 

Readiness Code.16 

Scan Tool.16 

DISplus/MoDIC.17 

OBD II Diagnostic Trouble Codes.18 

Scan Tool Connection.19 

20 Pin Diagnostic Socket Deletion.20 

Fault Codes.22 

DISplus/MoDIC.22 

OBD II Memory and Fault Codes. 23 

OBD II Fault Code Lists. Inserted Pages 


Review Questions 


24 

























EMISSIONS OVERVIEW 


Models: All Equipped with OBD II 
Production Date: 1995 to Present 

Manufacturer: Bosch and Siemens Engine Control Modules 
Pin Connector: 88 and 134 Pins 


Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• Describe What is Required to Illuminate the “Malfunction Indicator” Light. 

• Describe The Difference Between TLEV, LEV and ULEV. 

• Identity Vehicle Emission Compliance by Production Date. 

• List the Systems/Components that are Permanently Monitored. 

• Access the Readiness Codes using the DISplus/MoDIC. 

• Find the DLC Connector Locations in Various BMW Vehicles. 


2 


ST055 Emissions Overview 




Emissions Overview 


Purpose of the System 
What is OBD? 

Today many of the engine’s control systems such as throttle opening, fuel injection, ignition, 
emissions and performance are controlled by an electronic control module and the related 
sensors and actuators. The first on-board diagnostic (OBD) systems were developed by the 
manufacturer as a way to detect problems with the electronic systems. 

Beginning with 1994 model year, requirements for OBD systems have been established by 
the EPA and CARB. The purpose of the OBD system is to assure proper emission control 
system operation for the vehicle’s lifetime by monitoring emission-related components and 
systems for deterioration and malfunction. This includes also a check of the tank ventilation 
system for vapor leaks. 

The OBD system consists of the engine and transmission control modules, their sensors 
and actuators along with the diagnostic software. The control modules can detect system 
problems even before the driver notices a driveability problem because many problems that 
affect emissions can be electrical or even chemical in nature. 


What happens if a problem is detected? 

When the OBD system determines that a prob¬ 
lem exists, a corresponding “Diagnostic Trouble 
Code” is stored in the control module’s memory. 

The control module also illuminates a yellow 
dashboard Malfunction Indicator Light indicating 
“Check Engine” or “Service Engine Soon” or dis¬ 
plays an engine symbol. 


Have you seen this light? 



SFPVCF 

LiWH. 

ttHH 


A ^hurL iritr OduClKJn CO OED 


This light informs the driver of the need for service, NOT of the need to stop the vehicle. A 
blinking or flashing dashboard light indicates a rather severe level of engine misfire. 


After fixing the problem the Fault code is deleted to turn off the light. If the conditions that 
caused a problem are no longer present the vehicle’s OBD system can turn off the dash¬ 
board light automatically. If the OBD system evaluates the component or system three con¬ 
secutive times and no longer detects the initial problem, the dashboard light will turn off 
automatically. 


3 

ST055 Emissions Overview 



What is the most common problem detected by OBD? 


Fuel Filler Cap 

If the fuel filler cap is not properly closed after 
refueling, the OBD system will detect the vapor 
leak that exists from the cap not being com¬ 
pletely tightened. 

If you tighten the cap subsequently, the dash¬ 
board light should be extinguished within a few 
days or after deleting the Fault code. This is not 
an indication of a faulty OBD system. The OBD 
system has properly diagnosed the problem 
and accordingly alerted the driver by illuminat¬ 
ing the dashboard light. 

Please check the fuel filler cap first when the dashboard light comes on to avoid unneces¬ 
sary diagnostic time. To check the fuel filler cap turn the cap to the right until you hear a 
click or the cap reaches the full stop. Make sure that the retaining strap is not caught 
between the filler pipe and the fuel filler cap. If the light should stay on further in depth evap¬ 
orative leak diagnosis is required. 

Misfire Detection 

As part of the CARB/OBD II regulations the Engine Control Module must determine if mis¬ 
fire is occurring and also identify the specific cylinder(s). The ECM will determine severity of 
the misfire event, and whether it is emissions relevant or catalyst damaging. In order to 
accomplish these tasks the ECM monitors the crankshaft for acceleration losses during fir¬ 
ing segments of cylinder specific firing order. If the signal is implausible an erroneous refer¬ 
ence mark can be obtained by the ECM which will result in a misfire fault being set. 

Possible causes of cylinder misfire faults (actual field findings): 

• Vehicle ran low or out of fuel 

• Poor fuel quality (ex. water in fuel, customer uses an additive, etc.) 

• Low/high fuel pressure 

• Ignition coil 

• Fouled spark plug(s) 

• Restricted / contaminated fuel injector(s) 

• Crankshaft position sensor 

• Poor combustion due to low compression or high leakage 

• Blocked/restricted Catalyst 



4 


ST055 Emissions Overview 





Engine Misfire Diagnosis 


Engine Misfire is the result of inefficient combustion in one or more cylinders. The causes 
of Engine Misfire are extensive but can be grouped into the following sub-systems. 
Consider the charts below as an additional diagnostic aid once the DISplus/MoDIC is con¬ 
nected, the correct fault symptom has been chosen and the fault memory has been inter¬ 
rogated. Follow the Test Module as displayed by the DISplus/MoDIC. 


IGNITION SYSTEM 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION TEST CORRECTION 


Spark Plug: • Incorrect spark plug installed 

• Electrode gap closed or too small 

• Electrode(s) missing 

• Oil or fuel fouled spark plug 

• Ceramic insulation cracked 


Secondary • Verify correct spark plug 

Ignition • Replace if necessary 

DISplus Preset • Swap with another cylinder 
Measurement 


Secondary • Wet or moist due to water infiltration. • Check water ingress, repair, replace 

circuit: (wiring, • High resistance due to corrosion. • Check resistance value, replace 

M73-cap, rotor) 

Ignition • Secondary/Primary Circuits open or shorted. Secondary • Inspect and replace if necessary 

Coil(s): • Housing cracked, damaged. and Primary • Swap with another cylinder 


Primary • Look for open, loose connector, 

Ignition & corrosion, crossed or backed out 

Term 4A feed- pins (also consider ignition unloader or 
back Preset ECM relay on MY97 and newer cars). 
Measurements • Determine defective condition, 

• A secondary ignition oscilloscope display provides vital information 
about the ignition system’s condition. 

• Follow the precautions in group 12 of the Repair Instructions. 

• Use the following scope patterns as a guideline for ignition sys¬ 
tem diagnosis. Use the preset measurement function of DISplus. 


Evaluation of secondary signal amplitude at idle speed. 

1. Normal Ignition Voltage Peak: Spark Plug is OK 

2. Low Ignition Voltage Peak: Gap too small (defective) 

3. High Ignition voltage peak: Gap too large (defective) 



repair or replace. 



Ignition Coil • Power supply, Primary control and 
& Engine ground (shunt signal) circuits impaired. 

Harness 

Connectors 



ST055 Emissions Overview 










Pistons, • Hole in piston crown, ring(s) broken, 

Rings, valve(s) not seating, valve(s) bent, 

Valves, valve spring(s) broken, camshaft lobe 

Camshaft: cracked, etc. 


Idle Quality - Rough Run¬ 
ning Preset. 

Cylinder compression & 
leakdown tests. 


Correct condition as 
required. 


Hydraulic • HVA oil bore restricted or blocked. 

Valve • Engine oil pressure builds up too slow. 

Actuator • Intermittant Misfire Fault - Not 
(HVA): Currently Present. 

• HVA binding/sticking in bore. 


• Idle Quality - Rough Run¬ 
ning Preset. 

• Listen to HVA 

• Check Oil Pressure 

• Cylinder leakdown 


Always consider 
mechanical com¬ 
ponents when 
diagnosing misfire. 

1 Inspect for scoring. 


Vacuum • Unmetered vacuum leaks causing a 

Leaks: “lean” operating condition. Possible 

“Excessive Mixture Deviation” 

fault codes. 


■ Idle Quality - Rough Run- • Correct cc 
ning Preset. Test for vacuum required, 
leaks per Repair Instr. and SIB 

on “Crankcase Ventilation”. 

Interpret Add. & Multipl. adaptation values 


Correct condition as 
required. 


FUEL QUALITY, DELIVERY, INJECTION & EVAPORATIVE SYSTEMS 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION 


Fuel (quality): • Contaminated fuel. 

(water, other non combustible). 


TEST 


CORRECTION 


* Clean fuel system, replace fuel. 


Fuel Delivery: • Fuel pump delivery pressure low, 
restriction in fuel line to fuel rail or 
running loss valve. 

• Fuel filter restricted (clogged). 

• Low fuel in tank. 


• Check fuel 
pressure & 
volume. 

• Check fuel 
pump power 
and ground 


• Determine restriction/flow reduction, 
replace component as necessary. 

• Interpret Additive and Multiplicative 
adaptation values. 


Running Loss • Valve stuck in “small circuit’’ position. 

Valve: 


• Check valve • Display “diagnosis requests” in DISplus 
and test valve for proper function, repl¬ 
ace valve as necessary. 


Fuel Injectors: • Leaking fuel injector pintle seats cause 
rich engine starts with hot ambient 
temperatures. 

• Blocked (dirty) injector(s). 


• Ti Preset & 
status page. 

• Sec Ign scope 
pattern. 


Check injectors for leakiage. 

Swap suspect injector with another 
cylinder. 

Inspect injector, replace if necessary. 


Fuel Pressure • Regulator defective, causes fluctuation 
Regulator: in the injected quantity of fuel causing 

mixture adaptation faults. 


• Fuel pressure • Check nominal fuel pressure value with 
engine operating under varied speeds. 


Evaporative • Defective evaporative system vent 
System: causing fuel tank collapse and fuel . 

starvation. 


DISplus status, • Check the fuel tank condition and vent 
Evap test line. 

with press- • Check Fresh Air Valve on TLEV E36 
ure tool, vehicles or LDP/DM TL and filter on 

purge valve ORVR vehicles for proper system 

func. test. “breathing”. 


ST055 Emissions Overview 








IMPLAUSIBLE ECM CONTROL FUNCTION OR SENSOR INPUT SIGNALS 


COMPONENT POSSIBLE CONDITION TEST CORRECTION 


Crankshaft 
Position 
Sensor or 
Increment 
Wheel: 


• Implausible signal for misfire detection. • DISplus preset • Determine defective sensor or 

• Increment wheel loose or damaged measurement. increment wheel and replace, 
(internal on M44, M52 and M54, 

external on M62 & M73). 

• Air gap between sensor and wheel. 

• Noticeable at higher rpm. 


Catalyst 

Damaged: 


• Excessive exhaust back pressure 
(bank specific fault present, more 
noticeable under heavy load and 
high rpm). 


• DISplus preset • Determine catalyst condition, replace 
measurement or repair as necessary. 

of oxygen 
sensor. 

• Back pressure test per SIB with Special Tool. 


Oxygen • Excessive mixture deviation, 

Sensor: possible vacuum leaks. 


• Monitor 
oxygen 
sensor 
signal via 
DIS preset. 


• Swap sensor from other bank (if app¬ 
licable) and see if fault transfers to 
other bank. 


Engine • Internal control module fault. 

Control 

Module • Misfire Reprogramming. 


• Check fault • Highly unlikely but must be considered, 
memory. 

• Refer to SIB • Check Model/Prod range - reprogram 


When diagnosing a Misfire fault code, Remember: 

“Misfire” is caused by a defect in the internal combustion engine or a defect in the 
control of the engine operation. 

“Misfire” is the result of improper combustion (variation between cylinders) as 
measured at the crankshaft due to: 

- Engine mechanical defects; breakage, wear, leakage or improper tolerances. 

- Excessive mixture deviation; air (vacuum leaks), fuel and all the components that deliver 
air/fuel into the combustion chambers. 

- Faulty ignition; primary, secondary including spark plugs. 

- Faulty exhaust flow; affecting back pressure. 

- Tolerance parameters; ECM programming. 

A Misfire fault code(s) is the “symptom” of a faulty input for proper combustion. 
When diagnosing a misfire, review the charts to assist you in finding the faulty 
input. 

7 


ST055 Emissions Overview 









OBD History 


As a result of low fuel costs, together with a high standard of living and a dense population, 
the state of California was affected particularly heavily by air pollution. This spurred the state 
to pass the most comprehensive and stringent emissions and consumption laws in the 
world. The automobile manufacturers were reminded of their obligations and this drove 
them on to comply with the new regulations at enormous expense. 

• In continuing efforts to improve air quality, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
amended the Clean Air Act in 1990. The Clean Air Act was originally mandated in 1970. 
The Clean Air Act has a direct impact on automobile manufactures whereby they are 
responsible to comply with the regulations set forth by the EPA. The 1990 amendment 
of the Clean Air Act set forth all of the changes currently being introduced on vehicles 
sold in the United States today. 

• In 1967, the State of California formed the California Air Resources Board (CARB) to 
develop and carryout air quality improvement programs for California’s unique air pollu¬ 
tion conditions. Through the years, CARB programs have evolved into what we now 
know as ON Board Diagnostics and the National Low Emission Vehicle Program. 

• The EPA has adopted many of the CARB programs as National programs and laws. 
One of these earlier programs was OBD I and the introduction of the “CHECK ENGINE” 
Light. 

• BMW first introduced OBD I and the check engine light in the 1987 model year. This 
enhanced diagnosis through the display of “flash codes” using the check engine light as 
well as the BMW 2013 and MoDiC. OBD I was only the first step in an ongoing effort to 
monitor and reduce tailpipe emissions. 

• By the 1989 model year all automotive manufactures had to assure that all individual 
components influencing the composition of exhaust emissions would be electrically 
monitored and that the driver be informed whenever such a component failed. 

• Since the 1996 model year all vehicles must comply with OBD II requirements. OBD II 
requires the monitoring of virtually every component that can affect the emission per¬ 
formance of a vehicle plus store the associated fault code and condition in memory. 

If a problem is detected and then re-detected during a later drive cycle more than one 
time, the OBD II system must also illuminate the “CHECK ENGINE” Light in the instru¬ 
ment cluster to alert the driver that a malfunction has occurred. However, the flash 
code function of the Check Engine Light in OBD I vehicles is not a function in 
OBD II vehicles. 


8 

ST055 Emissions Overview 



• This requirement is carried out by the Engine Control Module (ECM/DME) as well as the 
Automatic Transmission Control Module (EGS/AGS) and the Electronic Throttle Control 
Module (EML) to monitor and store faults associated with all components/systems that 
can influence exhaust and evaporative emissions. 

OBD I 

The essential elements here are that electrical components which affect exhaust emissions 
are monitored by the motor-electronics system and an optical warning signal (CHECK 
ENGINE Light) is issued in the event of an OBD l-relevant malfunction. The corresponding 
fault can be read out via a flashing code without the aid of a testing device. 

OBD II 

Since January 1996, OBD II has been compulsory on all vehicles in the US market. The 
main difference from OBD I is that not only are the purely electrical components monitored 
but also all the systems and processes that affect exhaust emissions and fuel system evap¬ 
orative emissions. 

The operational reliability of the exhaust-treatment system must be guaranteed for 5 years 
and/or 100,000 miles; this is maintained by emission certification. In this case, the data rel¬ 
evant to exhaust/evaporative emissions are read out via a standardized interface with a uni¬ 
versal "diagnosis device". If a violation is identified, the vehicle manufacturer in question is 
legally bound to eliminate the fault throughout the entire vehicle series. 


Objectives of OBD II: 






Permanent monitoring of components relevant 
to exhaust emissions in all vehicles. 

Immediate detection and indication of signifi¬ 
cant emission increases over the entire 
service life of each vehicle. 



• Permanently low exhaust emissions in the field. 


9 

ST055 Emissions Overview 




Overview of the National Low Emission Vehicle Program 


Emission Reduction Stages: 

While OBD II has the function of monitoring for emission related faults and alerting the oper¬ 
ator of the vehicle, the National Low Emission Vehicle Program requires a certain number 
of vehicles produced (specific to manufacturing totals) currently comply with the following 
emission stages; 

TLEV: Transitional Low Emission Vehicle 
LEV: Low Emission Vehicle 
ULEV: Ultra Low Emission Vehicle. 


Prior to the National Low Emission Vehicle Program, the most stringent exhaust reduction 
compliancy is what is known internally within BMW as HC II. The benefit of exhaust emis¬ 
sion reductions that the National Low Emission Vehicle Program provides compared with 
the HC II standard is as follows: 


TLEV- 50% cleaner. 
LEV- 70% cleaner. 
ULEV-84% cleaner. 




Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non Methane 
Hydrocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.250 

3.4 

0.4 

LEV 

0.131 

3.4 

0.2 

ULEV 

0.040 

1.7 

0.2 



Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non Methane 
Hydrocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.125 

3.4 

0.4 

LEV 

0.075 

3.4 

0.2 

ULEV 

0.040 

1.7 

0.2 



Compliance 

Level 

NMHC 

Non Methane 
Hydrocarbon 

CO 

Carbon 

Monoxide 

NOx 

Oxide(s) of 
Nitrogen 

TLEV 

0.156 

4.2 

0.6 

LEV 

0.090 

4.2 

0.3 

ULEV 

0.055 

2.1 

0.3 


10 

ST055 Emissions Overview 






OBD II Emission Compliance 



1995 

1996 

1997 

1998 

1999 

2000 

2001 

M44 

E36 


HC II 

TLEV 




1/96 

1/97 

M44 

Z3 


HC II 

TLEV 

10/96 1/97 

M52 

E36 

TLEV 


10/95 


M52/TU 

Z3 


TLEV 


LEV 


1/97 9/98 - M52TU 


S52 - E36 M3 
MCoupe/Roadster 


TLEV 


9/98 


M54 


2.5 LEV 

Z3 


3.0 ULEV 


10/00 


M52TU 

E46 


LEV 


6/98 


M54 



2.5/3.0xi LEV 9/00 

E46 


3.0 ULEV 


6/00 


S54 - E46 M3 
MCoupe/Roadster 


LEV 


1/01 


M52/TU 

E39 


TLEV 


LEV 


3/96 


9/98 - M52TU 


M54 


2.5 LEV 

E39 


3.0 ULEV 


9/00 


M62/TU 

E38/E39 


HC II 

LEV 

1/96 9/98 - M62TU 

M62TU 

E53 


LEV 

LEV - Truck 


9/99 4/00 


M54 3.0 
E53 


ULEV-Truck 


4/00 


S62 

E39 M5/Z8 


TLEV 


9/99 


M73/TU 

E38 


HC 


LEV 


1/95 


9/98 - M73TU 


11 


ST055 Emissions Overview 













































































System Monitoring 


Within the framework of OBD II, certain components/systems must be monitored once per 
driving cycle while other control systems (e.g. misfire detection) must be monitored perma¬ 
nently. A " driving cycle " consists of engine startup, vehicle operation (exceeding of 
starting speed), coasting and engine stopping. 

Permanent Monitoring 

Permanently monitored systems are monitored according to temperature immediately after 
startup. In the event of malfunctions (e.g. oxygen sensor), the Malfunction Indicator Light 
will illuminate immediately. 

The following are monitored permanently: 

• Misfire Detection 

• Fuel System (duration of injection) 

• All emission related electrical circuits, components and systems of the ECM, TCM and 
EML (if equipped). 

Cyclic monitoring 

Systems monitored once per driving cycle will only result in a fault being registered after the 
corresponding operating conditions have been completed. Therefore, there is no possibili¬ 
ty for checking when the engine is started up briefly and then shut down. 

The following are monitored once per driving cycle: 

• Oxygen Sensor Function 

• Secondary Air Injection System 

• Catalytic Converter Function (efficiency) 

• Evaporative Vapor Recovery System 


Due to the complexity involved in meeting the test criteria within the defined dri¬ 
ving cycle, all tests may not be completed within one "customer driving cycle". 
The test can be successfully completed within the defined criteria, however cus¬ 
tomer driving styles may differ and therefore may not always monitor all involved 
components/systems in one "trip". 


12 


ST055 Emissions Overview 



Drive Cycle 

The following diagram shows how a drive cycle is set (test drive) in order for all the systems 
to be monitored once. The test conditions can be created in any desired order after start¬ 
up. 



1. Engine cold start, idling, approximately 3 minutes. Evaluated: 

• Secondary Air System 

• Evaporative Leak Detection (LDP Equipped Vehicles) 


2. Constant driving at 20 to 30 MPH, approximately 4 minutes. Evaluated: 

• Oxygen Sensors - Achieved “Closed Loop” Operation 

• Oxygen Sensors - Response Time and Switching Time (Control Frequency) 


3. Constant driving at 40 to 60 MPH, approximately 15 minutes (sufficient vehicle coast 
ing phases included). Evaluated: 

• Catalytic Converter Efficiency 

• Oxygen Sensors - Response Time and Switching Time (Control Frequency) 


4. Engine idling, approximately 5 minutes. Evaluated: 

• Tank-Leak Diagnosis (DM TL Equipped Vehicles after KL 15 is switched OFF) 


NOTE: The diagnostic sequence illustrated above will be interrupted if: 

• The engine speed exceeds 3000 RPM. • Large fluctuations in the accelerator pedal position. 

• The driving speed exceeds 60 MPH. 

13 

ST055 Emissions Overview 


















The “Malfunction Indicator Light” ( MIL) will be illuminated under the following conditions: 


• Upon the completion of the next consecutive 
driving cycle where the previously faulted sys¬ 
tem is monitored again and the emissions rele¬ 
vant fault is again present. 


• Immediately if a “Catalyst Damaging” fault 
occurs (Misfire Detection). 


The illumination of the light is performed in 
accordance with the Federal Test Procedure 
(FTP) which requires the lamp to be illuminated 
when: 

• A malfunction of a component that can affect the emission performance of the vehicle 
occurs and causes emissions to exceed 1.5 times the standards required by the (FTP). 

• Manufacturer-defined specifications are exceeded. 

• An implausible input signal is generated. 

• Catalyst deterioration causes PIC-emissions to exceed a limit equivalent to 1.5 times the 
standard (FTP). 

• Misfire faults occur. 

• A leak is detected in the evaporative system, or “purging” is defective. 

• ECM fails to enter closed-loop oxygen sensor control operation within a specified time inter¬ 
val. 

• Engine control or automatic transmission control enters a "limp home" operating mode. 

• Ignition is on (KL15) position before cranking = Bulb Check Function. 

Within the BMW system the illumination of the Malfunction Indicator Light is performed in 
accordance with the regulations set forth in CARB mail-out 1968.1 and as demonstrated 
via the Federal Test Procedure (FTP). The following page provides several examples of 
when and how the Malfunction Indicator Light is illuminated based on the "customer drive 
cycle". 



14 


ST055 Emissions Overview 





DRIVE 
CYCLE #1 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 2 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 3 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 4 

DRIVE 
CYCLE # 5 


* DRIVE 
CYCLE # 43 

TEXT 

NO. 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT 

CODE SET 

MIL 

STATUS 

FUNCTION 

CHECKED 

FAULT CODE 

ERASED 

MIL 

STATUS 

CHECK 

engine) 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

ENGINE 

[check 

ENGINE 

CHECK 

[engine 

CHECK 

ENGINE 







1 . 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

















2. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 














3. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

NO 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 











4. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 





5. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

\ 

1 

r 

/ 

6. 

YES 

YES 

OFF 

YES 

YES 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

ON 

YES 

NO 

OFF 

YES 

\ault/ 

ERASED 

OFF 


1. A fault code is stored within the ECM upon the first occurrence of a fault in the system 
being checked. 

2. The "Malfunction Indicator Light” will not be illuminated until the completion of the sec¬ 
ond consecutive "customer driving cycle" where the previously faulted system is again 
monitored and a fault is still present or a catalyst damaging fault has occurred. 

3. If the second drive cycle was not complete and the specific function was not checked 
as shown in the example, the ECM counts the third drive cycle as the “next consecu¬ 
tive" drive cycle. The "Malfunction Indicator Light” is illuminated if the function is checked 
and the fault is still present. 

4. If there is an intermittent fault present and does not cause a fault to be set through mul¬ 
tiple drive cycles, two complete consecutive drive cycles with the fault present are 
required for the "Malfunction Indicator Light” to be illuminated. 

5. Once the "Malfunction Indicator Light” is illuminated it will remain illuminated unless the 
specific function has been checked without fault through three complete consecutive 
drive cycles. 

6. The fault code will also be cleared from memory automatically if the specific function is 
checked through 40 consecutive drive cycles without the fault being detected or with the 
use of either the DIS, MODIC or Scan tool. 

NOTE: In order to clear a catalyst damaging fault (see Misfire Detection) from memory, the 
condition must be evaluated for 80 consecutive cycles without the fault reoccurring. 

With the use of a universal scan tool, connected to the "OBD" DLC an SAE standardized 
DTC can be obtained, along with the condition associated with the illumination of the 
"Malfunction Indicator Light”. Using the DISplus or MODIC, a fault code and the conditions 
associated with its setting can be obtained prior to the illumination of the "Malfunction 
Indicator Light”. 

15 

ST055 Emissions Overview 































































Readiness Code 


The readiness code provides status (Yes/No) of the system having completed all the 
required monitoring functions or not. The readiness code is displayed with an aftermar¬ 
ket Scan Tool or the DISplus/MoDIC. The code is a binary (1/0) indicating; 

• 0 = Test Not Completed or Not Applicable - six cylinder vehicles (not ready - V8 and VI2) 

• 1 = Test Completed - six cylinder vehicles (ready - V8 and VI2) 

A "readiness code" must be stored after any clearing of fault memory or disconnection of 
the ECM. A readiness code of "0" will be stored (see below) after a complete diagnostic 
check of all components/systems, that can turn on the "Malfunction Indicator Light” is per¬ 
formed. 

The readiness code was established to prevent anyone with an emissions related fault and 
a "Malfunction Indicator Light” on from disconnecting the battery or clearing the fault mem¬ 
ory to manipulate the results of the emissions test procedure (IM 240). 

Interpretation of the Readiness Code by the ECM(s) (SAE J1979) 

The complete readiness code is equal to "one" byte (eight bits). Every bit represents one 
complete test and is displayed by the scan tool, as required by CARB/EPA. For example: 

0 = EGR Monitoring (=0, N/A with BMW) 

1 = Oxygen Sensor Heater Monitoring 

1 = Oxygen Sensor Monitoring 

0 = Air Condition (=0, N/A with BMW) 

1 = Secondary Air Delivery Monitoring 

1 = Evaporative System Monitoring 

0 = Catalyst Heating 


1 = Catalyst Efficiency Monitoring 



Drive the car in such a manner that all tests listed above can be completed (refer to the 
drive cycle). When the complete "readiness code" equals "1" (ready) then all tests have 
been completed and the system has established its "readiness". 

16 

ST055 Emissions Overview 





Readiness Code using the DISplus/MoDIC 


The readiness code can be checked with the' 
DISplus/MoDIC. This is particularly helpful in ver¬ 
ifying that “drive cycle” criteria was achieved. A 

repair can be confirmed before returning 
the vehicle to the customer by a success¬ 
fully completed drive cycle. 

Using an MS43 system for example, the readi¬ 
ness code is found under “Service Functions” 

• Drive _> 

• Digital Motor Electronics 

• Diagnostic Function ^ 


I BMW 0%@mI!@ ©pcateisri mportssOedta 


Complete vehicle 
Component and signal information 
Service functions 
Drive 


Electronic transmission control 
Electronic car immobilization sysl 
Chassis 
Body 


isMfclMMite _i@G 

DME(DDE) - EWS-111 calibration KSl [Nor 
CO calibration 
Calibration, idle speed 
Calibration, consumption indicator 
Reset adaptations I ; 

Setpoint/actual-value comparison, id I 


Function test, mixed-up oxygen sen 
Activation, DMTL pump 



Examples of functions/components checked are shown below: 



The following preconditions must be met to ensure that ail tests are conducted: 
No problems defined before test drive. 

Any stored fault codes were worked through beforehand. 

Fault code memory of engine control unit has been deleted. 


Start test drive with vehicle cold (for secondary air system test) 

Drive vehicle at a constant speed within the range between 65 and 95 
km/h in 4th gear/selector lever position 4 for about 10 minutes (for oxygen 
' -. .'■ - ‘‘ino and catalytic converter monitorinat 



Fuel supply: 1 
Combustion misfiring: 1 
Oxygen sensor heating: 1 
Oxygen sensors: 1 
Secondary air: 1 
Fuel tank leak diagnosis: 1 
Catalytic converter: 1 
Evaluation: 0: not supported; 

1: supported 



ST055 Emissions Overview 













































































OBD II Diagnostic Trouble Codes (DTC) 


The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) established the Diagnostic Trouble Codes used 
for OBD II systems (SAE J2012). The DTC’s are designed to be identified by their 
alpha/numeric structure. The SAE has designated the emission related DTC’s to start with 
the letter “P” for Powertrain related systems, hence their nickname “P-code”. 


For example: 


P 0 4 4 0 


P-Powertrain, B-Body, C-Chassis - ' 

DTC Source; 0-SAE, 1-BMW - 

System; 0-Total System - 

1 -Air/Fuel Induction 

2- Fuel Injection 

3- Ignition System or Misfire 

4- Auxiliary Emission Control 

5- Vehicle Speed & Idle Control 

6- Control Module Inputs/Outputs 

7- Transmission 


Sequentially numbered 
fault identifying individual 
components or circuits 
(00-99) 


• DTC’s are stored whenever the "Malfunction Indicator Light” is illuminated. 

• A requirement of CARB/EPA is providing universal diagnostic access to DTC’s via a stan¬ 
dardized Diagnostic Link Connector (DLC) using a standardized tester (scan tool). 

• DTC’s only provide one set of environmental operating conditions when a fault is stored. 
This single "Freeze Frame" or snapshot refers to a block of the vehicles environmental 
conditions for a specific time when the fault first occurred. The information which is stored 
is defined by SAE and is limited in scope. This information may not even be specific to 
the type of fault. 


18 

ST055 Emissions Overview 



Scan Tool Connection 

Starting with the 1995 750iL, soon after on all 1996 model year and later BMW vehicles, a 
separate OBD II Diagnostic Link Connector (DLC) was added. 


The DLC provides access for an 
aftermarket scan tool to all emis¬ 
sion related control systems: 

• ECM - Engine Management 
Monitored Emissions Functions/ 
Components 

• TCM (AGS/EGS) -Transmission 
Control 

• EML - Electronic Throttle 
Control 

This diagnostic communication 
link uses the existing TXD II cir¬ 
cuit in the vehicle through a sep¬ 
arate circuit on the DLC when the 
20 pin cap is installed. 


DIS/MoDiC 
COMMUNICATE VIA: 

PIN 15 - RXD (Limited use) 
PIN 20 - TXD 
PIN 17-TXD II 



The DLC Connector bridging cap is marked “OBD II” and is found: 



- Driver’s Footwell Area 



NOTE: E38 and older models have a cosmetic cover and a secured DLC cover. 


19 

ST055 Emissions Overview 




















































































































20 Pin Diagnostic Socket Deletion 


Model and Production Date: E46 from 6/00 

E39, E52, E53 from 9/00 

For model year 2001 the E39, E46 and E53 will eliminate the 20 pin diagnostic connector 
from the engine compartment. The 16 pin OBD II connector located inside the vehicle will 
be the only diagnosis port. 


The E38 and Z3 will continue to use the 20 pin connector until the end of production. 


The 16 pin OBD II connector has been in all 
BMWs since 1996 to comply with OBD regula¬ 
tions requiring a standardized diagnostic port. 

Previously before 2001, only emissions relevant 
data could be extracted from the OBD II con¬ 
nector because it did not provide access to TXD 
(D-bus). 

The TXD line is connected to pin 8 of the OBD 
II connector on vehicles without the 20 pin diag¬ 
nostic connector. 



The cap to the OBD II connector contains a bridge that links KL 30 to TXD and TXD II. This 
is to protect the diagnostic circuit integrity and prevent erroneous faults from being logged. 



The OBD II connector is located in the driver’s 
footwell to the left of the steering column for 
E39, E46 and E53 vehicles. 

Special tool 61 4 300 is used to connect to the 
20 pin diagnostic lead of the DIS until the intro¬ 
duction of the DISplus. 


20 

ST055 Emissions Overview 




Diagnostics via the OBD II Connector 


DIS/MoDiC 

CONNECTOR 





21 


ST055 Emissions Overview 










































































BMW Fault Code (DISplus/MoDiC) 


• BMW Codes are stored as soon they occur even before the "Malfunction Indicator Light” 
comes on. 

• BMW Codes are defined by BMW, Bosch and Siemens Engineers to provide greater 
detail to fault specific information. 

• Siemens systems - one set from four fault specific environmental conditions is stored 
with the first fault occurrence. This information can change and is specific to each fault 
code to aid in diagnosing. A maximum of ten different faults containing four environmen¬ 
tal conditions can be stored. 

• Bosch systems - a maximum of four sets from three fault specific environmental condi¬ 
tions is stored within each fault code. This information can change and is specific to each 
fault code to aid in diagnosing. A maximum of ten different faults containing three envi¬ 
ronmental conditions can be stored. 

• BMW Codes also store and displays a "time stamp" when the fault last occurred. 

• A fault qualifier gives more specific detailed information about the type of fault (upper limit, 
lower limit, disconnection, plausibility, etc.). 

• BMW Fault Codes will alert the 
Technician of the current fault 
status. He/she will be advised if 
the fault is actually still present, 
not currently present or inter¬ 
mittent. 

The fault specific information is 
stored and accessible through 
DISplus/MoDIC. 

• BMW Fault Codes determine 
the diagnostic output for BMW 
DISplus/MoDiC. 


Change 


BMW Diagnosis DIAGNOSIS REQUESTS 


115 Hot-film air-mass flow 
Current type of 
Voltage Value 
The fault is not currently 
Detected 5 


First fault detection 
Engine speed 
Coolant temperature 
Throttle-valve angle 


Oh 24min ago 
600 rpm 
71 C 
4 degree 




<4 


Function 

Selection 


Document 




Test 

Schedule 


< ► 


22 


ST055 Emissions Overview 




OBD II Fault Memory and Fault Codes 


Within the framework of OBD II, a diagnosis of all emission-related components/functions 
must take place during driving. Faults will be stored and displayed if necessary. For this pur¬ 
pose, the ECM includes OBD II memory. The standardized P codes for malfunctions are 
stored in this memory. The memory can be read out with the DISplus/MoDIC or a Scantool. 

Emission Control Function Monitoring & Comprehensive Component Monitoring 

OBD II regulations are based on section 1968.1 of Title 13, California Code of Regulations 
(OCR), The law set forth in section 1968.1 requires an increased scope of monitoring emis¬ 
sion related control functions including: 

• Catalyst Monitoring 

• Pleated Catalyst Monitoring (currently used on BMW 750iL vehicles) 

• Misfire Monitoring 

• Evaporative System Monitoring 

• Secondary Air System Monitoring 

• Air Conditioning System Refrigerant Monitoring (Not applicable for BMW vehicles) 

• Fuel System Monitoring 

• Oxygen Sensor Monitoring 

• Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR) System Monitoring (Not applicable for BMW vehicles) 

• Positive Crankcase Ventilation (PCV) System Monitoring (Not required at this time). 

• Thermostat Monitoring (if equipped) 

Monitoring these emission requirements is a function of the ECM which uses “data sets” 
while monitoring the conditions of the environment and the operation of the engine using 
existing input sensors and output actuators. 

The data sets are programmed reference values the ECM refers to when a specific moni¬ 
toring procedure is occurring. If the ECM cannot determine the environmental and/or 
engine operating conditions due to an impaired or missing signal, it will set a fault and illu¬ 
minate the “Malfunction Indicator Light”. 

This input or control signal monitoring falls under another category called 

“Comprehensive Component Monitoring”. The ECM must recognize the loss or 
impairment of the signal or component. The ECM determines a faulted signal or sensor via 
three conditions: 

1. Signal or component shorted to ground. 

2. Signal or component shorted to B+. 

3. Signal or component lost (open circuit). 

Specific fault codes are used to alert the diagnostician of these conditions. 

23 

ST055 Emissions Overview 




Review Questions 

1. What is required to illuminate the “Malfunction Indicator” Light? 


2. What are the definitions and differences between TLEV, LEV and ULEV? 

• TLEV =_ 

• LEV =_ 

• ULEV = __ 

3. What is the OBD II Emission Compliance of a: 

• E46 M3_ • 2001 3.0 Liter E46_ • 1997 six cylinder E39_ 

4. What systems/components that are: 

Permanently Monitored Monitored Once per Drive Cycle 

• • 

• • 

• • 

5. Under what Operations “heading” (using the DISplus/MoDIC) will you access the 

Readiness Code status for an MS43 equipped E46? __ 

6. List the DLC connector locations in the following BMW vehicles: 

• E38_ • Z3 _ 

• Z8_ • E46_ 

7. What are the three conditions an ECM uses to determine a faulted signal/sensor? 

• 


24 


ST055 Emissions Overview 



