Table of Contents 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 

Subject Page 

Drive Away Protection.4 

System Components .4 

Door Lock Switch .4 

General Module.4 

Board Computer.4 

DME .4 

Principle of Operation .5 

EWS 1.6 

System Components .6 

Starter Immobilization Relay.6 

Door Lock Cylinders and Switch .7 

General Module.7 

Board Computer.7 

Transmission Range Switch .7 

DME .7 

Principle of Operation .8 

Input.8 

Output.8 

DWA (E31).8 

EWS II.9 

System Components .9 

Key with Transponder.9 

Ring Antenna.11 

Transmitter/Receiver Module.11 

EWS II Control Module .12 

DME .13 

Principle of Operation.14 

Replacement Procedures.16 

Keys.16 

EWS II Control Module .16 

DME Control Module .16 

Key Activation .16 


Initial Print Date: 4/06 Revision Date: 



































Subject Page 

EWS III (3.2) .17 

System Components .17 

EWS III (3.2) Control Module .17 

Input From The K-Bus.17 

Engine Speed .17 

Lock and Unlock Requests.18 

Code Function .18 

Range Selector Position .18 

Clutch Switch .19 

Principle of Operation.19 

Replacement Procedures.19 

Keys.19 

EWS III (3.2) Control Module .20 

DME Control Module.20 

Key Activation .20 

EWS III (3.3) .21 

System Components .21 

EWS III (3.3) Control Module .21 

DME Control Module.22 

Transmission Range Selection Input .22 

Principle of Operation.23 

Replacement Procedures.24 

Keys.24 

EWS III (3.3) Control Module .24 

DME Control Modules.24 

Key Activation .24 

EWS MID.25 

System Components .25 

Replacement Procedures.26 

Keys.26 

EWS III D Control Module.26 

DME Control Modules.26 

Key Activation .26 




































Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems (EWS) 

Model: All 

Production: From 9/1993 production 

■Biicmns 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the differences in the EWS systems. 

• List the components that make up the different EWS systems. 

• Describe the operation of each system. 

• Understand and relate the data exchange sequence between the EWS and 
DME. 


3 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 



Drive Away Protection 


The first version of Drive Away Protection was installed on production vehicles 9/93 
through 12/93. 

The purpose of the Drive Away Protection system was to reduce vehicle theft as man¬ 
dated by the European Insurance Commission to combat the high theft rate in European 
Countries. 

This first version of the Drive Away Protection System added a circuit from the General 
Module to the DME. The added circuit was spliced into the existing code function from 
the Board Computer (BC) to the DME. 

The components of the Drive Away Protection System are: 

• Door Lock Switch 

• General Module 

• Board Computer 

• DME 

System Components 

Door Lock Switch 

The door lock switch provides a 12V (High) signal to the GM when the vehicle is locked 
from the outside. The switch also provides a Low signal to the GM when the vehicle is 
unlocked. 

General Module 

The GM receives the lock and unlock signals from the door lock switch and signals the 
DME with a 12V High signal when the vehicle is double locked or with a Low signal 
when this vehicle is unlocked. 

Board Computer 

The Board Computer (BC) through its’ code function provides a High signal to the DME 
to disallow vehicle operation ora Low signal to allow vehicle operation. 

DME 

The DME looks for a High/Low signal from the BC or GM and dependent on the signal, 
it will either allow or prevent vehicle operation. 


4 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 




Principle of Operation 

When the vehicle is locked from the outside, a High signal is sent to the GM from the 
door lock switch. The GM receives this High signal and outputs a High signal to the 
DME. The circuit from the GM is spliced into an existing circuit from the BC to the DME. 

A High signal from the GM (or BC) causes the DME to cancel the fuel and spark func¬ 
tions to the engine resulting in a no-start condition. The vehicle must be unlocked with 
the key or the code function of the BC cancelled for the DME to allow engine operation. 


Lock 



Active 

Code Function 


ECM 


OV 


Note: The status pages of the ZKE and DME will show the condition of the Drive 
Away Protection signal as High/Active or Low/Not Active. 


5 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 





EWS I 


EWS I was installed on vehicles beginning production 1/94, replacing the original Drive 
Away Protection System. 

The next level of compliancy with the European Insurance Commission reguired addi¬ 
tional changes from the previous system. An additional component was added called the 
Starter Immobilization Relay. This relay module provides added theft prevention and 
safety features. 

At the time of introduction the system was referred to as Electronic Drive Away 
Protection which in German is Electronische Wegfahrsperre or EWS. 

The EWS I system consisted of the following components: 

• Starter Immobilization Relay 

• Door Lock Cylinders and Switch 

• General Module 

• Board Computer (if eguipped) 

• Transmission Range Switch 

• DME Engine Speed Signal (Beginning 6/94 Production) 

• DWA (E31) 

System Components 

Starter Immobilization Relay 

The Starter Immobilization Relay was installed on E31, E34 and E36 vehicles. 

It was in the following location: 

E36 -In the relay carrier to the left of the steering column. 

E31/E34 -In the “A” pillar above the footwell kick panel speaker. 

The Starter Immobilization Relay functions as a “Smart Relay”, a relay which receives 
inputs from various sources looking at the proper combination of input signals before 
activating a component, in this case the starter. 

The Starter Immobilization Relay receives input from: 

• Ignition Switch • General Module • Board Computer 

• Trans Range Switch • DME (>6/94) 

And processes output to: 

• Starter • DME 

6 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 







Door Lock Cylinders and Switch 

The door lock cylinders and switch input a High/Low signal into the GM informing the 
GM of lock status. The signal is High when the system is in Double Lock. 

General Module 

The GM receives the High/Low signal from the door lock switch and outputs a High/Low 
signal to the Starter Immobilization Relay. A High signal indicates the vehicle is in Double 
Lock. 

Board Computer 

The Board Computer outputs a High/Low signal to the Starter Immobilization Relay. A 
High signal indicates the Code function is active. 

Transmission Range Switch 

The Transmission Range Switch input with automatic transmission eguipped vehicles 
allows the Starter Immobilization Relay to provide a Neutral safety switch function. A High 
signal from the Trans range switch indicates the transmission is in Park or Neutral. A Low 
signal indicates the transmission is in a drive gear and will prevent starter operation. 

DME 

The DME is both an input device (after 6/94) and an output device of the Starter 
Immobilization Relay. 


Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 






Principle of Operation 

The EWS Starter Immobilization Relay receives it’s inputs from the Ignition switch, GM (or 
DWA), BC, Trans Range Switch and the DME (after 6/94). The relay will prevent engine 
starting if: 

• The vehicle is locked from the outside. The GM receives the High signal from the 
door lock switch and sends a High signal to the EWS. 

• The BC Code function is set. 

• A DWA High signal is received. (E31only) 

• A Low signal is received from the Trans Range Switch. 

• The engine speed signal from the DME exceeds 60Hz. (after 6/94) 

The Ignition and injection functions of the DME are disabled and the KL50 start signal to 
the starter is opened to prevent starter operation. 

Input 

Starting with production 6/94, the DME “TD” (engine speed) signal was added to the 
inputs of the Starter Immobilization Relay. This additional input allows the relay to provide 
a starter protection feature. The internal relay contact (starter operation) opens if the TD 
signal exceeds 60 Hz which eguals the following engine speeds: 

• 4 cylinder = 1800 RPM 

• 6 or 12 cylinder - 1200 RPM 

• 8 cylinder = 900 RPM 

The relay contacts will close when the exceeded Hz value drops to 5Hz below the maxi¬ 

mum value. This is intended as a safety feature to prevent starter motor activation when 
the engine is running above these speeds. 

Output 

The DME receives a High/Low signal from the Starter Immobilization Relay. When the 
signal is High, the DME does not activate injector or ignition operation. 

DWA(E31) 

The DWA outputs a High/Low signal to the Starter Immobilization Relay indicating the 
condition of the alarm system. A High signal indicates the alarm is armed, preventing 
vehicle starting. 

Workshop Hints: 

Starter Immobilization Relays are different for manual and automatic vehicles, check to ensure correct relay is 
installed. 

The Starter Immobilization Relay is not on the Diagnostic Link. Conventional troubleshooting techniques using the 
DISplus, a DVOM and the correct ETM are necessary. 

Loss of input from the GM or BC will allow the engine to start. 

Loss of input from the Trans Range Switch will NOT allow the engine to start. 


8 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 






EWSII 


Starting with 1/95 production, all vehicles were equipped with a new EWS system, 

EWS II. This change was once again brought about to meet the next level of compliancy 
with the European Insurance Commission regulations. 

Changes to the European Insurance Commission regulations made it necessary to intro¬ 
duce a new theft protection system with greater capabilities and a higher level of security. 

The EWS II system operates independent of the mechanical key. The mechanical key 
only makes a request of the vehicle starting system. Verification of the key electronically 
is required before the starting procedure is initiated. 

The system features wireless communication between a programmed EEPROM housed 
in the ignition key and the EWS II control module. A key which is properly coded to the 
EWS II control module is required before starting operation continues. The EWS II and 
the DME control modules are synchronized through an Individual Serial Number (ISN). 

The ISN, stored in the EWS II, must match that of the DME every time the ignition is 
switched “ON” before engine operation is allowed. 

EWS II was installed on E31, E34, E36, E38 and E39 vehicles. 

System Components 

The major components of the EWS II system are: 

• Key with Transponder 

• Ring Antenna 

• Transmitter/Receiver Module 

• EWS II Control Module 

• DME Control Module 

Key with Transponder 

Four keys are initially supplied with each vehicle. 

Each key contains a wireless electronic chip 
(transponder chip). The function of the transpon¬ 
der is to receive and transmit data to the EWS II 
control module. The transponder contains a wire¬ 
less read/write EEPROM in addition to a small 
capacitor and coil for self power capabilities. 



9 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 












Dl Splus GT1 


The functions of the EEPROM are: 

• Store codes for key identification, password 
and changing codes. 

• Receive and respond to coded messages from 
the EWS II control module. 

Power for the transponder is produced through the 
inductive coil and stored in the capacitor. Each time 
the key is inserted into the ignition AC voltage in the 
antenna ring induces voltage in the inductive coil. 

Note: • All keys either with remote or without, including wallet and valet 
keys contain transponders. 

• Keys have temperature operating range of -400 to 800C. 

• Keys are shock resistant from a height of 10 meters. 



10 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 





Ring Antenna 

The Ring Antenna is an inductive coil installed around the lock cylinder which provides 
power for the transponder in the key and the communication link (antenna) between the 
key and the transmit/receive module. 



Transmitter/Receiver Module 

The Transmitter/Receiver module supplies 
power to the transponder through the ring 
antenna and controls the flow of data between 
the transponder and the EWS II control module. 

Data transmission between the 
transmitter/receiver module and the transpon¬ 
der takes place over a radio freguency of 125 
KHz amplitude modulated AM signal. 


TRANSMITTER / RECEIVER MODULE UNDER DASH 



The transmitter/receiver module converts the analog data received through the AM signal 
to digital data and transfers it to the EWS II control module over a single wire bi-direction¬ 
al data interface. 


Note: • On E34 and E36 models the transmitter/receiver module is located 
under the dash near the steering column. 

• On E 31, E38 and E39 models the transmitter/receiver module is locat 
ed in the steering column cover on the right hand side of the column. 


11 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 















EWS II Control Module 

The EWS II Control Module is linked to the BC, GM, DME, Trans Range switch and the 
starter for drive away protection operation. The module incorporates an integral starter 
relay and stores data and codes for communication with the transponder chip. 

The function of the EWS II module is to provide improved drive away protection for the 
vehicle and it incorporates many features of previous systems: 

• Lock out of the starter when the code function of the BC is set. 

• Disable injection and ignition through the DME. 

• Prevent starter engagement with engine running. 

• Recognition of Park/Neutral position with automatic transmission. 

New features that have been added: 

• Disable injection, ignition and starter operation until a correct key is recognized. 

• EWS and DME synchronization through the use of the ISN. 

• Release of double lock when a correctly coded key is switched on. 

The EWS II control module stores the following data for the key transponder inter-link: 


• Key identification code- up to 10 keys. 

• Key password. 

• Changing code- up to 10 keys. 



12 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 







DME 

The DME is redesigned to incorporate the new 
ISN code. As of production 1/95 all DME control 
modules will contain the unique ISN number and 
will not interchange with previous DME’s. The fol¬ 
lowing new features are added to the DME: 

• Unique ISN assigned to DME during manu¬ 
facture, it can not be changed, altered or 
overwritten. 

• The BC code input to the DME is eliminated. 



• The DME and EWS II control module must be synchronized. The DME sends the 
ISN to the EWS II module which stores the number for replay to the DME. 


• The ISN received from the EWS II module during start-up is compared to the internal 
ISN of the DME. The numbers must match before the start operation is allowed to 
continue. 


• The ISN is sent to the DME continuously by the EWS II module with the key on. 

• The DME will ignore loss of the ISN after the engine is running. 

• The DME retains the ISN information from the EWS II module for 10 seconds after 
the ignition is switched off. Restarting or switching the ignition on within the 10 sec¬ 
onds cancels the key identification process. 


13 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 






















































Principle of Operation 

The starting sequence involves communication between all the components. 

Any break-down in the communication process will result in a no start condition. The 
sequence of events for vehicle starting is as follows: 

• The key is inserted into the lock cylinder and switched “ON”. The transmitter/receiv¬ 
er module is powered through KL R. The transmitter/receiver module sends a 

125kHz. AM signal to the ring antenna. The AM signal induces voltage in the key 
coil and powers up the transponder. 

• Powered up, the key transponder sends the key identification code to the transmit¬ 
ter/receiver module via the 125kHz AM signal (1). The transmitter/receiver module 
converts the AM signal to a digital signal and sends it to the EWS II control module 
( 2 ). 

• The EWS II control module verifies the key identification code and checks to see if 
the key is enabled (3). 


KL 30 



Converted 
To Digital 
Signal 

TRANSMITTER J_KL31 
RECEIVER 
MODULE 


KL R 


>">. 01010101 

JLfULTL 


EWS II 

© 

10001101 
00101101 
00000011 
11000001 
01010101 
11111100 
01111001 
11111110 
00000001 
01001100 


• Upon accepting the key as valid and enabled the EWS II control module sends a dig¬ 
ital password (4) to the transmitter/receiver module, which converts the data to an 
AM signal (5) and sends it to the transponder via the ring antenna (6). 



14 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 

























If the transponder accepts the password as correct the transponder releases the 
changing code (7) to the transmitter/receiver module which converts this AM signal 
to digital (8) and sends it to the EWS II module (9). 



If the changing code received by the EWS 
II module is correct, the status of the BC, 
transmission range switch and TD is exam¬ 
ined. With correct input status the internal 
starter relay is energized and the starter 
motor begins to operate (10). At the same 
time the EWS II module sends the ISN to 
the DME via the single wire communica¬ 
tion link (11). 

If the ISN code stored in the EWS II mod¬ 
ule matches that of the DME, the drive 
away protection is cancelled and injection 
and ignition is enabled. 

During the process of sending the ISN to 
the DME, the EWS II module sends a new 
changing code to the transponder through 
the transmitter/receiver and ring antenna. 
The transponder stores the changing code 
until the next starting sequence. 



: • The entire process takes place in under 750ms. 

• If the starter operates, the key has been recognized as OK and the key 
requires no further diagnosis. Check status of ISN in DISplus or MoDic. 

• Recognition of a valid key by the EWS II module causes it to send an 
unlock signal to the GM if the vehicle is in double lock. 


15 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 





























Replacement Procedures 


Keys 

Up to 6 additional keys may be ordered as replacement keys. The EWS II control module 
is codeable for only 10 keys (4 delivered with vehicle and 6 replacement). 

EWS II Control Module 

Replacement EWS II Control Modules must be ordered VIN specific. EWS II modules 
contain the VIN and coding from the factory to recognize the key codes. Modules from 
other vehicles will not recognize keys as being valid and not start the engine. 

EWS II Control Modules store the Central Coding Key (ZCS) and the VIN. If the EWS II 
control module is replaced the system must be ZCS coded (SIB 61 02 96 and TRI 61 01 
95). 

The EWS II module must be synchronized with the DME (aligned). There is no limit to the 
number of times the ISN may be changed in the EWS II module. 

DME Control Module 

The DME Control Module is not ordered VIN specific and must be programmed during 
replacement. The ISN from the new DME must be transferred to the EWS II module 
using the DISplus or MoDic. 


Key Activation 

Keys that are lost or stolen may be deactivated 
or made to not operate the starter functions. The 
SERVICE FUNCTIONS of the DISplus or MoDic 
for EWS II contains a “Bar/Release Code” func¬ 
tion that activates and deactivates keys of the 
EWS II. Any key may be “Barred” except the key 
in the ignition at the time of deactivation. The 
lost or stolen key can be identified by the identi¬ 
fication of the remaining keys. 

There is no limit to the number of times a key 
can be activated/deactivated. 




BMW Diagnosis BAR/RELEASE CODE 




Note: • Beginning MY 1997 E31 and E36 vehicles with manual transmissions 
were updated to include a clutch pedal position switch. The clutch 
switch signal is provided by a hall-effect sensor providing a high sig¬ 
nal when the clutch is depressed. 

• A “Barred” key will not start the engine, it will still unlock the vehicle. 


16 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 




























EWS III (3.2) 


The 1997 Model Year E38 is equipped with EWS III (3.2) drive away protection. E39 
vehicles produced 3/97 and later are also equipped with EWS III (3.2). 

The major changes of the EWS III (3.2) system over the EWS II are a modified control 
module, revised wiring and the addition of the clutch switch input. 

Output functions, starter control and ISN signal, remain the same for EWS III (3.2). 
Component changes are: 

• EWS III (3.2) Control Module. 

• Input From The K-Bus. 

• Clutch Switch. 

• Transmitter/Receiver Module Eliminated. 

System Components 

EWS III (3.2) Control Module 

The EWS III (3.2) Control Module has a 13 pin connector. The transmitter/receiver mod¬ 
ule is no longer a separate module of the system with the electronic functions for the 
data transfer between the key transponder and the EWS control module being handled 
directly by the EWS III (3.2) control module. The vehicle wiring harness has been 
changed to reflect this modification and to route the wiring from the ring antenna directly 
to the EWS III (3.2) control module. 

Input From The K-Bus 

Reduction in wiring has also been accomplished with the use of the K-Bus for data com¬ 
munication between the GM, Door Module, IKE and the EWS III (3.2) control module. 
This data link provides the following signals to be communicated on one wire: 

• Engine Speed. 

• Lock and Unlock Requests. 

• Code Function. 

• Range Selector Position (Redundant Signal). 

Engine Speed 

The DME outputs the engine speed “TD” signal over the CAN Bus to the IKE. The IKE 
uses the TD information as needed and passes it on to the EWS III (3.2) via the K-Bus. 


17 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 





SELECTED DISplus GT1 


Lock and Unlock Requests 

The lock and unlock information arrives at the GM over the P-Bus from the door module 
and is sent via the K-Bus to the EWS III (3.2) control module. This information informs the 
EWS control module the lock status of the vehicle (lock/double lock). The EWS III (3.2) 
control module signals the GM over the K-Bus that an authorized key has been recog¬ 
nized and requests the doors be removed from the double lock position. 

Code Function 

The code function status arrives at the EWS control module over the K-Bus. This infor¬ 
mation allows/disallows vehicle operation based on code status. If a code has been set 
and entered correctly during the start-up, the vehicle will operate normally based on the 
other inputs. Entering the code incorrectly will prevent vehicle operation. 

Range Selector Position 

Range selector position is still provided directly to the EWS III (3.2) control module from 
the Transmission Range Selector Switch. Redundant information is provided over the K- 
Bus in case of loss of signal from the range switch. 


18 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 



Clutch Switch 

A Hall-Effect Switch is added to the clutch system to inform the EWS III (3.2) control 
module of clutch status. Input from the switch replaces the signal from the Trans Range 
Selector Switch on manual transmission equipped vehicles. High signal status indicates 
the clutch is depressed and vehicle starting is allowed. 

Principle of Operation 

The starting sequence for the EWS III (3.2) is as follows: 

• The key is inserted into the lock cylinder and switched “ON”. The EWS III control 
module is powered through KL R and sends a 125kHz AM signal to the ring anten¬ 
na. The AM signal induces voltage in the key coil and powers up the transponder. 

• Powered up, the key transponder sends the key identification code to the EWS III 
module. The EWS III module verifies the key identification code and checks to see if 
the key is enabled. If the key is correct and enabled, a password is sent to the 
transponder over the 125kHz AM signal through the ring antenna. 

• When the transponders accepts the password, it releases the changing code, which 
it received from the EWS III module during the last start-up operation, to the EWS III 
module via the ring antenna. 

• The EWS III module compares the changing code received from the transponder 
with the code stored in its memory and if they match the process is allowed to con¬ 
tinue. 

The EWS III module looks at the other inputs for correct status (e.g. Code function 
not active, Transmission in P or N or clutch depressed, engine speed below speci¬ 
fied RPM) and energizes the the internal relay to begin starter operation. 

• As the starter begins to operate, the EWS III module sends the ISN to the DME and 
if verified as correct by the DME, drive away protection is cancelled and injection and 
ignition is enabled. The EWS III module also sends a new changing code to the key 
transponder through the ring antenna. 

Replacement Procedures 

Keys 

Up to 6 additional keys may be ordered as replacement keys. The EWS III (3.2) module is 
codeable for only 10 keys (4 delivered with vehicle and 6 replacement). The keys are 
mechanically matched to the vehicle with the lock tumblers and electronically matched to 
the EWS III (3.2) through unalterable coding. 


19 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 



EWS III (3.2) Control Module 

Replacement EWS III (3.2) Control Modules must be ordered VIN specific. The EWS III 
modules contain the VIN and coding from the factory to recognize the key codes. Use of 
EWS III modules from other vehicles will result in the keys not being recognized. 

The EWS III (3.2) control module stores the ZCS coding and must be coded at time of 
installation. The module must be aligned with the DME so that it stores the correct ISN. 

There is no limit to the number of times the ISN may be changed in the EWS III module. 

DME Control Module 

DME Control Modules are “off the shelf” parts that reguire programming during installa¬ 
tion. 

Part of the programming procedure is the transferring of the ISN to the EWS III (3.2) con¬ 
trol module. The DME is contains a non-changeable ISN during manufacture and must 
be transferred to the EWS III (3.2) module. 

Key Activation 

Keys that are lost or stolen may be deactivated or made to not operate the starter func¬ 
tions. The SERVICE FUNCTIONS of the DISplus or MoDic for EWS III (3.2) contains a 
“Bar/Release Code” function that activates and deactivates keys of the EWS III (3.2). Any 
key may be “Barred” except the key in the ignition at the time of deactivation. The lost or 
stolen key can be identified by the identification of the remaining keys. 

There is no limit to the number of times a key can be activated/deactivated. 

Notes: If the starter engages the following inputs are functioning normally: 

• Key 

• Code Function 

• Trans Range (Clutch Switch) 

• Engine Speed 


20 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 



EWS III (3.3) 


EWS III (3.3) is installed in the 1998 E38from 5/97 production, in the 1998 E39 from 
9/97 production, in the E46 beginning of production, in the E52 and E53 beginning of 
production. 

The purpose of the EWS III (3.3) system is to add greater theft protection by providing a 
higher level of sophistication than previous systems. The new “Rolling Code” provides 
an additional theft deterrent through a changing of the ISN every time the vehicle enters 
the start sequence. 

Components changed in the EWS III (3.3) system include: 

• EWS III (3.3) Control Module. 

• DME Control Module. 

• Transmission Range Selection Input. 

System Components 

EWS III (3.3) Control Module 

The EWS III (3.3) Control Module uses the same 13 pin connector as EWS ill (3.2) but 
functions differently. The EWS III (3.3) module has a “Rolling Code” ISN assigned to it 
during manufacture. The “Rolling Code” is burned into the module and cannot be over¬ 
written by ZCS Coding or DME alignment procedures. 

The “Rolling Code” is a one way signal from the EWS III (3.3) control module to the DME 
and is similar in operation to the data exchange between the EWS control module and 
the key transponder. 

The “Rolling Code” will be different each time the start operation is begun. The “Codes” 
are taken from the “Rolling Code Table” which is assigned at the factory to the EWS III 
(3.3) control module and the DME. 



21 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 









SELECTED 


DME Control Module 

The DME Control Module has changed in that it is not the source of the ISN but now 
only stores the “Rolling Code”. It compares the “Codes” to those sent to it by the EWS III 
(3.3) control module. The “Rolling Code Table” assigned to the DME must match the 
table in the EWS III (3.3) module. The “Rolling Code Table is “burned” into the DME dur¬ 
ing the programming of the DME and cannot be change once “burned”. 

Transmission Range Selection Input 

With the introduction of the SKE type connectors on Transmission Control Modules the 
direct input from the Transmission Range Selector Switch is eliminated. The input for 
range selection is now received from the AGS Control Module. 

On manual transmission vehicles clutch status is input directly into the DME. 

Note: If during diagnosis the key is switched on while the DME or EWS modules 
are “Disconnected”, the alignment procedure will need to be carried out. 
The “Alignment” procedure may be carried out an unlimited number of 
times. 


22 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 




Principle of Operation 

The starting sequence of the EWS III (3.3) is as follows: 

• The key is inserted into the lock cylinder and switched “ON”. The EWS III (3.3) con¬ 
trol module is powered through KL R and sends a 125kHz AM signal to the ring 
antenna. The AM signal induces voltage in the key coil and powers up the transpon¬ 
der. 

• Powered up, the key transponder sends the key identification code to the EWS III 
(3.3) module. The EWS III (3.3) module verifies the key identification code and 
checks to see if the key is enabled. If the key is correct and enabled, a password is 
sent to the transponder over the 125kHz AM signal through the ring antenna. 

• When the transponders accepts the password, it releases the changing code which 
it received from the EWS III (3.3) module during the last start-up operation to the 
EWS III (3.3) module via the ring antenna. 

• The EWS III (3.3) module compares the 
changing code received from the transponder 
with the code stored in its memory and if they 
match the process is allowed to continue. The 
EWS III (3.3) module looks at the other inputs 
for correct status (e.g. Code function not 
active, Transmission in P or N or clutch 
depressed, engine speed below specified 
RPM) and energizes the the internal relay to 
begin starter operation. 

• While energizing the internal starter relay, the EWS III (3.3) module calculates a 
stored code from the “Rolling Code Table” and sends the calculated results to the 
DME. 

• On receipt of the “Rolling Code” from the EWS III (3.3) the DME calculates it’s own 
stored code and compares its results with the code it received from the EWS III (3.3). 
If the “Codes” match the drive away protection is released and injection and ignition 
are enabled and the engine starts. 

If the “Codes” do NOT match, the DME “rolls forward” to the next code according to 
the “Rolling Code Table” and makes the same calculations. The DME continues this 
“forward roll” up to a maximum of 200 times or until a match is found. Failure to find 
a match will result in the engine cranking but not starting. 

• When the ignition is switched off and no engine RPM is present in both the DME 
and the EWS III (3.3) control module each module will automatically “roll forward” to 
the next predetermined code based on the “Rolling Code Table”. This new code is 
used for the next starting sequence. 



23 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 



Replacement Procedures 


Keys 

Up to 6 additional keys may be ordered as replacement keys. The EWS II control module 
is codeable for only 10 keys (4 delivered with vehicle and 6 replacement). 

EWS III (3.3) Control Module 

Replacement EWS III (3.3) Control Modules are ordered VIN specific. The module is 
received with the same “Rolling Code Table” as the original module. Once ZCS coded, 
the DISplus software “resets” the current rolling code in the DME back to “Rolling Code” 
#1, providing synchronization of both modules. 

DME Control Modules 

Replacement DME Control Modules are “off the shelf” and must be programmed for the 
specific vehicle. After programming the DISplus software informs the EWS III (3.3) control 
module that a new DME has been installed. The next time the ignition is switched on, the 
EWS III (3.3) module will send the entire “Rolling Code Table” to the DME and reset it to 
“Rolling Code” #1. 

The DME will automatically burn the “Rolling Code Table” into its memory. Once the 
table has been burned into the DME memory it can NOT be changed. For this reason 
once a DME is “Married” to the vehicle it will not work in any other vehicle. 

Under certain condition “Alignment” of the DME and EWS III (3.3) modules may still be 
necessary. The alignment procedure only resets the code table to code #1 it does not 
change the “Rolling Code Table”. 

Key Activation 

Keys that are lost or stolen may be deactivated or made to not operate the starter func¬ 
tions. The SERVICE FUNCTIONS of the DISplus or MoDic for EWS III (3.3) contains a 
“bar/release code” function that activates and deactivates keys of the EWS III (3.3). Any 
key may be “Barred” except the key in the ignition at the time of deactivation. The lost or 
stolen key can be identified by the identification of the remaining keys. 

There is no limit to the number of times a key can be activated/deactivated. 


Notes: 


While checking key operation, don’t forget to wait 10 seconds 
before inserting the next key. 

You can not BAR the key in the ignition. 

A dead key battery does not affect vehicle starting. 

Keys without replaceable batteries are not charged if the ignition 
is in the KLO (Off) position. 


24 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 



EWS III D 


EWS III D is installed on E36/7 beginning of production 99 Model Year. The system does 
not have a K-Bus input. The purpose of this system is to provide the highest level of 
drive away protection available to vehicles without a K-Bus. The input side of the control 
module functions the same as an EWS II (no bus inputs) system with the exception of an 
integrated EWS module and transmitter/receiver module. The output side functions simi¬ 
lar to an EWS III (3.3) system with “Rolling codes”. The EWS III D control module is on 
the D-Bus for diagnostics. 

System Components 

Individual component inputs and system operation is the same as the mentioned previ¬ 
ous systems. 



25 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 





Replacement Procedures 

Keys 

Up to 6 additional keys may be ordered as replacement keys. The EWS III D control mod¬ 
ule is codeable for only 10 keys (4 delivered with vehicle and 6 replacement). 

EWS III D Control Module 

Replacement EWS III D Control Modules are ordered VIN specific. The module is 
received with the same “Rolling Code Table” as the original module. Once ZCS codes, 
the DISplus software “resets” the current rolling code in the DME back to “Rolling Code” 
#1, providing synchronization of both modules. 

DME Control Modules 

Replacement DME Control Modules are “off the shelf” and must be programmed for the 
specific vehicle. After programming the DISplus software informs the EWS III D control 
module that a new DME has been installed. The next time the ignition is switched on, the 
EWS III D module will send the entire “Rolling Code Table” to the DME and reset it to 
“Rolling Code” #1. 

The DME will automatically burn the “Rolling Code Table” into its memory. Once the 
table has been burned into the DME memory it can NOT be changed. For this reason 
once a DME is “Married” to the vehicle it will not work in any other vehicle. 

Under certain condition “Alignment” of the DME and EWS III D modules may still be nec¬ 
essary. The alignment procedure only resets the code table to code #1 it does not 
change the “Rolling Code Table”. 

Key Activation 

Keys that are lost or stolen may be deactivated or made to not operate the starter func¬ 
tions. The SERVICE FUNCTIONS of the DISplus or MoDic for EWS III D contains a 
“bar/release code” function that activates and deactivates keys of the EWS III D. Any key 
may be “Barred” except the key in the ignition at the time of deactivation. The lost or 
stolen key can be identified by the identification of the remaining keys. 

There is no limit to the number of times a key can be activated/deactivated. 

Notes: With E46 Style diagnostics, check the following status’ in Diagnosis, 
Control Unit Functions, EWS: 

• Starter Status: Park/Neutral, BC Code active, Engine Speed, 

Double lock status, Starter Enabled 

• Key Status: Transmits, Changing code, Key I.D., Key number, 

Key Password, Key disabled 

• DME Wire Status 

• Selector lever/Clutch Status 

• Central Locking Status 

• Input Power 

• BC Code via K-Bus 


26 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 



EWS 

System 

Introduced 

Model 

Features 

One 

Touch 

Starting 

Drive Away 
Protection 

9/93 - 12/93 

All 

Injection/Ignition 
Disabled if car 

In Double lock 

No 

EWS 1 

1/94-1/95 

All 

Starter 

Immobilizer 

Injection/Ignition 

Disable 

No 

EWS II 

1/95 

E-36 To End of 
Production 
E36/7TO MY 

1998 

E-34 To End of 
Production 
E-38 To M.Y 

1997 

E-38 To 3/97 

Production 

Transponder 

Key 

Starter 

Interlock 

DME-EWS 

ISN Code 

E38 Late MY 
1997 

EWS III 

3.2 

9/96 

E 38 MY 97 

E39 From 3/97 
Production 

Transponder Key 

Starter Interlock 

IDME-EWS 

ISN Code 

K-Bus 

Yes 

V-12 and V-8 
Only 

EWS III 

3.3 

5/97 

E38 MY 1998 

From 5/97 
Production 

E39 From 9/97 
Production 

Transponder Key 

Starter Interlock 

K-Bus 

DME-EWS 

Rollinq Code 

Yes 

V-12 and V-8 
Only 

EWS III D 

MY 1999 

Z3 Only 

Transponder Key 

Starter Interlock 

DME-EWS 

Rolling Code 

No 


27 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 














Review Questions 

1. Why was Drive Away Protection introduced? 

2. What component was added in 1/94 to Drive Away Protection? 

3. Name the major components of EWS II._ 


4. Describe how th transponder chip in the key is powered. _ 

5. What were the main function of the Transmitter/Receiver module?_ 

6. What is an ISN and where does it originate?_ 

7. Describe the operations to be performed when replacing the EWS II module. 

8. What are the key differences between EWS II and EWS III (3.2)._ 

9. How many keys total may be coded to an EWS III (3.3) control module?_ 

10. Explain the operation of the “Rolling Code”. _ 


28 

Electronic Drive Away Protection Systems 



