Table of Contents 
Electronic Signals 

Subject Page 

Electronic Signals.3 

Purpose of Electronic Signals.3 

AC Voltage Signals .4 

Inductive Signals (Induced Voltage).4 

DC Voltage Signals .5 

DC Analog Signals.5 

DC Analog Sensors.5 

NTC Sensors.5 

PTC Sensor.6 

Potentiometers .7 

DC Digital Voltage Signals .8 

Switched B+ (High/Low) Signal .8 

Switched B- (High/Low) Signal .9 

Modulated Square Wave.10 

Frequency.10 

Pulse Width.11 

Duty Cycle.11 

DC Digital Sensors .12 

Hall Effect Sensors.12 

Magnetoresistive Sensors .13 

Designated Value Signals.15 

Coded Ground Signals .16 

DC Digital Input/Output Stages .17 

Transistor Final Stage Function.17 

Modulated, Momentary, Constant B- as Input/Output.18 

Momentary/Constant B+ as an Input/Output Signal.18 

Constant B-/B+To Energize a Component .19 

Modulated B-/B+To Operate A Component.20 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 3/06 































Electronic Signals 


Model: All 
Production: All 

ibjichwis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the operation of an Inductive Sensor. 

• Understand the difference between analog and digital signals. 

• Know the difference between NTC and PTC type sensors. 

• Explain the operation and use of different types of signals 

• Recognize signal types on the oscilloscope. 


2 

Electronic Signals 



Electronic Signals 


Purpose of Electronic Signals 

Electronic signals move information much like cars move passengers down the highway. 
It would be difficult to get to work without transportation, and there would be no trans¬ 
portation with out signals. 

Signals allow devices (e.g. sensors or switches) to communicate with control modules 
(either complicated processors or simple relays) which in turn perform or request 
(through more signaling) other functions to be carried out. 

Signals inform the Climate Control of the outside air temp or tell the brake lights the right 
time to illuminate. 

The use of electronic signals goes far beyond the basic application of electron flow to 
control components, enabling complex information to be passed from one component 
to another. 


The data (input or output) is conveyed through various forms of changing voltages, resis¬ 
tances, current or frequency modulation. 

Signals are divided into TWO main groups: 

• AC type signals 


DC type signals 



3 

Electronic Signals 


















































































































































AC Voltage Signals 


Inductive Signals (Induced Voltage) 

Inductive sensors produce an AC Sine Wave signal. The AC voltage is induced by the 
shifting of a magnetic field. The sensor consists of an impulse wheel (the moving part) 
and a coil wound magnetic core (the stationary part). 

As each tooth of the impulse wheel approaches the sensor tip, the magnetic field of the 
sensor shifts toward the impulse wheel and induces a voltage pulse in the windings. 

As the teeth move away from the sensor, the magnetic field shifts back inducing a voltage 
pulse in the opposite direction. 

This shifting of the magnetic field produces an alternating current (positive to negative). 

Control modules which receive this alternating current, count the impulses (shifts from 
positive to negative) and interpret the speed of rotation of the impulse wheel. 





□ 


Note: Voltage levels are dependent on sensor design. Not all inductive sensors 
produce 12 volts. 


4 

Electronic Signals 





DC Voltage Signals 

Five Types of DC Voltage Signals Are Used: 

• Analog Signals 

• Digital Signals 

• Designated Value Signals 

• Coded Ground Signals 

• Transistor Signals 

DC voltage signals are based on either 5 volts 
or 12 volts. 

DC Analog Signals 

Analog signals transmit information through an electrical circuit by regulating or changing 
the current or voltage. 

The voltage of the signal has no fixed value. The value may be anywhere in the operating 
range of the signal. 

Three sources of analog signals are: 

• NTC Sensors 

• PTC Sensors 

• Potentiometers 



DC Analog Sensors 


NTC Sensors 

NTC (Negative Temperature Coefficient) sensors change resistance based on temperature. 


As the temperature goes up the resistance goes down. This decrease in resistance caus¬ 
es the voltage drop across the sensor to decrease and the input signal voltage at the con¬ 
trol module decreases. 


RKW TMtv^tam 0*cJta«cnp« 



Typical NTC Sensor Signal 



M. 31 


5 

Electronic Signals 













































































































PTC Sensor 

PTC (Positive Temperature Coefficient) sensors also change resistance based on tem¬ 
perature. In a PTC sensor as the temperature goes up the resistance also goes up. 
The increase in resistance causes the voltage drop across the sensor to increase and 
the input voltage signal at the control module increases. 

When troubleshooting a faulty input display, the input signal must be verified as 
“good” BEFORE the control module is replaced. 

When checking a NTC Sensor look for these voltages and problems: 

• Ov = no supply voltage or shorted to ground. 

• 2v = sensor is indicating a warm condition for system being measured. 

•4v = sensor is indicating a cold condition for system being measured. 

• 5v = sensor or wiring harness is open. 

Remember a PTC type sensor will indicate opposite results on intermediate readings 
(i.e. 4 volts = warm). 


Typical Application of NTC Type sensor: 

• Engine Coolant Temp Sensor 

• Transmission Temp Sensor 

• T-MAP Sensor 

• IHKA interior air temp sensor 

Notes: 


6 

Electronic Signals 



Potentiometers 

A Potentiometer produces a gradually changing voltage signal to a control module. The 
signal is infinitely variable within the operating range of the sensor. 

This varying voltage reflects a mechanical movement or position of the potentiometer 
wiper arm and its related components. 



7 

Electronic Signals 










DC Digital Voltage Signals 

Digital Signals transfer information through an 
electrical circuit by switching the current on or 
off. Unlike analog signals which vary voltage, a 
digital signal has only two possible states, con¬ 
trol voltage or 0 voltage. 

Two types of Digital Signals: 

• Switched (High/Low) Signals 

• Modulated Sguare Wave signals 



Switched B+ (High/Low) Signal 

This DC voltage signal produces an ON/OFF type input to the control module. The volt¬ 
age level will indicate a specific operating condition. 



8 

Electronic Signals 







Switched B- (High/Low) Signal 

This Ground Signal produces an ON/OFF type 
input to the control module. The voltage level 
will indicate a specific operating condition. 

The only difference between a switched B- and 
a switched B+ is the voltage in which the sig¬ 
nals are switched. 




Typical Application of Switched B- 

• Door Position Switch 

• Window Switches 

• Sunroof Switch 


9 

Electronic Signals 








Modulated Square Wave 

A Modulated Square Wave is a series of 
High/Low signals repeated rapidly. 

Like the switched signals (B+, B-) the square 
wave has only two voltage levels. 

A high level and a low level. 


n^mn 

A Modulated Square Wave appears as a 
High/Low signal repeated rapidly over and over. 


A modulated square wave has 3 characteristics that can be modified to vary the signal: 


• Frequency 

• Pulse Width 


• Duty Cycle 


Frequency 

The frequency of a modulated square wave signal is the number of complete cycles or 
pulses that occur in one second. This number of cycles or frequency is expressed in 
Hertz (Hz). 1 Hz = 1 complete cycle per second. 

An output function may use a fixed or varied frequency. 



Typical Application of Fixed and Varied Frequency 

Fixed Throttle command from EMS2000 to EDR 

Varied Hall effect crank sensor 

Hall effect wheel speed sensor 
Hall effect camshaft sensor 


10 

Electronic Signals 










Pulse Width 

The Pulse Width of a signal is the length of time a pulse is on. Vehicle systems may use 
fixed or varied ON times/pulse width. Pulse width is expressed in milliseconds (ms). 


Pulse Width: 

Time it takes for 
active portion of 
cycle in millisec¬ 
onds (ie. 50ms). 



Pulse Width 




Period: 

Time it takes for one full cycle in 
milliseconds (ie. 100ms). 


Duty Cycle 

The Duty Cycle of a sguare wave is the ratio of ON time to OFF time for one cycle. Duty 
cycle is expressed in %. 

Vehicle systems use both fixed duty cycle signals and variable duty cycle signals. 




10ms Period 


2ms 

20% Duty Cycle 


2.5ms 

25% Duty Cycle 


Time 

1 second = 1000 milliseconds (ms) 
1/4 second = 250 milliseconds 
1/100 second = 10 milliseconds 


1/2 second = 500 milliseconds 
1/10 second = 100 milliseconds 
1/1000 second = 1 millisecond 


11 

Electronic Signals 








DC Digital Sensors 

Hall Effect Sensors 

Hall Effect Sensors can be used to produce ON/OFF signals or modulated square wave. 

Hall Effect Sensors are electronic switches that react to magnetic fields to rapidly control 
the flow of current or voltage ON and OFF. It consists of an epoxy filled non-magnetic 
housing containing a hall element and a magnet, and a trigger wheel. 

The Hall element is a thin non-magnetic plate which is electrically conductive. (Voltage will 
flow through the plate.) Electron flow is equal on both sides of the plate. 

Since everything between the magnet and the hall element is non-magnetic the magnet 
(magnetic field) has no effect on the current flow. 

+ 




As a metal disk or solid area of a toothed wheel, flywheel or other trigger device approach¬ 
es the sensor, a magnetic field is created between the magnet and the disk. This magnetic 
field cause the electron flow to stop on one side of the plate. Electrons continue to flow on 
the the other side of the plate. 

The Hall Sensor Signal is a measurement of the voltage drop between the two sides of the 
plate or element. When the magnetic field increases (disc or solid toothed area in front of 
sensor) the voltage drop across the two sides of the element increases. High voltage on one 
side, low voltage on the other. The signal output from the sensor is High. 

As the disc moves away from the sensor the magnetic fields weakens and is lost. The loss 
of the magnetic field (blank toothed or open area of the wheel in front of the sensor) pro¬ 
duces very little voltage drop across the two sides of the element. The output signal is Low. 

A rapid switching of the voltage ON/OFF produces a HIGH/LOW signal that the control 
module uses to recognize speed and position. 


Typical Application of Hall Effect sensors 

• Crankshaft Sensors 

• Camshaft Sensors 

• Motor Position and Speed Sensors (e.g. Window Motor, Sunroof Motor) 


12 

Electronic Signals 




Magnetoresistive Sensors 

The active sensing of the Magnetoresistive Sensor is particularly suitable for advanced 
stability control applications in which sensing at zero or near zero speed is reguired. 

A permanent magnet in the sensor produces a magnetic field with the magnetic field 
stream at a right angle to the sensing element. 

The sensor element is a ferromagnetic alloy that changes its resistance based on the 
influence of magnetic fields. 

As the high portion of the pulse wheel approaches the sensing element a deflection of 
the magnetic field stream is created. This creates a resistance change in the thin film 
ferromagnetic layer of the sensor element. 



1. Metal Pulse Wheel 

2. Magnet 

3. Sensor Element 

4. Evaluation Module 

5. Support for Sensor Element 


6. Sensor Wiring With Weather Boot 

7. Ground Contact Ring 

8. Fastening Element 

9. Sensor Housing 

10. Pick-Up Surface 


13 

Electronic Signals 



5 


1 



Magnetoresistive Sensor 5 . Magnetic Field 


The sensor element is affected by the direction of the magnetic field, not the field 
strength. The field strength is not important as long as it is above a certain level. This 
allows the sensor to tolerate variations in the field strength caused by age, temperature, 
or mechanical tolerances. 

The resistance change in the sensor element affects the voltage that is supplied by the 
evaluation circuit. The small amount of voltage provided to the sensor element is moni¬ 
tored and the voltage changes (1 to lOOmv) are converted into current pulses by the 
evaluation module. 


mA 

14 

• Signal Low-7mA 

• Signal High-14mA 


The sensor is supplied 12V by the control unit. Output voltage from the sensor is 
approximately 10V. The control unit counts the high and low current pulses to determine 
the wheel speed. 


Typical Application of Magnetoresistive Sensor 

• Currently used for wheel speed sensors. 


14 

Electronic Signals 








Designated Value Signals 

Designated values are produced through fixed 
resistance positions of a multi-position switch. 
As the switch is operated the voltage drop 
across the resistor(s) of each switch position 
causes the voltage level of the input signal to 
change to a predetermined voltage value. 

These predetermined (designated) voltages 
signal the control module to perform specific 
functions. 


12V 


CJV 



switched 
values reflect 
each switch 
position 



15 

Electronic Signals 




Coded Ground Signals 

Coded ground signals produce a set of High/Low reguests, the combination (pattern) of 
which is interpreted by the control module to perform a specific function. 

Coded ground signals are generated through a switch or series of switches signaling the 
control module reguests for operation. 

Wiper Switch Schematic 



Typical Applications of Coded Ground Signals 

• Wiper Switch 

• Window Switch 


16 

Electronic Signals 
































DC Digital Input/Output Stages 


Transistor Final Stage Function 

The transistor takes on a number of applications that must be understood to effectively 
analyze a circuit. The transistor in operation functions as two parts much like a relay. Both 
the relay and the transistor control high currents with a low current signal. 


COLLECTOR 



Transistor 


COTTROL WORK 



Relay 


The transistor consists of three major sections: 

• Base 

• Emitter 

• Collector 

The base/emitter path functions as the control circuit activated by the control module to 
oversee or control the work. 

The collector/emitter path functions as the work side of the circuit, supplying power or 
switching on the work. 

In operation the transistor can either be switched ON momentarily, or supply a constant 
power or ground. The transistor can also be modulated or pulsed to supply a modulated 
square wave signal. 



17 

Electronic Signals 




Modulated, Momentary, Constant B- as Input/Output 

The input signal of control module 1 is an output signal of control module 2. 

Control module 2 through activation of its internal transistor provides a ground input for 
control module 1. 


The input signal at control module 1 is either a momentary/constant signal (i.e torgue 
convertor signal from TCM to DME) or a modulated signal (i.e. vehicle speed signal ASC 
to DME). 



Momentary/Constant B+ as an Input/Output Signal 

The input of control module 2 is controlled by control module 1 through internal 
activation of the transistor. Control module 1 provides power for the input circuit of 
control module 2. 



18 

Electronic Signals 






Constant B-/B+ To Energize a Component 
Constant B- 


Output function to energize a component. 

Relay is energized by activation of the transistor inside the module. The transistor 
provides a ground for the relay coil, control module. 



Control module output function to energize a component. 

Transistor controls output function of the control module. 

Control module supplies power to the relay. 

The relay is activated by the control module through activation of the transistor which 
provides a ground for the relay coil. 



31 -S- TO CONSUMER 


19 

Electronic Signals 







Modulated B-/B+ To Operate A Component 
Modulated B- 

Output function to operate a component. 

The idle valve motor is operated by the control module through activation of the transistor 
which provides a ground for the open winding of the valve. 


HOT IN RUN OR START 



The motor is controlled by a transistorized function of the control module, which provides 
a modulated voltage at a specific freguency to the motor. The throttle position is 
changed by altering the Duty Cycle of the pulses. 



20 

Electronic Signals 







Review Questions 

1. What are the two main groups of signals? _ 

2. The two parts of an inductive sensor are: _ 

3. The frequency of a signal indicates _ 

4. In a NTC sensor as Temperature increases, Resistance _ 

5. High resistance in a PTC sensor indicates hot or cold? _ 

6. A 5V measurement in a NTC sensor means? _ 

7. Describe the purpose of the three wires used on a potentiometer? _ 

8. How many voltage level possibilities does a Modulated Square Wave contain? 

9. The duty cycle of a square wave is the ratio of _ to _ time. 

10. Duty cycle is expressed in _ 

11. 50 milliseconds is equal to _ seconds. 

12. When is the signal on a Hall Effect Sensor high? _ 


21 

Electronic Signals 



