Table of Contents 
The Battery 

Subject Page 

Battery Construction. 4 

Battery Types.7 

How The Battery Works..8 

Common Battery Terms.10 

Battery Testing.12 

Battery Maintainence.15 

Battery Replacement.21 

Special Battery Systems.25 

Closed Circuit Current Draw Testing.32 

Review Questions.35 


Initial Print Date: 5/01 


Revision Date: 













The Battery 

Model: All 

Production Date: All 


Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Explain the battery components and construction. 

• Understand the different types of batteries. 

• Explain the chemical process of charging and discharging. 

• Know common battery terms. 

• Perform battery testing. 

• Properly charge a battery. 

• Know the procedures for the Battery Log Form. 

• Understand dual battery systems. 


2 

The Battery 







l4"rf»i'ii CiiiH 


(Efl. HB* 5 . NflU. STC-) 


CQH?1*T1TO 

1E.0. Light*, Mhtor ETC| 


uajPotmon 

©**? i 


Ji«vi|j*f T^rfrwtnl 


Piirt- i □I'.ti 111•.i11■:• 11 



KatfeHy 


All things electrical start at the Battery 


3 

The Battery 














The Battery 

Purpose of the Automotive Battery 


The battery is the primary EMF source in the automobile. In addition the battery performs 
the following functions: 

• Provides voltage and current for the starter motor. 

• Provides voltage and current for the ignition during cranking. 

• Supplies all electrical power when the charging system is not operating. 

• Supplies the extra power necessary when the vehicle’s electrical load exceeds the 
supply from the charging system. 

• Acts as a voltage stabilizer in the electrical system. The battery evens out voltage spikes 
and prevents them from damaging other components in the electrical system. 

• Provides power to KL30, KL15 and KLR. 


The battery does not store electrical energy. It stores chemical energy that is converted to 
electrical energy as it discharges. 


Battery Construction 

Modern automotive batteries are made of cases (usually 
plastic) containing alternating plates of Lead and Lead 
Dioxide (or Lead Oxide) separated by insulators. These 
alternating plates are connected in series to produce a volt¬ 
age of 12.6 volts, or about 2.1 volts for each set of Lead 
and Lead Dioxide plates. The negative terminal is connect¬ 
ed to a Lead Dioxide plate and the positive terminal to a 
Lead plate. 



The plates are covered with electrolyte which is a solution of 35% Sulfuric acid and 65% 
Water. 



1. Plastic container. 

2. Positive and negative internal plates made 
of lead. 

3. Plate separators made of porous synthetic 
material. 

4. Electrolyte which is a dilute solution of 
Sulfuric acid and water better known as 
Battery Acid. 

5. Lead terminals which are the connection 

point between the battery and whatever it 
powers. 


4 

The Battery 





Battery Case 

Most battery cases and their covers are made of polypropylene. The case is divided into six 
sections or cells, shaped similar to an ice-cube tray. 

The case is designed to: 

• Withstand hot and cold temperature extremes. 

• Resist damage caused by mechanical shock in automotive applications. 

• Resist acid absorption and chemical damage. 

The Grids 

The grids are the supporting framework for the 
active material of the plates. They also con¬ 
duct current to and from the active material 
plates. 


The Plates 

Plates are grids covered with a paste mixture 
of Lead Oxide and Sulfuric Acid and water. An 
expander material made of powdered sulfates 
is added to the paste to produce negative 
plates. 

A forming charge is applied to the positive plates converting the Lead Oxide to Lead 
Dioxide, a highly porous material which allows the electrolyte to freely penetrate the plate. 
A forming charge is also applied to the negative plates converting the Lead Oxide to 
Sponge Lead. The Sponge Lead allows the electrolyte to penetrate freely allowing the 
material beneath the plate surface to take part in the chemical reaction. 

The Separators 


Separators are thin sheets of electrically insu¬ 
lating porous material used as spacers 
between the plates to prevent short circuits 
within the cells. 

Fine pores in the separators allow ionic current 
flow in the electrolyte between the positive and 
negative plates. 

A cell: Cfllls unt ogn'iB^rf 

pDsilivB and n&lal ¥>£t 

nwgatva mates conr1i>d» Aldrich'/ 

with srf5.ni HID rs PfCntWIi Cell totte 

riant 

5 

The Battery 







































Elements 


In the most common method of construction, a stack of alternate positive and negative 
plates are formed with separators between each positive and negative plate. The lugs of 
the negative plates are welded together as are those of the positive plates. The plate strap 
of each group of plates is used to connect them in series with the plate group of the next 
cell, or with a battery terminal. 

The assembly resulting from placing one positive plate group and one negative plate group 
together, with separators is known as an element. There is one element per battery cell. 
More or larger plates per cell will increase plate surface area and increase capacity of the 
battery but will not affect the voltage output. 

Electrolyte 

The electrolyte is a mixture of Sulfuric Acid and Water. Electrolyte consists of 35% sulfuric 
acid and 65% water. 

The electrolyte is the carrier for the electric current to move between the positive and neg¬ 
ative plates through the separators. 

The Lead Terminals 

BMW’s use a tapered top terminal. This design uses tapered terminal posts built to indus¬ 
try standards so that all cable clamps will fit any battery with these posts. 

The positive terminal is slightly larger than the negative to minimize the danger of installing 
the battery in reverse. The positive terminal is 17.5mm in diameter at the top. The negative 
terminal is 15.9mm at the top. 


15.9 

mm 


17.5 

mm 



5510170.jpeg 


6 

The Battery 







Battery Types 


There are at least three types of the Lead-acid batteries that are currently used in the 
Automotive Industry. 

Lead-Acid Battery 

The three major contributors to battery chemistry are lead, lead dioxide and sulfuric acid. 
Pure lead is too soft to withstand the physical abuse of mobile applications, so a strenght- 
ener is needed. About 6% antimony, a semi metallic element produced as a by-product to 
copper and lead ore refining, is added to strengthen the lead. 

The antimony added to the grids acts as a catalyst and makes the loss of hydrogen and 
oxygen through outgassing worse. These batteries require frequent water replenishing. 

Lead/Calcium Battery 

Introduced in the 1970’s Lead/Calcium batteries have Calcium added to the positive and 
negative grids to reduce the outgassing. These batteries were first referred to as “mainte¬ 
nance free”. The Lead/Calcium batteries are not resistant to deep-cycling which occurs 
when a battery is drained to a very low voltage before being recharged. Frequent deep¬ 
cycling renders these batteries unable to sustain a charge. Lead/Calcium batteries need to 
be charged at higher voltage settings or they will not be recharged to full capacity. 

Hybrid Battery 

Hybrid batteries use a positive grid strengthened with antimony and a negative grid with 
calcium. The hybrid battery is more resistant to deep cycling than the lead/calcium, but still 
not as good as the original Lead-acid battery. Water usage is greatly reduced in the hybrid 
battery, although regular checking is advisable. Most cars supplied with hybrid batteries 
have their voltage regulators set to 14.3 volts. 

Hybrid batteries were first installed in the E30 convertible (SIB 61 12 91) during the 1991 
Model Year. 


7 

The Battery 



How The Battery Works 


Discharging 


Batteries don’t store electrical energy, they store chemical energy and convert it to electri¬ 
cal energy during the discharging process. 

Each cell of a battery contains positive and negative plates (grids). The positive plate is 
made of lead dioxide, the negative plate of a spongy lead. The negative plate combines 
with the sulfuric acid to create lead sulfate and one extra electron. The positive plate pro¬ 
duces hydrogen ions and sulfuric acid ions (positive ions, atoms missing one electron). 

The extra electrons from the negative plate are passed from the negative battery terminal 
and through the electrical consumer, back to the positive battery terminal. Once back at 
the battery, the free electrons combine with the positive ions at the positive battery termi¬ 
nal producing lead sulfate and water. 

It is important to remember that the system is closed. For every electron generated at the 
negative terminal, there is an electron consumed at the positive terminal. 

As the process continues, the active materials (lead and lead dioxide plates and the elec¬ 
trolyte) become depleted and the reactions slow down until the battery is no longer capa¬ 
ble of supplying electrons. At this point the battery is discharged. 


The discharge process changes the ratio of sulfuric acid to water in the electrolyte, as more 
water is produced in the discharge process. By measuring the volume of acid in the water, 
the state of charge of the battery is discovered. 


5510161 .jpeg 


Discharge Process 



Negative 

Sponge lead changing 
to Lead Sulfate. 


Positive 

Lead peroxide 
changing to 
Lead Sulfate 


Lights 


Horn 


Radio 


L\ 


Starter 


Ignition 


_ 


Electrolyte 

The sulfate of sulfuric acid unites with active material 
on plates leaving water and acid solution. Hydrogen of 
acid and oxygen of lead peroxide combine to form 
water diluting solution. 


8 

The Battery 









Charging 


Applying voltage to the battery from an external source such as the generator or battery 
charger reverses the chemical action in the battery. 

Reversing the chemical action in the battery, forces the free electrons at the negative ter¬ 
minal of the battery back into the electrolyte raising the sulfuric acid percentage. This chem¬ 
ical action removes the Lead sulfate that had formed on the negative plates leaving pure 
active material. 

The electrons that were forced into the electrolyte are able to react with the lead sulfate on 
the positive terminal again raising the Sulfuric acid content and leaving pure active materi¬ 
al on the positive plates. 

This process enables the battery to be used over and over again. 


Charging Process 


t 





Negative Plate 

Lead sulfate changes 
to sponge lead. 
Sulfate returns to 
electrolyte 



A 


Positive Plate 

Lead sulfate changes 
to lead peroxide. 
Sulfate returns to 
electrolyte 


Very dilute electrolyte made stronger 
by return of sulfate from plates. 


5510160 


9 

The Battery 





Common Battery Terms 





Teile-Nr. (Part No.) 61021 6 902 796 


12V 55AH 480A EN 555 080 048 

12V 90RC 425CCA SAE Group No . 47 


fur Ersatz (for replacement): 

Teile - Nr. 61 21 6 902 796 Nass (wet) 


95101104.eps 


Ah -Amp Hour Capacity 

This rating is derived from discharging a fully charged battery at a constant amp draw 
for 20 hours @ 80° F, without the voltage of the battery falling below 10.5 volts. The 
constant amp draw is multiplied by the 20 hours to come up with the Amp Hour Rating. 


• CCA -Cold Cranking Performance 

Represents the amperage capacity a fully charged battery can deliver @ 0° F for 30 
seconds before the voltage of the battery falls below 7.2 volts. 


• RC -Reserve Capacity 

Reserve capacity is expressed in minutes and relates to the amount of time a fully 
charged battery can maintain a constant draw of 25 amps @ 80° F before the voltage 
falls below 10.2 volts. 


• W -Watts 

The measurement of electrical power that the battery can deliver for a cold start. It is 
calculated by multiplying the starter amperage draw @ 0° F times 10 volts. 

• V -Volt 

Unit of measure of potential difference (Electrical pressure). 

• A -Amp 

The current flow in a circuit. Value is proportional to the number of electrons flowing past 
a point in one second. 

• Q -Ohm 

The measurement of the resistance of a component or circuit to current flow. 


10 

The Battery 







• Electrolyte 

The mixture of sulfuric acid and water. 35% sulfuric acid, 65% water. 

• Specific Gravity 

The measurement (by weight) of the volume of sulfuric acid in the electrolyte. A 
specific gravity of 1.275 (the specific gravity of a fully charged battery) means that the 
electrolyte is 1.275 times heavier than water. The specific gravity of water is 1.000. 

• Sulfate 

Deposits formed on the plates of the battery as the electrolyte gives up its sulfuric acid. 
Excessive deep cycling of a battery can cause a hardening of this deposit and make it 
impossible to return sulfate to the electrolyte. A sulfated battery is one which has these 
hardened deposits on the plates and cannot be recharged to full capacity. 

• OCV Open Circuit Voltage 

The measurement of the voltage of a battery across the terminals. 

Notes 



Original BMW 

Teile-Nr.(Part No.) 61 21 8 381 762 


12V 90Ah 720A EN 590 051 072 
12 V 175C 850CA SAE 


fur Ersatz (for replacement). 
Teile-Nr.61 21 8 381 762 neB (wet) 





ManUfaxtured for 
DETA-DOUGLAS 

BATTERIES, INC. 
by: 


DOULAS BATTEY 

Winston-Salem, NC 




551072-1 .eps 


J 


11 

The Battery 





















Battery Testing 


There are four steps to follow in testing an automotive battery: 

• Inspection 

• Removal of Surface Charge 

• State-of-Charge Test 

• Load Test 

Tools Needed 

To test a battery following tools are needed: 




5510112.jpeg 


12 

The Battery 


6510199.jpeg 


DVOM Digital Volt Ohm Meter 
Battery Load Tester (i.e. Snap On VAT 60) 

DISplus or MoDic 

Battery Draw Test Special Tool PN 61 2 300 

Closed Circuit Measurement Adapter PN 90 88 6 612 310 

Temperature Compensating Hydrometer 


5510173.il 







Inspection 

Visual inspection is important for the detection of obvious problems: 

• Loose Generator Belt 

• Low Electrolyte Level 

• Corroded Cable or Terminal Clamps 

• Loose Hold-Down Camps or Cable 
Terminals 

• Damaged Battery Case 

Removal of Surface Charge 

If the battery has just been recharged, or the car has been driven, eliminate any surface 
charge by one of the following methods: 

• Allow the battery to sit for 2-3 hours. 

• Turn the headlights on high beam for 5 minutes and wait 5 minutes after turning off. 

• With battery load tester, apply a load of 1 /2 the battery’s CCA for 15 seconds, then wait 
5 minutes. 

State-of-Charge Test 


Note: 

The proper electrolyte level is just covering the 
plates, not all the way to the top of the battery 
inspection holes. 


Open Circuit Battery Voltage 

Approximate State Of Charge 

Average Cell SG 

12.65 + 

100% 

1.265 + 

12.45 

75% 

1.225 

12.24 

50% 

1.190 

12.06 

25% 

1.155 

11.89 

0% 

1.120 


Use the table to determine the battery’s State-of-Charge. 

Pay special attention if the DVOM measurement of OCV is equal to: 

• 0 volts -Indicate an open cell. 

• 10.45 - 10.65 volts -Indicates a shorted cell. 


13 

The Battery 





For non-sealed batteries, check both specific gravity (SG) in each cell with a temperature 
compensated hydrometer and battery OCV, without the engine running. 

For sealed batteries, measuring the battery’s OCV (without the engine running) with an 
accurate DVOM is the only way to determine the state-of-charge. 

Batteries with a built-in hydrometer measure the state-of-charge in one cell only. If the indi¬ 
cator is clear or light yellow, the battery has a low electrolyte level and should be refilled 
before proceeding or replaced. 

A state-of-charge reading BELOW 75% using SG, voltage measurement or dark indicator 
in batteries with built-in hydrometers, indicates the battery must be recharged before pro¬ 
ceeding. 

Replace the battery if one or more the the following conditions are met: 

• More than 0.050 difference in the specific gravity readings between the highest and 
lowest cell (There is a weak or dead cell). 

• The battery will not recharge to 75% or greater state-of-charge or the built in 
hydrometer does not indicate good (green indicates 65% or better). 

• DVOM reading indicates 0 volts (Open cell). 

• DVOM reading indicates 10.45 - 10.65 volts (Shorted cell). 

Load Test 

A battery which has a state-of-charge of 75% or greater or has a “good” built-in 
hydrometer indication may be load tested. 

With a battery load tester properly installed, load the battery for 15 seconds to one of the 
following: 

• One-half (1/2) the CCA (Cold Cranking Amps). 

• Three (3) times the A FI Rating (Amp Flour Rating). 

The voltage on a good battery will NOT drop below 
9.7 volts during the battery load test. After the load is 
removed, wait 5 minutes, the battery should bounce 
back to 50% or greater state-of-charge. If a battery 
drops below 9.7 volts during the load test, does not 
bounce back or fails to start the engine, the battery 
should be replaced. Batteries which pass this test 
should be recharged to restore peak performance. 

14 

The Battery 


Load Test Conditions 

Tests assume electrolyte temperature of 
80°F, 26.7°C. 

If the electrolyte temperature is above 
80°F add .1 volt for every 10 degrees up 
to 100°. 

If the temperature is below 80°F sub¬ 
tract .1 volt for every 10 degrees to 40° 




Battery Maintainence 


Electrolyte Level 

If battery electrolyte level is allowed to drop substantially, the gas volume inside the battery 
grows proportionately resulting in an increased amount of flammable gas mixture. Any 
external or internal spark may result in an oxyhydrogen explosion. Additionally the plates 
are no longer covered by the electrolyte and may corrode. 

As described in SIB 61 01 90, battery electrolyte level should be checked on every 
Inspection I and Inspection II. 

Use only distilled water to top up the battery ! 

Tap water and electrolyte must never be used 
to refill or top off an automotive battery. 


Battery Cable Connections 

The top of the battery should be clean. 

Check for and correct corrosion on the top of 
the battery and the cable connections. 


Workshop Hint 

Many battery problems are caused by loose or 
corroded connections. Insure that cables are 
free from corrosion and tight before continuing 
diagnosis. 


Workshop Hint 

Electrolyte levels may drop at a higher rate in 
the winter months, due to higher loads and 
increased utilization of electrical systems 
(SIB 61 01 90). 


Battery Charging 

The purpose of charging a battery is to put back the energy that has been removed. 

A battery that is not properly charged will deliver sub-standard performance and display a 
shorter life span. 

A battery should be charged only after performing a visual inspection on the battery case 
and the electrolyte levels. Never attempt to charge a battery with a damaged case or low 
electrolyte levels. 

A state-of-charge test should be performed before attempting to charge a battery. 

Always connect the positive lead of the battery charger to the positive terminal of the bat¬ 
tery and the negative lead of the battery charger to the negative terminal of the battery. 

Unplug the the charger or turn it off BEFORE disconnecting the leads at the battery. 


15 

The Battery 





Batteries that are fully discharged should be charged according to the following table. 


Reserve Capacity Rating (RC) 

Slow Charge 

Fast Charge 

80 minutes or less 

15 hours @ 3 amps 

2.5 hours @ 20 amps 

80 to 125 minutes 

21 hours @ 4 amps 

3.75 hours @ 20 amps 

125 to 170 minuites 

22 hours @ amps 

5 hour @ 20 amps 

170 to 250 minutes 

23.hours @ 6 amps 

7.5 hours @ 10 amps 

Above 250 minuites 

24 hours @ 10 amps 

6 hours @ 40 amps 


5510174.eps 


The best charging method is to SLOWLY recharge the battery using the BMW approved 
battery charger. 

A slow charging rate allows more time for the electrolyte to penetrate the plates. 

Sulfated Batteries 

Continuous discharging of the battery or low electrolyte levels cause crystals to form on the 
plates. These crystals of lead sulphate occur when a battery is discharged. The deeper the 
discharge the more serious the sulphation. The sulphur molecules that form the sulphate 
are then absent from the electrolyte, causing the electrolyte to become inefficient. 

A battery relies on clean plates and strong electrolyte to both receive charging current and 
offer strong current discharge. A sulphated battery can do neither. Proper recharging of the 
battery will remove some but not all of the sulphate. Eventually the battery plates are coat¬ 
ed with enough sulphate that it is impossible to achieve an efficient recharge. 

Testing A Battery for Sulphation 

A battery which fails the load test should be tested for sulphation. To test a battery for sul¬ 
phation, place it on a battery charger for three minutes with the charger set on 40 amps. 
After three minutes check the OCV, if the reading is greater than 15.0 volts the battery is 
sulphated. Batteries which indicate a sulphated condition should be recharged slowly and 
retested before being discarded. 


16 

The Battery 























Battery Freezing 


A fully charged battery can be stored at sub-freezing temperatures with no damage. The 
battery is protected from freezing to a temperature of -75° F. A fully discharged battery 
however will freeze at +27°F. 

Avoid freezing by keeping the battery fully charged. 

Carefully inspect a battery which has frozen for a cracked case. 


Battery Maintenance (Center Vehicles) 

The battery charge is monitored while the vehicle is at the VPC and before it leaves on the 
transport. When the vehicle is having the QC I performed at the center the check list 
requires that the battery voltage be checked and maintained to 12.65V minimum. 

In order to facilitate tracking vehicles in inventory, BMW has in place a Battery Maintenance 
Program. The program uses : 

• Battery Log Forms 

• Battery Log Binder 

• Colored windshield stickers (red, green, yellow and white) 

The Battery Maintenance Program has three possibilities: 

• Vehicle in storage, battery disconnect switch removed 

• Vehicle in showroom or display 

• Vehicle in storage, Battery disconnect switch left in the vehicle 

Vehicle In Storage, Battery Disconnect Switch Removed 

A four week charging cycle has been established for these cases. All vehicles arrive with a 
color coded sticker on the windshield. The color corresponds to the week that the battery 
must be charged. Also the vehicle will be provided with a Battery Log Form. 

The “A” portion (Vehicle Receipt) of the Log Form must be completed during the QC I 
Display check and then has to be filed in the Battery Charge Log Book under the 
applicable color coded section. All the vehicles in that color section will have to be charged 
that week. 

Vehicle In Showroom or Display 

Because of the high consumer demand on vehicles that are being displayed and not 
driven, a four week charging cycle is not enough. For vehicles in the showroom the 
battery has to be charged as frequently as necessary to ensure that the battery never drops 
below 12.5V. Use the ”C” portion of the log form (Display Vehicle - Monitored Daily) to keep 
track of the charging and checking of the battery. 


17 

The Battery 



Vehicle In Storage, Battery Disconnect Switch Left In The Vehicle. 

Since the battery disconnect switch is left installed and in the “OFF” position the 3 month 
charge cycle can be used. Use the “D” section of the Battery Log Form to document when 
the battery is charged. 

Upon the sale of the vehicle, the Battery Log Form should be removed from the binder and 
placed in the vehicle file for future reference. 


VFCUSE; viN 


2000 

Battery Log Form 


Stock f 


Date: _/_ 


This Icrm r.hf-Jd hr fi Inrt aul v»hm the whcli- i*, 'cccivrtil .1*1 i.p.l.n a 1 gcLLn^riq 10 ihc- (wopcr prftfiurt.i'c 
(deploy vi ^Icrxp vehicle) It itoutd be plowed in I he vehicle hstpry fir when Mid. 

Mins Ip mti'tin' lHWtye F ’ «r> lecisnmMTkxi cfeejumenletl *mlh |hi^ form wl be tzm>ide«eci ■’uirkHjnl 
cjsltih ro 'hjH-f.i hV-i r.vi ry claims 


'■Linde Riy-i 'fil 


Mm 


Miv; nn in.wnJ 

hr+FChlnl [q 

Ltalc ii3L?mJ 


'.U \tahkk: In Stmge Cfuiigcd ELvctj h Wbrfco 


f Pi lo br rh#»]c rl tiring tve i 



Dec. i 


(Q) DkpUiy VahcJi? - MOTiKJJCKt DdPy 

Cnw 











¥0*4#* C-4VJF .mjn.y- 











fjijrijpil r. r 












DMi 











VoUgv 1 lilW c* wgr 











Uhll'JPJ Ilf 












18 

The Battery 




Battery Log Form Stockf _ 

Tins- -am should ha Hied oul vil'en the vtfuclc Is received end LpRJtrsd according Lo ihe draper procedure 
!■-=■ tMmj? , . , t. ,, n.k , i t JHjukl tw pltk-mJ m Ihr w^kIci Nslrtf Ite ntwi Hfcl. 

«M« H* (VliirK^ili beuwfe « recctf'rtifcrrtetl *■<! dwumwiw) #HI* IN& IKym wil I» ^[R--*x 

c.ilsi! lo rejfrc! pvarranty cl.hH!. 


WHxle Rec&pi 


Tvim 


Cwl 



Half nvi-i.r-ii 


U Vhhcli> In Storage - [ihnrged E- very 3 Mnnlhrt 


January 

(LH# 


rvb*t«*j 

turn 

Mbrtfi 

L4I".- 

Wl*S* 

Salor-fl 

r.r.vp. 

■i 

■ it ■.%} r- 

Ekltrc 

T.Kvip 

Bp 

VriHf* 

ttcf'JT 

r.Kirij# 

■ChppMl 

Hr 

Jtprf 

Qjii 

May 

Qm 

June 

Ullb 

YMlay* 

lili» 

■P 

riAmp.' 

nH.v f 

et&ys 

C. ;| v|nrf 

■P 

Ihrfon 

Ghtfj}* 

£h*>||*iJ 

■f 

July 

tut 

Adgu*r 

Owe 

Sepor-mlMf 

bit 

TiWIagi 

tuiln* 

□wp 

CIWQ«d 

Bp 

YUlxga 

0 +ftB* 

i'lwgi 

CfwD»d 

fip 

Vntjpi 

n«HV.ir- 

Lhuigi 

Own-id 

IVlpt—■ 

Dvlv 

Kill VI HI kiwi 

Ml 

1 hHHnilHK 

Dfifl 

Mli^* 



«nn *3 o 

CWOH 

tauiip 

r.rssiftiri 

iVliri 



Hflvr 

ep 

Mht 

t» 




Ch-p* 


rhjicf« 



((£■ [H^pMy Wftnicie - daily 


Dm- 











Uofclfp^ tW.-HP WlfP' 










Ourq#d lip 












OfllE 












L-r.-r 











(w>p! by 












Note: 

If the battery voltage drops below 11.6 v for three days or more the battery must be 
replaced before delivery to the customer 


19 

The Battery 







Battery Maintenance Flowchart 


Vehicle Received at BMW center 

I 


Quality Certification I 

* 


Check battery Voltage 
Charge if below 12.65V 
Complete section “A” of log form. 


Showroom Storage 


Condition 1 Condition 2 



(Delivery Check) 


• Remove Battery disconnect switch 

• Tighten battery ground cable nut to 15Nm (after switch removal) 

• Check charge of battery. Recharge if below 12.65V. 

If Battery Voltage has been below 11.65V for 
3 or more days, the battery must be replaced. 


Load test battery at 90% of DIN cranking current or 4x DIN rating for maximum of 
15 seconds and observe Voltage reading. 


Condition Condition Condition 



I 


Vehicle Prepared for Customer Delivery"* 

Move Battery Log Form to vehicle history file. 


20 

The Battery 








Battery Replacement 


Batteries determined to be defective through testing procedures should be replaced using 

the following guidelines. 

• Reconfirm battery is actually defective and it does not need charging. 

• Insure that ignition switch is in “Off” position and engine is not running. 

• Disconnect negative battery terminal first. 

• Place negative battery cable in a position so that it can not come in contact with 
battery during removal process. 

• Reinstall battery hold down clamp. 

• Install positive cable first. 

• Recheck output of vehicle generator and balance of electrical system for other 
problems. 

• Provide clear and concise description of the defect including cell readings, load test 
results and any other pertinent information which led to the battery replacement. 

• Tag battery with VIN and repair order number. 


Battery Failures 

An analysis of batteries replaced under warranty shows that many claims could have been 
avoided had the batteries been maintained in a full state of charge. 

Batteries must be maintained at all times when vehicles are at a retailer whether they are 
new cars, used cars, in storage (back lot), on display, or customer cars in for maintenance 
or repairs. 

Batteries replaced due to lack of maintenance will not be covered by warranty. 


Most Common Causes of Premature Battery Failures 

• Failure to maintain proper state of charge. 

• Loss of electrolyte due to overcharging or excessive heat. 

• Deep discharging (Leaving lights on or other parasitic draws). 

• Undercharging of battery. 

• Vibration (Loose battery hold down clamp). 

• Using tap water (instead of distilled water). 

• Corrosion. 

• Freezing. 


21 

The Battery 




Workshop Hints 

Safety Tips 

• Proper Clothing: 

-Always wear a face shield or safety goggles. 

-Plastic gloves can prevent acid burns to hands. 

• Neutralizing Electrolyte: 

Any leakage or spillage of battery electrolyte should be neutralized as soon as possible 
to prevent damage to paint, body or trunk linings. Depending on the amount of spillage 
dilute some baking soda in water and apply to areas of the car that have been exposed 
to the battery electrolyte. The neutralizing action will create some foaming in the area 
where the chemical action takes place. Flush with ample amounts of water once the 
chemical reaction has subsided. 

General Battery Hints 

• Add only distilled water NEVER TOP OFF WITH ACID. 

• Keep electrolyte level above plate separators. 

• Keep battery top clean and dry. 

• Keep open flame and metal objects away from battery top and terminals. 

• Keep vent caps tightly in place (if applicable). 

• Use proper charging equipment. 

Notes 


22 

The Battery 




Workshop Exercise 

1 . 

Vehicle Model:_ 

Record OCV and Battery Ratings:_ 

Perform Battery Test:_ 

Step A:_ 

Step B:_ 

Step C:_ 

Step D:_ 

What was the State-of-Charge prior to testing: 

At what amperage was this battery tested:_ 

What was the voltage after Load Testing:_ 

Did the voltage change after the waiting period: 


2 . 

Vehicle Model: _ 

Record OCV and Battery Ratings:_ 

Perform SG test with hydrometer:_ 

Record Results: 

Celll:_ 

Cell2:_ 

Cell3:_ 

Cell4:_ 

CellS:_ 

Cell6:_ 

What is the State-of-Charge of this battery: 

Are the SG reading within specified limits: 


23 

The Battery 





3. 

Vehicle Model:_ 

Record OCV and Battery Rating:_ 

Perform Battery Sulphation Test:_ 

Is this battery sulphated:_ 

A voltage reading during this test of 15V indicates: 

What should be done with a battery which fails this test:_ 

What would be the optimum charge rate and time to charge this battery in an attempt 
to recover the battery:_ 

Why is a slow charging time preferred:_ 

At what temperature would this battery freeze:_ 

Battery Notes: 


24 

The Battery 



Special Battery Systems 


Special battery systems are broken into two groups: 

• Vibration Compensating Battery Systems 

• Dual Battery Systems 

Vibration Compensating Battery Systems 


Vibration Compensating Battery Systems act as vibration absorbers, smoothing out road 
vibrations in the E36 and E46 convertibles. 


E36 : 

The E36 convertible is not only 
an energy source. The battery is 
designed as a vibration dampen¬ 
er. Due to this additional function 
the battery also has a special tray 
with an integrated vibration 
absorber. 

Note: E36 convertible batteries 
are labeled “Vibration Proof”. 
Replacement batteries must be 
of the same type. 


E46: 

The E46 convertible uses the 
same battery as the E46 sedan, 
coupe and touring. The battery 
box is specially designed to float 
on the vertical axis through three 
articulated rods. 

This allows the battery to act as 
an inertia mass and dampen var¬ 
ious vibrations while the vehicle is 
driven. 


5510131 .jpeg 



25 


The Battery 





Dual Battery Systems 
E31 (8501): 

The dual battery system on the 850i was introduced to handle the higher level of electron¬ 
ic technology with increased functions and safety features that were added to the vehicle, 
as well as the added diagnostic information. 

Design considerations were made to minimize electrical loads during Key Off and periods 
of driving with low engine speeds while certain timed operations (e.g. Glove compartment 
light, courtesy lights and seat heating) were active. 

Special testing and charging procedures exist for the dual battery system on the 850i, refer 
to SIB 61 10 90 and SIB 61 06 91 for specific information. 

E38 750iL: 

The dual battery system on the 750iL is necessary due to the addition of the E-CATs. 

If a single battery system was used, the E-CATs would be provided power from the single 
battery just after cold engine start-up when the battery is at its lowest capacity. This would 
increase engine loads due to charging of the single battery and cause an increase in injec¬ 
tor “On” time during the cold engine warm-up period, which result in unnecessary tail pipe 
emissions. 

Providing separate battery systems for the starting circuit and the vehicle circuits also min¬ 
imizes the possibility of a discharged starter battery ensuring reliable engine starting. 

Components of E38 Dual Battery System 

• Starter Battery: Located in the right rear trunk wheel, the starter battery is connected 
to the starter motor and to the heating coils of the E-CATs (via the E-CAT module). 

• Vehicle Circuit Battery: Located above the starter battery on a swing out mount, the 
vehicle circuit battery provides operating power for the balance of the vehicles electrical 
requirements and is directly connected to the vehicle generator. 

• Battery Isolation Switch: Located on the swing out mount of the vehicle circuit battery 
the battery isolation switch opens and closes the circuit between both batteries based 
on monitored conditions. 


Note: 

The battery isolation switch is NOT used to boost a discharged starter battery 
with the voltage of the vehicle circuit battery to start the engine. 

The battery isolation switch can only withstand a maximum current flow of 60 
amps. 


26 

The Battery 




Battery Isolation Switch 


The Battery Isolation Switch provides the vehi¬ 
cle with separate battery systems for the vehi¬ 
cle circuits and the starting circuit. 

When the isolation switch is open, the vehicle 
circuit battery is the only power source con¬ 
nected to the power distribution center. 

When the isolation switch is closed the starter 
battery is charged and the vehicle circuit bat¬ 
tery is boosted by the starter battery. 

Modes of the isolation switch: 

• Starting Mode 

-Normal Starting 
-Safety Starting 

• Driving Mode 

• Charging Mode 

• Sleep Mode 

Starting Mode 


5510137 .jpeg 



Battery isolation Vehicle circuit 

switch battery 

250 amp gener- Starter/E CAT 

ator circuit fuse battery 


When the isolation switch recognizes KL15 via the K Bus, it determines the voltage of the 
vehicle circuit battery. 


• If the vehicle circuit battery IS sufficiently charged, it proceeds with Normal Starting. 

• If the vehicle circuit battery IS NOT sufficiently charged, it proceeds with Safety 
Starting. 

Normal Starting 

• The isolation switch is open. 

• Within 0.5 seconds of engine start-up the E-CAT module energizes the E-CAT heating 
coils (program dependent) and simultaneously signals the isolation switch that the E- 
CATs are “On” via signal “KATON” (low signal). 

• Upon completion of the heating period, the E-CAT module signals the isolation switch 
that the E-CATs are off (High Signal). 


• Under normal conditions, the isolation switch is not closed before the heating 
procedure is finished. 


27 

The Battery 




Safety Starting 

• In response to a discharged condition of the vehicle circuit battery, the isolation 
switch closes to momentarily boost the vehicle circuit battery and supply all systems 
with starter battery voltage via the power distribution center. 

This operation lasts for a maximum of 30 seconds or until confirmation of engine start 
up is received. (TD signal on the K Bus) 

• Receiving the TD signals causes the isolation switch to immediately open for the dura¬ 
tion of the E-CAT heating cycle. 

• If the engine is not started within the 30 seconds, the isolation switch opens and 
remains open until KL 15 is recognized on the next start-up cycle. 

Driving Mode 

The vehicle circuit battery is permanently connected in parallel to the generator and is 
charged when the engine is running. When the isolation switch is closed, the generator 
simultaneously charges the starter battery. 

As the vehicle is driven the isolation switch cycles between open and closed based on: 

• Voltage values of both batteries. 

• Current transfer between both batteries as monitored by the isolation switch. 

• Internal temperature of isolation switch. 

Conditions Causing Switch To Open While Driving 

• Sufficiently charged starter battery. 

• Current flow through switch exceeding 0.5 amps. 

The starter battery will supplement vehicle electrical needs during periods of high 
demand (e.g continuous wiper operation combined with lights and blower). 

• The internal temperature of the isolation switch exceeds programmed maximum value. 

Conditions Causing Switch To Close While Driving 

• Monitored voltage of vehicle circuit battery exceeds that of starter battery by 0.7 volts. 

• The voltage of the vehicle circuit battery drops below 9 volts three times within one 
minute. 


28 

The Battery 



ADDITIONAL B+ TERMINAL 



r 

STARTER 


29 

The Battery 
































































































































Charging Mode (in the workshop) 

The isolation switch monitors starter battery voltage during key off conditions and contin¬ 
ues monitoring after the vehicle and the isolation switch have entered sleep mode. 

• If starter battery voltage exceeds 13.8 volts during charging in the workshop, the 
isolation switch comes out of sleep mode and closes. 

This causes the starter battery voltage to bleed off to the vehicle circuit battery, 
charging the circuit battery and protecting the starter battery from overcharging. 

The isolation switch remains closed until the next key on cycle. 



Vehicle circuit battery 
B + terminal 


Vehicle B Connection 


Starter Battery B + 
Terminal 

Sleep Mode 

The isolation switch goes into sleep mode as soon as the engine is switched off. The cur¬ 
rent draw of the isolation switch drops below 1 mA. The isolation switch comes out of sleep 
mode if: 

• KL15 is recognized 

• Starter battery voltage exceeds 13.8 volts (charging mode) 

Failure of KATON signal 

If the KATON signal is not received due to: 

• Open or short to B + - isolation switch closes for 4 seconds after start-up, TD received. 

• Short to B - isolation switch opens 60 seconds after receiving TD 


30 

The Battery 














Workshop Exercise 

1 . 

Vehicle Model: _ 

Access battery isolation switch through Diagnosis: _ 

Though Component Activation, check status of disconnecting switch: _ 

Trigger closing of disconnecting switch:_ 

Observe and record voltage change is system and starter battery and note change 
when status of switch is changed: _ 

What is the nominal resistance of the semiconductor switch with disconnect switch 

closed: _ 

Open:_ 

What is the temperature of the power circuit-breaker in the disconnect switch: 

How many Test Modules are available for the disconnect switch:_ 

Start engine and observe status of disconnect switch:_ 


31 

The Battery 



Closed Circuit Current Draw Testing 

Increased closed-circuit currents may occur permanently or intermittently and cause the 
battery to discharge prematurely. The increase in closed circuit current may be caused by 
a faulty control unit or by the installation of a non-approved accessory. 

In a situation where a vehicle has broken down due to a discharged battery, for diagnostic 
purposes it is important not to disconnect the battery. The control unit may reset if the bat¬ 
tery is disconnected. Following a reset, a faulty control unit may start functioning correctly 
again, making accurate diagnosis impossible. 


Tools Needed 

• Closed Circuit Current Measurement Adapter 

• MoDic Adapter 

• DISplus, MoDic or DVOM 

To correctly measure closed-circuit current, measurement adapter 61 2 300 (P/N 90 88 6 
612 300) should be used. This tool provides a bridge to ground, before the negative bat¬ 
tery terminal is disconnected, and this prevents the control units from being reset. 

The additional use of MoDiC adapter 61 2 310 (P/N 90 88 6 612 310) provides a method 
for current measurements over an extended period of time. 

The measuring device needed depends on the situation. 

The DISplus may be used in situations of suspected high current draw. 

The 1000 amp probe measures AC and DC current from 0 to 1000 amps. It is a self cali¬ 
brating inductive pick-up. (Use this pick-up with current draws over 10 amps) 

The DISplus, through MFK 1 is capable of measuring up to 2 amps. 

The MoDic is particularly suitable for extended measurements and provides a graphical 
readout of recorded measurements over time. It is recommended for the situations where 
the use of a multimeter provided insufficient information for problem diagnosis. 

The DVOM may be used for measurements up to 10 amps either with the measurement 
adapter or alone. 

Note: 

It is extremely important that the battery is NOT disconnected during the installation of test 
equipment. Disconnection of battery may cause faulty component to function normal. 


32 

The Battery 






Performing Closed Current Draw Test 

• Select proper measuring device (DISplus, MoDic or DVOM) 

-Remember amperage draw in excess of 10A will damage DVOM. 

-Use inductive amp probe of DISplus when amperage draw is high. 

-When using DISplus inductive probe, clamp on negative battery cable with 
-arrow pointing away from battery. Switch off all consumers. 

-(It is not necessary to disconnect B from body when using inductive probe) 

• Connect (-) test lead to negative battery terminal and (+) test lead to a known good 
ground. 


Ensure all systems are OFF ! 


POWER DISTRIBUTION 


• Be sure DVOM is on and set in 
proper mode. 

• Disconnect battery ground lead 
from body. 

• Observe meter reading, wait for 
vehicle to enter sleep mode. 

• Identify faulty circuit by disconnecting 
fuses, relays, control 

modules or connectors, 
observing meter readings. 


Defective circuit is found when 
current is below maximum closed 
current for vehicle being tested. 



CONNECT POSITIVE 
LEAD TO A KNOWN 
GOOD GROUND t 


DISCONNECT 
BATTERY GROUND 
FROM BODY POINT 


Maximum closed current by vehicle 

E31 

50mA 

E32 

50mA 

E34 

40mA 

E36 

30mA 

E38 

50mA 

E39 

40mA 

E46 

40mA 

E52 

50mA 

E53 

40mA 

Z3 

30mA 


Note: 

Refer to SIB 61 08 00 for complete instructions 
to perform closed circuit current measurement 
using measurement adapter and MoDic 
adapter. 


33 

The Battery 





Workshop Exercise 

1 . 

Vehicle Model: _ 

Perform Closed Current Draw Testing:_ 

Record current at: 

Initial: _ 

5 Minutes: _ 

10 Minutes: _ 

16 Minutes: _ 

2 . 

Vehicle Model:_ 

Customer Complaint: Battery goes dead overnight. 


Observations/Symptoms/Faults stored: 


Test steps/modules recommended by diagnostic program: 


Test steps/modules performed: 


Results: 


Repair Recommendation: 


Notes: 


34 

The Battery 



Review Questions 

1. What functions does the battery provide? 


2. What is electrolyte?_ 

3. A battery rating of 425CCA indicates what?_ 

4. What four steps are followed during a battery test? 


5. An OCV of 12.65 indicates?_ 

6. What would be the expected OCV for a battery with a shorted cell?_ 

7. A battery should be replaced if the SG readings vary by more than_per cell. 

8. What is the state-of-charge in a battery with a SG of 1.190?_ 

9. A battery should be load tested to the CCA rating. True _ False _ 

10. During a load test, the electrolyte temperature is 100°F, and the voltage drops to 

9.8 volts. Is this acceptable?_ 

11. Flow can a battery be tested for sulphation?_ 

12. What section of the Battery Log Form must be filed out during QC I?_ 

13. What is the most common cause of battery failure?_ 

14. When is it OK to add acid to a battery?_ 

15. Does the E46 convertible use a “Vibration Proof “ battery similar to the E36 

convertible?_ 

16. Why was a dual battery system added to the E38 750iL?_ 


35 

The Battery 



17. What is the maximum current flow the battery isolation switch can withstand?_ 

18. When does the battery isolation switch allow the vehicle circuit battery to boost the 

starter battery?_ 

19. What three conditions may cause the battery isolation switch to open while driving? 


20. When does the battery isolation switch come out of the sleep mode? 


21. How does current flow through the separators in a battery? 


22.As a battery is discharged, what happens to the electrolyte? 


24. What is the freezing point of a fully charged battery?_ 

25. Why should the battery NOT be disconnected while preparing for a closed current 

measurement test? _ 

26. During a closed circuit measurement test using a DVOM, the meter reading shows 

out-of-range. How is the test best completed?_ 


27. When charging a fully discharged battery with a RC rating of 90, the battery should 

be charged_@_. 

28. The starter battery is located above the vehicle circuit battery on a swing out mount 

True_False_. 

29. Which type of battery is more resistant to deep cycling than the Lead/Calcium? 


30. What is an OHM? 


36 

The Battery 



