Table of Contents 

The Charging System 

Subject Page 

The Purpose of The Charging System.3 

System Components.3 

Brush Type Generators.4 

Brushless Type Generators.6 

Voltage Regulator.7 

Charging System Principle of Operation.9 

Single Phase AC Voltage Generation.10 

Three Phase AC Voltage Generation.11 

Voltage Rectification.12 

Three Phase Voltage Regulation.13 

Charge System Indicator.16 

Generator Diagnosis.18 

Review Questions.22 


Initial Print Date: 5/01 


Revision Date: 
















Charging Systems 

Model: All 

Production Date: All 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Explain the purpose of the charging system. 

• Identify the components of the charging system. 

• Describe how AC current is rectified to DC current. 

• Explain the differences in the types of generators. 


2 

The Charging System 




Purpose of The Charging System 


The purpose of the charging system is to convert the mechanical energy of the engine into 
electrical energy that is used to recharge the battery and power the electrical accessories. 
When the engine is first started, the battery(s) supplies all the current required by the start¬ 
ing and ignition systems. 

As the battery drain continues and engine speed increases the charging system is able to 
produce more voltage than the battery can deliver. When this occurs, the electrons from the 
charging device are able to flow in a reverse direction through the battery’s positive termi¬ 
nal. The charging device now supplies the electrical system’s load requirements and 
recharges the battery. 

The charging system consists of 


• Battery 

• Generator 

• Drive Belt 

• Rectifier Assembly 

• Voltage Regulator 

• Charge Indicator 

• Ignition Switch 

• Cables and Wiring Harness 

System Components 

Battery 

The Battery is the primary EMF source in the automobile. The automotive battery is an 
electromechanical device that provides the potential difference (voltage). The battery does 
not store electrical energy. It stores chemical energy that is converted to electrical energy 
as it discharges. 

Generator 

The Generator produces free electrons necessary to charge the battery. The electron flow 
is produced through inductance, a magnetized rotor spinning inside a stator. The genera¬ 
tor produces AC voltage which is converted to DC voltage or rectified. 

Generator styles: 

• Brush Type 

• Brushless Type 


Note: 

In an attempt to standardize terminology in the 
industry, the term alternator is being replaced 
with generator. Often an alternator is referred to 
as an AC generator. 



Air or liquid (coolant) is used for generator cooling. 


3 

The Charging System 





Brush Type 


Brush Type generators consist of the following 
main components: 


• Generator Housing 

• Stator Assembly 

• Rotor Assembly 


Generator Housing 

The Housing is made of two pieces of die-cast 
aluminum. Aluminum is used because it is non¬ 
magnetic, light weight and provides good heat 
dissipation. 



...-Rectifier 

assembly 


6510101 .jpg 


Bearings for support of the rotor assembly are 
mounted in the front and rear housings. 


Stator Assembly 

The Stator is fixed to the housing of the genera¬ 
tor and does not turn. It contains three main sets 
of windings wrapped in slots around a laminated, 
circular iron frame. Each of the three windings 
has the same number of coils as the rotor has 
pairs of north and south poles. The coils of each 
winding are evenly spaced around the core. 


Stator neutral junction 



*Y' connection 

To diodes To diodes 



Y Connection 


The three sets of windings alternate and overlap 
as they pass through the core in order to pro¬ 
duce the required phase angles. 

Each group of windings occupy one third of the 
stator, or 120 degrees of the circle. 

The voltage produced by each loop of the stator 
is at a different phase angle, as a result the out¬ 
put of the stator is divided into three phases. 

Two common methods of connecting the 
windings are: 

• Y Connection 

• Delta Connection 

The parallel path of the Delta connection makes 
more current available. 


6510120.jpg 



Delta Connection 

6510121 .jpg 


4 

The Charging System 




Rotor Assembly 

The Rotor Assembly consists of the rotor shaft, 
a winding around an iron core, two pole pieces 
and slip rings. 

The rotor shaft is pressed into the core, then 
six-fingered malleable iron pole pieces are 
assembled on the shaft against each end of 
the winding core. 

The pole pieces are placed so that the fingers 
mesh but do not touch. When direct current is 
passed through the field coil winding, the fin¬ 
gers become alternately North and South 
poles. 


As a result of this arrangement of poles, the 
magnetic flux lines will move in opposite direc¬ 
tions between adjacent poles. 

(Flux lines always move from North to South.) 

This arrangement provides for several alternat¬ 
ing magnetic fields to intersect the stator as the 
rotor is turning. 



6510104.jpg 


A slip ring pressed on to the rotor shaft is con¬ 
nected to the two ends of the field winding. 

Two brushes are held by springs against the 
slip rings. One brush is connected through a 
switch to the battery B+, the other to the volt¬ 
age regulator. 

The brushes conduct only the field current 
(2 to 5 amps). 


Ignition switch 



5 

The Charging System 


Brushless Type 


Brushless Type generators are liquid cooled 
(coolant) and consist of the following main com¬ 
ponents: 

• Generator Housing 

• Stator Assembly 

• Rotor Assembly 


Generator Housing Water Cooled 

The Water Cooled Generator is housed in an 
encapsulated metal shell enclosure. The enclosure 
is installed an aluminum shell. 

The space between the inner surface of the shell 
and the outer surface of the generator creates a 
water jacket that engine coolant flows through. 
Coolant flows from the engine into the shell 
through internal ports and exits via hose connec¬ 
tions. 


Liquid cooling minimizes noise generation through 
elimination of generator cooling fan 


Stator Assembly 

Although different in appearance the Stator 
Assembly in a brushless generator performs the 
same functions as the brush type. 


3 4 13 5 6 7 8 12 9 10 11 



1. Pulley 

2. Rectifier 

3. Voltage Regulator 

4. Drive End Shield 

5. Generator Housing 

6. Coolant 

7. Coolant Housing 

8. Field Winding 

9. Stator Housing 

10. Stator Winding 

11. Rotor 

12. Non Magnetic 
Intermediate Ring 

13. Rotor Pole 


Rotor Assembly 



1. Rotor Shaft With Pole Core 

2. Left Pole-Finger Crown 

3. Non-,Magnetic Retaining Ring 

4. Right Pole-Finger Crown 


The brushless generator Rotor does not contain the field 
coil. The pole-finger crowns rotate around a fixed field coil 
and are magnetized by the flux field of the field coil. 

The two crowns form claw-pole half sections and are 
retained by a non-magnetic ring positioned below the pole 
fingers. 


6 

The Charging System 











Rectifier Assembly 


The Rectifier Assembly consists of six diodes, a pair of diodes for each stator winding. 
Each pair contain one positive biased diode and one negative biased diode. By using a pair 
of diodes that are reversed biased to each other, rectification of both sides of the AC sine 
wave is achieved. The negative biased diodes allow for conducting current from the neg¬ 
ative side of the AC sine wave and putting this current into the circuit as positive current. 
The use of positive and negative biased diodes provide for full wave rectification because 
both halves of the sine wave are used. 

Drive Belt 

It is the function of the Drive Belt to transfer rotating energy from the engine to the gener¬ 
ator. The drive belt rotates the rotor, spinning the magnetic field. A loose belt can inhibit 
charging system efficiency and a belt that too tight causes early bearing failure. 

Voltage Regulator 

Voltage Regulators prevent excessively high voltage output of the generator. Excessive volt¬ 
age would cause damage to the battery (through overcharging), light bulbs, motors, and 
particularly sensitive electronic components. 

The regulator prevents these problems by limiting the current output of the generator. 

Two types of regulators that are used: 

• Standard Regulator 

• Multifunction Controller 

Standard Regulator 

Electronic Voltage Regulators are mounted internally in the back of the generator assembly. 
Generator output is controlled by varying the amount of time the field coil is energized. 

The duty cycle of the field coil ground side is varied based on the demand placed on the 
electrical system. 

The electronic voltage regulator compares field current supply voltage (from the stator wind¬ 
ings through the diode trio) against a set voltage level ( using a zener diode). 

As the field current supply voltage surpasses the zener diode’s breakdown voltage, the field 
current to the rotor is switched off. When the field current voltage to the rotor is off, the gen¬ 
erator is not producing voltage. A rapid switching of the field current allows a fixed voltage 
output to be maintained. Additional diodes in the regulator, prevent current flow when the 
ignition is off preventing battery drain. 


7 

The Charging System 



Multifunction Controller 

In addition to voltage regulation, the Muti-function Control electronic regulator provides the 
following features: 


• Load response during start-up. 

• Load response during driving. 

• Fault display (under voltage, drive 
belt breakage, field coil interruption). 


The start-up load response system provides for the alternator exciter current (field coil) to 
be started by a transistor two seconds after the battery indicator goes out. This means that 
engine start-up is unaffected by generator induced drag. 

The load response during driving ensures that when large current consumers are switched 
on the generator output increases linearly allowing the DME/EML system to stabilize the 
engine speed and/or modify injection time if necessary. 


Note: 

Multi-function Control electronic regulators are 
available with and without start load response. 
The only difference is the time limitation of the 
rated current during the start procedure. 


Charge Indicator 

The purpose of the Charge Indicator is to advise the driver that the vehicle’s electrical sys¬ 
tem is not operating at peak efficiency and service should be performed. 

The charge indicator operates differently depending on which type of regulator the vehicle 
is equipped with. 

Standard Regulator 

The charge indicator operates on the basis of opposing voltages. If there is no output 
through the diode trio, then the lamp circuit is completed to ground through the rotor field. 
Diode output applies voltage to the previously grounded side of the bulb, turning the bulb 
off (No current flow with equal voltage on both sides of the bulb). 

Multifunction Controller 

The charge indicator is activated by an electronic switch integrated in the controller. This 
internal switch receives its voltage supply from KL15 of the 2 pin generator connector. The 
controller measures internally the difference in voltage between KL30 and KL15 and switch¬ 
es the indicator circuit low in case of a fault. 


8 

The Charging System 




Ignition Switch 


The Ignition Switch provides initial power for the field circuit of the alternator, reducing the 
time required for the field to develop the magnetic field. Depending on which type of regu¬ 
lator is employed the ignition switch supplies power to the charge indicator to check bulb 
integrity. 

Cables and Wiring Harness 

The Cables and Wiring Harness are used to deliver the voltage produced by the generator 
to the battery for storage, and to vehicle systems to supplement battery voltage. 


Charging System Principles of Operation 

Charging Systems (Brush or Brushless) use the principle of electromagnetic induction to 
generate electrical power. Electromagnetic induction occurs in a generator when a mag¬ 
netic field is rotated within a stationary conductor. The magnetic field can be generated by 
permanent magnets or as in the case of the automotive generator by powerful electro¬ 
magnets. 

Passing electric current through a wire or winding causes a magnet field to surround the 
wire or winding. The number of turns in the winding and the magnitude of the current flow¬ 
ing through the winding determine the magnetic field strength. 

The strength of the field is further increased by surrounding the coil with pole pieces. The 
poles will take on the polarity (North or South) of the side of the coil they touch or the ones 
they are closest to. The combined windings (field coil) and pole pieces are referred to as the 
rotor. Output of the generator is regulated through control of field coil intensity. 

An examination of single phase AC voltage generation, will aid in the understanding of 
3 phase AC voltage generation. 


9 

The Charging System 



Single-Phase AC Voltage Generation 


Single Phase AC Voltage Generation requires one stator frame 
with windings and one magnetic field (North and South pole 
pieces). 


Phase Stator 



As the North pole of the rotor pole piece approaches the wind¬ 
ing of the stator, induced voltage level in the stator begins to rise. 
The closer the North pole gets to the stator winding the higher 
the induced voltage. As the North pole reaches 90° to the stator 
winding the maximum amount of flux lines are acting on the 
winding, induced voltage is at its highest positive value (1/4 turn). 


The rotor continues to rotate and the North pole gets further a- 
way from the winding. The the voltage drops, until 0 voltage is 
induced through the stator (1/2 turn). 


With the South pole now approaching the winding voltage 
begins to increase negatively. When the South pole reaches 90° 
to the winding, again the maximum amount of flux lines are act¬ 
ing on the winding and induced voltage is at its greatest nega¬ 
tive value (3/4 turn). 


B 



3/4 Revolution 


The South pole continues to travel farther away from the wind¬ 
ing decreasing the negative voltage value until 0 voltage is again 
reached (1 full turn). 

This comprises one cycle or 360° rotation of the magnetic field. 


Sine wave produced by a single winding of the stator during a single 
revolution of one pair of pole pieces is called single phase voltage. 

10 

The Charging System 


E 



1 Revolution 




Three-Phase AC Voltage Generation 

Most AC generators use either a twelve or a fourteen pole rotor. Each pair of poles (North 
and South) produce one complete sine wave in each winding per revolution. 


Degrees of rotor rotation 


0 90 180 270 360 



Voltage phase B 


0 90 180 270 360 


N 

\ 

* 

\ 


> 

/ 

/ *' 
t 

\ 

• 

> 

7 r 

/ 

/ 

l_ 

J/ 

i 

/ 

* 

/ 



Voltage phase C 


\ J 

Y 

x \ 

„. a 

'' 

4 \ 

■'B‘% 

/ 

\ 

_^_ 

♦ 

> 

* 

* 

* „ # 

ta *■ 

it 

* 

< 

V- 

\ / 

\ / 

K 

y\ 

' / 
V 

y'' 


Three-phase voltage 


Voltage of each stator winding is added 
together to create three-phase voltage 


During one revolution a fourteen pole rotor will 
produce seven sine waves. (The stator has one 
winding (coil) for each pair of rotors.) 

The rotor generates three overlapping sine wave 
voltage cycles in the stator (one rotor three sets 
of windings in the stator). 



The total output would be twenty one sine wave 
cycles per revolution. (3 sets of stator windings, 
each with 7 coils) 


Sine wave cycle of a fourteen pole 
rotor and three phase stator. 

6510122.jpg 


11 

The Charging System 











Voltage Rectification 


The battery and the electrical system cannot 
store or use the 3-phase AC voltage produced 
by a generator, it must be rectified or converted 
to DC voltage. 

A diode rectifier bridge is used to make the con¬ 
version. 

The diode is similar to a non-return or one way 
valve which permits the passage of a fluid or gas 
in only one direction. 



In a simple conversion the rectifier diode sup¬ 
presses the negative half waves and allows only 
positive half waves to pass. 

To make use of the negative value half waves full 
rectification is applied. 

Full rectification of the negative half waves invert 
them into positive half waves. 

The result is a rectified pulsating direct current. 


6510143 


+16 


io (W WY\ 


-16 


Rectified Pulsating DC current 


6510137 


Three-Phase Voltage Rectification 

Six diodes are used to achieve three-phase AC voltage rectification. Three diodes are pos¬ 
itive biased and three are negative biased. 

The positive half-waves pass through the positive biased diodes and the negative half¬ 
waves through the negative biased diodes. 

Diode rectification of the negative half-waves invert them into positive half-waves. 


12 

The Charging System 






With full rectification DC voltage supplied to vehicle by generator is not ideally smooth, but 
exhibits a slight ripple. This ripple is further smoothed by the battery which is connected in 
parallel with the generator. 

The rectifier diodes in the generator not only convert the current but also prevent battery 
discharging through the 3 phase windings of the stator. Current flow can only take place 
from the generator to the battery. 



6510134 


Current flow through Y wound stator. 




6510123.jpg 


Rectified AC output has a ripple as 
seen on oscilloscope. 


6510135 


Current flow through Delta wound stator 


13 

The Charging System 







Voltage Regulation 


Standard Regulator 


The Electronic Regulator uses a zener diode that 
blocks current flow until a specified voltage is 
obtained. 

Sensing current from terminal 2 passes through 
a thermistor to the zener diode (D2). As the sys¬ 
tem voltage exceeds the breakdown voltage of 
the zener diode, current flows through the zener 
diode turning transistor 2 (TR2) on. 

With TR2 on transistor 1 (TR1) is shut off. 



Transistor 1 controls field current to the rotor. 

With TR1 off no current flows to the field coil and the generator has no output. 


A voltage drop below the breakdown voltage of the zener diode stops the current flow to 
TR2 which turns on TR1. 

Voltage is again applied to the field allowing the generator to produce voltage. 



Field coil off, no charging 


14 

The Charging System 













Multifuncton Controller 


The Multifunction Controller regulates voltage in the same manner as the standard voltage 
regulator. Regulation is through duty cycle control of the field coil. 

The differences as compared to the standard regulator are: 

• Manner in which malfunction indicator lamp is controlled. 

• Connections to wiring harness. 


B+ 



Terminal 1 

KL 15 from fused 
source. 

Terminal 2 

D+ (KL61) to DME. 

B+ 

Generator output to 
Battery. 



15 

The Charging System 















Charge Indicator System 


Standard Regulator 

The Charging System Indicator light operates on the principle of opposing voltage. Battery 
voltage is supplied to one side of the light bulb, the other side of the bulb is connected to 
the voltage regulator. With the key turned on, power is sent to the light bulb, through to 
the regulator. No voltage is being produced by the stator, so there is no voltage from the 
diode trio. This lack of voltage from the diode trio, allows the voltage from the ignition switch 
to flow through the regulator to ground. This completes the circuit allowing the charge indi¬ 
cator bulb to burn. 


As the generator begins to 



16 

The Charging System 








































Multifunction Controller 


The charge indicator light is activated by means of an electronic switch integrated into the 
controller. This switch receives its voltage supply from terminal 15 on the 2 or 3 pin con¬ 
nector on the generator. Terminal D+ is replaced by an isolated electronic terminal 61E in 
generators with a multifunction controller. The task on this terminal is to activate the battery 
charge indicator lamp and to indicate to the various loads that the generator is in charge 
mode. 

The indicator lamp is supplied with voltage via terminal 15 from the instrument cluster. The 
lamp is illuminated when the voltage at terminal 61E is below 1,5v and goes out when the 
voltage is above 8v. 

The indicator is on during the following conditions: 

• Key on, engine off 

• Generator not charging 

• Failure of drive belt 

• Interruption of field coil 

• Controller overvoltage 

• Break in charging cable 














Generator Diagnosis 


Before beginning any generator diagnosis, ensure that the battery is in good condition and 
has passed all testing procedures. A weak or defective battery will influence the generator 
testing. 


The generator may be tested using: 

• DISplus 

• VAT testing equipment. 


Testing Generator With DISplus 


Two modes of testing are available when using DISplus. 

• Testing using Test Plan 

• Testing using Preset Measurement 

Testing Generator Using Test Plan 

Testing the charging system using a test plan is the more complete method of testing. 
When selecting this mode of testing, other components in the charging system are tested 
in addition to the generator. 

Test plans available: 

• Generator (Checks voltage and current output) 

• Wiring from generator to battery (Performs voltage drop test) 

• Charge indicator lamp (Condition of bulb, wiring and signal to bulb) 

• ON delay and Start ON delay (If applicable) 

• Ground side circuit wiring (Voltage drop test) 


Sub-tests may be available with some of the com¬ 
ponent testing. 


There are many advantages to using the test plan. 

1. Complete system testing. 

2. Functional description of system on screen. 

3. Proper wiring diagrams provided during test¬ 
ing. 

4. Test instructions and notes. 

5. Instructions for proper test set-up. 

6. Display of nominal values. 

7. Solutions. 


|Print 11Change | |End _1 1 Services | 

BMW Test system Alternator test 


a|mv| 

< 


Cursor 1 


Memory 1 


ursor 2 1 

D> 

b|v 

▲ 















▲ 

16 

14 

12 

10 

8 

6 

4 

2 

0 














































































































































▼ 

◄ 














T 


-25 -15 -5 5 15 25 

-20 -10 0 10 20 

► 



.lloscope stimulators 


Workshop Hint 

Before beginning diagnostic procedures on the charging 
system do the following: 

• Run engine at idle speed for about 5 minutes. 

• Switch off all electrical loads. 

This is done to ensure the battery is charged to such a 
level that the generator will not be fully utilized and that 
loads required during starting (e.g. starter, secondary air 
pump) will be already switched off. 


18 

The Charging System 



















































































Testing Generator Using Measurement System 

Enter the measurement system and select Preset Measurements. 

Instruction on the proper hook-ups required are available through the HELP button, select¬ 
ing Help using Preset Measurement. 


The oscilloscope will display pre¬ 
configured for the testing. 

Diagnostic information available 
through oscilloscope. 

• Voltage Graph. 

• Charging Current. 

• Harmonic Content. 

• Rotation Speed (Engine RPM). 


Harmonic Content 

This is an expression of AC voltage 
contained in DC voltage. 

The higher the percentage of harmonic 
content the larger the amount of resid¬ 
ual AC voltage in the DC voltage. 

High residual AC voltage is caused by 
weak or failing diodes in the generator. 
Generators which have harmonic con¬ 
tent readings higher than specified (In 
TIS) should be replaced. 



VM 

i 

i/ 






j^Serv^e^J 


BMWMeasuringsystemOscilloscopedisplay 

a 



2rJ I Counter ] I Oscilloscotfl I Stimulator® preset 
U VI | setting H I_I |measurements|||| 


65101105.eps 

Signal Tests 

* Wire Tests 

* Potentiometer Tests 

Signal Measurements 

* Status Diagnostic Socket 

* Status of OBD Socket 

* Engine Speed Sensor Signal 

* TD Signal 

* Tl Injection Signal 

* Ignition Signal, Primary (Terminal 1 
Signal) 

* Ignition Signal, Secondary 

* Diesel NBF Signal 

* Diesel Engine Speed Sensor Signal 

* Terminal 4a Signal 

* Oxygen Sensor (Lamboda) Signal 

* Idle Actuator Signals 

* Throttle Valve Potentiometer Signal 

* Camshaft Sensor Signal 

Futher Measurements 

* Alternator Test 

* Absolute Compression 

* Relative Compression 

* Smooth Running 

* Xenon Headlight Test Up to 8/99 

* Xenon Headlight Test from 9/98 


19 

The Charging System 






























































































Workshop Exercise 

1 . 

Vehicle Model: _ 

Perform Vehicle voltage check using Preset Measurement, Status Diagnostic Socket (or 
OBD Socket):_ 

Print Results:_ 

2 . 

Vehicle Model:_ 

Perform generator test using Preset Measurement, Alternator Test: using Normal: 

Engine RPM:_ 

Charging Current:_ 

Harmonic Content: _ 

What is the nominal value for the harmonic content: _ 

3. 

Vehicle Model:_ 

Perform generator test using Preset Measurement, Alternator Test: using Direct Method: 

Engine RPM:_ 

Charging Current:_ 

Harmonic Content:_ 

What is the nominal value for the harmonic content: 


20 

The Charging System 



4. 

Vehicle Model: _ 

Perform generator testing using Test Plan:_ 

Compare results with Preset Measurements:_ 

Perform On Delay Test Plan:_ 

Perform Start ON delay Test Plan:_ 

Perform charge indicator light Test Plan:_ 

Perform Voltage Drop test on Ground side of circuit as per Test Plan: 


Charging System Notes: 


21 

The Charging System 



Review Questions 

1. Name the major components of the charging system. 


A. 

B 

C. 

D 

E. 

F. 

G. 

H 


2. A rotor assembly has 7 pairs of North and South Poles. How many coil windings will 

each winding in the stator contain?_ 

3. What is the purpose of the slip rings and brushes?_ 


4. Why are field coil windings in a brushless generator contained in the housing instead of 

the rotor assembly?_ 

5. Why are some generators now liquid cooled?_ 


6. What functions does the multifunction controller perform? 


7. The strength of a magnetic field is influenced by what two factors? 


8. How are the negative half waves converted to positive half waves? 


9. What is the biasing of the diodes used in three phase rectification? 


10. How does the standard voltage regulator control generator output? 


11. Explain the operation of the charge indicator lamp with a standard voltage regulator. 


12. Explain harmonic content. 


22 

The Charging System 



