Table of Contents 


Starting System 

Subject Page 

Starting System.3 

Purpose of the Starting System .3 

System Components .3 

Battery.3 

Ignition Switch.3 

Starter Motor Assembly.4 

Electric Starter Motor.4 

Solenoid .6 

Pinion Engaging Drive.6 

Starter Drive - Conventional .7 

Starter Drive - Gear Reduction.7 

Overrunning Clutch .8 

EWS.9 

Starter Safety Switch .9 

Cable and Wiring Harness.9 

Starting System Principle of Operation.9 

Electric Starter Motor.9 

Shunt Wound Motors .11 

Series Wound Motors.11 

Permanent Magnet Motors .11 

Compound Wound Motors.11 

Solenoid.12 

Pull-In Winding .12 

Hold-In Winding .12 

Pinion Drive .13 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 Revision Date: 3/06 




























Starting System 


Model: All 
Production: All 

■Biicmns 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the purpose of the starting system. 

• List and identify the components of the starting system. 

• Recognize the different types of starters. 

• Diagnosis starting system problems. 


2 

Starting System 


Starting System 


Purpose of the Starting System 

The purpose of the starting system is to convert chemical energy stored in the battery 
into electrical energy, then into mechanical energy in the starter motor. This mechanical 
energy is then transferred through gears and drives from the starter motor to the engine 
flywheel. 

After the transfer and conversion of all this energy the engine flywheel begins to rotate. 

The rotation must be of sufficient speed to allow the engine to form the combustible air- 
fuel mixture reguired for starting. It must be maintained during initial combustion long 
enough until the the engine can sustain operation. 

To accomplish this a starter or cranking motor is used. 

System Components 

The starting system consists of the following components: [. . 

• Battery ' if 

J SW/BL —_ 

• Ignition Switch A--T- 

■ EC ! Electronic mmobiUzar 
j I control unit 

• Starter Motor Assembly ‘'"~ J 

• EWS (if eguipped) . '2 1 

• Starter Safety Switch L Sr 

• Cables and Wiring Harness f- 

Battery 

The Battery is the primary EMF source in the automobile. The automotive battery is an 
electro-mechanical device that provides the potential difference (voltage). The battery 
does not store electrical energy. It stores chemical energy that is converted to electrical 
energy as it discharges. 

All energy for starting the car is drawn from the battery. State-of-charge, and capacity of 
the battery are important factors in the ability of the engine to start, especially in cold and 
harsh conditions. 

Ignition Switch 

The Ignition Switch provides a reguest to the EWS module to begin the starting 
seguence. The switch provides power to the EWS module only while the switch is 
held forward in the start position. When released, the switch springs back to the KL15 
position. 



3 

Starting System 







Starter Motor Assembly 

The Starter Motor Assembly is a DC motor which uses the interaction of magnetic fields 
to convert electrical energy into mechanical energy. 

The starter motor assembly consists of: 

• Electric Starter Motor 

• Solenoid 

• Pinion Engaging Drive 



Starter Motor Assembly 

1. Electric Starter Motor 

2. Solenoid Switch 

3. Pinion Engaging Drive 


Electric Starter Motor 

The Starter Motor provides the mechanical energy to rotate the engine through a direct 
or a gear reduction drive. 


The major components of the starter motor are: 

• Armature Shaft (1) 

• Armature Winding (2) 

• Armature Stack (3) 

• Commutator (4) 


Poles Shoes (5) 
Field Coil (6) 
Carbon Brushes (7) 
Brush Holder (8) 



4 

Starting System 




Armature 

The Armature assembly is comprised of the armature shaft, armature winding, armature 
stack and commutator. Thin iron stampings are laminated together to form the stack or 
core. The slots on the outside of the laminations hold the armature windings. The wind¬ 
ings loop around the core and are connected to the commutator. Each commutator seg¬ 
ment is insulated from the adjacent segments. The commutator may have up to 30 seg¬ 
ments. A steel shaft is insert in the center hole of the laminations with the commutator 
insulated from the shaft. 



Field Coils 

There are two types of field coils: 

• Electromagnetic 

• Permanent magnet 

Electromagnetic 

Wire ribbons or coils wrapped around a pole shoe, attached to the inside of the starter 
housing. The iron pole shoes and the iron starter housing work together to increase and 
concentrate the strength of the field coils. When current flows thought the field coils 
strong electromagnetic fields with North and South poles are created. 

Permanent 

Multiple permanent magnets manufactured from an alloy of boron, neodymium and iron 
are positioned in the starter housing. Use of permanent magnets allow for the elimination 
of the field circuit and windings and realize a 50% weight savings. 

Brushes 

Brushes are electrically conductive sliding contacts, usually made of copper and carbon. 

The brushes make contact with the commutator and as the starter begins to rotate the 
brushes reverse the flow of current to the armature. Starter brushes carry the full flow of 
current through the motor. 


5 

Starting System 





Solenoid 

The Solenoid assembly is an integral part of the starter and is actually a combined relay 
and engagement solenoid. 

The solenoid has two functions: 

• Pushing the pinion forward so that it engages in the ring gear of the engine. 

• Closing the moving contact, providing the main current path for the starter. 

The solenoid has two windings. 

• Pull-in winding 

• Holding-in winding 

Both windings are used to draw in the plunger and engage the pinon, only the hold-in 
winding is used to hold the plunger in position. 



Pinion Engaging Drive 

The starter’s end shield assembly contains the Pinion Engaging Drive with pinion, over¬ 
running clutch, engagement lever and spring. The drive mechanism is responsible for 
coordinating the thrust motion of the solenoid switch and the rotary motion of the electric 
starter motor and transferring them to the pinion. 

The starter engages the ring gear on the flywheel by means of the pinion. A high conver¬ 
sion ratio of pinion teeth to flywheel teeth (between 10:1 and 15:1) make it possible to 
overcome the high cranking resistance of the engine using a relatively small but high 
speed starter motor. 

As soon as the engine starts and accelerates past cranking speed, the pinion must auto¬ 
matically "de-mesh" in order to protect the starter. For this reason, the starter incorporates 
an overrunning clutch. 


6 

Starting System 



Starter Drive - Conventional 

In a Conventional Drive starter the pinion gear is located directly on the armature shaft. 
The pinion and overrunning clutch form the driver assembly. 

The driver assembly rides on a helical spline on the armature shaft so that when the dri¬ 
ver is thrust by the solenoid, a combined axial and rotary motion occurs which greatly 
facilitates the meshing of the pinion. 


1. Drive End Shield 

2. Engaging Lever 

3. Meshing Spring 

4. Driver 

5. Roller Type Overrunning Clutch 

6. Pinion 

7. Armature Shaft 



Starter Drive - Gear Reduction 

In their design and function, Gear Reduction Drives are much the same as conventional 
drive starters. The main difference in the gear reduction drive starter is a planetary gear 
set added between the field frame and the drive end shield. This design allows for the 
use of smaller and lighter starters. 





1. Planetary-Gear Carrier Shaft with 
Helical Spline. 

2. Internal Gear (Ring Gear). 

3. Planet Gears 

4. Sun Gear on Armature Shaft 

5. Armature 

6. Commutator 


7 

Starting System 



Overrunning Clutch 

In all starter designs the rotary motion is transmitted via an Overrunning Clutch. The over¬ 
running clutch allows the pinion to be driven by the armature shaft (or planetary gear set), 
however it breaks the connection between the pinion and the armature shaft as soon as 
the accelerating engine spins the pinion faster than the starter. 

The overrunning clutch is located between the starter motor and the pinion and prevents 
the starter motor armature from being accelerated to an excessive speed when the 
engine starts. 

Overrunning Clutch 

1. Clutch Cover 

2. Pinion 

3. Driver with Clutch Shell 

4. Roller R-ace 

5. Roller 

6. Pinion Shaft 

7. Coil Spring 

a. Direction of Rotation for 
Clutch Locking Action 




Fully assembled permanent magnet gear reduction starter 


1. Drive End Shield. 

2. Pinion 

3. Solenoid Switch 

4. Terminal 


5. Commutator End 
Shield 

6. Brush Plate with 
Carbon Brushes 

7. Commutator 


8. Armature 

9. Permanent Magnet 

10. Field Frame 

11. Planetary Gear 


12. Engaging Lever 

13. Pinion Engaging 
Drive 


8 

Starting System 








EWS 

The EWS system(s) is designed to provide electronic anti-theft protection for the vehicle 
through the use of coded keys and coded data communication between the EWS and 
the engine control module. The starter and engine control module are locked out until a 
properly coded key is recognized and the proper code is established between the EWS 
and the engine control modules. 

Because the starter relay is housed inside and controlled by the EWS control unit, the 
starter will not activate unless the EWS sees all inputs (keys, range selector switch, etc,) 
as correct. 

Starter Safety Switch 

The Starter Safety Switch is part of the transmission range switch on automatic transmis¬ 
sion vehicles and a clutch switch on manual transmission vehicles. 

The purpose of the switch is to prevent engine start-up with the vehicle in gear or the 
clutch not depressed. On vehicles with EWS, this signal is sent directly to the EWS 
module for processing. 

Cable and Wiring Harness 

Cables to the starter from the battery must carry large amounts of current. The wiring har¬ 
ness from the ignition switch and/or EWS carry little current as they are control signals to 
a relay or starter solenoid. Minimum voltage drop in starter cables is necessary to ensure 
sufficient starter speed and torgue. 

Starting System Principle of Operation 

Electric Starter Motor 

The Electric Starter Motor converts electrical current into rotary motion. In doing so it 
converts electrical energy into mechanical energy. The interaction of two magnetic fields 
produce this rotational force. 

The field coils (either electromagnetic or permanent) located in the housing produce 
magnetic flux lines. Within the stationary field coils is the armature, a loop of wire (a con¬ 
ductor) 

with one end connected to B+, the other to B-. When current is applied to the armature 
flux lines circle the loop in one direction on one side and in the opposite direction on the 
other side. The interaction of the flux lines on the armature and the flux lines from the 
field coil cause the armature to rotate. 

The armature will only rotate to the point where the magnetic force is egual on both 
sides. (Armature 90° to magnetic flux lines of field) 


9 

Starting System 



For the armature to continue to rotate, the polarity or direction of current flow must be 
reversed. 

Through the brushes and the commutator, the current flow is reversed as the magnetic 
forces become egual, causing the armature to continue to rotate. 


This constant reversal of current flow in the armature provides continual rotation. 



Loop is being force out of magnetic field Loop is being force out of magnetic field 


Direction of rotation is determined using Flemings Left Hand Rule. 

• Point your First finger in the direction of the 
magnetic Field (from N to S). 

• Rotate your hand about that finger until your 
second finger points in the direction of the 
Current (conventional current, from + to -)■ 

• Then your thumb points in the direction of 
the Movement of the wire. 


To increase the force on the wire (armature) do one of the following: 

• Use a larger current. 

• Use a stronger magnetic field. 

• Use a greater length of wire in the field. 

To increase torgue and speed in the starter motor, more windings in the armature are 
added, and the field has more pairs of magnets (either permanent or electromagnetic). 

Torgue and speed of the starter motor is dependent on the wiring of the field coils, (elec¬ 
tromagnetic coils) 

• Shunt Wound 

• Series Wound 

• Compound 


Flemings left hand rule 

The basic law of motors, the direction of force on a 
wire that is carrying current when it is in a magnetic 
field. 


Motion 

Field 



10 

Starting System 






Shunt Wound Motors 

In Shunt Wound Motors, the field coil is connected in 
parallel with the armature. The shunt motor does not 
decrease its torque as speed increases. Shunt motors 
do not produce high torque. 



Series Wound Motors 

In Series Wound Motors, the field coil is in series with 
the armature. 

The current flows to the field windings, then to the 
brushes, commutator, and armature back again to the 
ground side brush. A series wound motor will develop 
maximum torque output at the time of initial start, then 
as motor speed increases, torque falls off rapidly due 
to the CEMF. 

Permanent Magnet Motors 

Permanent Magnet Motors eliminate all wiring to the field coils. The magnetic field is 
generated by the permanent magnet without the need for winding and pole shoes. The 
magnets use flux-concentrating pieces to direct the magnetic field. 




Arrangement of permanent magnets 
(M) with flux concentrating pieces (F). 



Compound Wound Motors 

Compound Wound Motors have some of the field coils wired in series to the armature 
and some in parallel. This configuration allows the compound motor to develop good 
starting torque and constant operating speed. 

Note: CEMF - Counter Electromotive Force 

The voltage produced in the starter motor itself through electromagnetic 
induction. This voltage acts against the supply voltage from the battery. 
Motors must be designed to control the CEMF for optimum operation. 


11 

Starting System 



Solenoid 

The Solenoid performs the following functions: 

• Pull the pinion to engage the flywheel 

• Hold the pinion engaged with the flywheel during starting rotation. 

• Complete the electrical circuit from the battery to the brushes of the starter. 


1. Armature (relay) 

2. Pull-in winding 

3. Hold-in winding 

4. Solenoid armature 

5. Contact spring 

6. Contacts 

7. Terminal 

8. Moving contact 

9. Switching pin 

10. Return spring 

Two windings are used to pull and hold the pinion engaged to the flywheel. 

Pull-In Winding 

The stronger of the two windings, used to pull the pinion into engagement. 

This winding is released when the starter circuit is completed. 

Hold-In Winding 

Used to help the pull-in winding move the pinion initially, then holds the pinion engaged 
to the flywheel. 

Signal 50 is received at the solenoid, energizing both windings. The windings cause the 
armature to be drawn into the coils, pressing on a spring, causing the moving contacts to 
close. The pull-in winding is released, the starter begins to turn. When signal 50 is 
released, the power is lost to the hold-in winding, spring pressure forces the armature out 
of the coil, the moving contacts are opened and the pinion returns to the rest position. 

Note: Battery voltage is critical. 

The combination of the pull-in winding and the hold-in winding may 
have sufficient power to engage the pinion. When the moving contacts 
are completed and the increased load of the starter motor is added to 
the system, low voltage will cause the hold-in winding to release the 
pinion. If signal 50 is still present the pull-in winding will again assist 
in pulling the pinion into engagement and the cycle starts over again. 
This gives the “clicking” noise from the starter. 


• Cause the pinion to retract from the flywheel 

1 2 3 * 5 



ID $ 3 


12 

Starting System 



Pinion Drive 

The Pinion Drive gear is attached to the roller-type overrunning clutch which is splined via 
a helical shaft to the starter armature. At rest the spring pressure in the overrunning clutch 
wedge rollers between the pinion shaft and the clutch hub race. This locks the pinion to 
the clutch. During start-up the clutch and pinion rotate as one. 

As the engine speed exceeds starter speed, the pinion pushes the rollers, against the 
spring pressure, into a wider area. This movement of the rollers allow the pinion to turn 
independently of the starter armature, not causing the armature to over-rev. 

When the solenoid windings are released the clutch assembly is pulled away from the 
flywheel through spring pressure. 

Phases of Starter Operation 

1. Start Request Signal (KL50) 

2. Solenoid Switch 

3. Return Spring 

4. Field Windings 

5. Engaging Lever 

6. Overrunning Clutch 

7. Pinion 

8. Battery 

9. Armature 

Starter At Rest No Current Supplied 




Current Is Switched On 


Pull-in and hold-in winding energized. 

Pinion tooth meets gap in ring gear and meshes. 



Engaging lever in end position. 
Pull-in winding released. 

Pinion meshed. 

Main current flows. 

Engine is rotated. 


Engine Is Cranked 


13 

Starting System 







Review Questions 

1. Name the major components of the starting system. 


2. What is the purpose of the commutator? 


3. What is the purpose of the overrunning clutch?_ 


4. Explain Flemings Left Hand Rule. 


5. Why is the pull-in winding released when the starter circuit is completed? 


6. Explain the operation of the overrunning clutch. 


14 

Starting System 



