Table of Contents 

E65 Car Access System 

Subject Page 

E65 Car Access System .4 

CAS System Overview.5 

Legend for CAS Overview.6 

Components.7 

Ignition/Starter Switch (ZAS) .7 

Start/Stop Button.8 

CAS Control Unit.8 

“Ignition Key” (Remote Controls) .10 

Remote Controls.11 

Mechanical Key Integrated into the Remote Control.11 

Reserve Key with Adapter.11 

Key Management.11 

Principle of Operation.12 

Inserting, Locking and Releasing Remote Controls 

in Ignition Switch .12 

Automatic Ejection of a Remote Control.12 

Removing the Remote Control .12 

Terminal Selection.13 

Starting the Engine .13 

Switching off the Engine.14 

Incorrect Operation and "Emergency On".14 

Automatic Release with Missing Transponder.14 

Terminal Control .15 

Terminal Status in Vehicle Electrical System.15 

Hardware Redundancy.15 

Announcement of Terminal 15w “Wake-up” .16 

Announcement of Terminal 15 "on" .16 

Terminal 50 (Engine Starting).17 

Starter Motor Disabling .18 

Actuation Time of Terminal 50.18 

Terminal 50 E 

(Electronics-Signal of Starting Reguest to the DME) .19 

Terminal 50 L (Load-Starter Solenoid).19 


Initial Print Date: 12/04 


Revision Date: 


































Subject Page 

Auto-Park, Interlock and Shiftlock Functions.19 

EWS Functions .20 

Central Body Electronics Master Functions.21 

Central Locking System Master - CAS.21 

Window Control System Master - CAS .21 

Remote Control Services (FBD).21 

Redundant Data Storage .21 

Vehicle Order .22 

CBS (Condition Based Service) Data .23 

Vehicle Mileage Storage .23 

Workshop Flints.23 

Installation of a New CAS .23 

Replacement of Both CAS and Instrument Cluster 

(two new components).24 

Diagnosis .25 

Blocking Remote Controls.26 


















E65 Car Access System 


Model: E65, E66 
Production: All 

■Biiermis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the function and operation of the Car Access System 

• Understand EWS functions of CAS 

• Diagnose faults within the Car Access System 


3 

E65 Car Access System 


E65 Car Access System 

The Car Access System (CAS) controls access to the vehicle by controlling the master 
functions of the central locking system. It also controls the terminal statuses (KL R, KL 
15, KL 50) via the ignition/starting button. The EWS functions are also integrated into 
the CAS which allows for starting of the engine. 

The CAS is a new development and combines the components previously installed in 
separate control units or systems: 

• Ignition/starter switch 

• Electronic vehicle immobilization (EWS) 

• Functions of the central body electronics (ZKE). 

The major development goals were increased convenience and a new operating concept. 


Terminal Status Master: 

• KLR, KL15, KL50 

• Hardwire outputs 

• Bus telegrams 


Central Body 
Electronics: 

• Central Locking 
controller (main) 

• Window master 

• FBD functions 



EWS Functions: 

• Remote control 
identification 

• Rolling code ISN 

• EWS 3.3 


Gateway Functions: 

• Gateway between 
K-CAN-S and 
K-CAN-P 


4 

E65 Car Access System 




















Legend for CAS Overview 


Acronym 

Description 

Acronym 

Description 

Ml 

Starter 

LM 

Lamp Module 

KL15w 

Terminal 15 Wake-up 

MER 

Unlock motor 

KL30 

Terminal 30 

MHK 

Hood contact 

KL87 

Terminal 87 

MVR 

Locking motor 

BLS 

Brake light switch 

MZS 

Central locking motor 

CAS 

Car Access System 

OBD 

On-board diagnosis 

CLT 

Central locking button 

PM 

Power Module 

DME 

Digital Motor Electronics 

SCA 

Soft close automatic 

ER 

Unlocking 

SZL 

Steering Column Switch Center 

EGS 

Electronic Transmission Control 

TK 

Door Contact 

EKP 

Electric Fuel Pump 

TKL 

Fuel Filler Door 

FBD 

Remote Control System 

TMBFT 

Door Module passenger side 

GRL 

Trunk Light 

TMBFTH 

Door Module passenger side rear 

GRS 

Rotation rate sensor 

TMFAT 

Door Module, driver’s side 

HS 

Hotel Switch 

TMFATH 

Door Module, driver’s side rear 

IVM 

Integrated Voltage Supply Module 

TOEHK 

Trunk release button, outside 

K-CAN-P 

K-CAN Periphery 

TOEHKI 

Trunk release button, inside 

KiSi 

Child Proof door lock 

ZGM 

Central Gateway Module 



Z V 

Central Locking System 


6 

E65 Car Access System 



















































































Components 



Ignition/Starter Switch (ZAS) 

The ignition/starter switch is the electro-mechanical part of the CAS and consists of: 

• An ignition switch with an electromagnetic lock. 

• A start/stop button. 

• A coil for powering and communicating with the EWS transponder and for 
charging the battery in the remote controls. 


The ignition lock/start button (ZAS) is located in the instrument panel between the instru¬ 
ment cluster and the control display at the level of the trim strips. 

Light emitting diodes (LEDs) are integrated into the ignition/start button for illumination. 
The LEDs: 

• Illuminate the start/stop button and the ignition lock/remote control receiver. 

• Are switched on by the CAS from the "wake-up" signal. 

• The LEDs are switched on as long as the bus is active (Useful for diagnosis of the 
bus sleep mode: when the LEDs light up, the bus is active). 


1. Start/Stop Button 

2. Ignition Lock/Remote 
Control Receiver 


7 

E65 Car Access System 



Using the ignition/starter switch (ZAS) and the remote controls: 

• The vehicle is started. 

• The different terminal statuses are selected (KL30, KL R, KL 15, KL 50). 

Start/Stop Button 

The various terminals are no longer actuated by turning an ignition key, but instead by 
touching the start/stop button. The vehicle is also started and shut-off with the start/stop 
button. 



CAS Control Unit 


The CAS control unit is the electronic part of the CAS/ZAS. The CAS is connected via 
the K-CAN Periphery with: 

• The door modules 

• The seat modules 

• The Power Module 

The higher-level connection to the entire vehicle is 
carried out via the K-CAN System. 

All outputs from the CAS are designed 

• With semiconductor technology 

• Are short-circuit-proof to ground and B+ 

• Are fully diagnosis-capable 



8 

E65 Car Access System 



The CAS is the Gateway between the K-CAN System and K-CAN Periphery Bus. 


D-BUS 



WIM 

K-CAN P K-CAN S MOST byteflight PT-CAN 


The CAS directly controls the functions: 

• Radio remote control (FBD) 

• Terminal control 

• Electronic immobilizer (EWS) 

• Starter-motor control 

• Engine starting (ignition/starter switch) 

The CAS control unit has the master functions for: 

• The central locking system 

• The window functions 

The CAS has data storage functions: 

• The mileage reading is stored in the instrument cluster (KOMBI) and in the CAS. 
When one of the two control units is replaced, the kilometer reading of the vehicle is 
transferred from the other control unit to the new control unit. 

• Vehicle Order (successor to ZCS) is stored in the Lamp Module (LM) and the CAS. 


9 

E65 Car Access System 















































“Ignition Key” (Remote Controls) 

The “keys” are the component that represents the access and driving authorization for 
the vehicle. 

All keys (with the exception of the key integrated in the remote control) contain the 
transponder for EWS. 

The delivery specification of the vehicle are: 

• 2 coded remote controls with integrated mechanical key. 

• A reserve key (also individually coded) with an adapter for the ZAS (ignition lock). 

Note: Since no ignition switch in the ordinary sense is installed, the term vehi 
cle keys is also no longer used, but instead "remote controls") 


Remote control 



Release button for mechanical key 


Integrated mechanical key 



Adapter for reserve key 


Reserve key 



10 

E65 Car Access System 




Remote Controls 

The power supply for the remote controls is provided by a non-replaceable re-chargeable 
battery. 

• Charging: The battery is charged when the remote control is engaged in the ignition 
switch. Charging takes place via a 125 kHz interface in the ignition switch. 

• Monitoring: The re-chargeable battery voltage is monitored by the remote control. 

At low voltage a Check Control message is output to the instrument cluster. 

Each remote control is individually coded. As a result, different memory functions can be 
saved for each key: for example, seat adjustment, outside mirror adjustment, steering col¬ 
umn adjustment etc. 

The operating radio freguency of the remote controls in the U.S. is now 868.4Mhz. 

No initialization procedure is reguired for the Remote Controls, once the CAS has recog¬ 
nized the key as valid it is automatically initialized. 

Mechanical Key Integrated into the Remote Control 

A key is pushed into the housing of the remote control. The key is purely mechanical and 
contains no transponder function for the EWS. 

The key is used to emergency unlock the drivers door and trunk and also to lock and 
unlock the center storage box (hotel switch inside) and transmission emergency park 
release cable. To release the key, push the small button at the end of the remote control 
and slide the key out. 

Reserve Key with Adapter 

The delivery specification also includes a reserve key with an adapter for the ZAS. The 
reserve key is considerably smaller than the remote controls, enabling it to be easily car¬ 
ried in a wallet. 

The reserve key consists of an integrated transponder and a mechanically cut plastic key. 
An adapter is reguired to push the narrow, flat reserve key into the slot and to engage it. 
The adapter should be stored in the vehicles tool kit. 

A reserve key with the adapter has full access and driving authorization for the vehicle. 

Key Management 

The CAS control unit can manage a maximum of 10 valid vehicle keys. Three keys are 
initialized during vehicle assembly, two remote controls and one reserve key. 

The customer can order 7 additional keys if necessary. 


11 

E65 Car Access System 



Principle of Operation 

Inserting, Locking and Releasing Remote Controls in Ignition Switch 

The vehicle can be started with the remote controls or with the reserve key: 

1. Inserting: push the remote control into the ignition switch. 

2. Pressing the remote control: the sensor detects a user request to lock the remote 
control in the ignition switch. 

3. Identification of the transponder by the CAS. 

4. Locking the remote control in the ignition switch: when the remote control is recog¬ 
nized as authorized, the electro-mechanical removal lock is activated. 

The remote control is mechanically fixed in place (locked). Locking of the remote control 
in the ignition switch is verified by a hall sensor in the CAS. 

This ensures that the vehicle can be locked with the key in the case of a system failure. 

5. Terminal R "on": after the remote control is locked in the ignition switch, terminal R is 
automatically switched on. 

Automatic Ejection of a Remote Control 

A remote control recognized as invalid cannot be locked (e.g. the key of another vehicle).If 
the transponder is invalid, the remote control will be pushed out. 

Removing the Remote Control 

The remote control can only be removed when the vehicle is stopped (below 1 km/h) and 
the engine is switched off. 

If these conditions are met, then the remote control can be removed in any terminal sta¬ 
tus by pressing the remote control. When pressed, the sensor in the CAS detects a 
request for release. 

The CAS control unit actuates the electro-mechanical removal lock. The remote control 
is pushed out with spring force. After releasing the removal lock, the CAS is always in the 
position terminal R "off." 

The remote control may also be “comfort released” by pressing the start/stop button for 
longer than 2 seconds after shutting off the engine. 


12 

E65 Car Access System 



Terminal Selection 

The terminal statuses are selected when the brakes are not actuated by touching the 
start/stop button. A valid key must be locked in place. The terminal statuses are run 
through as follows: 

Ignition "off" (terminal 30) > terminal R > terminal 15 > terminal R > ignition "off" 



Starting the Engine 

The vehicle engine can be started from all terminal statuses when: 

• A valid remote control is inserted and locked in the ignition switch 

• The brake pedal is actuated. 

If the brake-light switch is defective or disconnected, an actuation of the brakes is detect¬ 
ed by the DSC control unit via the brake pressure sensor. Also, the P or N position of the 
transmission is detected via the EGS (TCM). 


13 

E65 Car Access System 





Switching off the Engine 

The vehicle engine is switched off when the vehicle is stopped and the start/stop button 
is pressed. 

If the start/stop button is pressed for longer than 2 seconds, the vehicle engine is 
switched off and then the key is automatically released and pushed out with spring pres¬ 
sure ("convenience off"). 

After the vehicle engine is switched off, the CAS is in KL "R" (operational readiness for 
windshield wipe, radio, airbag). 

Incorrect Operation and "Emergency On" 

To ensure the safety of the vehicle in the case of an accidental engine shutdown during 
driving, the "Emergency On" function is available. 

An engine shutdown during driving can be caused by accidentally pressing the start/stop 
button (the start/stop button must be pressed for at least 1 second or 3 times consecu¬ 
tively). 

The "Emergency On" function enables the starter to be actuated again without brake 
operation at a vehicle speed above 5 km/h (3mph). The "Emergency On" function also 
prevents terminal R from being switched off during driving. 

Automatic Release with Missing Transponder 

To protect against damage, tampering or incorrect operation, the remote control in the 
ignition switch is automatically released when: 

• The transponder is no longer detected with terminal R "on". 

• The vehicle is stopped. 

• The transmission is in the park position. 

The authentication (validity test) of the transponder is carried out every 500 milliseconds 
within the first 10 seconds. Then the authentication takes place every 3 seconds. 


14 

E65 Car Access System 



Terminal Control 

The CAS generates the terminal statuses for the vehicle when the start/stop button is 
operated. 

The terminals can only be connected when the remote control in the ignition switch is 
authenticated (recognized as valid) and the "key valid" signal is generated by the 
transponder in the CAS. 

Terminal Status in Vehicle Electrical System 

The terminal status generated by the CAS for the vehicle is transmitted to the following 
buses every 100 milliseconds: 

• K-CANS 

• K-CAN P 

• PT-CAN 

• MOST 

• bytef light 

The following statuses are output as telegrams: 

• Status of terminal R 

• Terminal 15 wake-up 

• Status of terminal 15 

• Status of terminal 50 

• Valid key inserted 

Hardware Redundancy 

For safety reasons the terminal status of the terminal 15 outputs is redundant (via a hard¬ 
ware switch in the CAS). 

Notes: 


15 

E65 Car Access System 



Announcement of Terminal 15w “Wake-up” 

The CAS and the ZGM (Central Gateway Module) are the only control units that can 
wake up the vehicle electrical system. 

The control units on the K-CAN S, K-CAN P, byteflight and MOST are awakened by the 
network management (NWM) on the respective bus. 

The control units on the PT-CAN are woken up via a high signal on the activation wire for 
terminal 15 wake-up. If a PT-CAN control unit receives the change in voltage "low-high" 
at the wake-up input, the control unit begins with reception and the evaluation of the 
messages from the PT-CAN. 

Two modules (ZGM and the Power Module receive KL 15 wake-up as a hardwired input 
from the CAS in addition to the network management wake-up signal over the bus. 

Announcement of Terminal 15 "on" 

For safety reasons certain control units and sensors are not only informed via the bus sig¬ 
nal about terminal 15, but also have a direct hardwired output from the CAS. 

The CAS provides ten KL 15 outputs for hardwire redundancies: 

• Ignition coil relay: the output for the ignition coil relay is equipped with an overrun for 
maintaining OBD-relevant emission values (Emissions optimization). When KL15 is 
switched "off" the ignition coils are not switched off until after a run-on time so that 
any fuel still injected is burned. 

• GRS (Rotation/transverse acceleration rate sensor for DSC) 

• LM/BLS (Lamp Module, brake-light switch) 

• SBSR (Satellite B-pillar right, fuel pump) 

• SZL (Steering Column Switching Center, selector lever transmission) 

• OBD socket KL15 supply (On-Board Diagnosis) 

• Rear seat heating (has no bus line) 

• Three are reserved for future use 


16 

E65 Car Access System 




Terminal 50 (Engine Starting) 

Terminal 50 is actuated by pressing the start/stop button. 

Engine start-up and the related terminal change are carried out as soon as the start/stop 
button is pressed for at least 50 milliseconds. 

The following conditions are needed to complete the start sequence: 

• Remote control is valid and locked (transponder authentication). 

• Brake operation: the brake is either detected via the direct wiring of the brake-light 
switch or redundantly via the CAN signal from the DSC. An incorrect brake signal 
from a defective or disconnected brake-light switch is detected as a "plausibility 
fault" as soon as the brake pressure is greater than 10 bar. If one of the two signals 
is missing, a Check Control message is sent. The engine start-up is permitted when 
the start/stop button is pressed again. 

• Selector lever of automatic transmission in position P and N. The position of the 
selector lever is detected via the direct P signal or via a CAN signal. The engine can 
be started when at least one of these signal is present. 

• No start-repeat lock present (start-repeat lock is activated at an engine speed above 
1000 rpm). 

If these conditions are not met, the starter-motor disabling circuit is activated. The engine 
cannot be started. 



17 

E65 Car Access System 







Starter Motor Disabling 

The starter disable circuit is used to protect the starter. The starter cannot be engaged 

with an already running engine. 

The starter disable is carried out after the actuation of the starter solenoid has been 

ended. 

The following situations will enable the starter disable function of the CAS: 

• No "brakes actuated" signal: if no "brakes actuated" signal is output within a maxi¬ 
mum of 200 milliseconds after the start/stop button is pressed, the engine start-up 
is aborted again. If only one of the two redundantly output brake operation signals is 
received, then the engine can be started. 

• No continuous "brakes actuated" signal: if during the starting procedure the brakes 
are not continuously actuated, the engine start-up is aborted again. 

• Time-out expired: the maximum operating period of the starter is 21 seconds. 

• Selector lever in invalid position: outside P or N. 

• The engine speed is greater than 1000 rpm. The DME (ECM) signals "status 
engine running." 

• Short circuit/overloading detection of the starter by the CAS. 

Actuation Time of Terminal 50 

The monitored actuating times of terminal 50 protects the starter against overloading. 

The actuation times of terminal 50 are: 

• A maximum of 21 seconds. A repetition is possible immediately. 

• The actuation time is reduced for each repetition by 2 seconds until the minimum 
actuation time of 3 seconds is reached. 

• If the start/stop button is pressed for longer than the preceding actuation time, the 
actuation time is increased by 2 seconds again (up to a maximum of 21 seconds). 


Notes: 


18 

E65 Car Access System 



Terminal 50 E (Electronics-Signal of Starting Request to the DME) 

Terminal 50 E is provided to signal the starting request by the CAS to the DME. 

Terminal 50 L (Load-Starter Solenoid) 

Terminal 50 L is an input to the IVM to switch on the starter solenoid. 

Auto-Park, Interlock and Shiftlock Functions 

Auto-Park, Interlock and Shiftlock are safety functions. 

Auto-Park and Interlock are CAS functions. Shiftlock is an EGS function. 

• Auto-Park: When the remote control is removed from the ignition switch, the park 
position of the selector lever is automatically engaged. The "Auto-Park" function is 
programmed in the EGS. 

• Interlock: The selector lever is locked in the park position until a valid remote control 
can be detected in the ignition switch. 

• Shiftlock: the selector lever can only be moved out of the positions P or N with the 
brakes actuated. 

For safety reasons the EGS supplies the "transmission range and park position" signal 

redundantly. The EGS supplies two signals: 

• The transmission position P via a direct, hard-wired cable (between the transmission 
and the CAS) for deactivation. 

• The transmission range status via the message "gear status" as a redundancy (sig¬ 
nal path: EGS - ZGM - CAS). 

Notes: 


19 

E65 Car Access System 



EWS Functions 

The EWS function is also integrated into the CAS control unit. The transponder authenti¬ 
cation is similar to the method used by EWS 3.3. The encoding process was changed 
compared to that of the previous versions (to increase security against tampering). 


Byteflight 



SZL 


ir* 


After a start reguest from the start/stop button, starting may continue if the following 
conditions are met: 

• Valid transponder detected 

• Brakes actuated 

• Selector lever in position P or N 

The EWS sends a message (ISN) with a random code to the DME. To start the engine, 
the DME (ECM) enables the ignition and fuel injection. The fuel pump is actuated via the 
SBSR (satellite B-pillar right) as soon as a corresponding speed signal is sent on the bus 
by the DME (ECM). 

The starter is actuated independently of the EWS ISN using the terminal 50 signal. If the 
starter turns and the engine fails to start, there may be a problem with communication 
between the DME (ECM) and EWS. 


20 

E65 Car Access System 






































Central Body Electronics Master Functions 

Central Locking System Master - CAS 

The CAS contains all of the programmed logics for the Central Locking system. 

Window Control System Master - CAS 

The CAS contains all of the programmed logics for the window control system. 

Remote Control Services (FBD) 

The CAS is responsible for receiving the remote control request signals from the FBD 
receiver and placing requests for operation over the bus line. 

Redundant Data Storage 

The CAS is one of three control units in the E65 to store important vehicle specific data. 
The CAS is responsible for storing: 

• The full 17 digit VIN Number (Only the last 7 digits are stored in codeable modules) 

• Vehicle Order (FA) 

• Total mileage 

• CBS (Conditioned Based Service) Data 

Redundantly, the full 17 digit VIN and the Vehicle Order (FA) are stored in the LM and the 
mileage is stored in the KOMBI. CBS data is stored in the Remote Controls. 

Notes: 


21 

E65 Car Access System 



Vehicle Order 

The Vehicle Order (FA-Fahzeugauftrag) replaces the central coding code (ZCS) used up 
until now. The Vehicle Order describes the current status of a vehicle (following produc¬ 
tion and in case of a change in the vehicle eguipment). 

The Vehicle Order is formed for each vehicle individually from the factory assembly order. 
The length of the vehicle order varies depending on the amount of vehicle eguipment. 

During first initialization at the factory, the Vehicle Order is entered into the CAS. It is also 
stored redundantly in the LM (Lamp Module). If the CAS is replaced or retrofitted in the 
workshop, the Vehicle Order must be re-entered or added to the CAS control unit. 

Content of the Vehicle Order: 

• Vehicle Identification Number (full 17 digit VIN) 

• Series (E65) 

• Model key (Digits 4-7 of the VIN) 

• Time criterion (Production date: MM/YY) 

• Paint code (4 digit paint code) 

• Upholstery code (4 digit code) 

• Assembly Number (ZusBau: prog, part # for powertrain) 

• E word (Additions to the standard series not in the SA) 

• HO word (center installed options using 3 digit option codes: not used yet) 

• Special-eguipment codes (3 digit SA #’s, up to 100 possible entries) 

The FA may be read out and printed using the E65 programming software (CIP). Any 
options installed at the BMW center will be able to be registered and input using the FA 
editor function. 


22 

E65 Car Access System 




CBS (Condition Based Service) Data 

The CBS (Condition Based Service) data are saved in: 

• Remote controls (key) 

• The EEPROM of the CAS 

• Kombi 

The CAS reads the data from the vehicle electrical system (DME (ECM), DSC, 
KOMBI etc.). 

If terminal 15 is switched off, the CAS saves the data into the remote control. 

Vehicle Mileage Storage 

To prevent the vehicle-specific data from being lost when the instrument cluster is 
replaced, they are stored redundantly in the CAS. Mileage is only transferred from 
the KOMBI to the CAS when the stored VINs match. 




K-CAN-SYSTEM 
MANIPULATION DOT 


Workshop Hints 
Installation of a New CAS 

A new CAS must ordered on a VIN-specific basis (key number, vehicle identification 
number, standard eguipment) and installed in the relevant vehicle. 

The new CAS must then be coded using the BMW DISplus, GT-1 or MoDiC III. 
Alignment of the CAS and DME (ECM) must also be carried out, only then can the 
engine be started. 

Installation of a used CAS control unit is of limited use, as it will not be possible to open 
the vehicle using the original remote control or start the engine. 


23 

E65 Car Access System 



Replacement of Both CAS and Instrument Cluster (two new components) 

Where possible, this should be avoided, as the current mileage reading and all the CBS 
data are irretrievably lost! 

If both control units have to be replaced at one time, the following installation seguence is 
recommended: 

1. Replacement of the instrument cluster 

2. Coding of vehicle identification number 

3. Terminal 15 OFF/ON (possible data transfer) 

4. Replacement of the CAS 

5. Coding of vehicle identification number 

6. Terminal 15 OFF/ON 

When terminal 15 is switched on again, the manipulation dot is extinguished. The com¬ 
munication between the instrument cluster and the CAS for redundant data storage is 
now available. 

Remember, when replacing a CAS or KOMBI: 

• The manipulation dot is set if the vehicle identification number in the CAS is differ¬ 
ent from the vehicle identification number in the instrument cluster. 

• If the vehicle identification numbers are different, data exchange takes place in the 
working memory of the instrument cluster; however, no data is stored permanently. 

• The instrument cluster adopts the data from the CAS if the CAS has a higher 
mileage reading than the instrument cluster and the vehicle identification numbers 
match. 

• The CAS adopts the data from the instrument cluster if the instrument cluster has a 
higher mileage reading and the vehicle identification numbers match. 

• The mileage is transferred from the instrument cluster to the CAS every 10 km (6 
miles) of the trip. If at least 24 hours have elapsed between switching terminal 15 
on and off, then another download is performed, regardless of the distance driven. 


24 

E65 Car Access System 



Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the various functions of the CAS are carried out using the Diagnosis 
Program of the DISplus, GT-1 orMoDiC. The Test Modules are automatically selected 
based on the faults stored or can be selected on the basis of a customer complaint. 

The test modules are developed based on a specific function and may not deal exclusive¬ 
ly with only the CAS. 

“Expert Mode” diagnosis is available in the Control Unit Functions mask. The available 
functions are: 

• Identification page 

• Read fault memory 

• Clear fault memory 

• Diagnosis Reguests 

-Transponder data 
-Programming data 
-Internal hall sensors 
-Inputs 

-Terminal Statuses 
-Remote Controls 
-Remote Control battery status 

Blocking Remote Controls 

If a Remote Control is lost, it can be blocked using the Test Module “Key Bar/Release” 
located under the “Service Functions” menu. 

• Insert another valid and released remote control. 

• Identify the lost Remote Control: To identify a lost Remote Control, it is necessary 
that all physically present remote controls are presented to the CAS. 

• Read out the numbers of all Remote Controls via the CAS. 

• Determine the number of the lost Remote Control from the available key numbers. 

• Block the lost Remote Control with the Test Module. 

If the Remote Control is found again it can be enabled again in the same way. 


25 

E65 Car Access System 




Workshop Exercise - Car Access System 


Using an instructor designated vehicle, perform a complete short test on the vehicle. 
Access CAS in the “control unit functions” screen. 

Go to status requests. 

What is the key # and personalization number of the current key in use? 


What is the difference between the key # and the personalization number? 


Go to the “service functions” menu and access the “enable/disable” key test module. 
Locate extra key and disable. 

Can the vehicle be started with the extra key after disable procedure? 


Re-enable key and re-check. 

Can the vehicle be started with the re-enabled key? 

Check key status screen. 

How many keys are enabled? 


Notes: 


26 

E65 Car Access System 



Workshop Exercise - Diagnosis 

Using an instructor designated vehicle, perform a complete vehicle short test. 
Diagnose complaint as directed by instructor. Complete worksheet using the proper 
“Complaint, Cause and Correction” format. 

Vehicle:_ Chassis #:_Production Date:_ 

Complaint: 


Cause: 


Correction: 



27 

E65 Car Access System 




^ Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What are the principle functions that the CAS is responsible for? 


2. What is the ZAS? How can the ZAS be helpful in determining if the CAS is 
asleep? 


3. Between which two Bus lines does the CAS act as a “Gateway”? 


4. What is required before the “wallet” key can be used in the ZAS? 


5. What is the frequency of the Remote Controls for the E65? 


28 

E65 Car Access System 

























6. How can the customer cycle between KL R and KL 15 without starting the 

engine? How are the different control modules aware that a terminal has changed 
state? 


7. What important vehicle data is stored in the CAS? Where else in the vehicle is this 
data stored redundantly? 


8. What would occur if the CAS and Instrument Cluster were replaced 
simultaneously? (Explain Answer) 


9. Where it the data for Condition Based Service (CBS) stored? 


10. After pressing the start button to start the vehicle, what other conditions must be 
observed by the CAS in order to start the vehicle? 


29 

E65 Car Access System 



