Table of Contents 


E70 Introduction Workbook 

Subject Page 

The New E70.3 

Technical Comparison (E53 vs E70).4 

Pedestrian Protection.6 

Side Panel Module.7 

Alignment of the Side Panel with the Hood.7 

Changing the Light Source .7 

Body Construction .8 

Strut Towers .9 

Vehicle Seating .16 

Glovebox.17 

Emergency Unlocking of Glovebox.17 

Walk Around Summary .18 


Initial Print Date: 12/06 


Revision Date: 















2 

E70 Introduction Workbook 

Introduction 

Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Compare the E70 with the E53 

• Describe changes on the E70 




Understand Basic Features ofthe E70 





The New E70 


Since the first X5 SAV, the world has been anxiously awaiting the 
successorto the E53. The E70 marks the second generation of 
the X5 and includes many new features and functions which were 
not available in the previous X5. 



As one would expect, the new E70 raises the standard for the 
SAV driving experience. The propulsion for the new SAV is 
provided by new 6-cylinder and V-8 engines with more perform¬ 
ance than the previous power units. 

Since the introduction of the original X5 (E53), there have been 
more than 580,000 units produced, half of which (240,000) have 
been sold in the U.S. market. 

The new X5 continues the tradition of a luxury appointed, premi¬ 
um SAV. The E70 interior combines sophisticated materials with 
innovative options and class leading technology. 


The overall ground clearance has been increased and there is a 
new front suspension to complement the BMW patented integral 
IV rear suspension. 

The BMW active steering system has been added for the first 
time on aX-drive equipped vehicle.There is also an optional 
"Adaptive Drive" package which combines Active Roll Stabilization 
(ARS)and Electronic Damping Control (EDC) for improved ride 
quality and handling. 

The new EDC system features the world debut of FlexRay, a new 
high speed data transmission system developed with the leader¬ 
ship ofBMW and a major consortium of development companies. 

The highlights of the new E70 X5 include: 

• Weight optimized body shell with improved torsional stiffness 

• Standard Run-flat tires 

• Active Steering 

• Adaptive Drive package (EDC and ARS) 

• New 6-speed gearbox with electronic gear selector 

• Full time AWD - X-drive technology 

• Improved power and efficiency with new engines 

• Larger interior with 3rd row seating (up to 7 seats) 

• Optional Head-up display 

• New i-Drive control concept with six programmable keys 

• Exclusive interior with innovative options 

• Improved handling and driving dynamics 


E70 Introduction Workbook 

3 









4 

E70 Introduction Workbook 


Technical Comparison (E53 vs E70) 

The E70 represents a logical progression from the E53. Overall, 
in comparison with the E53, the E70 is larger in all dimensions. 
As you can see from the chart below, the E70 is longer, wider 
and taller than it's predecessor. 

Most notably, the wheelbase has increased significantly and the 
weight has been increased by only 30 kilograms. 


Specification 

E70 

E53 

Unladen weight (kg) 

2,125 

2,095 

Length (mm) 

4,854 

4,667 

Width (mm) 

2,197 

2,180 

Height (mm) 

1,766 

1,707 

Wheelbase (mm) 

2,933 

2,820 

Track width, front (mm) 

1,644 

1,576 

Track width, rear (mm) 

2,933 

2,820 


Although, the E70 is larger and heavier, the handling, agility and 
ride quality are not affected. In fact, the new chassis systems and 
adaptive ride packages only enhance the driving experience on the 
E70. 

Overall interior room is improved and with the optional 3rd row 
seat, up to seven passengers can be accommodated. 



■4 


4854 


i i 


co 

CO 

r- 


' r 


















































































































































































































Workshop Exercise - External Walkaround 


Using the training vehicle, inspect and view the overall vehicle 
exterior and answer the questions below: 

Fill in the chart below regarding the external body materials: 


Body Component 

Material 

Hood 


Fenders 


Doors 



What type of tires are used on the E70?_ 

Are run-flat tires standard or optional on the E70? 


Fill in the blank below with the correct answer regarding the overall 
dimensions on the E70: 


The overall length the the E70 is 

mm 

than 

the E53. 



The unladen weight of the E70 is 
the E53. 

kg. 

than 

The wheelbase of the E70 is 

mm 

than 

the E53. 



The overall height of the E70 is 

mm 

than 


the E53. 



E70 Introduction Workbook 

5 

























Pedestrian Protection 


6 

E70 Introduction Workbook 


In Europe and Asian markets, new requirements are in place to 
protect pedestrians in the event of an impact with a vehicle. 

Currently in the U.S. there are no regulations regarding the protec¬ 
tion of pedestrians. However, BMW has introduced one of the first 
SAV's to include such measures. 

The front end of the E70 has been modified to reduce impact 
forces in the event of a collision with a pedestrian. 

These measures include: 


• The hood is an aluminum design which will flex in an impact 
reducing potential head injuries 

• The hood hinges have a disengaging mechanism which 
allows for downward hood movement at the rear 

• The fender are made from thermoplastic and are mounted on 
a plastic "lattice" frame which also flexes on impact. 

The frontframe rails are also modified (curved inward) in orderto 
be compatible with the pedestrian protection system. 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hood 

3 

Side panel module 

2 

Hood Hinge 


















Additionally, the airfilter housings on both engines (N62KP and 
N62TU) have been modified to comply with pedestrian protection 
requirements. 



Side Panel Module 

The side panel module consists ofthe plastic side panel (fender) 
and the plastic module carrier. 

In addition, the side panel module also contains the washertank, 
the front headlight, the fog lamp, the auxiliary turn signal light, the 
wheel arch cover and the wheel arch finisher. 

■ Alignment of the Side Panel with the Hood 

The eccentric cam sets the position ofthe side panel between the 
side panel and the module carrier. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Auxiliary turn signal 

5 

Front headlight 

2 

Washertank 

6 

Front fog lamp 

3 

Module carrier 

7 

Washer pump 

4 

Side panel module support 




■ C hanging the Light Source 

The light source ofthe front headlight is changed through the 
engine compartment. To do this, insert your hand between the ribs 
ofthe module carrier and remove the coverfrom the headlight 
housing. 

The light source ofthe fog light is changed by first removing the 
side grill on the decorative strip.Through these openings, you can 
now reach in to change the light source. 


E70 Introduction Workbook 

7 



















8 

E70 Introduction Workbook 


Body Construction 

As usual, BMW has improved the E70 in many areas. Notthe least 
of which are in the body construction. The overall rigidity has been 
improved to 27,000 Nm per degree in the E70. This is a consider¬ 
able increase overthe E53 at 23,500 Nm per degree. 

This is accomplished with the use of high strength steels. Some 
of the areas improved include the b-pillar, front end and rear end. 




The various colors in the above illustrations show the variety and 
mix of materials used on the E70. These materials are advanced 
steels which are used according to the requirements such as 
strength, weight and thickness. 

The use of advanced steels and processes have allowed the E70 
to achieve a 5 star rating on the NCAP crash test. 

For additional information on the body construction, refer to the 
"Introduction” section of the E70 reference material which can be 
found onTIS and ICP. 







































StrutTowers 

As you may already know, the E60 was the first vehicle to use the 
GRAV front end which is almost entirely aluminum. In contrast, the 
E70 only uses aluminum on the hood and the strut towers. 

The strut towers are made from cast aluminum and riveted to the 
the vehicle with special rivets as on the E60. 



The cast aluminum spring support (strut tower) of the E70 is 
distinguished primarily by the following features: 

• Lower weight through intelligent lightweight construction 

• Improved driving dynamics through increased rigidity 

• Fewer components and thus lower production costs. 

With the E70 a cast aluminum spring support has been used in 
the front end, for the first time in the X-series. 

The cast aluminum spring support absorbs the chassis forces and 
directs them to the body. 


Both the spring strut and the upper transverse link are attached to 
the spring support. This requires the componentto be extremely 
rigid. This rigidity is achieved through improved material distribu¬ 
tion, by only clustering material where it is necessary. 

The spring support thus makes a significant contribution to the 
driving characteristics, as it supports static and dynamic wheel 
forces. 

Since the casting construction method makes it possible to inte¬ 
grate many individual functions and components into a single part, 
this design is significantly more compact than the conventional 
shell-type design and helps reduce the weight. 

• Weight reduction of approximately 50% through lightweight 
construction using cast aluminum compared with conventional 
sheet metal design 

• Extra space compared with conventional sheet metal 
construction: 80 mm shorter front end 

• Functional design through specific local reinforcements; 
contribution to lightweight construction; robustness of the 
construction 

• Integration of various brackets for mounting assemblies, etc. 
in the component. 



E70 Introduction Workbook 

9 



10 

E70 Introduction Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Vehicle Walkaround 


Open the rear hatch and note the operation of the upper and 
lower gate. 


In comparison to the E53, how is the lower gate opened on the 
E70? 




Are there any special tools required for the lower gate adjustment 
shown above? 


Take a look at the upper gate and note the position/operation of _ 

the emergency tailgate release. 

Locate and note the adjustment points for the upper and lower Which adjustment should be performed first? U pper or lower gate 

hatch. 




















The adjustment point shown above is for: 


What tool is used forthis? 


Proceed with checking the upper hatch adjustment. 
Does the E70 have "soft close" on the tailgate lid? 










li 

k 






E70 Introduction Workbook 

ll 










































12 

E70 Introduction Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Vehicle Walkaround 


In the rear hatch area, look over the storage options and check 
over the various component locations. 



If possible, check a vehicle with 3rd row seating and compare 
the storage options and equipment to a vehicle equipped with 
only 2nd row seating. 

Locate the vehicle tool kit and note contents: 

What is the "hex key" tool used for? 


In the tool kit, there is a red "hammer like” tool, what are the two 
uses for this tool? 


Locate the EMF emergency release location and use tool to 
release parking brake? 



Find the following components and note locations: 


Component 

Location 

Battery 


Rear Distribution box (on battery) 


Spare tire 


SDARS 


HiFi Amplifier 


TCU 


Fuel Pump Module (EKP)N52 


MOST bus junction point 


Rear Power Distribution box 


Comfort Access Module 


Vertical Dynamics Module (VDM) 




























Workshop Exercise - Vehicle Walkaround 


Open hood and note hood release operation. Examine under¬ 
hood components and note the following items: 

□ Engine Oil Fill 

□ Dipstick (N62) 

□ Washer Fluid Fill 

□ Power 5teering Fill 

□ Brake Fluid Fill (Master Cylinder) 

□ E-BoxAccess 

□ A/C Fligh and Low Pressure Ports 

□ Microfilter Access 

□ A/C A mbient (Outside) Temp 5 ensor 

□ A ir Filter R eplacement 

□ Fender Adjustment Points 

□ H eadlight B ulb A ccess 

□ DSC Control Unit 

□ Oil Filter L ocation (N52 and N62) 

□ BatteryJ unction Locations 

□ Coolant Fill 



E70 Introduction Workbook 

13 





14 

E70 Introduction Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Exterior Lighting 


Fill in the chart below regarding the front lighting. 


Operate all of the exterior lighting features as shown in the chart 
below and complete the chart by checking off the bulbs which 
are illuminated by these functions: 



Low Beam 
(Bi-Xenon) 

High Beam 
(Bi-Xenon) 

Corona Rings 
(Parking light) 

Marker/Directional 
(parking light) 

Interior Lights 

Courtesy Lights 

Fog Light 

Cornering light 

Tail light 

Back-up light (Reverse) 

License plate light 

Welcome lights 











Parking Lights 
(Side Lights) 











Low Beams 











High Beams 











Flash-to-pass 











Adaptive Mode 
(Block RLSS) 











Daytime Driving 
Lights 











Cornering (turn) 
Lights 











Fog Lights 











Back-up Lights 













Index 

Explanation/function 

1 


2 


3 


4 



Which control module is primarily responsible forthe exterior light¬ 
ing on the E70? 











































Workshop Exercise - Vehicle Lighting 



How are the "daytime driving lights" activated? 


What's new about the Rain Sensor? 


Under what conditions do the "welcome lights" come on? 


Under what conditions does the "cornering light" come on? 




E70 Introduction Workbook 

15 
















































16 

E70 Introduction Workbook 


Vehicle Seating 

The new E70 features some new seating arrangements which 
were not previously available on the E53. 

In addition to the front driver and passenger seating, there is a 
2nd row seating configuration which is standard. 


In order to access the third row of seats, the 2nd row slides forward 
and tilts to facilitate entry and exit from the vehicle. To prevent the 
possibility of the driving with the 2nd row seats unlocked, there are 
a series of microswitches which will trigger a warning gong and 
check control message. 

The microswitches are an input to the J B. There are several 
microswitches connected in series. If any of the switches are open, 
a check control message and gong will be initiated. 




There is also an optional 3rd row seating package. This option not 
only comes with the 3rd row of seats, but also a 3rd row heating 
and ventilation package. 

On vehicles with the 3rd row seating option, there is no spare tire 
available. The vehicle is already equipped with run-flat tires as a 
standard feature. 



On vehicles with 2nd row seating only, the vehicle has a standard 
spare (space saver) with jack. 
























Glovebox 

A new feature in the E70 is a glovebox with a lid split into two sec¬ 
tions. The two-section lid can be electrically unlocked at the touch 
of a button. After being unlocked, the lids are automatically opened 
by spring force. 

Activation is triggered by a button. The button is located below the 
center air vent in the instrument panel. To close, it is sufficient to 
press one lid only in the "CLOSED" direction. 

The other lid is automatically closed in the same process. The lids 
snap into place in the lock in the "CLOSED" end position. 

Depending on the vehicle order, a C D changer or DVD changer can 
be installed in the glovebox. 



Emergency Unlocking of Glovebox 

An emergency unlocking mechanism is provided so that the glove¬ 
box can be opened when the vehicle is de-energized or in the 
event of faulty unlocking mechanisms. 

The emergency unlocking mechanism can be accessed from the 
front passenger's side. 

Only the instrument-panel cover needs to be opened here. Behind 
this cover is a loop, which, when pulled, unlocks and opens the 
glovebox. 

The color of the system components shown here has been 
changed so that the emergency unlocking mechanism can be rec¬ 
ognized more easily. Glovebox can be opened even when the 
vehicle is de-energized! 



E70 Introduction Workbook 

17 




18 

E70 Introduction Workbook 


WalkAround Summary 

After the vehicle walk around and overview of topics in the section. 
Check and make sure you can answerthe following questions: 

□ What are the basic dimensional changes on the E70? 

□ What are the materials used on the hood and fenders etc.? 

□ Do you understand the basic rear hatch adjustments? 

□ What are the components/systems involved in the "Pedestrian 
Protection System? 

□ Can you locate and identify the components which are 
accessible in the rear hatch area? 

□ Do you understand the 2nd and 3rd row seat operation and 
configuration? 

□ Do you understand the exterior lighting features on the E70? 

□ How is the EM F released in the event of an emergency? 

□ Can you locate the vehicles fuses (front and rear)? 

□ How is the emergency glovebox release accessed? 

□ How is thej B accessed? 

□ Can you locate all of the important "under hood” items? 

(fluid fill/B + junctions etc.) 

□ How are the front headlight bulbs accessed? 



