Table of Contents 


E70 Powertrain Workbook 

Subject Page 

E70 Powertrain. 5 

E70 Engines.6 

N62B4801 .6 

New Belt Drive .7 

Air Intake and Filter.7 

N52B30O1.8 

New Belt Drive (N52B30O1).9 

Intake Air Control .9 

E70 FuelTank .10 

Transfer Case ATC 700 .12 

Coding Resistor .12 

Transfer Box Control Unit.12 

Front and Rear Differential.14 

Front Axle Gearbox VAG180A .14 

Final Drive Unit HAG188KA88L.14 

HAG188L .14 

'Propeller Shaft and Output Shafts.15 

Propeller Shafts .15 

Output Shafts .15 

Automatic Transmission (GA6HPTU) .16 

Torque Converter.17 

Converter Lockup Clutch Connection Stages.17 

Casing and Intermediate Plate .18 


Initial Print Date: 12/06 


Revision Date: 


























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Clutches.18 

Electronic-hydraulic Control.18 

Torque Converter Control .18 

Variable Cooling Oil Flow .18 

System Pressure in Reverse Gear .18 

Clutch Valves .18 

Solenoid Valves (MV).19 

Electronic Pressure Control Valves (EDS).19 

Target gear allocation dependent on accelerator pedal gradient .20 

Shift Speed Characteristics .20 

Torque Intervention .20 

LIN-bus Module.20 

Gear Selector Lever (GWS) .21 

Operation and Functions .21 

Haptic Locks.21 

Manual Gate, Sport Program (M/S) .22 

Parking Lock "P" .22 

Automatic Downshift from "M/S" .22 

Interface to the EGS .23 

Definition of Messages.23 

Communication .23 

Safe Status for Sending .23 

Indicator in the Gear Selector Lever.23 

Flashing of a Position LED.23 

Indicator Flashing Through Diagnosis .23 

Secure Indicator Status .24 

Park and Unlock Button .24 






























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Evaluating the P-button .24 

Evaluating the Unlock Button .25 

Components.25 

Sensors .25 

Actuators.25 








4 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 

Powertrain 

Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the new engines used in the E70 

• Understand the changes to the powertrain on the E70 




Understand GWS shifter operation on the E70 





E70 Powertrain 



E70 Powertrain Workbook 

5 











6 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 


E70 Engines 

N62B4801 

From the start of production, the X5 4.8is will receive the N62TU 
engine as introduced on the E65 in 2005. This engine will be 
referred to as the N62B4801 engine to be consistent with the new 
engine code designations. 

The N62B4801 features the following: 

• New air cleaner and air intake system 

• Modified belt drive 

• Oil pan (for installation into E70) 

The engine managementforthe new engine is the M E9.2.3 system 
which is a further variant of the ME9.2.2 . The processor speed has 
been increased to 66 M hz to cope with the enhanced capabilities of 
the engine and chassis systems in the E70. 

M ost of the engine systems and mechanical components are the 
same as on the previous N62TU from 2005. With the exception of 
the items outlined above, the engine is mechanically the same as 
it's predecessor. 

As compared to the N62B44 in the E53, the horsepower and 
torque have been increased. However, the N62B4801 complies 
with the ULEV II requirements. 

The exhaust system has been modified to meet ULEV standards. 
The catalyst design allows the elimination of the secondary air sys¬ 
tem. 

On of the most notable changes to the physical appearance of the 
engine is the air intake system and air cleaner assembly. This 
design allows the new N62 to meet acoustic goals as well as the 
necessary requirements for pedestrian protection. 



Specification 

N62B44 (E53) 

N62B4801 (E70) 

Engine type 

V-8 90 degrees 

V-8 90 degrees 

Displacement (crrP) 

4398 

4799 

Stroke/bore (mm) 

82.7/92 

88.3/93 

Power output (kW/bhp) 

235/320 

261/350 

at engine speed (rpm) 

6100 

6300 

Torque (Nm) 

440 

475 

at engine speed (rpm) 

3600 

3500 

Compression ratio 

10.0 

10.5 

Valves/cylinder 

4 

4 

Fuel type (RON) 

98 

98 

Firing order 

1-5-4-8-6-3-7-2 

1-5-4-8-6-3-7-2 

Engine management 

ME9.2 with VVT 

ME9.2.3 with VVT 

Emission standard 

LEV 

ULEV II 





















New Belt Drive 

The belt drive on the 4.8 engine has been modified for use on the 
E70. The alternator and A/C compressor have been relocated for 
space reasons. 

The belt drive is a double system as standard. The main belt drive 
is a ribbed seven groove belt which includes the power steering 
pump, alternator and coolant pump. 


Air Intake and Filter 

The new air filter and intake system has been designed to allow 
increased airflow and improve engine acoustics. It is mounted on 
the engine ratherthan on the inner fender orfront support as on 
past designs. 

The intake system features a series of filtered and un-filtered air 
resonators to accomplish these goals. 


The A/C compressor is driven by an ELAST drive belt. However, a 
new feature is a linear tensioner which eliminates the need fora 
special tool for removal or installation. 

Be aware that the A/C compressor and alternator have a new 
mounting technique which has a threaded insert to align the belt 
drive properly. It is imperative to follow the removal instructions. 


V 1 L> 1) 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

ELAST drive belt for AC comp 

6 

Power steering pump 

2 

Coolant pump 

7 

Ribbed V-belt 

3 

Tensioning pulley 

8 

Torsional vibration damper 

4 

Deflection pulley 

9 

Lineartensioner 

5 

Alternator 

10 

AC compressor 


The new design also allows compatibility with the pedestrian 
protection features on the E70. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Unfiltered air pipe 

6 

HFM 

2 

Unfiltered air resonator 

7 

Intake silencer cover 

3 

Filtered air resonator 

8 

Aircleaner 

4 

Double-chamberfiltered resonator 

9 

Intake silencer 

5 

Unfiltered air pipe 

10 

Bracket 


E70 Powertrain Workbook 

7 









































8 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 


N52B30O1 

Forthe 6-cylinder version of the E70, the new N52KP engine will 
be used. This new N52KP is the upper output version as intro¬ 
duced on the E83LCI with some minor changes. 

Many of the mechanical changes are the same as on the N52KP 
engines in order models (E83/E9X etc). 

The N52B30O1 features: 

• Plastic cylinder head cover 

• Modified oil pan for installation into E70 

• C rankshaft has higher degree of balance 
(to reduce load on drivetrain) 

• New Torsional vibration damper 

• Modified belt drive 

• 6 mm exhaust valves 

• Lightweight "hydroformed" camshafts 

The engine management system is the M SV80 system which 
includes improvements overthe MSV70 system. These items 
include: 

• Digital HFM 

• New throttle valve with magneto resistive feedback 

• 180 amp alternator (Bosch or Valeo) 

• Oil level/quality sensor (QLT) 

The MSV80 engine management complies with the ULEV II 
requirements for 2007. 

The catalyst system allows forthe elimination of the secondary 
air pump. 

Note: For more detail, see the ST616 training course. 



Specification 

M54B30 (E53) 

N52B3001 (E70) 

Engine type 

inline 6 

inline 6 

Displacement (cm’) 

2979 

2996 

Stroke/bore (mm) 

89.6/84 

88.0/85 

Power output (kW/bhp) 

170/231 

163/260 

at engine speed (rpm) 

5900 

6600 

Torque (Nm) 

300 

305 

at engine speed (rpm) 

3500 

2500 

Compression ratio 

10.2 

10.7 

Valves/cylinder 

4 

4 

Fuel type (RON) 

98 

98 

Firing order 

1-5-3-6-2-4 

1-5-3-6-2-4 

Engine management (DME) 

MS43 

MSV80 

Emission standard 

LEV 

ULEV II 
















New Belt Drive (N52B3001) 

With regard to the 6-cylinder, there are two possible belt drive 
arrangements on the E70. 

The single belt drive uses a 6 rib v-belt with a conventional "spring 
loaded" belt tensioner. 

If the E70 is equipped one of the following options; Active steering, 
Adaptive Drive or the 220 Amp Alternator, there is a double belt 
d rive. 

In this case, the A/C compressor is driven separately by a four rib 
ELAST drive belt. As opposed to the V-8 engine, this ELAST belt 
does not have a linear tensioner and must be installed with the 
special tool as one previous applications. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Basic belt drive 

4 

Power steering pump 

B 

Double belt drive 

5 

Ribbed V-belt 

1 

Tensioning pulley 

6 

Torsional vibration damper 

2 

Alternator 

7 

A/C compressor 

3 

Deflection pulley 

8 

ELAST drive belt for A/C comp 


Intake Air Control 

As with the V-8 engine option, the 6-cylinder uses an engine 
mounted airfilterand duct system. This arrangement also achieves 
the desired sound quality goals and also meets the necessary 
crash optimization requirements for pedestrian protection. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hot-film air mass meter 

6 

Unfiltered air pipe 

2 

Filtered air pipe 

7 

Intake silencer 

3 

Double chambered filtered air 
resonator 

8 

Aircleaner 

4 

Bracket 

9 

Intake silencer cover 

5 

Unfiltered air resonator 




E70 Powertrain Workbook 

9 










































10 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 


E70 FuelTank 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Engine aircleaner 

2 

intake manifold 

3 

Fuel injectors 

4 

DM-TL 

5 

Dust filter 

6 

Purge canister 

7 

Fuel filter 

8 

Fuel level sensor 

9 

Suction jet pump 

10 

Intake mesh filter 

11 

Initial filling valve 

12 

Non-return valve 

13 

Electric fuel pump 

14 

Compensating line 

15 

Return line 

16 

Feed line 

17 

Suction jet pump 

18 

Non-return valve 

19 

Fuel level sensor 

20 

Non-return valve 

21 

Pressure regulator 

22 

Breather valve 

23 

Refuelling vent valve 

24 

ECM (DME) 

25 

Fuel tank vent valve (purge valve) 

26 

Purge airline 

27 

Central constant pressure valve (Z-DHV) 

28 

Feed line to engine 

































































































































































































































Workshop Exercise ■ Fuel Tank 


Using the fuel tank training aid, remove the service openings 
from both sides. Remove the fuel pump and both sending 
units. 


What's new about the seals and clamps on the service openings 
on the fuel tank? 


Why are the seals and clamps a new design? 


When installing a new clamp (or clamps) how is propertightening 
torque achieved? 



Re-install fuel system components into fuel tank and observe 
the following: 


Installation: 


M ake sure that service cover is 
installed in correct position. 


Indentation (2) on clamping ring 
must line up with raised section (1) 
of tank. 


Pin on service cover (3) must line 
up with indentation on clamping 
ring. 


Ensure correct positioning of seal. 


Always replace seal and clamp in 
field service situations. 


Using the illustration on the page above, compare actual 
components to the illustrated ones to gain better understanding 
of actual system operation. 


E70 Powertrain Workbook 

ll 




12 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 


Transfer Case ATC 700 

The ATC 700 transfer case is a further development of the ATC500 
transfer case known from the E53. The power transfer takes place 
via a chain drive and multi-disc clutch. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Input from automatic gearbox 

5 

Multi-disc clutch 

2 

Output to rear axle 

6 

Actuator lever with ball ramp 

3 

Output to front axle 

7 

Chain drive 

4 

Actuator motor 

8 

Control wheel 


As compared to the ATC 500, there are only minor changes: 

• Installation position of coding resistor 

• Optimized lifetime gear oil 

• New ventilation system 

• Transfer case control unit (VGSG) 


Coding Resistor 

The locking power characteristic of the multi-disc clutch can vary 
slightly due to the mechanical tolerances in the production process. 
After measuring the actual locking power on the clutch test rig, a 
resistor is fitted to the actuator motor with its value representing a 
reference regarding the progression of the locking power. 

Every time the engine is started, the transfer box control unit 
measures the resistance and correspondingly selects the optimum 
characteristic map for the installed transfer box. 

To facilitate accessibility, the coding resistor is no longer fitted on 
the casing of the worm drive but rather on the casing of the transfer 
box. 



Transfer B ox C ontrol U nit 

The transfer box control unit is known from the E60 and E90 all¬ 
wheel drive models. It has a new housing that is not water-tight. It 
is arranged under the luggage compartment floor on the left next to 
the battery. 







































14 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 


Front and Rear Differential 

Front Axle Gearbox VAGI 80A 

The front axle gearbox is a new design with an aluminum casing. 
As before, it is centered and mounted as part of the oil pan. In 
terms of function, the front axle gearbox remains the same as that 
in the E53 predecessor. 



Two different drive flange variants are used for 6-cylinder and 
8-cylinder engines. 

• In connection with the N52B30O1 engine, the propeller shaft 
is connected by means of a flexible coupling to the front axle 
gearbox. 

• In connection with the N62B4801 engine, the propeller shaft 
is pivoted further downward due to the catalytic converters. 

The front axle gearbox is adapted accordingly. Forthis reason, a 
universal joint is used as the drive flange in this case. The oil filler 
and drain plug is located in the same position as on the E53. 


Final Drive Unit HAG 188K/188L 

The final drive unit (rear axle differential) HAG188K is already 
known from the previous model series. The HAG188L represents 
a further development that is fitted on the E70 with N62B4801 
engine. 

The output shafts are now also fitted in a plug-on arrangement to 
the final drive unit as known from the front axle gearbox of the E53. 
Since there is now no flange for the output shafts, the final drive 
unit is supplied without an oil fill for replacement purposes. 



The propeller shaft is also fitted in a plug-on arrangement to the 
final drive unit and therefore also has no drive flange. Instead, the 
SAE gearing of the drive pinion extend out of the casing of the final 
drive unit. The propeller shaft is fitted onto the spline. 

■ HAG188L 

Angular contact ball bearings are used in the HAG188L instead of 
the taper roller bearings in the HAG188K.The ball bearings greatly 
reduce friction losses. In addition to contributing to lowering fuel 
consumption, this measure also reduces power loss in the thermal 
balance of the axle drive. 








Propeller Shaft and Output Shafts 

Propeller Shafts 

A new connection arrangement of the rear propeller shaft to the 
final drive unit (rear axle differential) is used on the E70. 

The constant velocity joint of the propeller shaft is now bolted to 
the flange of the final drive unit but rather it is fitted onto the unit. 



The rear propeller shaft in the E70 is fitted onto the final drive unit. 
This arrangement provides many advantages regarding function 
and assembly. 

Output Shafts 

The output shafts are also fitted in a plug-on arrangement to the 
final drive unit as already known from the front axle gearbox. 

The rear output shafts are now fitted in a plug-on arrangement to 
the final drive unit as already known from the front output shafts. 
Currently, the two CV boots (gaiters) on the constant velocity joints 
cannot be replaced. 

The housings of the constant velocity joints for the front and rear 
output shafts are no longer powder-coated but now have a bright 
finish. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Propeller shaft 

4 

Drive pinion 

2 

Retaining clip 

5 

Flange nut 

3 

Nut 

6 

Casing of final drive unit 


This arrangement offers various advantages: 

• Reduced overall size 

• Improved balance characteristics 

• Shorter assembly time 

• Quieter running 

• Higher torsional rigidity 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 

15 






















Automatic Transmission (GA6HPTU) 


16 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 



There are 2 new transmission variants forthe X5. The new "TU" 

version ofthe already proven 6HP19/26Z has been improved for The automatic gearboxGA6HPTU forthe E70 has been 

use in new vehicles including the X5. re-engineered in terms ofthe following points: 

• Torque converter with turbine-torsion damper 

• Clutch E 

• Adapted electronic transmission control (EGS) 

• Faster hydraulics through new pressure regulator 

• Electric gearshift 


The 6HP19 is used in the E70 X5 3.0, while the 6HP26 can be 
found in the 4.8 version. 


Vehicle 

Engine 

Transmission 

Torque Cap. 

E70 X5 3.0 

N52B30O1 

GA6HP19TU 

400 Nm 

E70X5 4.8 

N62B4801 

GA6HP26TU 

650 Nm 






























































Torque Converter 

A new torque converter is used in the GA6HPTU gearbox. This 
torque converter contains an effective torsion damper system 
known as the turbine-torsion damper (TTD). 

This is a classic torsion damper, in which the primary side (engine 
side) is fixed to the turbine wheel of the torque converter. 

This arrangement brings about an increase in the flywheel mass on 
the primary side thus distinctly improving the damping properties. 


The secondary side of the turbine-torsion damper is connected to 
the input shaft of the gearbox. Since the converter transmits no 
vibrations, the torsion damper need not perform any damping work. 
In this case it functions virtually as a rigid transmission element. 

When the converter lockup clutch is engaged, the power is trans¬ 
mitted directly from the clutch to the primary side of the turbine tor¬ 
sion damper. Due to the rigid connection to the turbine wheel of 
the torque converter, the flywheel mass is increased on the primary 
side. 



With the converter lockup clutch disengaged, i.e. in converter 
mode, the power flow from the turbine wheel does not take place in 
the usual mannerto the transmission input shaft. 

The turbine wheel transmits the power to the primary side of the 
torsion damper. 


The power is transmitted via the turbine-torsion damper to the 
input shaft of the gearbox. Torsional vibration is filtered out very 
effectively. 

With this system, it is possible to engage (close) the converter lock¬ 
up clutch much earlier without having to take any deterioration in 
comfort into account. This arrangement directly connects the 
gearbox to the engine, resulting in a boost in dynamics as well as a 
reduction in fuel consumption and exhaust emissions. 

Converter Lockup Clutch Connection Stages 

The ability of the new torque converterto dampen torsional vibra¬ 
tion with the turbine torsion damper is used to keep the converter 
lockup clutch closed as often as possible. 

A general statement as to under what conditions the converter 
lockup clutch is disengaged (open) or engaged (closed) can still 
not be made as this depends on very many factors. 

• Load choice signal (accelerator pedal position) 

• Engine load status 

• Vehicle speed 

• Transmission fluid temperature 

• Selected gearshift program 


E70 Powertrain Workbook 

17 





































































18 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 


Casing and Intermediate Plate 

The casing and the intermediate plate of the GA6HPTU gearbox 
have been adapted to the new hydraulic unit and the resulting 
channel arrangement. 

The GA6HPTU gearbox is a reengineered version of the 6-speed 
automatic gearbox that was introduced in the E65 and since then 
used in all model series. 

The modifications are specifically targeted at achieving higher 
dynamics, lowerfuel consumption and reduced pollutant emis¬ 
sions. 

Clutches 

The clutch E has been reworked.The clutch E is a drive clutch that 
connects the ring gear of the single planetary gear train with the 
long planet gear of the double planetary gear train. 

It is closed in fourth, fifth and sixth gear. The lining of clutch E is 
made from a new material that offers greater stability in terms of 
vibration and squeaking. 

Electronic-hydraulic Control 

The electronic-hydraulic control installed in the GA6HP19/26TU 
has been optimized in the following areas with regard to faster 
gearshift operations and higher efficiency. 

• Torque converter control 

• Cooling oil flow 

• System pressure in "R" 

• Clutch valves 

• Electronic pressure control valves 

The electronic-hydraulic control now has only two solenoid valves 
but seven electronic pressure control valves. 


Torque Converter Control 

The torque converter control including the converter lockup clutch 
has undergone distinct improvements with regard to the control 
capabilities under all conditions. 

It is equipped with a new pressure regulator. Raised converter 
pressure (increased from approx. 0.5 bar to 1 bar at the low end) 
ensures faster control of the converter lockup clutch particularly at 
low temperatures. 

The oil feed comes from the primary connection of the main 
pressure control valve, thus improving control at low speeds. 

The converter lockup clutch is now engaged with a backpressure 
in order to proportionate more effectively. 

Variable Cooling Oil Flow 

The flow of cooling oil is variable in order to reduce power losses. 
No cooling is required for the clutch faces when the converter lock¬ 
up clutch is engaged (closed). The flow of cooling oil can be 
reduced in this state thus also reducing the pump power. The flow 
of cooling oil is controlled by the main pressure and can vary 
between 10 l/min and 15 l/min. 

■ System Pressure in Reverse Gear 

The system pressure that is applied in reverse gear has been 
increased from 15 bar to 16 bar. This change caters for the higher 
torque and the higher possible total weight. It ensures that clutch 
slip is prevented even in extreme situations (e.g. uphill gradient with 
trailer). 

■ Clutch Valves 

The clutch valves now exhibit a smaller control space. This facili¬ 
tates a more spontaneous response as the time required until the 
clutch valve reacts to the control pressure applied by the EDS is 
shorter. This results in distinctly shorter gearshift times. 





Solenoid Valves (MV) 

Two solenoid valves are mounted on the hydraulic selector unit. 
These valves are designed as 3/2-way valves, i.e. valves with three 
connections and two switch positions. 

The solenoid valves are controlled by the electronic transmission 
control (EGS) and assume the "opened" or "closed" positions 
making it possible to switch over the hydraulic valves. 

The two solenoid valves are used for the electronically switched 
parking lock. One solenoid valve controls the valve for the parking 
lock and the other solenoid valve locks the cylinderforthe parking 
lock. 

■ Electronic Pressure Control Valves (EDS) 

The electronic pressure control valves convert electrical current 
into a proportional hydraulic pressure. They are driven by the EGS 
and operate the hydraulic valves belonging to the shift elements. 


The tasks of the electronic pressure control valves are listed in the 
following: 


EDS Valve 

Corresponding Shift Element 

l 

Drive Clutch A 

2 

Converter lock-up clutch 

3 

Drive Clutch B 

4 

Drive Clutch E 

5 

Brake Clutch C 

6 

Brake Clutch D 

7 

System pressure 


T he solenoid valve that the E DS (4) in the predecessor model 
assigned to the clutches (D and E) depending on the gearto be 
shifted is no longer required. 


Instead another electronic pressure control valve is used so that 
each clutch is now controlled by its own electronic pressure control 
valve. The pressure control valve 7 maintains a constant system 
pressure during the gearshift operations, thus making shorter shift 
times possible. 


Three different electronic pressure control valves (EDS) are now 
installed which are all resistant to low temperatures. They enable 
stable presentation of the gearshift requirements even at low tem¬ 
peratures and when the transmission fluid is cold: 


EDS with rising characteristic 





Electronic pressure control valves 1, 2: 
Orange cap, rising characteristic 
Technical data: 

• Pressure range 0 to 4.7 bar 

(0 mA =0 bar, TOO mA =4.7 bar) 

• Supply voltage 12 V 

• Resistance 5.05 Ohm (at 20 °C) 


p 



Electronic pressure control valves 4, 5, 6: 
Yellow cap, rising characteristic 
Technical data: 

• Pressure range 0 to 4.6 bar 

(0 mA =0 bar, 700 mA =4.6 bar) 

• Supply voltage 12 V 

• Resistance 5.05 Ohm (at 20 °C) 


EDS with falling characteristic 




p 


Electronic pressure control valves 3, 7: 



Blue cap, rising characteristic 

Technical data: 

Pressure range 0 to 4.6 bar 
(700 mA =0 bar, 0 mA =4.6 bar) 

Supply voltage 12 V 

Resistance 5.05 Ohm (at 20 °C) 


E70 Powertrain Workbook 

19 











































































20 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 


Target gear allocation dependenton accelerator pedal 
gradient 

Target gear allocation dependent on the accelerator pedal gradient 
replaces the previous target gear allocation system dependenton 
the accelerator pedal for the purpose of shifting down while 
accelerating. 

In the case of accelerator-dependent target gear allocation, based 
on the respective downshift characteristic curves, the EGS 
determines whether a downshift is necessary while accelerating. 

The gearbox shifts down by one gear if the accelerator pedal is 
pressed and the first downshift characteristic is reached within a 
certain time. If the accelerator pedal is pressed further, the gearbox 
shifts down again to the second downshift characteristic and again 
to response to the third downshift characteristic. 

In the case of accelerator pedal gradient dependent target gear 
allocation, the EGS determines the target gear already at the first 
downshift characteristic. The accelerator pedal gradient is used for 
this purpose. This is the angle the movement of the accelerator 
pedal currently described or expressed more simply, the speed at 
which the accelerator pedal is depressed. 

The target gear which is now determined in connection with the 
first downshift characteristic is engaged by a multiple downshift 
function. This serves as a boost to overall dynamics as the 
corresponding gear is engaged earlier and the interruption in 
tractive power is minimized. 

Shift S peed C haracteristics 

The transmission control now has three different shift speed levels 
known as quickshift 1, 2 and 3. The higherthe level, the fasterthe 
gearshift. The respective shift speed level is selected as a function 
of the selected drive program ("D", "S" or "M") and the accelerator 
pedal gradient, i.e. as a function of the speed at which the pedal is 
depressed. 


Torque Intervention 

When shifting gear at low load or when coasting, the EGS sends a 
so-called torque pulse to the engine management in orderto 
achieve a torque intervention. 

This is negative when upshifting so that the engine speed is 
reduced. When downshifting while coasting, the torque interven¬ 
tion is positive in orderto boost the engine speed. This torque 
intervention facilitates smooth gearshifts without the torque 
converter having to intervene in this task. 

LIN-bus Module 

The EGS now contains a LIN-bus module for communication with 
the gear selector lever (G WS). 



Gear Selector Lever (GWS) 

The automatic gearbox in the E70 is operated by means of an 
electric gearshift system. This shifter arrangement is similar to the 
E65, however unlike the E65 the E70 is not on the steering column 
but rather in the usual position on the center console. 

The gear selector lever consists of the selector lever itself with 
indicator and the housing with the control unit. 



■ Operation and Functions 

The shift pattern is modeled on the conventional BMW automatic 
gearbox. It features an automatic gate and a manual gate. Only the 
parking lock is not engaged by pushing the selector leverforward 
but rather by pressing a button at the top of the selector lever. 

The selector lever is monostable in both gates (manual and auto¬ 
matic). This means, after being moved, the selector lever always 
returns to its initial position. In the manual gate this is the same as 
automatic gearboxes with Steptronic. 


In addition to the one-touch function, the selector lever can also be 
pushed in the automatic gate. This is comparable to the function 
of the direction indicator stalk in the E90. 

The drive range is changed by tapping the selector lever. A direct 
change from "D" to "R" or vice versa can be achieved by tapping 
the selector lever twice or by pushing the lever. 

The Unlock button is located on the left-hand side ofthe selector 
lever. 

■ Haptic Locks 

Electrically controlled, mechanically actuated locks ensure that the 
selector lever can only be pushed in the logically possible direction, 
e.g. only forward from "D". 

These locks are also used for the shift lock function, i.e. when a 
drive range can be engaged only by pressing the unlock button. 
The selector lever is not locked if it is necessary to depress the 
service brake in order to engage a drive range for example. 

Instead, the function is not executed and a message appears in 
the on-board monitor indicating: "Press brake to engage gear". 

The lock for moving the leverforward differs from the lock for 
moving the lever back. 

The forward lock is a double lock and can therefore prevent over¬ 
pressing the lever when a flick is possible. In contrast to this, the 
backward lock can only completely prevent the movement. 

Wheneverthe selector lever can be pulled back, it can also be 
pulled back beyond the stop even if it no longer has a function. 


E70 Powertrain Workbook 

21 









22 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 


The following graphics illustrate the operating options.The arrows indicate: 

• Yellow arrow - M ovement possible only with unlock button pressed. 

• Grey arrow - M ovement not possible. 

• Green arrow - Movement possible. 



Manual Gate, Sport Program (M/S) 

As before, the sport program is engaged by shifting the selector lever to the left. The selector lever locks in this position. The sport 
program can only be engaged from "D". 


■ Parking Lock"P" 

The parking lock "P" is engaged by pressing the button at the top of the selector lever when the vehicle speed is <2 km/h. The gearbox 
also automatically selects "P" as soon as the engine is turned off and "N" is not engaged. 


■ Automatic Downshift from " M/S" 

The automatic downshift function returns the selector lever from the "M/S" gate to the automatic gate. This occurs, for example, when the 
EGS signals gearbox position "P" as is the case when the engine is shut down orthe "P" button is pressed. 


The selector lever remains locked in the "M/S" gate only if "S" 
automatic downshift is defective or receives no power supply. 


or "M" mode is actually active while driving in forward direction orthe 


5 downshift attempts are executed at intervals of approx. 5 seconds if the selector lever is blocked from the outside, e.g. by an object. 

If the downshift cannot be executed, the check control message: "Move selector lever back into automatic gate" appears after two 
attempts. A fault code memory entry is generated. 









Interface to the EGS 

With the aim of increasing availability, the gear selector lever 
position is sent via the PT-CAN and LIN-bus. This means, a signal 
is still sentto the EGS should the PT-CAN fail. This is not neces¬ 
sary for safety reasons. 

Safety is guaranteed by neutrally complementary signals or alive 
counters. The gear selector switch (GWS) is woken by a high-level 
on the PT-CAN wakeup line. The GSW itself has no active wake-up 
capabilities. 


Definition of Messages 


Interface 

From 

To 

Message 

PT-CAN 

GWS 

EGS 

Gear selector lever 
operation 

PT-CAN 

EGS 

GWS 

Show gearbox data 

LIN-bus 

GWS 

EGS 

Gear selector lever 
operation 

LIN-bus 

EGS 

GWS 

Show gearbox data 


Communication 

The data blocks are sent both event controlled as well as cyclically 
on the PT-CAN. They are sent only cyclically on the LIN-bus. 
Complementary signals are sentforthe purpose of securing the 
transmission link. 

These signals are compared with the actual signals in the respec¬ 
tive receive control unit. Alive counters serve the purpose of 
detecting defects in the transmit control unit. The alive counter in 
the respective receive control unit is monitored to establish 
whether it remains at a constant value. 

A plausibility check between the signals of the PT-CAN transmis¬ 
sion and of the LIN-bus does not take place in the receive control 
unit. 


Safe Status for Sending 

If a GWS-internal plausibility check determines that the position of 
the selector lever can be transmitted incorrectly, the system 
assumes the safe status for sending the message "Operation of 
gear selector lever". 

Consequently, all signals of this message are sent invalid on the 
PT-CAN and the LIN-bus. If it is not possible to ensure that the 
signals can be sent invalid, the sending of these messages is 
completely deactivated. 

Indicator in the Gear Selector Lever 

The task of the indicator in the gear selector lever (GWS) is to 
reliably indicate the drive range currently engaged. The indicator 
consists of the locator light that represents the shift pattern and the 
function lighting. This comprises the various position LEDs that 
indicate the drive range currently engaged. 

The function lights in the gear selector lever are controlled by the 
"Indicate gearbox data" message sent from the EGS. It is neces¬ 
sary to monitor the function lighting. For this purpose, the indica¬ 
tion is read back and compared with the required indication. 

The indicator is active as soon as bus communication is active on 
the PT-CAN orthe LIN-bus. 

■ Flashing of a Position LED 

A position LED flashing draws the driver's attention to incorrect 
operation. The locator lighting remains constant and does not flash. 
The flashing action is triggered by an EGS signal. The frequency is 
0.5 Hz. 

Indicator Flashing Through Diagnosis 

The entire function lighting can be made to flash at a frequency of 
1 Hz for approx. 10 seconds by means of a diagnosis job fortesting 
the indicator. 


E70 Powertrain Workbook 

23 



E70 


Secure Indicator Status 

The indicator is a safety-relevant function so that incorrect indica¬ 
tion must be prevented. The system assumes the secure indicator 
status if the possibility of an incorrect indication cannot be ruled 
out. 

The function lighting is switched off for this purpose. The locator 
lighting remains switched on. 

Transfer to the secure status can be triggered by two events: 

• Defective communication on the bus or 

• An internal defect in the gear selector lever 

The main transmission path to the EGS is the PT-CAN. If the 
"Display gearbox data" message is not received correctly on the 
PT-CAN, the gear selector lever will change overto the LIN-bus. 

If, after changing overto the LIN-bus, a fault is also detected on this 
communication path, the system will assume the secure status. 
The plausibility check of the LIN-bus is constantly executed in the 
background. If it is necessary to change overto the LIN-bus in the 
event of a defect, it is possible to switch directly to the secure 
indicator state if the system detects beforehand that there are 
problems with the communication on the LIN-bus. 

A fault code entry is generated in response to changing overto the 
secure status due to communication problems. This fault situation 
is irreversible. If the "Display gearbox data" message is received 
correctly again, the indicator will be activated normally once again 
after 2 seconds. 

The gear selector lever immediately changes overto the secure 
indicator status if the diagnostic function in the gear selector lever 
detects an implausibility regarding the indicator. 

In this case, a corresponding fault code entry is generated. This 
fault case is not reversible until the next time the gear selector lever 
assumes sleep mode. 


Workbook 


Park and Unlock Button 


Evaluating the P-button 

The P-button sends the driver's choice to apply the parking lock to 
the EGS. 

• The P-button is read by means of two contacts in inverse 
logic. 

• The two contacts are evaluated in separate logic and repre¬ 
sented by the two signals PI and P2 independent of each 
other. 

• Before being sent, the P2 signal is inverted in the gear selec¬ 
tor lever. 

• The two contacts in the gear selector lever are compared for 
diagnostic purposes. A fault code entry is stored if different 
contacts are applied for longerthan 2 seconds. 

• An internal diagnostic function in the gear selector lever 
detects a defective contact and enters a corresponding fault 
code in the fault code memory. 

• The button sticking is detected when at least one contact is 
applied for longerthan 2 minutes. 

• The PI and P2 signals are sent independent of each other on 
the PT-CAN and redundantly on the LIN-bus to the EGS. 

• Due to the confirmation tolerances, one signal can be sent as 
confirmed before the other. 

If the required conditions are met (speed,...), the EGS will engage 
the parking lock when at least one signal (PI and/or P2) was sent 
as confirmed. 





Evaluating the Unlock Button 

The lock to shift to "R" or out of "P" is released by pressing the 
unlock button. 

• The unlock button is read by means of two contacts in inverse 
logic. 

• The two contacts in the gear selector lever are compared for 
diagnostic purposes. A fault code entry is stored if different 
contacts are applied for longerthan 2 seconds. 

• An internal diagnostic function in the gear selector lever 
detects a defective contact and enters a corresponding fault 
code in the fault code memory. 

• Before being sent, the P2 signal is inverted in the gear selec¬ 
tor lever. 

• The button sticking is detected when at least one contact is 
applied for longerthan 2 minutes. 

• Both signals are sent on the PT-CAN and redundantly on the 
LIN-bus to the EGS as soon as a contact is detected as con¬ 
firmed. 


Components 

Sensors 

The selector lever position is detected without contact with the aid 
of seven Hall sensors for detecting the selector lever position in the 
longitudinal direction of the vehicle as well as four Hall sensors for 
detecting the selector lever position in the transverse direction of 
the vehicle. 

In the event of one individual sensor failing, the software in the gear 
selector lever is still capable of calculating the correct position of 
the selector lever. 


Actuators 

Three actuators are used. A motor with subsequently connected 
gear mechanism is used for shifting out of the "M/S" gate and for 
the lock (inhibit) to "M/S". 

A bi-directional spring-centered double magnet is used forthe 
inhibit in "R" direction. A single magnet with spring reset is used 
forthe inhibit in "D" direction. 

The actuators do not inhibit the shift to "R" and "D" in the case of 
fault or if no power is applied. 


E70 Powertrain Workbook 

25 



26 

E70 Powertrain Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - GWS 


Demonstrate the emergency release procedure for the E 70 
transmission as shown below: 


Remove GWS assembly from center console. 
Observe proper removal steps with regard to bolts. 
What 2 bus systems connect GWS with EGS and Why? 



When the transmission park lock is released manually, are there any 
indications to the driver/technician? 


Is there any mechanical connection between GWS and EGS? 


Re-install GWS assembly using proper procedures. 

Go to diagnostics and look for any status requests or 
component activations. List below: 


Apply parking brake for safety. Operate shifter through all 
modes (P,R,N,D etc.). Note shifter operation and indicator 
lights. 

With the vehicle is Drive (sport mode), turn off ignition. 
What happens to the shifter when the ignition is turned off? 






















