Table of Contents 


E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

Subject Page 

E70 Voltage Supply . 5 

Overview of System Components.6 

Vehicle Battery .6 

Distribution Box (on battery).6 

Energy Management .7 

Bus Systems . 10 

New Bus Systems on the E70.10 

Diagnosis CAN .11 

Location of D-CAN Connector .11 

FlexRay .12 

FlexRay in the E70.13 

MOST Bus .14 

MOST Users.14 

MOST Access .14 

Car Access System 3 (CAS3) .17 

History of the Car Access System .17 

Functional Overview .17 

Electronic Vehicle Immobilizer 3 (EWS 3) .18 

Electronic Vehicle Immobilized (EWS 4).18 

Design of EWS 4 .18 

Start Enable through EWS .19 

Data Transmission .19 


Initial Print Date: 12/06 


Revision Date: 

























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Secret Key.19 

Gearbox Enable.20 

Start Value Matching .20 

Emergency Release.20 

Vehicle Data Storage .21 

Data for Condition-based Service.21 

Manual Update of CBS Data.21 

Manual Update of Fault Memory Data.21 

Control Unit Replacement.21 












Table of Contents 


Subject 


Page 



4 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 


Voltage Supply and Bus Systems 

Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe changes to the E70 Voltage Supply Systems 

• Understand the Bus Systems as applied to the E70 

• Understand the new D-CAN and FlexRay 







E70 Voltage Supply 



With regard to voltage supply on the E70, much of the vehicle is configured in a similar mannerto the E9X 
vehicles. 

With increases in technology, there is an ever-increasing load on the electrical system. As with every new 
model, the power supply system becomes more significant. 

In the E70, there are two power distribution boxes. The front distribution box (2) is below the glovebox and 
the rear power distribution box(l) is on the right hand side of the luggage compartment. 

The illustration above shows the layout of the primary power supply system components. 

Also, there is a distribution box on the battery which contains large capacity fuses. 


E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

5 





















6 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 


Overview of System Components 

The power supply system of the E70 consists of the following 
components: 

• Vehicle battery 

• Distribution box on the battery 

• Rear distribution box on the right-hand side 
ofthe luggage compartment 

• Battery cables 

• Front distribution box behind the glove compartment 

• J unction box control unit 

• E-box engine compartment 

• J ump start connection point 

• Alternator. 

The most important new features/changes to the power supply 
system in the E70 are described below. 

Vehicle Battery 

The vehicle battery is installed in the luggage compartment floor. 

The vehicle batteries are AGM type, and depending upon equip¬ 
ment, they are either 70 Ah or 90 Ah. 

Distribution Box (on battery) 

The distribution box in the luggage compartment ofthe E70 is 
mounted directly on the vehicle battery. The rear distribution box on 
the battery is secured on the vehicle battery by means of a metal 
tab. The metal tabs must be pressed downward and outward in 
order to release the distribution box. 


The distribution box on the battery is equipped with fuses for the 
following electric loads: 

• E lectrical auxiliary heater (100 A) 

• Valvetronic or common rail system (80 A) 

• Intelligent battery sensor IB S 

• Reserve 

• Front distribution box (250 A) 

• Rear distribution box (100 A) 

• Large electric fan 850 W (100 A) 

• Reserve. 

The distribution box on the battery should be replaced only as a 
complete unit. 

The fuses are integrated as a complete unit in the housing ofthe 
distribution box on the battery. The fuses differ in terms of their 
power rating. The distribution box additionally contains the power 
supplyforthe BS. 

Note: The connectors are color coded and mechanically coded to 
avoid confusion. These are high power connections, therefore 
always ensure correct contacting! 

When replacing or working on the distribution box, always make 
sure the plug connections and, above all, that the screw connec¬ 
tions are secured properly. 

Connection between battery terminal and distribution box =15 Nm. 





Distribution Box (on battery) 



Energy Management 

The E70 is equipped with Advanced Power Management. This 
simply means that the power management system includes the 
Intelligent Battery Sensor (IBS). 

M uch of the system functions the same as the E90 on which it is 
based. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Advanced Power Management 

7 

Electrical loads 

2 

Idle speed boost 

8 

Electrical system and battery 
diagnosis 

3 

Engine 

9 

BMW Diagnostic System 

4 

Charging voltage target value 

10 

Intelligent Battery Sensor 

5 

Alternator 

11 

Battery Data 

6 

Electrical load reduction 




E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

7 




























































8 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Power Supply 


Using the instructor designated vehicle and the ETM's in 
WebTIS, locate the relays in the front & rear power distribution 
boxes. 


Fill in the chart at the right denoting the relay designation and 
whether or not it is soldered to the PC board. 


Relay Designation 


Soldered 


Yes 


























Exercise - PowerSupply 


\S_ 

Continue with the exercise using the front power distribution box. 


Relay Designation 


Soldered 



E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

9 



























10 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 



1 


HSJSB 




TPM SEN 

iiUi 


&VFA 


53FA 


ASF 

£■ 


E-wr 

a 


I I Jl> II JBI JiB 



I IJI IJI IJIIJE 


i ■ j i i j iiaii 


1 


■ i ii i n iji i i 

■ neiiFnni 

. m m iii ■■ j 


| ■ m ■ ibi ii gj 7 

KldlildUJUJ kI 


New Bus Systems on the E70 


The bus network on the E70 is built upon the foundation from the E90. Many of the bus systems have been carried over. 
As far as the E70 bus systems are concerned, there are two new systems not previously used: 

• D-CAN - This is the Diagnosis CAN which will be phased into all models from this point. 

• FlexRay- FlexRayis currently used only on the Vertical Dynamics Management System (VDM). 





































































































































































Diagnosis CAN 

After connecting a BMW diagnostic system, the gateway (junction 
box control unit) places the requests of the BMW diagnostic 
system on the internal buses. The responses undergo the same 
process in opposite direction. 

In future, a new communication protocol will be used for diagnosis. 
The D-CAN will replace worldwide the previous diagnostic inter¬ 
face and its protocol which is based on KWP 2000 (Keyword 
Protocol 2000). 

The reason for the changeover is a new legal requirement in the 
USA requiring that all vehicles be equipped with the D-CAN as 
from model year 2008. The transitional phase will begin in 
September 2006. 

This modification will then be phased-in on all BMW models. 

In order to connect diagnostic equipment to a vehicle equipped 
with D-CAN, only the OPS orOPPS can be used in conjunction 
with the correct cable shown below. 


Location of D-CAN Connector 

The diagnosis socket is located underthe dashboard on the 
driver's side in the same location as previous diagnostic 
connectors. 

D-CAN support with the diagnostic head is technically not possible. 
The following interfaces can be used: 

• OPS 

• OPPS 

OBD access in the vehicle will remain unchanged. 

The pin assignments are as follows: 

• 16 =Terminal 30 

• 5 =Terminal 31 

•14+6 = Communication connections 

The diagnosis socket is located underthe dashboard 
on the driver's side. 


The cable should have the appropriate "CAN Included" markings. 



c an included 
l/ace in G ftp wry 

L A 





E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

11 






















12 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 


FlexRay 

Up until now, the CAN bus format has provided the necessary 
speed required for today's vehicle systems. From this point on, 
many of the new features and systems will require a more robust 
network with much higher communication speeds. 

Therefore, in 1999, the FlexRay consortium was founded by 
BMW AG, Philips, Motorola (Freescale) and Daimler Chrysler AG. 
This consortium set forth developing innovative communication 
technology for the future of the automobile. 

Since 1999, the FlexRay consortium was joined by additional 
partners including GM, Ford, Mazda, Bosch, and Siemens VDO. 

Soon after many other automotive industry concerns have signed 
on allowing FlexRay to become an industrial standard. 


lifr 

LH-r lisJ h | IABI 




!- i- if • I.-ii -• 




Gegelopment Member 

■Ji 

Associate Member ,, 




1 j la ■ ju 


'lUJati 
“■ 0 * 'll 





KVUKJkfl,V 
Hia, wgTtfFig 


fynn 

I Inc'njnlcf 

1 nyTi|ji 

Rcr-euCi 


E?MW Giuuij 




Dclptn 

Dj-inlSrChtiffillfir ■ . . 


Philips 


General Wotora 




rinrw^ 

K.n± 
SMnr Go 


NIH^N „ 

FrE'C-scnl-n Sc-micantiuctQr 1 >nl lental 
■ cq„V^ IWsACSfiCo 

lycu Fa^d 

PSA FfLviifli Cliraon 


MUL 

Un i!i ■ niihi l.l.T iM ll 


LL-rrJL.-a 

4cm ChESFnE 9vf4mAE 


Lmr- Ji.. i i i> i l il 


Flexray, with a communication speed of 10 Mbits/second,far 
exceeds the current CAN based systems at 500 Kbits/second. 

In addition to speed, FlexRay offers efficient "real time" capabilities. 

The following outlines the advantages of FlexRay: 

• High bandwidth (10 M bits£ compared to 0.5 M bits/s of the CAN) 

• Deterministic (= real-time capabilities) data transmission 

• Reliable data communication 

• Supports system integration 

• Standard in automotive industry 
























































FlexRay in the E70 



Currently, the only system on the E70 which uses the FlexRay bus system is the Vertical Dynamics 
Management (VDM). This system is similarto the EDC system known from existing vehicle. 

The use of FlexRay will be expanded in future models. M any powertrain and chassis systems will 
adopt this format in order to be compatible with the requirements of future systems. 

For more information on FlexRay and VDM, referto the Chassis Dynamics section of this workbook. 


E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

13 



14 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 


MOST Bus 

MOST Users 

In the E70, the MOST but is used forthe components in informa¬ 
tion/communication systems. The CCC, M-ASK orthe CHAM P is 
used as the master control unit. 

Other bus users may be: 

• CD changer/DVD changer 

• Top-HiFi amplifier 

• Satellite tuner SDARS, IBOC (U.S only) 

• Telephone 

• Head-up display HUD 

The following overview shows a possible equipment configuration. 



MOST Access 

As on all vehicles equipped with a MOST bus system, direct 
MOST access is also provided on the E70. 

The direct MOST access is located on the right hand side under 
the dashboard in the vehicle interior. 

A cover provides direct access to the MOST. 

The two connectors are then plugged together. The OP S/OP PS 
can now be connected to the connector as usual. 

The two connectors must be removed from the holder secured on 
the cover. 




























E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

15 



16 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 


Car Access System 3 













► 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hood contact switch 

8 

Terminal 15 

2 

Car Access System 3 

9 

Electronic Outer Door Handle Module 

3 

Digital Motor Electronics 

10 

Telematics Control Unit 

4 

Intelligent Battery Sensor 

11 

START-STOP Button 

5 

Starter 

12 

Central Lock Button 

6 

J unction Box Control Unit 

13 

Brake Light Switch 

7 

Identification Transmitter 

14 

Dynamic Stability Control 


































































Car Access System 3 (CAS3) 

The Car Access System now features the 3rd generation of control 
units. The electronic vehicle immobilizer 4 (EWS 4) is also used in 
connection with the Car Access System 3. 

The previous functions of the electronic vehicle immobilizer 3 have 
been retained. The Car Access System 3 can therefore be operat¬ 
ed together with the electronic vehicle immobilizer 3 or 4. 

The digital motor electronics and the Car Access System 3 are 
incorporated in the overall electronic vehicle immobilizer system in 
the E70. 

In addition, the electronic transmission control is used as a further 
immobilizer in the E70.The electronic vehicle immobilizer 4 
improves the anti-theft properties of the vehicle. 

A longer cryptic code is used for the data exchange. The cryptic 
code provides the enable to start the engine. The Car Access 
System 3 is backwards compatible with the Car Access System 2. 
This means the functions of the Car Access System 2 are also 
included in the Car Access System 3. 

The electronic vehicle immobilizer 3 orthe electronic vehicle 
immobilizer 4 is used depending on the engine installed and the 
associated digital engine management. 

The table below shows the assignment of the engine management 
to the respective electronic vehicle immobilizer. 


Vehicle 

Launch Date 

Engine 

Engine 

Management 

EWS 

Function 

E70 

10/06 

N62B4801 

ME9.2.3 

EWS 3 

E70 

10/06 

N52B30O1 

MSV80 

EWS 4 


History of the Car Access System 

The Car Access System was used forthe first time in the E65 
(03/2002). It has undergone continuous further development and 
has been successively introduced in various BMW models. 

Functional Overview 

The Car Access System 3 is responsible for many functions, 
including the masterforthe following functions: 

• Central locking 

• Power windows 

• Panoramic glass roof 

• Comfort Access 

The Car Access System 3 enables or interrupts the execution of 
the aforementioned functions. 

The control units which execute the functions are: 


Control units which execute functions 

J unction Box Control unit (| BE) 

Central Locking 

Footwell Module (FRM) 

PowerWindows 

Roof Functions Center (FZD) 

Panoramic Glass Roof 

Comfort Access (CA) 

Comfort Access 


Further functions are integrated in the Car Access System 3. 


They are: 

• Terminal control 

• Electronic vehicle immobilizer4 

• Vehicle data storage 


E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

17 



18 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 


Electronic Vehicle lmmobilizer3 (EWS 3) 

The familiar functions of the previous EWS 3 system have been 
retained. The CAS 3 system is integrated in the system network 
via the K-CAN. The vehicle key data are read into the Car Access 
System 3 via the key slot. 

Pin 20 is used in connection with the Car Access System 3. 

The enable code is signalled to the digital motor management via 
this pin. 

The Car Access System 3 contains the start relay that is activated 
by means of an integrated circuit. The integrated circuit is informed 
via a separate line (A_S_Start) that the digital engine electronics is 
ready to start. Furthermore, the start procedure is terminated via 
the A_S_Start line if the engine does not start up because, for 
example, there is a fault in the PT-CAN system. Data transmission 
is unidirectional. 

Electronic Vehicle Immobilized (EWS 4) 

The electronic vehicle immobilizer 4 is an immobilizer system that 
prevents unauthorized engine start. It was used for the first time in 
the CAS 3 system in the E92. 

The EWS 4 system uses a new, modern encryption system. 

A 128 bit long secret key is assigned to each vehicle and stored in 
the BMW database. This secret key is known only to BMW. The 
secret key is programmed and locked in the Car Access System 3 
and in the digital engine management. 

0 nee entered in the control unit, the secret key can no longer be 
changed, deleted or read. This therefore means that each control 
unit is assigned to a specific vehicle. 

The electronic vehicle immobilizer 4 operates with bidirectional and 
redundant data transmission. The K-CAN (CAN protocol) and 
CAS-bus (K-bus protocol) are used forthis purpose. 


Pin 30 of the CAS 3 system serves as the connection to the 
CAS-bus. 

The redundant data transmission enables operation of the elec¬ 
tronic vehicle immobilizer even if a bus system fails due to a defect. 

Design of EWS 4 

The vehicle immobilizer consists of the identification transmitter 
which identifies itself to the vehicle and therefore to the Car Access 
System 3. The Car Access System 3 exchanges data via the CAS- 
bus with the digital motor electronics and thus cancels the 
immobilizerfunction. 

The software for the electronic vehicle immobilizer as well as the 
enable for the starter is resident in the CAS 3. The digital engine 
management is responsible for issuing the enable for the ignition 
and fuel injection. 

The gearbox functions are enabled by the electronic transmission 
control. The remote control orthe identification transmitter must 
be identified as matching the vehicle before the electronic vehicle 
immobilizer issues the start enable. This already takes place before 
a vehicle is unlocked. 

A renewed check (authentication) must be performed as soon as 
an attempt is made to start the engine. The check establishes 
whether the remote control matches the vehicle orthe identifica¬ 
tion transmitter is located in the vehicle interior. 

The vehicle can be started if the check is successful. 
Authentication starts with the status "Terminal 15 ON". 

Note: The start enable can be given only by a remote 
control matching the vehicle ora suitable 
identification transmitter. 




Start Enable through EWS 

The start procedure is enabled by means of a special request and 
response procedure known as challenge-response. As from 
"Terminal 15 ON", the digital engine management sends an 
encrypted random numberto the CAS 3.The DME (ECM) control 
module generates the random number in a random number 
generator. 




From this random number together with its secret key, the 
CAS 3 system calculates a response and sends it to the DME. 

In the meantime, the digital engine management calculates the 
expected response from the random number with its secret key. 

The CAS 3 system and the DM E use the same secret key and 
algorithm forthe calculation. The electronic vehicle immobilizer is 
cancelled if the value which the CAS 3 sends to the digital engine 
management agrees with the value calculated by the engine 
management. 

The engine can now be started. 


Note: As from "Terminal 15 ON", a cyclic query (challenge- 
response) is performed as long as the engine is notyet 
running. A fault code is entered in the CAS 3 if there is 
no query from the digital engine management approxi¬ 
mately 10 seconds afterthe start of the request. 


Data Transmission 

Data transmission is redundant via the bus systems. The signal 
from the DM E reaches the CAS 3 via the K-CAN and the 
CAS-bus. 

The DME, however, is connected to the PT-CAN. For this reason, 
the signal is sent via the gateway of the junction box control unit to 
the K-CAN. The runtime of the signals via the bus systems is of no 
significance as the signal that reaches the DM E first is used forthe 
electronic vehicle immobilizer. 

The authentication is repeated in response to following events: 

• Transmission and response time exceeded 

• Transmission problems 

• Response with the secret security code incorrect (e.g. 
incorrect secret key due to control unit from another vehicle). 

S ec ret Key 

The control units are assigned a secret key on the assembly line. 
This secret key is generated from a random number. The secret 
key is valid fora pair of control units and linked to the specific 
vehicle. This means that one pair of control units receives the same 
secret key. Once the secret key has been entered, the control unit 
is locked. From this point on, the control unit is permanently tied to 
this secret key and the vehicle. 

The CAS 3 and the digital motor electronics form one pair of 
control units. 

Note: S ince the control units are assigned to the specific 
vehicle, replacement with a unit from another vehicle 
is not possible. When replacing a control unit, the 
new control unit must be ordered from BMW. 
Matching of the control units to each other is no 
longer necessary. 


E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

19 







































20 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 


Gearbox Enable 

The enable is based on a procedure similar to that used for EWS 3. 
As from "Terminal 15 ON", the CAS 3 sends encrypted individual 
codes to the electronic transmission control. The electronic trans¬ 
mission control deciphers and checks these individual codes. 

If the check is successful, the gearbox control unit will enable the 
gearbox functions. 

The electronic gearbox control unit forms a pair of control units 
together with the CAS 3. 

Start Value Matching 

A start value matching procedure between the CAS 3 and the 
electronic transmission control is performed on the assembly line. 
As part of this procedure, the CAS 3 transfers in encrypted form an 
individual code to the electronic transmission control. 

Consequently, the electronic transmission control knows the indi¬ 
vidual code and can check whetherthe gearbox functions can be 
enabled. 

Emergency Release 

The parking lock cannot be released in the event of a defect or 
data transmission error. Forthis reason, the E70 features a 
mechanical emergency release facility for the parking lock. 

A handle for the emergency release of the parking lock is located in 
the luggage compartment. This handle must be plugged in under 
the left cup holder, turned through 90° and pushed down. 

The gearbox is released as soon as the handle has been locked in 
position. The vehicle can now be towed but not driven. 

Note: The handle must remain locked in position while the 
vehicle is being towed. The parking lock will engage if 
the handle is removed while the vehicle is being towed. 

This could cause an accident in unfavorable towing 
situations. 







Vehicle Data Storage 

The Car Access System 3 stores the following vehicle data: 

• Personal Profile, the Car Access System 3 stores data for the 
Personal Profile 

• Vehicle order, the vehicle order is stored in the footwell module 

• Redundant data storage for instrument cluster 

• Data for condition-based service CBS 

• Authentication for diagnosis access to vehicle 

Data for Condition-based Service 

The data for condition-based service are stored and transferred to 
the remote control. 

This data can be read out via the key reader for service purposes. 
The data for the condition-based service are updated during vehi¬ 
cle operation. The data in the fault code memory are also updated 
during vehicle operation. 

The conditions are: 

• "Terminal 15 ON", Speed above 50 km/h and below 30 km/h 

• The data are updated after covering a distance of 10 km and 
at a speed below 30 km/h. 

■ M anual U pdate of C B S Data 

The procedure for transferring current data to the remote control 
during servicing is as follows: 

• Insert remote control in its holder 

• Press and hold center-lock button and select "terminal 15 
ON" with the STARTSTOP button. 

• After 15 s the CBS data will have been transferred to the 
remote control. 

• Read out remote control. 


Manual Update of Fault Memory Data 

The procedure for transferring current data to the remote control 
during servicing is as follows: 

• Press and hold center-lock button 

• Insert remote control in its holder 

• Select "Terminal 15 ON" with the START-STOP button 

• The fault code memory data are transferred to the remote 
control after 15 seconds. 

• Read out remote control. 

Control Unit Replacement 

A defect in the control units belonging to the EWS represents a 
challenge forthe Service technician. Since a defective control unit 
cannot be replaced by control units from other vehicles particular 
care is necessary when performing the diagnostic procedure. 

A defective control unit can be ordered through spare part 
channels. However, it is important to bear in mind that the digital 
engine management and the CAS 3 were supplied already coded 
to the vehicle. 

This has the advantage that only the control unit is replaced and 
the matching procedure with the electronic vehicle immobilizer is 
not necessary. There is no point in ordering a control unit to be 
kept in stock as the secret key is assigned to the control unit and 
the vehicle. 

A matching procedure is necessary for the electronic transmission 
control after replacement. As part of this procedure, the CAS 3 
transfers the individual code to the electronic transmission control. 

Note: The matching procedure can take several minutes. 


E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 

21 



22 

E70 Voltage Supply and Bus Systems Workbook 



Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


5. On the E70, which system incorporates the new FlexRay 
technology? (C ircle those that apply) 


1. Which of the following devices is NOT compatible with 

D- CAN equipped vehicles? (Cross out those not applicable) 


VDM 

HUD 


CCC 

AS 


DSC 

ARS 


FRM 

DME 






Which of the following test cables is compatible with a 
D-CAN equipped vehicle? (Circle those that apply) 






Circle the bus systems which have NOT been in use prior to 
the introduction ofthe E70? 

LIN byteflight MOST K-CAN D-CAN 

BSD PT-CAN F-CAN FlexRay Lo-CAN 



What is the communication speed ofthe FlexRay system? 
(circle the applicable answer) 

10 Mbits/s 500K/bits/sec 22.5 Mbits/sec 


The D-CAN signal wires are incorporated into the OBD 
connector at pins: (C ircle the applicable answer) 

5 and 16 16 and 14 5 and 6 14 and 6 

The CAS-bus connects: (circle the applicable answer) 

DME, CAS 3 and J B 
DME, EGS and CAS 3 
EGS, GWS and DWA 
EGS, J B and FRM 

The CAS 3 system is the master for which of the following 
functions: (Circle those that apply) 

Central locking PowerWindows 

Panorama Roof Comfort Access 

On the E70,the KL30g_f relay is located: 

(Circle those that apply) 

In the front power distribution box 

In the rear power distribution box 

In the FRM 

In the CCC 











