Table of Contents 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

Subject Page 

Chassis And Suspension .7 

Front Axle .8 

Virtual Pivot Point.9 

Front Axle Data .9 

Front Axle Adjustments.9 

Rear Axle.10 

Chassis Comparison (E70 vs. E53) .11 

Wheels and Tires.12 

RSC tires with emergency running properties .12 

Extended Hump Rims (EH2+) .12 

Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS).12 

Brakes.13 

Steering Column .13 

Lateral Dynamics .14 

Active Steering (AS).14 

Changes to Active Steering .15 

Cumulative (total) Steering Angle (virtual) .15 

Electronically Controlled Bypass Valve (EVV).15 

Yaw-rate Control Plus (GRR+).16 

Special Feature .16 

Difference to Yaw Moment Compensation .16 


Initial Print Date: 12/06 


Revision Date: 
























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Vertical Dynamics.18 

Adaptive Drive .18 

Vertical Dynamics Control.19 

Comparison between EDC-K in the E65 and VDC in the E70.20 

VDC System Overview .21 

VDC Overview Explanation .21 

Objectives of the VDC System .22 

System Network .22 

VDC Components .23 

Control Strategy .23 

Display Control .24 

Degradation Behavior in the Event of a Fault.24 

Diagnostic Functions .24 

EDC Satellite Control (with damper) .25 

EDC Satellite Control Unit.25 

Twin-Tube Gas Pressure Damper.26 

Ride-height Sensor.26 

E70 Ride Height SensorVariants .27 

FlexRay in the E70 .28 

Bus Topology .29 

Line-based Bus Topology.29 

Point-to-point Bus Topology.29 

Mixed Bus Topology.29 

Redundant Data Transmission .29 

Bus Topology of FlexRay in the E70.30 

Transmission Medium - Signal Properties .30 

Deterministic Data Transmission.31 






























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Bus Protocol.31 

High Bandwidth.31 

Synchronization.31 

Wake-up and Sleep Characteristics.32 

Wiring .32 

Active Roll Stabilization .36 

Passive vs. Active Roll Bar .36 

ARS System Overview (E70).37 

ARS System Components.38 

ARS Control M odule .38 

Lateral Acceleration Sensor .38 

Active Anti-roll Bar .39 

Hydraulic Valve Block.40 

Tandem Pump.41 

Radial Piston Pump (part of tandem pump).41 

Vane-cell Pump (part of the tandem pump).41 

Fluid Reservoir.42 

Fluid Level Sensor .42 

Hydraulic-fluid Cooler.42 

Service Notes.43 

Steering Angle Calibration.43 

ARS Initialization .43 

ARS Bleeding Procedure .43 

Programming .43 

Coding.43 

Electronic Height Control (EHC) .44 

EHC Control Unit.45 






























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Air Supply Unit (LVA) .45 

AirSuspension .45 

Ride-height Sensor.45 

Longitudinal Dynamics.46 

Dynamic Stability Control .46 

ABS .46 

DSC System Overview.47 

Overview of DSC Components.48 

DSC Hydraulic Unit.48 

DSC Control Unit .48 

Wheel Speed Sensor.48 

DSC Sensor.48 

Steering Column Switch Cluster(SZL).49 

Overview of DSC Functions (DSC E7X) .49 

Electromechanical Parking Brake (EMF) .50 

Basic Functions of EM F .51 

Emergency Release.51 

Restoring Operation After Emergency Release.51 

EMF Components.52 

EMF Button .52 

EMF Actuating Unit .52 

EMF Actuating Unit (Internal Components).53 

Service Information for EM F .54 

Adjusting the Brake Shoes .54 

Removing the Bowden Cable Assemblies.54 

Start-up .54 





























Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Initializing the Parking Brake.55 

Bedding in the Duo-servo Brake .55 

Function on Brake Rolling Dynamometer .55 

Example Scenarios .55 

Transition from EMF Actuating Unitto DSC .55 

Transition from DSC to EMF Actuating Unit.55 

Function of the Parking Brake Controlled by the DSC Hydraulics .56 

Dynamic Braking .56 

Exiting Dynamic Emergency Braking .57 

Error Messages .57 

General Parking Brake Fault Concept .58 

Fault Distribution Between DSC and EMF Control Unit.58 

Fault Regeneration .58 

Dynamic Cruise Control (DCC) .59 

















6 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


E70 Chassis Dynamics 

Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

IBIECTIVES 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify and Adjust E70 Front Suspension 

• Diagnose VDC and FlexRay Concerns 


• Understand Changes to Active Steering on the E70 



Chassis And Suspension 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

7 








8 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Front Axle 

Forthe first time on a BMW vehicle, a double wishbone front axle is used on the E70. The outstanding driving dynamics, the excellent 
driving comfort as well as the stable straight-ahead running properties are factors of this design solution that contribute to a high degree of 
driving pleasure and safety while making the vehicle ideal for every day use and providing the most relaxing drive on long journeys. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Ride-height sensor 

2 

Mount 

3 

Spring strut 

4 

Uppercontrol arm (upperwishbone) 

5 

Spring strut support 

6 

Swivel bearing 

7 

Wheel bearing 

8 

Stabilizer link 

9 

Tension strut with hydraulic mount 

10 

Control arm, bottom 

11 

Spring strut fork 

12 

Anti-roll bar 


The addition of the upper control arm (wishbone) positively 
influences front wheel travel by reducing Camber changes during 
jounce and rebound events. 


The arrangement of the suspension allows the strut assembly to 
be focused on dampening duties alone. The strut is no longer part 
of the steering, but fixed in place (no upper bearing). 

The steering axis now rotates by way of the swivel bearing (6). 

The arrangement of the front suspension includes bearings at 
various swivel points. This allows for reduced friction, which in turn 
allows the damper (strut) to respond more sensitively to road 
surface irregularities. 

This design works well in conjunction with the Vertical Dynamics 
M anagement (VDM) system. 




























Components with special materials (see graphic on previous page): 

• The forged aluminum swivel bearing (6) with the 3rd genera¬ 
tion wheel bearing (7) Semi-trailing arm connected via steel 
bushes/tapered screw connection to the swivel bearing. 
Attention: Referto special repair instructions! 

• The A-arm at the top (4) is made from forged aluminum and 
the cylindrical joint pin is clamped in the swivel bearing (6). 

• Tension strut with hydraulic mount (9) and bottom control arm 
(10) are forged steel components while the bottom control 
arm bears the spring strut (3) by means of the cast steel 
spring strut fork (11). 

• The front axle subframe is a welded steel structure with an 
aluminum thrust panel for maximum lateral stiffness with 
service openings. 

Virtual Pivot Point 

The steering pivot axis of the wheel suspension is now formed by a 
joint at the top A-arm and the virtual pivot point of the lower arm 
level as known from the spring strut or McPherson axle. 




Front Axle Data 


Front axle data 

E70 

Wheel 

R18 8.5J X 18 EH2 +IS46 

Tires 

255/55 R18 

Rim offset (mm) 

46 

Tire radius (mm) 

338 

Wheelbase (mm) 

2933 

Track width (mm) 

1644 

Camber 

-0° 20' ±20' 

Camber difference 

0° ±30' 

Total toe-in 

10' ±6’ 

Wheel axle angle 

o 

O 

Kingpin offset (mm) 

-8.4 

Toe-out difference angle 

2.1° ±30' 

Caster angle 

7° 48' ±30' 


Front Axle Adjustments 

The toe adjustment on the front axle is carried out by means of a 
tie rod adjustment as on past models. 

The Camber adjustment, however, can only be adjusted by a 
replacement of the upper control arm (wishbone). The control arm 
is available in three possible part numbers. One of which is the 
standard (zero) arm, while the other two are offset to effect a small 
Camberchange if needed. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

9 

















10 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Rear Axle 

The E70 utilizes the integral IV rear axle from the E53 with some 
further improvements. This rear axle design contributes to 
improved driving dynamics without compromising comfort and 
driving safety. 

The rear axle arrangement made it possible to increase the width 
and depth of the load area. The result is a considerably larger and 
more functional load space (third row of seats) particularly through 
the use of the single-axle air spring (rear axle air suspension). 

The resulting advantages include: 

• Outstanding driving dynamics, further increased compared to 
the E53, without compromising comfort and driving safety. 

• Distinctly larger and more functional load area by increasing 
the effective load width and depth. 

• Level control (1-axis air suspension) ensures constant ride- 
height and driving characteristics irrespective of the vehicle 
load. 



Rear axle data 

E70 

Wheel 

R18 8.5J X 18 EH2 +IS46 

Tires 

255/55 R18 

Rim offset (mm) 

46 

Tire radius (mm) 

338 

Wheelbase (mm) 

2933 

Track width (mm) 

1650 

Camber 

-1° 30' ±15' 

Camber difference 

0° ±30' 

Total toe-in 

10' ±6' 

Wheel axle angle 

o 

O 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Control arm 

2 

Wheel carrier 

3 

Integral link 

4 

Upper radius arm 

5 

Swinging arm 
























Chassis Comparison (E70 vs. E53) 



E53 

E70 

Front axle 

Double pivot spring strut front axle 

Double wishbone front axle 

Suspension/damping, front 

Steel spring orairspring 

Steel spring 

Anti-roll bar, front 

M echanical 

M echanical or Hydraulic 

Rear axle 

Integral IV 

Integral IV 

Suspension/damping, rear 

Steel spring orairspring 

Steel spring orairspring 

Anti-roll bar, rear 

M echanical 

M echanical or Hydraulic 

Brake, front 

B rake disc diameter up to 356 mm 

Brake disc diameter up to 365 mm 

Brake, rear 

Brake disc diameter up to 324 mm 

Brake disc diameter up to 345 mm 

Parking brake 

Drum brake, mechanical 

Drum brake, with electro-mechanical parking brake (EMF) 

Wheels/tires 

Standard tires 

Run flat tires 

Steering 

Power steering orServotronic 

Power steering or active steering 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

11 








































12 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Wheels and Tires 

Forthe first time, an X-vehicle is equipped as standard with the run 
flat safety system. Tire damage and tire failure are among the most 
feared driving experiences. 

The BMW run flat safety system: 

• Warns the driver in good time of imminent tire pressure loss 
so that counter-measure can be taken. 

• Allows the journey to be continued for a defined distance even 
in the event of complete loss of tire pressure. 

• Keeps the tire safely on the rim even in the event of sudden 
tire pressure loss at high speed. 

The entire safety package consists of three components: 

• RSC tires with emergency running properties 

• Extended hump rims (EH2+) 

• Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS). 

RSC tires with emergency running properties 

With its reinforced side walls, additional strip inserts and heat- 
resistant rubber mixtures, even when completely depressurized, the 
"self-supporting tire" makes it possible to continue the journey for a 
limited distance at a maximum speed of 80 km/h. This means each 
tire is also its own spare wheel. 

The maximum range after complete tire pressure loss is: 

• approximately 250 km at low vehicle load 

• approximately 150 km at medium vehicle load 

• approximately 50 km at high vehicle load 

In the case of slow pressure loss, i.e. representative of approxi¬ 
mately 80% of all tire failure cases, the remaining range as from the 
TPMS warning is approximately 2000 km. ABS, ASC and DSC 
remain fully operational even in the event of complete tire pressure 
loss. 


When driving with a run flat tire with no pressure, the optionally 
available adaptive drive system automatically distributes the vehicle 
weight overthe remaining wheels so as to relieve the load on the 
depressurized tire with the aim of achieving the highest possible 
range for continued operation. 

Extended Hump Rims (EH2+) 

The specially shaped rim humps ensure that the RSC tire cannot 
detach from the rim even in the case of sudden tire pressure loss. 
This means substantially greater safety particularly when driving at 
high speed and on winding roads. 

The system consisting of the run flat tires (RSC), rims with the 
extended hump (EH2+) contour and the electronic monitoring 
system (TPMS in USA), renders a spare wheel or space-saver 
wheel, breakdown kit or vehicle jack unnecessary and this creates 
more storage space in the luggage compartment while also saving 
weight. 

Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS) 


TPM Control 
Module 



Note: For more information on the TPMS system, refer to 
the reference material in the C hassis Dynamics 
(ST504) class which is available onTIS or ICP. 









Brakes 

In terms of function, an optimized high performance brake system 
is used on the E70. Floating brake calipers are fitted on the front 
and rear axle. The brake system in the E70 features the known 
brake wear monitoring system forthe CBS indicator. 


Front axle 

N52B30 US+LA 

N62B48 US+LA 

Brake caliper housing 

GGG (Cast iron) 

GGG (Cast iron) 

Brake caliper/piston diameter [mm] 

60 

60 

Brake disc thickness [mm] 

30 

30 

Brake disc diameter [mm] 

332 

348 

Size 

17" 

18” 

Rear axle 

N52B30 US+LA 

N62B48 US+LA 

Brake caliper housing 

Aluminum 

Aluminum 

Brake caliper/piston diameter [mm] 

44 

44 

Brake disc thickness [mm] 

20 

24 

Brake disc diameter [mm] 

320 

345 

Size 

17" 

18” 

Parking brake 

Duo-Servo 185x30 (EMF) 


Steering Column 

The E70 is available with an electrically adjustable steering column 
as standard equipment. 

Adjustment range of electrical steering column: 

• Vertical +/-25 mm 

• Horizontal +/-20 mm 

A special feature of the electrically adjustable column is that only 
one electric motor is required forthe height and tilt adjustment and 
this motor is connected to a special gear mechanism for both 
adjustment axes. 



E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

13 


















14 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Lateral Dynamics 


Active Steering on the E70 is part of the lateral dynamics systems 
Nowadays, dynamic driving systems are subdivided according to 
their mode of operation. For example, lateral dynamics systems 
are those systems which influence the vehicle laterally (in a turn). 

In the E70, there are two systems which are considered part of 
the lateral dynamics systems. 

• Servotronic - Speed-dependent hydraulic steering torque 
assistance 

• AS - Active Steering (previously AFS, Active Front Steering) 

The E70 is the first all-wheel-drive vehicle to be offered with 
Active Steering (AS) Servotronic is only offered in conjunction 
with the Active Steering. 

Active Steering (AS) 

Active Steering was initially offered in the E60 (5 Series). Since 
then, a large proportion of BMW's in the 3 and 6 Series now have 
Active Steering. It is only the X models and other all-wheel-drive 
vehicles that have not yet been provided with this for reasons of 
space. 

This innovative steering system is now being offered, as an 
option, in an all-wheel-drive vehicle forthe first time at BMW, 
namely in the E70. 

Forthe most part, the active steering system on the E70 is much 
the same as on previous models. There are some minor changes 
which will be discussed in this section. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

DSC Sensor 

5 

Fluid reservoir 

2 

Steering Column Switch Cluster 

6 

Steering gear 

3 

AS control unit 

7 

Hydraulic pump 

4 

AS actuating unit 

8 

Power steering cooler 
















C hanges to Active Steering 


1 


On the E70, certain changes have been made to the Active 
Steering system on the E70. They are as follows: 

• The cumulative (total) steering angle sensor has been omitted 

• The ECO valve has been replaced by the Electronically 
Controlled Bypass Valve (EVV). 

• Yaw moment compensation is now enhanced with the 
addition of GRR+. 

Cumulative (total) Steering Angle (virtual) 

With the addition of Active Steering on the E70, the total steering 
angle sensor has been omitted from the system. The value forthe 
total steering angle is now a "virtual" value which is calculated from 
the driver's steering angle and the motor position sensor value. 

The virtual (total) steering angle value provides the same informa¬ 
tion as the the total steering angle sensor. The initialization proce¬ 
dure still needs to be carried out when there are any changes to 
the system. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rack and pinion unit 

5 

Engine 

2 

Steering valve 

6 

EVV 

3 

Flow regulating piston (in pump) 

7 

Throttle (restrictor) 

4 

Vane-cell pump 




The initialization process has changed and differs slightly from the 
procedure on previous vehicles with Active Steering. 

Electronically Controlled Bypass Valve (EVV) 

The EVV regulates the volumetric flow of hydraulic fluid in the 
hydraulic pump to ensure that only the volumetric flow currently 
required to provide power assistance is made available. 

Example: 

When the vehicle is being driven straight ahead without power 
assistance, the circulation pressure in the steering hydraulic circuit 
drops, thus reducing the circulation pressure and the power con¬ 
sumption. If a steering movement is required, the volumetric flow is 
immediately raised again and the usual steering angle speed is 
ensured. 


The EVV (1) therefore controls the power consumption of the 
hydraulic pump, thus reducing the fuel consumption and the C02 
emissions ofthe combustion engine. 



E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

15 



























16 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Yaw-rate Control Plus (GRR+) 

The "yaw-rate control plus" function assists the driver when he is 
braking on roads with varying friction coefficients, in a similar way to 
the yaw moment compensation. This function represents a signifi¬ 
cant safety feature. 

In the case of braking on different surface friction coefficients 
(asphalt/ice orsnow), a moment builds up about the z or vertical 
axis (yaw moment) rendering the vehicle unstable. 

In this special case, the Active Steering control unit calculates the 
steering angle (maximum ±4°) required for the front wheels to keep 
the vehicle stable using the actual yaw rate and the longitudinal and 
lateral acceleration. 


Special Feature 

This function shortens the braking distance because the yaw-rate 
control plus allows higher braking pressure on the high friction 
coefficient side. 


Difference to Yaw Moment Compensation 

With yaw moment compensation, an important calculation principle 
for automatic early counter-steering was the difference between 
the front wheel braking pressures that were detected by the DSC 
and based on which the DSC calculated the angle for attack of the 
front wheels and transmitted to the AS control unit. 

This shared functionality of the DSC and AS control unit is now 
fully integrated into the AS control unit with yaw-rate control plus 
This active counter-steering creates counter-torque about the z or an d, due to the high communication rate, precise interaction 
vertical axis (red arrow) which compensates for the earlier acting between the two units has now been achieved, 
yawing force (yellow arrow). 

In this way, the vehicle is stabilized by clever interaction between 
the DSC braking and the AS function, resulting in a new safety 
aspect, unique in this class. 
































Workshop Exercise - Active Steering 


Using an instructor designated E70, connect the diagnostic 
equipment and perform a short test. Proceed to test module for 
Active Steering initialization. 

Are there any special tools required forthis process? 


When does this procedure need to be carried out? 


How is total steering angle value calculated? 



Is there a "physical" sensorforthe total steering angle? 


Where can the "startup/adjustment" test module be found in 
diagnosis? 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

17 



















18 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Vertical Dynamics 


The vertical dynamics systems are those systems which affect 
vehicle motion along the vertical (orz-axis). In other words, the up 
and down movement of the chassis and or body. 

On the E70, these systems include: 

• Vertical Dynamics Control (VDC -previously EDC) 

• Electronic Height Control (EHC) 

• Active Roll Stabilization (ARS) 

Adaptive Drive 

Adaptive Drive is an optional system on the E70 which includes 
the combination of ARS and VDC. For the first time, these sys¬ 
tems are functionally linked which provides maximum safety, com¬ 
fort and agility beyond compare for an S AV. 

Adaptive Drive reduces lateral roll ofthe body, which normally 
occurs during high-speed cornering or in the event of rapid 
swerving. 

Adaptive Drive also reduces the required steering angle and 
improves ride comfort coupled with increased driving dynamics. 

The customer can choose between a normal and a sporty basic 
setting via a switch on the center console (near G WS). 

Unpleasant pitching and lateral rolling ofthe body are diminished 
or eliminated entirely. The self-steering and load transfer charac¬ 
teristics ofthe vehicle are significantly improved. 

The reciprocal movements in the upper part ofthe body, which 
are inherent in the design of SAV vehicles, are considerably 
reduced. The vehicle can be driven with higher levels of precision 
and agility. The system also contributes to shorter braking dis¬ 
tances. 







Vertical Dynamics Control 

The Vertical Dynamics Control (VDC) system being introduced on the E70 from SOP. VDC is a component of the Adaptive Drive equip¬ 
ment package and is an advancement of the EDC-K already fitted on the E65. 

Like EDC-K, VDC is notable for its continually adjustable dampers whereby, within certain limits, as many damping characteristic curves 
(damping force - piston speed) as desired can be plotted. 

The characteristic curve used depends on the driving situation, in otherwords, the variables that describe the dynamic driving state of the 
vehicle and which are selected automatically at the driver's command. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

19 






20 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Comparison between EDC-K in the E65 and VDC in the E70 



EDC-K 

VDC 

Model 

E65 from introduction into series 
production from 7/2001 

E70 from SOP 10/06 in the Adaptive Drive equipment package 

Program Selection 

via Control Display and controller 

"SPORT" button next to gear selector switch 

Control unit 

EDC-K control unit on the device holder behind glove 
compartment 

VDM control unit: rear left of luggage compartment 

Four EDC satellite control units directly on the damper 

Sensors 

Vertical: 

vertical acceleration sensor, front left, front right, rear right 

Longitudinal: 

wheel speed sensors, front left, front right 

Lateral: 

steering angle sensor (LWS) from the steering column switch cluster 

Vertical: 

fourvertical acceleration sensors integrated in the EDC satellite-control units, four 
ride-height sensors connected directly to the VDM control unit 

Longitudinal: 

wheel speed sensors orvehicle speed from the DSC control unit 

Lateral: 

steering angle sensor (LWS) from the steering column switch cluster, Rotor position 
sensor (if Active Steering fitted), lateral acceleration (DSC sensor) as redundant signal 

to the steering angle 

Damper 

Twin-tube gas-pressure dampers 

Twin-tube gas-pressure dampers 

Diagnostics 

fully compatible 

VDM and EDC satellite control units 
flash-programmable 

Programming 

EDC-K control unit is flash 
programmable 

VDM and EDC satellite control units are flash 
programmable 

Coding 


VDM and EDC satellite control units are codable 

Malfunction display 

Messages in the Control Display or instrument cluster 

M essages in the Control Display or instrument cluster 

Testing 

Diagnostic tester 

Diagnostic tester 



































VDC System Overview 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

J unction Box Control Module 

4 

Ride height sensors, front 

2 

Vertical Dynamics Management 

5 

EDC Satellites 

3 

Diagnostic connector 

6 

Ride height sensors, rear 


VDC Overview Explanation 

The VDM control module is connected to F-CAN, PT-CAN and the 
FlexRay bus systems. The four EDC satellites are connected to the 
VDM through FlexRay. The satellites contain the vertical accelera¬ 
tion sensors and the solenoid valves for dampening. 

Each satellite has its own power and ground supply. Power (B+) is 
supplied bythe KL30g circuit. 

The ride height sensors are "hardwired" to the VDM and send 
analog signals to report vehicle ride height. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

21 



























































22 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Objectives oftheVDC System 

The primary objective of the VDC system to improve ride comfort 
while maintaining driving safety at an invariably high level. High 
levels of ride comfort are achieved when the vehicle body hardly 
moves along the vertical axis in spite of excitations of the vehicle 
induced by cornering or by the road surface itself (bumps, gaps). 

Forthis reason, the adjustable dampers are operated in line with a 
soft, comfortable damping characteristic curve in as many situa¬ 
tions as possible. 

High levels of driving safety are achieved if the wheels never lose 
contact with the road surface and a high support force is available if 
required. A harderdamping characteristic is therefore set if the 
driving situation or driver's intervention (e.g. steering, braking) 
demands it. 

As with EDC-K, the dampers have an infinite number of damping 
characteristic curves at their disposal; unlike EDC-K, however, the 
dampers are controlled not only axle by axle but also at each 
individual wheel. 

In its regulation, the system uses the complete characteristic map 
of the rebound and compression stages between the comfort (1) 
and stability (2) threshold curves. 

In the event of a fault, the control range is minimized to safety char¬ 
acteristic curve (3). 

System Network 

The VDC system is a mechatronic system consisting of electronic, 
hydraulic and mechanical subsystems. These can be subdivided 
by function as follows: 

• Detection of input signals 

- Sensors for ride heights and rates of vertical acceleration 
to permit detection of the driving state and the prevailing 
road conditions 


- Control elementto enable the driverto set the damping 
program (comfort, sport).This is located on, and 
electrically integrated in, the gear selector switch. 

- Steering angle (output by the SZL control unit via F-CAN) 
for preemptive detection of cornering 

- Lateral acceleration (out by the DSC sensorvia F-CAN)for 
detection of cornering 

- Vehicle speed or wheel speeds (output by the DSC control 
unit via F-CAN) 

• Processing unit 

- VDM control unit - This checks the plausibility of the 
incoming signals and uses control algorithms that deliver 
damping forces at individual wheels as a set point value 

- EDC satellite control units - These process the signals 
from the vertical acceleration sensors on the one hand 
and output the processed signal. On the other hand, they 
convert into a valve current the target force from the VDM 
control unit by means of a stored characteristic curve 

• Actuators 

The electrically controllable valve in the adjusting damper 
makes it possible to realize the different damping force charac¬ 
teristic curves 

• Communications media 

The VDM control unit is connected to the PT-CAN, F-CAN 
and FlexRay; the EDC satellite control units are only connect¬ 
ed to the FlexRay 



VDC Components 


VDM Control Unit 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Comfort Access 

4 

Vertical Dynamics Management 

2 

Not for US Market 

5 

Electronic Height Control 

3 

Park Distance Control 




Control Strategy 

The underlying control strategy is known as the "Skyhook regula¬ 
tor"; the name reflects the highest of control objectives: to keep the 
vehicle body at the same height irrespective of the driving situation 
(as if the vehicle were suspended from the sky). 

To achieve this highest of all comfort objectives, the movements of 
the entire body have to be evaluated. To this end, there is a 
comprehensive analysis of ride heights and accelerations along the 
z-axis within the frequency range of between approximately 1 and 3 
Hz. 


The necessary (total) damping force forthis control component will 
turn out to be comparatively low. To simultaneously ensure that the 
wheels do not lose contact with the road surface and that optimum 
contact force is transferred according to the situation, the move¬ 
ment of each individual wheel is evaluated and not just the move¬ 
ment of the entire body. 

The movements, or excitations, relevant here take place within a 
frequency range of between approximately 11 and 13 Hz and can 
therefore be distinguished from the movements of the body. 

This control component will therefore calculate high damping 
forces dependent on the vertical movement of the individual wheel. 

As a matter of principal, these forces may be different at each 
individual wheel and, forthe first time with VDC, can be implement¬ 
ed as such. Furthermore, VDC regulation takes into consideration 
steering inputs (e.g. transition from straight-ahead travel to corner¬ 
ing) based on the steering angle curve. 

If VDC detects a rapid increase in the steering angle, the controller 
infers that the vehicle is entering a bend and can preventively 
adjust the dampers on the outside of the bend to a harder setting 
in advance. In this way, VDC is able to support ARS regulation and 
contributes to a reduction in vehicle rolling movements (of course, 
this applies also during steady-state circular driving). 

Moreover, VDC is able to detect the braking applications of the 
driver based on the brake pressure information supplied by DSC. A 
high brake pressure normally results in a pitching of the vehicle; 
VDC counteracts this by adjusting the front dampers to higher 
damping forces. 

This also results in an improvement in the front/rear brake force 
distribution, which in turn reduces the braking distance (by compar¬ 
ison with a vehicle without VDC). 

The VDC controller adjusts the basic damping force level in accor¬ 
dance with the damping program selected by the driver 
(comfort/sport). 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

23 


















24 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Nevertheless, high damping forces are always applied at individual 
wheels in critical driving situations, e.g. despite the fact that the 
comfort program is selected. 

Once the individual control components have been prioritized, a 
target damping force is output on the FlexRay for each wheel or 
damper. In addition, the dampers are prescribed a current value for 
the steady-state operating point. 

Display Control 

The VDM control unit is responsible for evaluating the button on 
the gear selector leverthat the driver uses to select the damping 
program. Depending on the damping program selected, the VDM 
control unit issues a request on the PT-CAN to switch the LED in 
the button on or off (off = comfort, on = sport). 

Degradation Behavior in the Event of a Fault 

Depending on the type of fault present, the VDM control unit 
decides which of three degradation levels must come into effect. 

• Level 1: Substitute values If, for example, the steering angle 
signal is unavailable, different variables will be used as a 
substitute value for cornering detection. The driver receives 
no failure message. No fault code memory entry is stored. 

• Level 2: Constant supply of current. The VDM control unit 
specifies a constant damping force, which is the same for all 
four wheels ("medium-hard damping"). This leads to a 
constant supply of current to the valve in the adjusting 
dampers. A triggering factorforthis degradation level may be a 
faulty ride-height sensor, for example. The driver receives a 
failure message. A fault code memory entry is stored. 

• Level 3: Zero supply of current. If a fault is present in the load 
circuit, e.g. in the control of a valve, the VDM control unit will 
select the third degradation level: it tells the dampers that the 
valve is no longer permitted to be supplied with current. The 
valve therefore moves into a position that corresponds to a 


rather hard suspension setting. The driver receives a failure 
message. A fault code memory entry is stored. 

From the damping force selected in the degradation levels, it can 
be seen that it is always the safe condition (hardertuning) that is 
adopted in the event of a fault (failsafe behavior). 

Diagnostic Functions 

The VDM control unit only stores its own faults in its fault memory. 
Faults with the EDC satellite control units are stored in their own 
fault memory. In the event of a VDC fault, therefore, it is necessary 
to check not only the fault memory of the VDM control unit, but of 
the satellites too. The VDM control unit also functions as a diag¬ 
nostics gateway between the PT-CAN and VD-F lexRay so that the 
EDC satellite control units are accessible to the tester). 

Note: The fault memories of the VDM control unit and the 
EDC satellite control units must be checked in the 
event of a VDC system failure. Unlike the EDC-Kin 
the E65, it is not necessary to perform straight-ahead 
calibration of the VDC system following replacement 
of the steering angle sensor. 



EDC Satellite Control (with damper) 

This new generation EDC on the E70 is located externally, unlike 
the EDC system in the E65. The twin-tube gas-pressure damper, 
EDC satellite control unit and the EDC control valve with wiring as 
far as the first plug connection form one complete component and 
can only be replaced in this combination. 



EDC Satellite Control Unit 

The following functions are implemented in the EDC satellite 
control unit: 

• Signal processing:The EDC satellite control units each have 
one single-axis acceleration sensor on the control unit board. 

It is a micro mechanical structural element, which converts 
accelerations into capacitance changes first and then into an 
analog voltage signal. 

This is processed accordingly by the EDC satellite control unit 
and made available to the VDM control unit via FlexRay. 

• Actuating functions: Each EDC satellite control unit has a 
damping characteristic map valid forthis type of damperthat 
is electronically stored in the form of support points. 

It is therefore possible to compensate for unavoidable toler¬ 
ances (variations) arising from manufacture and achieve a 
higher degree of actuating precision (damping force). 

Note: The EDC satellite control unit with twin tube gas-pressure 
damper and EDC control valve can only be replaced as one 
unit. The vehicle model and installation location (e.g. front 
left) must be stated when a replacement part is being 
ordered. 

• Diagnostic functions 

Each EDC satellite control unit is compatible with diagnostics 
and has its own fault memory. 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Strut damper (shock) 

3 

EDC solenoid (control valve) 

2 

EDC Satellite (with sensor) 




Note: The fault memories of the VDM control unit and the EDC 
satellite control units must be checked in the event of a 
VDC system failure. If the EDC satellite control units do 
not respond to diagnostics, there may be a fault in the 
VDM control unit (diagnostic gateway) or FlexRay. A cali¬ 
bration of the ride-height sensors and acceleration sen¬ 
sors must be carried out in the VDM control unit following 
replacement of an EDC satellite control unit. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

25 











26 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Twin-Tube Gas Pressure Damper 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Damping Force (N) 

A 

Control current = 2 A 

2 

Piston Speed (m/s) 

B 

Control current = 0.65 A 


Ride-height Sensor 

The ride-height sensors are electrically connected (hardwired) 
directly to the VDM control unit. The ride height is sent from the 
sensorto the VDM via an analog circuit. 

Two way or one-way sensors may be fitted to the rear axle, 
depending on the vehicle's equipment level. 


Note: If a new ride- height sensor is being fitted, it must be 
ensured that only parts with matching part numbers 
are fitted. In particular, care must be taken not to 
confuse one-way and two-way sensors (one¬ 
way/two-way depends on the equipment level of the 
vehicle). Two-way sensors bearthe marking "dop- 
pelt" on the housing. 


E70 Ride HeightSensors 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

One-way ride height sensor with 
one output 

B 

Adaptive drive w or w/o Xenon 

A 

Option- Xenon only 

C 

Option - EHC only 


Two-way sensors deliverthe signal not only to the VDM control 
unit but also to the EHC control unit. 






















E70 Ride Height Sensors (cont.) 





© ■ 



E70 Ride Height SensorVariants 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

One-way ride height sensor with 
one output 

B 

Option -EHC and Xenon 

2 

Two-way ride height sensor with 
two outputs 

C 

Adaptive drive and EHC 
w or w/o Xenon 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Two-way ride height sensor with 
two outputs 

2 

One-way ride height sensor with 
one output 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

27 

















28 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


FlexRay in the E70 


With the launch of the E70, the FlexRay bus system will be used 
forthe first time worldwide in a standard production vehicle. 

Currently, the E70 only uses the FlexRay bus in the Vertical 
Dynamics M anagement (VDM)system. The FlexRay bus system 
establishes the connection between the VDM control unit (vertical 
dynamics management) and the EDC satellites at the shock 
absorbers. 


Future BMW modules will expand the use of FlexRay due to the 
need for increased network speed and reliability. 



The FlexRay bus system in the E70 is designed as a two-wire, sin¬ 
gle-channel bus system. Acting as the gateway, the VDM control 
unit establishes the connection between the PT-CAN and FlexRay 
bus systems. 

Data communication between the EDC satellites on the FlexRay 
and the other control units installed in the E70 takes place via the 
VDM control unit. 



Index 

Explanation 

EDC SVL 

EDC Satellite, Front Left 

EDC SVR 

EDC Satellite, Front Right 

EDC SHL 

EDC Satellite, Rear Left 

EDC SHR 

EDC Satellite, Rear Right 

VDM 

Vertical Dynamics Management 


The most important properties of the FlexRay bus system are 
outlined in the following: 

• Bus topology 

• Transmission medium - signal properties 

• Deterministic data transmission 

• Bus protocol 






























Bus Topology 

The FlexRay bus system can be integrated in various topologies 
and versions in the vehicle. 

The following topologies can be used: 

• Line-based bus topology 

• Point-to-point bus topology 

• M ixed bus topology 

Line-based Bus Topology 

All control units (SG1...SG3) in line-based topology are connected 
by means of a two-wire bus, consisting of two twisted copper 
cores. This type of connection is also used on the CAN-bus. 

The same information but with different voltage level is sent on 
both lines. 

The transmitted differential signal is immune to interference. 

The line-based topology is suitable only for electrical data 
transmission. 



Point-to-point Bus Topology 

The satellites (control units SG2...SG5) in point-to-point bus 
topology are each connected by a separate line to the central 
master control unit (SGI). Point-to-point topology is suitable for 
both electrical as well as optical data transmission. 



Mixed Bus Topology 

Mixed bus topology caters forthe use of different topologies in one 
bus system. Parts ofthe bus system are line-based while other 
parts are point-to-point. 

Redundant Data Transmission 

Fault-tolerant systems must ensure continued reliable data trans¬ 
mission even afterfailure of a bus line. This requirement is realized 
by way of redundant data transmission on a second data channel. 

A bus system with redundant data transmission uses two inde¬ 
pendent channels. Each channel consists of a two-wire connec¬ 
tion. In the event of one channel failing, the information ofthe 
defective channel can be transmitted on the intact channel. 

FlexRay enables the use of mixed topologies also in connection 
with redundant data transmission. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

29 


























30 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Bus Topology of FlexRay in the E70 

The physical configuration of the FlexRay bus system in the E70 is 
point-to-point. All EDC satellites are individually connected via 
plug connections to the VDM control unit. 

Internally, however, the left and right EDC satellites are connected 
to form a line-based topology. The two lines are connected by 
means of a double point-to-point connection consisting of two bus 
drivers. Every item of information that is sent from one of the EDC 
satellites orfrom the central VDM control unit reaches all connect¬ 
ed control units. 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Channel 1 

B 

Channel 2 


Transmission Medium - Signal Properties 

The bus signal of the FlexRay must be within defined limits. A 
good and bad image of the bus signal is depicted below. The elec¬ 
trical signal must not enterthe inner area neither on the time axis 
nor on the voltage axis. 


The FlexRay bus system is a bus system with a high data transmis¬ 
sion rate and therefore with rapid changes in the voltage level. 

The voltage level as well as the rise and drop of the voltage (edge 
steepness) are precisely defined and must be within certain values. 
There must be no infringements of the marked "fields" (green and 
red hexagon). 



Electrical faults resulting from incorrect cable installation, contact 
resistance etc. can cause data transmission problems. 

The images shown above can be depicted only with very fast 
oscilloscopes. The oscilloscope in the current BMW diagnostic 
system is not suitable for representing such images. 

The voltage ranges of the FlexRay bus system are: 

• System ON - no bus communication 2.5 V 

• High signal - 3.1 V (voltage signal rises by 600 mV) 

• Low signal - 1.9 V (voltage signal falls by 600 mV) 

The voltage values are measured with respect to ground. 





























Deterministic Data Transmission 

The CAN-bus system is an event-controlled bus system. Data are 
transmitted when an event occurs. In the event of an accumulation 
of events, delays may occur before further information can be sent. 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

Time-controlled part of cyclic data transmission 

2 

Event-controlled part of cyclic data transmission 

3 

Cycle (5 ms total cycle length of which 3 ms static 
(= time-controlled) and 2 ms dynamic (= event-controlled) 

n 

Engine speed 

< 

Angle 

t° 

Temperature 

V 

Road speed 

xyz.. abc.. 

Event-controlled information 

t 

Time 


If an item of information cannot be sent successfully and free of 
errors, this information is continually sent until the communication 
partner confirms its receipt. 


If faults occur in the bus system, this "event controlled" information 
can back up causing the bus system to overload, i.e. there is a 
significant delay in the transmission of individual signals. This can 
result in poor control characteristics of individual systems. 


The FlexRay bus system is a time-controlled bus system that 
additionally provides the option of transmitting sections ofthe data 
transmission event-controlled. In the time controlled part, time 
slots are assigned to certain items of information. One time slot is a 
defined period of time that is kept free fora specific item of 
information (e.g. engine speed). 

Consequently, important periodic information is transmitted at a 
fixed time interval in the FlexRay bus system so that the system 
cannot be overloaded. Other less time-critical messages are trans¬ 
mitted in the event-controlled part. 

Bus Protocol 

Deterministic data transmission ensures that each message in the 
time-controlled part is transmitted in real time. Real time means 
that the transmission takes place within a defined time. 

Therefore, important bus messages are not sent too late due to 
overloading ofthe bus system. If lost due to a temporary problem in 
the bus system (e.g. EMC problem) a message cannot be sent 
again. A current value is sent in the next assigned time slot. 

High Bandwidth 

The FlexRay bus system operates with a data transmission rate of 
10 M bits/s. This speed corresponds to 20 times the data transmis¬ 
sion rate ofthe PT-CAN. 

Synchronization 

A common time base is necessary in orderto ensure synchronous 
execution of individual functions in interconnected control units. 
Time matching must take place via the bus system as all control 
units operate with their own clock generator. 

The control units measure the time of certain synchronization bits, 
calculate the mean value and adapt their bus clock to this value. 
This system ensures that even minimal time differences do not 
cause transmission errors in the long term. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

31 


























































32 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Wake-up and Sleep Characteristics 

The control units are activated by means of an additional wake-up 
line. The wake-up line has the same function as the previous 
wake-up line (15WUP) in the PT-CAN. The signal curve 
corresponds to the signal curve of the PT-CAN. 

As soon as the bus system is woken, the VDM receives a High 
level on the PT-CAN and transfers this signal to the wake-up line 
of the FlexRay, thus also waking the satellites. 



The "wake-up voltage curve" graphic shows the typical behavior of 
the voltage curve in response to unlocking and starting the vehicle. 

Phase 1: 

Driver unlocks the car, the CAS control unit activates the K-CAN 
and the PT-CAN, the voltage level in the PT-CAN briefly goes to 
High, the VDM copies the signal and transfers it to the wake-up line 
on the FlexRay. 

Phase 2: 

Car is opened, terminal R is still OFF, the voltage levels in the bus 
systems drop again. 

Phase 3: 

Car is started, terminal 15 is ON, the voltages remain at the set lev¬ 
els until terminal 15 is turned off again. 


Phase 4: 

The complete vehicle network must assume sleep mode at termi¬ 
nal R OFF in orderto avoid unnecessary power consumption. Each 
control unit in the network signs off to ensure that all control units 
"are sleeping". 

Only when all EDC satellites have signed off at the VDM control 
unit can this control unit pass on this information to the PT-CAN 
and therefore to the complete network. An error message is 
stored if this is notthe case. 

This error message is then evaluated as part of the energy 
diagnosis procedure. 

Wiring 

The wiring of the FlexRay bus in the E70 is executed as a 
sheathed, two-core, twisted cable. The sheathing protects the 
wires from mechanical damage. The terminating resistors are 
located in the EDC satellites. Each satellite has one terminating 
resistor. 


if r (r 

• | M 41 * 

>liJ i 

n 

TT “ 

ft ©n 

J 

r——— 
1 

! r 

i • 
i • 
i * 

• 

i 

• 

9 

- , 

xZ ] | 

1 1 1 

rs* J t 

KM 

075 it 

frvon 

3 MC© 1 

a ji 

_ 2_ 

an 

ON 


a " 

* 

Pr*nr !■»*« 

» 

311 

03 













































Since the surge impedance (impedance of high-frequency lines) of 
the lines depends on external influencing factors, the terminating 
resistors are precisely matched to the required resistance. 

The four sections of line to the satellites can be checked relatively 
easily by means of a resistance measuring instrument (ohmmeter, 
multimeter). The resistance should be measured from the VDM 
control unit. See BMW diagnostic system for pin assignments. 

The following conclusions can be made about the resistance 
between the VM D module and EDC satellite: 

• <or = 10 Ohms - There is a short circuit in this section of line. 

• 10-90 Ohms - This section of line is damaged (e.g. moisture 
in connector, line pinched) 

• 90-110 Ohms - This section of line is OK and the satellite is 
connected (Note: Impedance errors are not recognized) 

• > 110 Ohms - There is a break in the line orthe satellite is not 
connected orthere is a break in the connection to the 
satellites. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

33 



34 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - FlexRay and VDM 


Using the instructor designated E70, connect diagnostic equip¬ 
ment and perform short test. Note any faults to VDC or EDC 
systems. 


List any faults present: 


Using the test module and or ETM, locate the VDM connector. 
Unplug the VDM and test resistance to each EDC satellite. 
Record results below: 


EDC Satellite 

Resistance Value 

Front Left 


Front Right 


Rear Left 


Rear Right 



While investigating the above fault, note the power supply (B+) 
to each of the EDC satellites and record in the chart below: 


EDC Satellite 

PowerSupply/Fuse # 

Front Left 


Front Right 


Rear Left 


Rear Right 



What relay/circuit supplies power supply for each of the above 
satellites? 


Besides wiring concerns and terminating resistors, what other 
issues can affect the FlexRay bus system? 


What is the operating voltage of the FlexRay bus? 


What should the resistance values be on a normal (non-faulted) 
circuit? 


Are any of the above values out of specification? 


Can the oscilloscope from the DISplus/GT-1 be used to check the 
FlexRay bus? Explain answer. 





E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

35 



36 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Active Roll Stabilization 

The customer-friendly name forthe option is "Dynamic Drive" and 
was first available in the 7 Series with the E65. Since then, the ARS 
system has been used in the 5 and 6 series and now forthe first 
time in an SAV - the E70. 

ARS is one of the two "functionally linked" systems which make up 
the "Adaptive Drive" feature in the E70. 



As the vehicle drives through a bend, forces act on the vehicle 
causing it to rotate about the vehicles roll axis (X-axis). This force 
causes the body to tilt towards the outside of the bend. Ultimately, 
this causes the vehicle to rapidly approach its dynamic limits. 

The ARS system, through the use of active anti-roll bars, is capable 
of counteracting this force. By preventing this situation, ARS can 
greatly contribute to vehicle stability especially on turns and during 
evasive maneuvers. 

Passive vs. Active Roll Bar 

The following is a comparison of passive and active roll bars: 

• Conventional (passive) anti-roll bar - During cornering, 
the wheel suspension on the outside of the bend is 
compressed and the wheel suspension on the inside of the 


bend rebounds. This has a twisting effect on the anti-roll bar 
(torsion). The forces arising in the bearing points of the anti¬ 
roll bar produce a moment that counteracts the tilting of the 
body. The effect is to improve the distribution of loads acting 
on both wheels on the same axle. 

A disadvantage of a passive anti-roll bar is that the basic 
suspension tuning hardens when the suspension is com¬ 
pressed on one side of the vehicle during straight ahead travel. 
This results in a reduction in comfort. 

• Active anti-roll bar- The Dynamic Drive active chassis sys¬ 
tem also known as Active Roll Stabilization (ARS) - is a revolu¬ 
tionary step in chassis and suspension engineering. Forthe 
first time, the trade-off between handling/agility and comfort is 
largely eliminated. This results in a new type of "driving pleas¬ 
ure" typical of BMW. 

Dynamic Drive has two active anti-roll bars, which have a 
positive influence on body roll and handling characteristics. 
The fundamental feature of Dynamic Drive is the divided anti¬ 
roll bars on each axle. The two halves of the anti-roll bars are 
connected by a hydraulic oscillating motor. 

One half of the anti-roll bar is connected to the shaft of the 
oscillating motor, the otherto the housing of the oscillating 
motor. These active anti-roll bars control stabilizing moments: 

• which reduce the reciprocal movement of the vehicle body, 

• which make it possible to achieve high levels of agility and 
target precision overthe entire road speed range, 

• and produce optimum self-steering characteristics. 

During straight-ahead travel, the system improves suspension 
comfort because the anti-roll bar halves are de-coupled, with the 
effect that the basic suspension tuning does not additionally hard¬ 
en when the suspension on one side is compressed. 




ARS System Overview (E70) 



y yy y y 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hydraulic fluid reservoir 

6 

Valve block 

2 

Hydraulic fluid cooler 

7 

Lateral acceleration sensor 

3 

Front oscillating motor 

8 

Hydraulic lines 

4 

Tandem pump 

9 

Rear oscillating motor 

5 

Control unit 




E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

37 




















38 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


ARS System Components 

The ARS system components are outlined in the following: 

ARS Control Module 

The ARS control module (1) is located in the vehicle interior near 
the right-hand A-pillar. The module is supplied with powervia 
terminal 30 and is protected by a 10 A fuse. 

The ARS control module is activated exclusively by the Car Access 
System (CAS) on a CAN wake-up line after "ignition ON". 



A vehicle authentication process takes place when the system is 
started. This compares the vehicle identification numberfrom CAS 
with the vehicle identification number which is encoded in the ARS 
control unit. 

Then the ARS control unit's hardware and software are checked. 


All the outputs (valve magnets) are subjected to a complex check 
for short circuits and breaks. If there is a fault, the system switches 
the actuators into a safe driving condition. 

The ARS control unit switches off if there is undervoltage or over¬ 
voltage. 

The ARS control unit learns the offset forthe steering angle and 
the lateral acceleration during start-up and during driving. 

Lateral Acceleration Sensor 

The lateral acceleration sensor supplies the main sensorsignal. It 
measures the lateral acceleration of the vehicle during cornering up 
to a measurement range of 1.1 g. It is installed on the base plate 
underthe right front seat. The ARS control unit can learn an offset 
during start-up and when the vehicle is in motion. 






























Active Anti-roll Bar 

The oscillating motor and the oscillating motor housing are joined 
by one half of the anti-roll bar. 

The active anti-roll bar consists of the oscillating motor and the 
anti-roll bar halves fitted to the oscillating motor, with press-fitted 
roller bearings fortheir connection to the axle carriers. The use of 
roller bearings ensures optimum comfort thanks to better response 
and reduced control forces. 


V © V -V V © 0 © 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Anti-roll bar link connection to swivel bearing 

2 

Anti-roll bar bracket 

3 

Anti-roll bar 

4 

Oscillating motor (hydraulic) 

5 

Anti-roll bar links 


There are screw plugs in the area of the pressure relief valves on 
the oscillating motor of the rear-axle anti-roll bar. 



Rear axle anti-roll bar 


© Vi) <*) 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Lines from hydraulic valve block 

2 

Anti-roll bar links 

3 

Anti-roll bar 

4 

Oscillating motor (hydraulic) 


The rear anti-roll bar is mounted behind the rear axle carrier. The 
anti-roll bar links are connected to the rear-axle swinging arms. 


The oscillating motor of the front axle stabilizer bar is fitted with two 
pressure relief valves. 


Air filter elements are fitted to the pressure relief valves. These air 
filter caps with Goretex inserts must not be removed. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

39 




























40 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Hydraulic Valve Block 

The hydraulic valve block is located on the floor plate of the vehicle 
behind the front right hand wheel housing level with the front right 
hand door. The hydraulic valve block is connected to a carrier plate 
bolted to the body. 


® ® ® © © 



3> ^ v2S) & ® © 


The hydraulic valve block houses the following valves and sensors: 

• 2 pressure regulating valves; one for the front axle and one for 
the rear axle 

• one direction valve 

• one failsafe valve 

• 2 pressure sensors; one sensorforthe front axle, one sensor 
for the rear axle 

• one switch-position recognition sensor. 

The hydraulic valve block has the following connections: 

• 2 lines to the oscillating motor at the front 

• 2 lines to the oscillating motor at the rear 

• one connection forthe line to the tandem pump 

• one connection forthe line to the hydraulic fluid reservoir. 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Directional valve 

8 

Tandem pump line 

2 

Rear-axle pressure sensor 

9 

Hydraulic fluid reservoir line 

3 

Line 2, front axle oscillating motor 

10 

Line 1, rear axle oscillating motor 

4 

Proportional pressure limiting 
valve, front axle 

11 

Line 2, front axle oscillating motor 

5 

Proportional pressure limiting 
valve, rear axle 

12 

Line 1, front axle oscillating motor 

6 

Front axle pressure sensor 

13 

Failsafe valve 

7 

Switch position recognition 
sensor 


























Tandem Pump 

The hydraulic pumps fitted in the E70 were developed with a 
modulardesign. Depending on the engine and equipment specifi¬ 
cation, a suitably dimensioned hydraulic pump is flange-mounted 
to the engine in the same installation space. 

The exact pump design installed is dependent upon the optional 
equipment, such as: 

• Basic steering 

• Active Steering (AS) 

• CO2 measures 

• Adaptive Drive 

• Adaptive Drive and Active Steering. 


The hydraulic pump driven by the engine's poly-V-belt is, on 
vehicles with Adaptive Drive, invariably a tandem pump, which con¬ 
sists of a radial piston part for ARS and a vane-cell partforthe 
power steering. 

Radial Piston Pump (partoftandem pump) 

This radial piston pump has 10 pistons set out in two rows and 
designed fora maximum pressure of 210 bar. 

When the engine is idling, the pump speed is approximately 750 
rpm. Atthis idling speed, the radial piston part delivers a minimum 
fluid flow rate of approximately 6.75 liters/minute at a pressure of 
approximately 5 bar. This means that sufficient system dynamics 
are also guaranteed when the engine is idling. 

At a pump speed of 1,450 rpm, the maximum fluid flow rate is limit¬ 
ed to 13.3 rpm. 




Vane-cell Pump (part of the tandem pump) 

This part comprises 10 vane cells and designed fora maximum 
pressure of 135 bar. The vane-cell part has a characteristic map 
controlled fluid flow rate of 7-15 liters/minute. 

The decisive parameters forthe characteristic map are the vehicle's 
road speed and the steering angle speed. 

Adaptive Drive and the power steering share the same fluid 
reservoir and radiator. 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

A 

Radial piston pump 

3 

Steering pressure connection 

B 

Vane-cell pump 

4 

ARS pressure connection 

1 

Intake connection 

5 

Input flange 

2 

Proportional valve 




E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

41 














42 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Fluid Reservoir 

In the fluid reservoir is a fluid filter and fluid level sensor. The fluid 
filter cannot be replaced. The screw cap is fitted with a dipstick, 
which makes it possible to check the fluid level. A "M AX" mark 
indicates the maximum permissible fluid level, measured at room 
temperature (20°C). 



If a dipstick check at room temperature reveals the fluid reservoirto 
be dry, the reservoir must be topped up with the specified hydraulic 
fluid. If the lowest edge of the dipstick is still only just wet with 
hydraulic fluid (3), this is to be construed as the "M IN" mark. 


A mobile float contains a reed contact that converts float move¬ 
ments into an electric signal. 

The fluid level sensor (1) is fitted to the fluid reservoir. Short/open 
circuits cannot be detected by the fluid level sensor. A line break is 
interpreted as a loss of fluid. 



Hydraulic-fluid Cooler 

The hydraulic-fluid cooler serves to maintain a fluid temperature of 
< 120°C in all hydro-mechanical components under all conditions, 
although temperatures of < 135°C are acceptable for brief periods. 


Fluid Level Sensor 

The fluid level sensor detects the fluid level in the fluid reservoir. 
The fluid level sensor determines whetherthe fluid level has 
dropped below a critical minimum level and activates a warning 
message. Normal movements of the fluid in the reservoir are not 
cause fora message. 











Service Notes 

If Dynamic Drive fails, DSC can no longer be deactivated or if it is 
already deactivated it does not switch back on automatically. The 
connections for all the hydraulic components are designed in differ¬ 
ent dimensions and lengths so that they cannot be transposed. 

A disturbing transmission of noise into the vehicle interior occurs 
due mainly to the assembly and line connections. The lines must 
not make contact; they must be routed correctly through the brack¬ 
ets without slack ortension. They are covered by the underbody 
paneling. 

Steering Angle Calibration 

After work on the front axle, it is necessary to carry out a steering 
angle calibration with the Dynamic Drive control unit. 

The Dynamic Drive system is dependent on the exact zero balance 
of the steering angle. The maximum deviation tolerance is 1. 
Precise chassis alignment is a prerequisite. 

The steering angle calibration must always be carried out on the 
measuring stand and in accordance with BMW axle alignment 
guidelines. 

The zero position is lost each time the Dynamic Drive control unit 
is flash programmed. A steering angle calibration is required when- 
everthe control unit is flash programmed. 

ARS Initialization 

The initialization procedure must always be carried out once the 
system has been opened ora part has been replaced.This also 
applies afterthe lateral acceleration sensor has been replaced. 

The following conditions must be guaranteed for calibration of the 
offset values ofthe lateral acceleration sensorand the two pressure 
sensors: 

• The vehicle must be stand level on all fourwheels 


• The vehicle must be unladen 

• The engine must be idling 

• Rest status (doors closed, persons are not allowed in the 
vehicle). 

No persons may remain within the vicinity of moving chassis parts 
during the initialization (both in the works and the workshop). In 
addition you must ensure that the basic commissioning conditions 
(temperature range, constant engine speed etc.) are maintained. 
The ground clearance must not be limited and the doors must be 
closed. The arms ofthe hoist may no longer be situated beneath 
the car. 

ARS Bleeding Procedure 

A bleeding procedure must be carried out using the diagnostic 
tester if the ARS system was opened hydraulically. The bleeding 
procedure is performed exclusively by way ofthe initialization rou¬ 
tine ofthe diagnostic tester and not at the pressure relief valves or 
at the screw plugs ofthe oscillating motors. 

If the test still detects air in the system, a short movement trip 
should be made if necessary. 

The initialization routine must then be repeated afterthe short trip. 

In the event of an extreme leak or suspected partial function ofthe 
pressure relief valves (noticeable by rattling noises in the front end), 
the pressure relief valves and the pneumatic lines must be replaced 
with new components. 

Programming 

It is possible to program the Dynamic Drive control unit. 

Coding 

It is possible to code the Dynamic Drive control unit. 

Note: For more detailed information on ARS intheE70, 
refer to the reference material onTIS and 1C P. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

43 



44 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Electronic Height Control (EHC) 

As with the previous SAV, the E53, the new X5 has an available single-axle air suspension system. The EHC system is standard on the 
4.8is and only available on the 3.0 version as part of the 3rd row seat option. This system operates in a similar mannerto previous EHC 
systems. 

The purpose of a level control system is to maintain the height of the vehicle body as close as possible to a predefined level under all load 
conditions. Through a constant level of the body mainly the driving quality (e.g. camber, toe-in) will remain unaltered in the event of 
changes in payload. 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Air cleaner (filter) 

6 

Ride height sensor, right 

2 

Retaining plate 

7 

EHC control unit 

3 

Air Supply Unit (LVA) 

8 

Air spring, rear left 

4 

Pneumatic lines 

9 

Ride height sensor, left 

5 

Air spring, rear right 

























EHC Control Unit 

The EHC control unit is located in a module carrier in the rear of 
the luggage compartment on the right-hand side. 

The EHC control unit receives the following signal information: 

• Vehicle ride height 

• Load cutout signals 

• Terminal 15 ON/OFF 

• Vehicle speed 

• Lateral acceleration 

• "Engine running" signal 

• Hatch status. 

The EHC control unit decides on a case-by-case basis whether a 
control operation is required in orderto compensate for changes in 
load. It is thus possible to optimally adapt the frequency, specified 
heights, tolerance thresholds and battery load to the relevant situa¬ 
tion by means of the control operation. 

The EHC control unit is fully compatible with diagnostics. 

Air Supply Unit(LVA) 

The air supply unit is fitted to the underbody of vehicle by a 
component carrier level with the front right door. 



Air Suspension 

The E70 with EHC uses air spring fitted at the rear axle. Take note 
of the following cautions: 

Note: When a new air spring is being fitted, care must be 
taken to ensure that it is not over-stretched. 
Otherwise, the retaining ring forthe inner pipe could 
snap off the rubber gaiter, which could result in dam¬ 
age to the suspension air bag. 

Forthis reason, the top of the airspring should be 
secured to the body first, and only then should it be 
connected to the axle carrier. 

Ride-height Sensor 

The ride-height sensors are electrically connected directly to the 
EHC control unit. The mode of signal transfer is analog. Two-way 
or one-way sensors may be fitted to the rear axle, depending on the 
vehicle's equipment level. Two-way sensors deliverthe signal not 
only to the VDM control unit but also to the EHC control unit. 

Note: If a new ride- height sensor is being fitted, it must be 
ensured that only parts with matching part numbers 
are fitted. In particular, care must be taken notto 
confuse one-way and two-way sensors (one- 
way/two-way depends on the equipment level of the 
vehicle). Two-way sensors bearthe marking "dop- 
pelt" on the housing. 

For more information on ride height sensor configu¬ 
ration, referto the VDC section of this workbook or 
the reference material onTIS orICP. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

45 



46 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Longitudinal Dynamics 


Systems which affect the forward or rearward dynamics along the 
"X-axis" is referred to as longitudinal dynamics systems. These 
systems include various types of braking systems. 

In the E70, these systems include: 

• Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

• Anti-lock Braking System (ABS) 

• Electro-mechanical Parking Brake (EMF) 

• Dynamic Cruise Control (DCC) 

Dynamic Stability Control 

The DSC system utilized on the E70 is referred to as DSC E7x. 
The system is supplied by Bosch. With its optimized control 
functions, the new system design makes a significant contribution 
to increased driving dynamics. 

Additional functions for active safety and additional comfort have 
been implemented in the new system.The new system in the 
E70 offers the following advantages: 

• Driving Dynamics 

- DSC mode: Increased driving dynamics and maximum 
traction. Thanks to more precise and faster control inter¬ 
ventions, the driver can further extend the boundaries of 
driving dynamics while retaining vehicle safety. 

- DTC mode: Compared to DSC mode, Dynamic Traction 
Control (DTC) allows for increased slip at the drive wheels 
to provide maximum propulsion when driving off in snow 
for instance. In addition, the stabilizing interventions cut 
in later in DTC mode thus allowing a more sport-oriented 
driving profile. 


• Active Safety 

- The additional functions of brake standby, dry braking and 
fading assistance shorten the stopping distances. 

- Increased DSC efficiency makes for more effective safety 
relevant functions. 

• Comfort 

- Improved operating comfort (brake interventions are less 
audible, pedal vibration is drastically reduced) through the 
use of a 6-piston pump in connection with a new higher- 
frequency electrical actuation system. 

- Additional functions such as start-off assistant and park¬ 
ing brake provide increased driver assistance and com¬ 
fort. 

Note: To date, the DSC driving dynamics system on all¬ 
wheel drive vehicles was referred to with the abbre¬ 
viation 11 DXC 11 . S ince this lead to confusion with the 
xDrive, in the future the dynamic stability control 
system will be known as DSC also on all-wheel 
drive vehicles. 

ABS 

ABS functions in the E70 are identical to those functions in 
previous models. The pedal pulsations and noise from the 
solenoid valves and pump are reduced in the E70. This is a result 
of the high-performance hydraulic unit on the DSC E7X system. 




DSC System Overview 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hydraulic unit with DSC control unit 

5 

Center Console Switch Cluster (SZM) 

2 

Wheel speed sensors (4x) 

6 

Steering Column Switch Cluster(SZL) 

3 

Master cylinder 

7 

Gear Selector Lever (GWS) 

4 

DSC sensor 

8 

EM F Actuating Unit 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

47 


















48 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Overview of DSC Components 
DSC Hydraulic Unit 

With its new pump concept, the hydraulic unit provides a signifi¬ 
cant improvement in control accuracy. 2x3 pump elements with a 
diameter of 6.5mm and intake-optimized units operate in the 
hydraulic unit.This pump concept ensures substantially improved 
pressure dynamics resulting in lower pedal feedback in ABS mode 
and higher control quality. 

Forthe driverthis is noticeable in as far as the pedal pulsation can 
now only be felt very slightly during ABS braking. There is a pres¬ 
sure sensor in the hydraulic unit. 



DSC Control Unit 

The DSC control unit can be replaced individually. The 47-pin 
connector connects the DSC control unit to the engine wiring 
harness. 


Wheel Speed Sensor 

4 active wheel speed sensors are installed in the E70. All 4 sen¬ 
sors have a direct hardwired connection to the DSC control unit. 

These active wheel speed sensors facilitate recognition of the 
direction of rotation, air gap (clearance) and standstill. The DSC 
control unit receives this information in the form of a PWM signal. 

DSC Sensor 

The DSC sensor is located underthe front passenger seat and is 
available in two variants in the E70: 

• Vehicle without active steering, DSC sensor (designation 
M M 3.8), containing a 

- Transverse acceleration sensor. 

- Longitudinal acceleration sensor. 

- Yaw rate sensor in a housing. 

• Vehicle with active steering, DSC sensor (designation 
M M 3.2.2), containing. 

- 2 redundant transverse acceleration sensors. 

- Longitudinal acceleration sensor. 

- 2 redundant yaw rate sensors in a housing. 




Steering Column Switch Cluster(SZL) 

The Steering Column Switch Cluster (SZL) is carried overfrom the 
E90 and consists of the following components: 

• SZL electronics 

• Steering angle sensor (optical code disc) 

• Steering column stalk, cruise control 

• Steering column stalk, direction indicator 

• Steering column stalk, wiper 

• Coil spring assembly 

The steering column switch cluster can only be replaced as a 
complete unit. The coil spring assembly is fitted on the steering 
column switch cluster. The spring coil assembly can be removed 
and replaced individually. 



Overview of DSC Functions (DSC E7X) 


Function 


Can be 
switched 
on/off by 
driver 


DSC ON 


DTC DSC OFF 


DTC 




ABS 

EBV 

CBC 

MSR 

ASC 

ADB-X 

DSC 

HDC 

Dry braking 

Start assist 

Braking readiness 

Fading assistance 

DBC 

-DBS 

-MBS 


EMF [parking brake] © 

GRR+ (included in active steering option) 

RPA 

CBS 


Symbols: 

• = System active 

X = System with elevated control thresholds 
© = Can be switched on/off 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

49 














50 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Electromechanical Parking Brake (EMF) 

The concept of EM F has been carried overfrom the E65. The system functions in much the same way as the previous design. 
Most of the differences lie in component location and emergency release procedures. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Dynamic Stability Control 

4 

EMF actuating unit 

2 

Master Cylinder 

5 

Emergency release for EM F 

3 

Gear Selector Lever 




E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

50 














Basic Functions of EMF 

The parking brake (EMF) has two different functions, depending on 
the operating status of the vehicle. 

• Parking brake mode 

- When the engine is running orthe vehicle is rolling, the 
parking brake acts on the service brake with the aid of the 
DSC hydraulics. This means the brake units on the front 
and rear axle are active. 


Note: After a power failure, it may still not be possible to 
move the vehicle even after releasing the brake with 
the emergency release facility. The parking lock of 
the automatic gearbox may still be engaged. 

Once released, using the emergency release facility, the parking 
brake cannot be reactivated manually.The function can be restored 
only by way of electrical activation. 


- If the engine is not running and the vehicle is stationary, the 
electromechanical actuator and its cable assembly ensure 
the parking brake acts on the duo-servo drum brake on the 
rear axle. In this case, the vehicle is braked as defined in the 
control unit. 

• Dynamic braking 

Defined retardation is triggered via the DSC system if the 
parking brake button is pulled up while driving. The decelera¬ 
tion is monitored by the DSC control functions and takes place 
for as long as the parking brake button is pulled. 


Emergency Release 

A mechanical emergency release facility is provided in orderto be 
able to release the parking brake in the event of the electro¬ 
mechanical actuating unit failing or insufficient power supply. 


CAUTION!!! 


Secure vehicle to prevent it rolling 
before operating the emergency 
release! 


The release procedure is performed manually with the emergency 
release cable assembly (2) and the emergency release handle (1) 
from the vehicle tool kit. The emergency release procedure releas¬ 
es the duo-servo drum brake by way of mechanical intervention in 
the actuator of the electromechanical control unit. 



Restoring Operation After Emergency Release 

Afterturning on the ignition, push down the EM F operating 
button and pull up again to activate the parking brake. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

51 





52 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


EMF Components 
EMF Button 

On the E70, the EMF button (1) is located in the center console 
next to the gear selector lever. 

The EMF button is based on the function logic of a hand brake. 

• Pull EMF button (1) up: Parking brake is activated 

• Press EMF button (1) down: Parking brake is deactivated 



EMF Actuating Unit 

The EMF actuating unit is located on the rear axle component 
carrier. 



Note: The indicator lamp in the instrument cluster 
shows the driver when the EMF is activated. 








EMF Actuating Unit (Internal Components) 

The EMF actuating unit is sealed watertight and the housing 
cannot be opened. 

The EMF actuating unit contains the following main components: 

• EM F control unit 

• Electric motor 

• Spindle gear mechanism 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

EMF Control unit 

8 

Flexible band 

2 

Bowden cable, 
emergency release 

9 

Force sensor, pc board 

3 

Bowden cable, rear left 

10 

Force sensor magnet 

4 

Lock pin 

11 

Bowden cable, rear right 

5 

Actuating piston 

12 

Electrical connection 

6 

Spring 

13 

EMF Control unit 

7 

Emergency release cable 




The force sensor in the EMF actuating unit is a very important 
componentfor operation of the parking brake. With its signals, the 
force sensor makes it possible forthe EMF control unit to deter¬ 
mine the actuating force. The actuating force is essential for secur¬ 
ing the required braking pressure. 



8 7 ) 8 , 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Flook 

5 

Force sensor pc-board 

2 

Retaining plate 

6 

Piston 

3 

Hall-IC 

7 

Spring 

4 

M agnet 

8 

Lower section of housing 


The housing of the force sensor consists of two halves. The lower 
section of the housing (8) is made from pressure diecast aluminum 
so that it can take up the exerted forces. 


The upper section of the housing is made of plastic, to which the 
force sensor pc-board (5) with the Hall-IC (3) is secured. 

The magnet (4) is fixed to the piston (6). The sensor is located 
between the left and right bowden cable assembly. During actua¬ 
tion, the piston (6) moves with the magnet against the spring (7). 

The travel range of spring compression is measured in accordance 
with the familiar Hall principle. Since the spring data are defined, 
the EM F control unit can calculate the applied force from the travel 
range and the spring data. The force sensor is calibrated at the end 
of the assembly line. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

53 
































54 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Service Information for EMF 
Adjusting the Brake Shoes 

The procedure for adjusting the parking brake shoes is the same as 
before: 

Turn the adjusting screw using a screwdriverthrough the threaded 
hole in the wheel hub (10 teeth). 

Removing the Bowden Cable Assemblies 

Note: The EMF must be set to service mode with the diag¬ 
nostic tester before performing any maintenance or 
service procedures (the parking brake cannot be 
applied, EMF assumes the outermost position). 

The EMF will not respond to an operating signal 
until service mode has been deactivated again. 

Necessary preparation: 

• To remove emergency release bowden cable assembly in 
luggage compartment (see Emergency Release). Use pointed 
pliers to press togetherthe white clip while pressing in the 
direction of the floor plate. 

Remove the wheels, brake calipers and brake discs (according 
to repair instructions) to expose the duo-servo brake shoes. 

The heat shield must be removed on vehicles with Active Roll 
Stabilization (ARS) and the ARS anti-roll bar lowered. (It is suf¬ 
ficient to release the ARS anti-roll bar at the mounting points 
and to lower it.) 

Unplug the electrical connectorfrom the EMF actuating unit. 

• To detach and expose the emergency release bowden cable 
assembly (Note: Clip fastening behind wheel arch panel). 
Release spring clip on wheel carrier. Detach nipple of cable 
assembly from brake show expander and pull the cable out of 


the wheel carrier. Release the cable assembly from the clip on 
the rear axle carrier and pull in the direction of the EMF actuat¬ 
ing unit. 

• Detach the carrierforthe EMF actuating unitfromthe rear axle 
carrier and from the EM F actuating unit and pull out. 

• Screw the union nut on the rear left wheel cable assembly by 
5-7 turns (left-hand thread) into the spline shaft of the actuator. 
Then fit the twist lock (square) of the threaded spindle in the 
guide in the actuator housing. The sleeve of the cable assem¬ 
bly must lie flat on the actuator housing before fitting the union 
nut.Tighten the union nut to 6 Nm. Attach the rear rightwheel 
cable assembly to the mounting point on the actuator and 
secure with the clip. Make sure that the cable is firmly fitted. 

The cable assembly must lie flat on the actuator housing 
before fitting the union nut.Tighten to 6 Nm. 

• Reinstallation takes place in the reverse order of removal. 

F it the new EMF actuating unit, cable assemblies first, in the 
package space. If it was necessary to slack off the carrierfrom 
the EM F actuating unit, it must be resecured to the EM F 
actuating unit and tightened to a torque of 4 ±0.5 Nm.The 
component carrier must be secured to the rear axle carrierto a 
torque of 19Nm±15 %. Before securing the cable assemblies 
to the wheel carrier (tightening torque 8 Nm), check that the 
brake cables are securely attached in the brake shoe expander 
otherwise the EM F actuating unit may be damaged as soon 
as it is operated. 

Start-up 

A new EMF actuating unit is always set to "service mode". 

This mode can be actively reset with the diagnostic tester or it 
resets itself automatically on exceeding a defined vehicle speed. 
The actuating unit is now in "standby mode".The EMF actuating 
unit mustthen be encoded to the vehicle. 



Initializing the Parking Brake 

Note: TheEMF must be initialized with the diagnostic 
tester after replacing the drum brake linings. 

Bedding in the Duo-servo Brake 

If the brake shoes of the duo-servo brake are replaced as part of 
repair or maintenance work, it is necessary to bed in the brake 
shoes before a sufficient holding effect may be achieved. Also in 
this case, the special routine must be activated in the EM F with the 
diagnostic tester. 

The flashing indicator lamp in the instrument cluster signals that 
the bedding-in program is ready. 

The bedding-in program will be aborted and the normal parking 
brake function resumed if the bedding-in is not started within 30 
minutes of program activation or if the ignition is switched off. 

The bedding-in procedure can also be performed on the roller 
dynamometer. 

Function on Brake Rolling Dynamometer 

The Operation of the E70 parking brake can be tested on the brake 
rolling dynamometer. As part of the road inspection, the rear axle 
brake can be tested with the engine running by pulling the EM F 
button. 

As part of the road inspection, the rear axle brake can be tested 
with the engine running by pulling the EM F button. As a result, the 
EM F actuating unit is applied, the duo-servo brake is applied and 
the vehicle normally jumps out of the roller of the test rig. 


Example Scenarios 

Basic function of the parking brake controlled by the actuating unit 
Scenario: "Ignition ON", the engine is notyet running and the foot 
brake is pressed. 

With the vehicle stationary, the parking brake is released or applied 
by pulling or pressing the EMF button. The indicator lamp in the 
instrument cluster either goes out or lights up red. 

Note: The parking brake can be released only with the 
foot brake pressed when the engine is running or 
turned off. 

The dynamic braking function is triggered if the EMF operating 
button is pulled while the vehicle is rolling. 

Transition from EMF Actuating Unit to DSC 

The system switches overfrom mechanical to hydraulic mode 
when the engine is started. If the EMF actuating unit was applied 
at the time, the DSC hydraulics will assume control of the braking 
force. 

The EMF actuating unit is not released until the hydraulics are 
holding the vehicle secure. The indicator lamp remains lit red 
throughout this process, and the driver is unaware of the transition 
(the lamp does not even flash). 

Transition from DSC to EMF Actuating Unit 

The transition to the EM F actuating unit always takes place on exit¬ 
ing the hydraulic function at "ignition OFF". If the parking brake was 
applied, the hydraulics are not released until the EM F actuating unit 
is applied. The indicatorlamp remains red throughout this 
transition. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

55 



56 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


Function of the Parking Brake Controlled by the DSC 
Hydraulics 

Scenario: "Engine mnning" 

The parking brake is applied or released completely by hydraulic 
means when the EMF operating button is pulled or pressed. 

Dynamic braking ( hydraulic) is triggered with the vehicle rolling and 
the button operated atv >3 km/h. The basic functions mainly 
correspond to the functional scope of a conventional mechanical 
parking brake. 

The system switches between "brake applied" and "brake 
released" with pressure buildup and pressure reduction every time 
the EMF button is pulled or pressed. 

The parking brake must be released by pressing the EM F button 
before starting off. Pulling away against the applied brake pressure 
results in an increase in pressure and a warning to the driver. 

Scenario: "At rest" 

Remove control removed The parking brake enters rest status 
when the remote control is removed. If the parking brake is applied, 
the time-delayed red indicator lamp signals this status to the driver. 

If the EM F actuating unit is released in rest mode, the EM F actuat¬ 
ing unit is applied when the EM F button is pulled with the vehicle 
stationary. If the vehicle is in motion, pressing the button will initiate 
dynamic braking. 

Note: Always take the remote control with you when leav¬ 
ing the vehicle otherwise children could release the 
parking brake. 


Dynamic Braking 

Two braking units for brake operation are required by law 
(previously: foot brake and hand brake) In the E70, the second 
operating point besides the foot brake is the EM F button on the 
gear selector lever. 

The vehicle is braked by the drum brakes at the rear axle if the EMF 
button is pressed and held at speeds below v = 3 km/h and with 
the engine switched off. 

The vehicle is braked at a rate of 3 m/s^ for 0.8 seconds if the EM F 
button is pressed when the vehicle is in motion. Braking power is 
then ramped up to 5 m/s^ forthe next 2 seconds. This braking 
action is retained for as long as the EM F button is pulled. 

For stability reasons (over-braking - rear axle) the dynamic braking 
function is also triggered in the rest state in response to the vehicle 
rolling (engine turned off, ignition OFF) by means of active pressure 
build-up by the DSC hydraulics together with the DSC function. 

The brake pressure required is made available as rapidly as 
possible. The braking action is always monitored bythe DSC con¬ 
trol function. This ensures vehicle stability while braking. Since all 
four wheels are braked hydraulically, there is considerably greater 
deceleration with a minimum of operating effort (EMF button) by 
comparison with conventional parking brakes.The controlled 
brakes are therefore able to contribute to improving vehicle safety. 

For traffic safety reasons, operation of dynamic braking is indicated 
to the road users behind bythe brake lights coming on. 

To avoid accidental operation and misuse, the driver is notified of 
dynamic braking operation by a display message and gong. 

This function is intended only for use in an emergency and must 
never be used as a substitute for normal operation of the service 
brake. 



The more effective braking solution is used if the parking brake 
deceleration request is overlapped by the brake pedal being 
depressed. The DSC control unit decides which deceleration 
request is to be carried out. 

Exiting Dynamic Emergency Braking 

The vehicle will remain hydraulically braked even afterthe EM F 
button has been released if the vehicle is braked to a halt by 
dynamic braking. There is a transition to the normal DSC 
hydraulics function.The hydraulic brake is only released when the 
EMF button is pressed once more. 

If the EM F button is pressed while the vehicle is still in motion, the 
system level prevailing before the emergency dynamic braking was 
activated is resumed. If the parking brake is released and the vehi¬ 
cle is coasting, it is possible to activate emergency dynamic 
braking in any situation (terminal 30,15, R) by pressing the EM F 
button. 

Error Messages 

All fault statuses are detected by the monitoring system and dis¬ 
played to the driver. The main aim is to avoid safety-critical condi¬ 
tions forvehicle occupants, the vehicle and its surroundings. 

A fault can be assigned different priorities depending on the driving 
situation (vehicle stationary/ in motion, starting/stopping) and the 
system availability. In addition to the indicator lamp, supplementary 
instructions may be shown in the control display. 

To avoid additional damage, faults in the parking brake mechanism, 
particularly a broken cable in the operating cable assembly and 
excess load are detected by the force sensor and indicated accord¬ 
ingly. (See shutdown strategy table). 

Error messages can no longer be output actively in the event of the 
EM F control unit failing. 


In this case, the instrument cluster assumes the control of the cor¬ 
rect error message on recognizing the absence of the regular EMF 
telegram via the PT-CAN (alive signal). 


Shut-down Strategy 

Fault 

Availability 

Back-up System 


Parking brake 
(mechanical) 
v = 0 

Dynamic braking 
(hydraulic) 
v>0 


CAN signal 

OK 

OK 


DSC 

hydraulics 

OK 

NA 

Service brake + 
hand brake 

Actuating 

mechanism 

NA 

OK 

Park position automatic 
gearbox 

EMF control 
unit 

NA 

NA 

Park position automatic 
gearbox and service 
brake and auxiliary brake 
if necessary 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

57 




58 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 


General Parking Brake Fault Concept 

Fault Distribution Between DSC and EMF Control Unit 

Only DSC faults that actually affect operation of the parking brake 
result in shut-down of the hydraulic function. These are mainly 
faults that result in shut-down of the ABS functionality. 

They triggerthe transition to manual emergency mode. Dynamic 
braking is no longer possible unless only CAN faults occur affecting 
this functionality. 

• Shut-down level "electromechanical mode" (only EMF actuat¬ 
ing unit) initiated by following DSC faults 

- DSC control unit fault 

- Electrical fault (e.g. wiring harness) 

- Sensorfault (brake light switch/wheel speed) 

- actuator fault/hydraulic unit 

- Bus communication fault 

• Shut-down level "electrohydraulic mode" (failure of EMF 
actuating unit) 

- Force sensorfault 

- Actuator fault of EM F actuating unit 

- Error in actuation electronics 

- Fault in actuating mechanism 

- Electrical fault 

• Shut-down level "total shut-down" 

- EMF control unit or controller fault 
-EMF button fault 

- Electrical fault, power supply 


Note: All fault codes are stored in the control unitin which 
the monitoring routine was performed.The EMF con¬ 
trol unit is informed of the fault status of the DSC 
control unit and vice versa. 

Fault Regeneration 

When a fault is detected, the system remains in a safe mode until 
the end ofthe "ignition ON" cycle, once reached, a shut-down level 
is not cancelled during the cycle. 



Dynamic C ruise Control (DC C) 

The operating and display philosophy on the DCC steering column 
stalk and in the instrument cluster in the E70 is the same as that in 
other model series. 

Functionally, the DCC is integrated in the DSC control unit. 

The DCC functionality is realized by way of communication with the 
partner control units of the DSC control unit in the system network 
such as DM E/DDE, EGS, SZL and instrument cluster. 

The DCC function can be activated from 30 km/h/19 mph (up to 
max. 250km/h/155mph) and is deactivated by similar factors as for 
cruise control: 

• Brake pedal actuation 

• Deactivation of DSC 

• Activation of DTC 

• Active DSC intervention 

• Deactivation by the driver 

• Speed is reduced below 22 km/h 

• "N" engaged 

• EM F function activated 

DCC achieves a deceleration of max. 2.1 m/s 2 and an acceleration 
of about. 1.7 m/s 2 . The transverse acceleration is variably limited 
by the Curve Speed Limiter(CLS). The primary emphasis has 
been placed on comfortable performance in this system configura¬ 
tion. 

When cruise control with brake intervention is activated, the brake 
lights are also activated in accordance with legal requirements in 
connection with a system related braking operation DCC. 



Extended functions of the DCC compared to a conventional cruise 
control system: 

• Active brake intervention to realize the set speed also 
when driving downhill 

• Curve Speed Limiter (CLS) - adaptation of driving speed 
when cornering (transverse acceleration). 

This function limits the maximum transverse acceleration depend¬ 
ent on vehicle speed with the aim of achieving the greatest possi¬ 
ble agility in DCC mode. Driving on winding country roads in a 
speed range from > 50 km/h/31mph to < 120 km/h/74mph is 
controlled with a value of 3.3 - 3.7 m/s 2 . 

The value can increase up to 4.5 m/s forfast highway bends and 
slow lane changes at speeds between <50 km/h/31mph and > 
120 km/h/74mph. 

• Comfort Dynamic System (CDS) - this enables a type of 
"manual throttle mode" on the steering column stalk. 

• Adapted downhill mode - the overrun fuel cutout and gear 
down shift are correspondingly adapted. 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

59 




60 

E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 



Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. Circle the bus systems below which are directly connected 
to the VDM? 

D-CAN PT-CAN K-CAN FlexRay 

F-CAN MOST LIN BSD 


4. On previous vehicles equipped with Active Steering (AS), 
the ECO valve was responsible for controlling the flow of 
power steering fluid. Which component replaces the ECO 
valve in the E70? (circle the correct answer) 

EWS VDM EVV GRR + 

GWS SHL ARS RFK 


2. Which of the following diagnostic procedures is NOT 

recommended (or possible) when investigating faults in the 
FlexRay system? (cross out the procedure which is NOT 
useful in diagnosis) 

ETM and Ohm meter 

Fault codes and test modules 

Oscilloscope in DISplus orGT-1 

Physical inspection of connectors and wiring 



On an E70 equipped with the Adaptive Drive package and 
Active Steering a tandem power steering pump is installed. 
Which part of the power steering pump is responsible for 
the hydraulic pressure in the ARS system? (circle one) 

PartA PartB 

A special tool is used to move the strut assembly 
The upper wishbone must be replaced 
The swivel bearing must be replaced 
ThefrontCambercannotbe corrected in service 


5. 

3. During an alignment on an E70, a Camberchange is 

needed, which procedure represents the proper method to 
change frontCamber? (circle the correct answer) 

An eccentric must be adjusted 











6. On the Active Steering system on the E70, which ofthe (circle one) 


following components has been omitted as compared to 
previous models with AS? (circle one) 

500Kbit/second 

10M bits/second 

Actuator Motor Sensor 

22.5 Mbits/second 

10 Kb its/second 

C umulative (total) steering angle sensor 



Steering Angle Sensor(SZL) 

10. Which ofthe following systems/components on 
directly connected to the FlexRay bus system? 

Electromagnetic Safety Lock 

GWS SZL 

EDC Satellites 


EHC VDM 

EMF 


7. On vehicles equipped with VDC, how do the ride height 
sensors communicate with the VM D control module? 
(circle one) 

The sensors are hardwired to the VDM 
The sensors communicate to VDM via FlexRay 
The sensors are hardwired to the EDC Satellites 
The sensors communicate to the VDM via PT-CAN 

8. The resistance ofthe terminating resistors on the FlexRay 
bus is between: (circle one) 

200 and 240 Ohms 90 and 110 Ohms 

10 and 60 Ohms 80 to 100 Ohms 

9. What is the communication speed ofthe FlexRay bus? 


the E 70 is 

ARS 

DME 


E70 Chassis Dynamics Workbook 

61 



