Table of Contents 


E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module Workbook 


Subject Page 

Advanced C rash Safety Module 

Front Airbag, Driver. 

Front Airbag, Passenger. 

Curtain Airbag . 

Side Airbag. 

Crash Safety Module . 

Rollover Monitoring System .. 

Seat Position Detection . 

Seat-position Recognition . 

Calibration of Driver Seat .. 


Initial Print Date: 12/06 


Revision Date: 


rnmniruoNMnoora 












2 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module Workbook 


Advanced Crash Safety Module (ACSM) 

Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

■BIECIIMB 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Demonstrate the function of the ACSM system 

• Identify the different types of air bags used on the E70 


• Demonstrate the Driver Seat Calibration on the E70 




Advanced Crash Safety Module 


The safety system (ACSM) is used in the E70.The task of ACSM 
is to detect accident situations critical forthe vehicle occupants 
and to activate the necessary restraint systems selectively corre¬ 
sponding to the crash severity. 

The crash safety module performs internal diagnosis and monitors 
all inputs and outputs. Any faults that may occur are stored non¬ 
volatile in the crash safety module and indicated to the driver by 
way of the airbag indicator lamp in the instrument cluster. 

Communication with other control modules in the vehicle's system 
network takes place via the K-CAN and the F-CAN. 



In the event of a crash, a K-bus telegram is transmitted (provided a 
telephone is installed) via an additional separate data line to the 
Telematics Control Unit (TCU) and the emergency call triggered. 

It is possible to encode the crash safety module via the K-CAN. 
Diagnosis of the crash safety module takes place via the diagnosis 
CAN to the gateway that is located in the) unction-box ECU on 
the E70. 

Front Airbag, Driver 

In conjunction with the seat belt, the driver's front airbag is 
designed to reduce the risk of serious injury to the driver's head or 
thorax during a head-on collision. The front airbag forthe driver's 
side is located in the hub cushion of the steering wheel. The driver 
front airbag is equipped with a 2-stage inflator assembly. 

The two stages of the airbag are triggered with a time delay 
depending on the crash severity and use of seat belt. The two 
stages of the inflator assembly facilitate a restraint function adapted 
to the crash severity and consequently reduce additional stress on 
the occupants during the development phase. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Connection of firing pellet, first stage 

2 

Connection offiring pellet, second stage 


Front Airbag, Passenger 

Together with the seat belt, the task of the front airbag on the pas¬ 
senger's side is to reduce the risk of serious injury to the front pas¬ 
senger during a frontal crash. The 2-stage front airbag on the pas¬ 
senger's side is located underthe instrument panel. 

Deployment of the front passenger airbag breaks the instrument 
panel at defined points and opens a flap, which is connected to 
the instrument panel by means of a fabric strap. The passenger 
airbag opens in the direction of the windshield. The passenger 
airbag emerges in an upward direction and is supported on the 
windshield and on the instrument panel. 


E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module Workbook 

3 











«)x—1| -1- 


E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module Workbook 


(s © tstul 



5 © ts Q 




ACSM Circuit Diagram 








































































































































































































































5 


ACSM Circuit Diagram Legend 





















































































6 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module Workbook 


Curtain Airbag 

The well-proven curtain airbag is used as the head protection sys¬ 
tem in connection with the ACSM on the E70. 

The curtain airbag extends from the A-pillar up to the C-pillarand 
covers the entire side section at head level. The curtain airbag 
inflates between the occupants and side windows or side trim pan¬ 
els. 



In connection with the side airbag in the front seat, it provides opti¬ 
mum protection for the occupants in the event of side impact. 

The curtain airbag reduces the movement of the head and other 
extremities towards the outside during a side crash. This results in 
lower neck shearforces as well as bending moments in the cervical 
vertebrae. In addition, it also prevents direct head contact with the 
side structure of the vehicle. 

The inflator assembly (gas generator) mounted between the B-pil- 
larand C-pillar is triggered in the event of a side crash. The gas 
flows out of the pressure vessel through the two gas lances into 
the curtain airbag. 


Simultaneously filling the curtain airbag at the front and rear 
ensures the air cushion is filled uniformly. 

The head airbag is brought into position because of the way the 
curtain airbag is mounted on the A-pillar and the C-pillar. The cur¬ 
tain airbag extends between the side window and side trim panel 
and the occupants. 

The closed system retains the structural strength and stability of 
the curtain airbag for several seconds 

Side Airbag 

For many years now, the side airbag has been used by BMW as an 
important integral part in occupants safety and protection systems. 
The task of the side air bags is to minimize the risk of injury to the 
driver/front passenger in the trunk/torso area in the event of a side 
impact. 

The side air bags are mounted in the 
backrest of the front seats with the aim of 
achieving optimum interiorfunctionality 
and appealing design in the E70 while 
also satisfying the demanding safety 
requirements. The task of the side air 
bags is to minimize the risk of injury to 
the driver/front passenger in the pelvic 
and trunk/torso area in the event of a side 
impact. 

The side airbag is triggered in response to a sufficiently strong 
impact from the side. The side airbag emerges through the tear 
seam in the backrest of the seats and inflates between the door 
and occupant. The air cushion between the door and occupant 
provides controlled damping and therefore reduces load/strain on 
the occupant. 






Crash Safety Module 


The advanced crash safety module essentially comprises the fol¬ 
lowing components: 

• Crash safety module 

• Sensors and switches 

• Actuators 

The crash safety module consists of a die cast housing with inte¬ 
grated plug cover. 

The crash safety module contains various sensors: 

• Rollover sensor 

• Low-g sensors 

• Longitudinal and transverse acceleration sensors 



The advanced crash safety module has a comprehensive sensor 
system.Transverse acceleration sensors in the B-pillarand door 
pressure sensors are used forthe purpose of side crash detection. 
The B-pillarsatellites also have longitudinal acceleration sensors 
for front and rear-end crash detection. 

Note: The crash safety module is located on the transmis¬ 
sion tunnel behind the hand brake. Various sensors 
(rollover, Low-g as well as longitudinal and transverse 
acceleration sensors) are integrated in the crash 
safety module and the crash safety module is inte¬ 
grated in the K-CAN. 

Rollover Monitoring System 

The rollover protection system is an important instrument for 
improving occupant protection in the event of the vehicle rolling 
over. The seat belt pre-tensioners and the curtain air bags are trig¬ 
gered in response to corresponding crash severity. The crucial fac¬ 
tors which determine whetherthe car overturns are not just the 
angle but also the angular velocity at which the car is set into the 
roll. All these vehicle movements can also occur after a front-end, 
side-on or rear-end crash. 


Note: The front passenger air bags are not deployed when 
the front seat is not occupied. However, this is not 
indicated by the PassengerAirbag OFF light. 


E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module Workbook 

7 


8 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module Workbook 


Seat Position Detection 

In accordance with US legislation a system for recognizing the size 
of occupants must be provided forthe driver's seat. This size 
recognition function is based on the adjustment range of the for¬ 
ward/backward seat adjustment. On the E70, the exact position is 
determined by the actuator motor in the driver's seat. 

Seat-position Recognition 

Seat-position recognition indicates where longitudinally the seat is 
situated (distance to the steering wheel). In this way, the distance 
between the driver and the steering wheel can be detected. 

The ACSM requires this information so that it can fire the airbag 
under defined conditions. 

Seat-position recognition is calibrated at the factory.The positions 
in the front and rear longitudinal seat direction are known to the 
seat module. A maximum distance is available for longitudinal seat 
adjustment. 

This stretches from the mechanical front stop to the mechanical 
rear stop. The motorfor adjustment in the longitudinal direction 
generates Hall pulses overthis distance.The seat modules uses 
these Hall pulses to identify the current (absolute) seat position. 

An area for example in which a person would sit is defined in the 
longitudinal direction. The absolute seat position can be lost due to 
specific causes. The seat must therefore be calibrated. 


Calibration of Driver Seat 

The position of the driver seat in the longitudinal direction can 
become implausible in the course of that seat's life. This can be 
caused by repeatedly moving the seat forward and back. 

These movements can give rise to an unauthorized position delta 
which no longer provides fora determination of the seat position. 


The seat must therefore be recalibrated. Calibration is easy and can 
be performed by the customer him/herself following the steps in 
the Owner's manual. 

Note: These steps should turn off the Check Control 
Message, if not, repeat the process and if this 
doesn't work the system must be checked. 

If the seat is unable to reach the mechanical front stop, the calibra¬ 
tion must be performed in the service workshop. 

This situation can come about if, a coin is stuck in the seat-adjust¬ 
ment rail and blocks the adjustment travel. 

When repairs are made to the seat, the seat must always be cali¬ 
brated. This is necessary to guarantee seat-position recognition, or 
more precisely to increase the safe and reliable function of seat- 
position recognition. 

Switching the seat module fortest purposes for example with one 
from another vehicle is possible. The seat calibration will be lost 
however. Because the possibility of the calibration being in order 
when the old seat module is reinstalled cannot be ruled out, it is 
necessary to calibrate the seat. 


Note: For further details please referto BMW Service 
Information. 



Check Control Message 


Meaning 


Information in Central 
Information Display 






Seat must be recalibrated. 


Seat calibration necessary. 


Seat-position recognition mal¬ 
functioning! 


Seat-position recognition mal¬ 
functioning! Have the system 
checked by BMW Service at the 
next available opportunity. 



Rear seat not locked! 


Rear seat/Backrest 

Left or right rear seat not locked. 

Increased risk of injury in the 
event of an impact because seat 
belt is ineffective! 


The ACSM outputs a check control message via the K-CAN to the instrument cluster. 

The seat module can also triggerthe check control message. This is possible if for instance the Hall sensor of the longitudinal drive motor 
is defective.The seat must be calibrated after the repair. 

Note: The ACSM receives a message from the seat module via the K-CAN once a second as to whether calibration of the 
seat is necessary. 


E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module Workbook 

9 



















10 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module Workbook 



Workshop Exercise - Seat Detection 


Using an E70 shop vehicle perform the "Driver Seat Calibration" 

How do we know that the Driverseat is out of calibration? What procedure is to be followed if the Check Control Message 

does not go out? 


STEP 1 

Move the driverseat forward until it comes to a complete stop. 


STEP 2 

Move the driverseat forward once again (note a small amount of 
additional movement.) 


STEP 3 

Set the driverseat to the desired adjustment position. 




