Table of Contents 

E83 Life Cycle Impulse Workbook 

Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

Body .4 

Front.4 

Rear .5 

Interior.6 

Cockpit .6 

Door Panels .6 

Drivetrain.7 

N52 Engine.7 

Intake Air Duct.7 

Digital Engine Electronics (DM E) .7 

6-speed Manual Transmission .7 

6-speed Automatic Transmission GM 6 (6L45).7 

Chassis.8 

DXC+.8 

RDC .8 

Power Steering Cooling .8 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 Revision Date: 




















Table of Contents 

Subject Page 

Electrical Systems 

EWS 4.4 . 

Lights M odule 2 . 

Rear Seat Heating 
Oil Level Indicator 

Radio, CD . 

Navigation. 


00 00 00 00 00 00 OO 










Life Cycle Impulse Workbook 


Model: E83 

Production: from 8/2006 

■BIECIIMB 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 
• Identify the changes made to the E83 X3 LCI 


3 

E83 Life Cycle Impulse Workbook 


E83 Life Cycle Impulse Workbook 

4 


Introduction 


The BMW X3 has been available on the market as of the 2004 
model year and represents a premium product in the segment of 
compact luxury SUVs. 

As of August 2006 production, the E83 will undergo a redesign in 
orderto maintain its leading position in the market and to fend off 
the ever increasing number of competitors. 

This model redesign, known as LCI (Life Cycle Impulse), includes a 
pronounced visual upgrade, the introduction of new engines as well 
as a whole series of improvements in details as well as in the range 
of interior trim and fittings. 

As of September 2006, the E83 X3 3.0i with M54B30 (170 
kW/231 bhp) will be replaced with the X3 3.0si with N52B30O1 
(191 kW/260 bhp). 



Body 


The only technical change is to the openings forthe reversing 
lights in the inner panel of the rear hatch. Due to the higher posi¬ 
tioning of these lights, it was also necessary to displace the clear¬ 
ance for their bulbs further upward. 

The carrier, sheet metal components and assembly concept 
remain unchanged. Only the underbody paneling has been adapt¬ 
ed to the new engines as part of the model redesign. M odifications 
to the bodyshell components are solely restricted to details such as 
the repositioning of threaded connections, pins or securing ele¬ 
ments forthe adapted wiring harnesses. 

All parts of the bodyshell (hood/tailgate, side panels, doors, sills and 
weatherstrips) remain unchanged.The same also applies to the 
body connection points. 

Front 

The redesigned E83 can be immediately distinguished from its 
predecessor by the partly painted bumpers and the double kidney 
grill that extends further downward. 



Front view - Left: E83 up to 8/06, Right: E83 LCI 

















The newly designed front bumper which was previously two-piece 
is now three pieces. A top section painted in the car color and a 
bottom coverthat is also painted are now clipped onto the black- 
structured, bolted carrier.These painted parts can be individually 
replaced as required by removing the complete bumper. 

The kidney grills now extend further downward is available only 
with light titanium bars. 

The grill between the double kidney and bumper as well as the 
lower grill are black on all vehicles. 


Rear 

The rear bumper on the E83 LCI is also a new design. It is now 
made up of four main parts (previously one-piece). Two black side 
panels and one exhaust finisher also in black are fitted on a carrier 
painted in the car color. 

The panel at the lower edge of the rear hatch is now also painted in 
the car color, thus making a decisive contribution to the overall 
higher grade impression of the X3's rear end. 

Two separate reflectors are clipped on to the left and right of the 
exhaust finisher. 

The PDC sensors of the rear bumper are located in the painted 
area and are therefore painted in the car color (unchanged black at 
the front). 

The inner panel of the rear hatch is adapted to the new design lay¬ 
out of the lights. 

Although the exterior shape remains unchanged, different openings 
are required to accommodate the repositioning of the reversing 
lights. 



Rearview - Left: E83 up to 8/06, Right: E83 LCI 


E83 Life Cycle Impulse Workbook 

5 








6 

E83 Life Cycle Impulse Workbook 


Interior 


Cockpit 


Door Panels 


The dashboard has been upgraded by numerous details.The 
instrument cluster shroud (previously attached) provides for a wider 
color separation groove and a more harmonious general impres¬ 
sion. The dashboard, shroud, and airbag cover also have a new 
structure finish. 


The cover of the glove compartment is positioned slightly lower. 


The trim covers for the fresh air grills, the light switch cluster and 
the cup holder are now coated with soft paint (three different colors 
- depending on interior color). 

Both the basic steering wheel as well as the sports steering wheel 
now feature a new steering wheel rim and a new cover. 

In addition, the sports steering wheel features new spokes and a 
new backing. Both steering wheels have 3 spokes, the previous 4- 
spoke basic steering wheel is no longer available. 


As in other model series, the interior rear-view mirror in the E83 is 
available with a digital compass. 



Cockpit- Left: E83 up to 8/06, Right: E83 LCI 


The door mirrors have also been distinctly upgraded by new sur¬ 
face structuring and geometry. The connection to the dashboard 
has been improved while the trim covers for the speakers are now 
larger due to the installation of new speakers. 


Storage compartment shelves integrated in the doortrim panel 
replace the previous netshell combination. The finisherforthe 
power window switches are now smaller. 















Drivetrain 


N52 Engine 

The N52 engine first offered in 
the E90 will be reengineered for 
the September2006 launch and 
will then be known as the N52K. 

The exact engine designation will 
N52B30O1. 

Compared to the M 54 6-cylinder engine previously fitted in the 
E83, the N52K is characterized by lowerfuel consumption (12% 
reduction), reduced weight (10 kg less), 35 hp (30 kW) increase in 
power output and an increase of 11 lb ft torque. 

The exhaust manifold has been slightly adapted to match the 
geometry of the E83. 

The same also applies to the oil pan with modified underbody area 
and threaded connection to the front axle. 

The shape ofthe engine support has been modified to accept the 
N52.The power steering oil reservoir is now mounted on the screw 
connection forthe alternator instead of on the frame side member 
as previously. 

Intake Air Duct 

Forthe first time at BMW, the intake silencer is a fixed part in the 
engine. The unfiltered air duct is crash-optimized. An unfiltered air 
resonator and a time chamberfiltered air resonator are used in 
orderto satisfy acoustics requirements. 

Digital Engine Electronics (DME) 

The engine management MSV80 is used in connection with the 
N 52 K. This system is a further development ofthe MSV70 and has 
been adapted in terms of several details. 


6-speed ManualTransmission 

The synchromesh ofthe gearshift mechanism has been newly 
developed to provide outstanding gearshift comfort both at low as 
well as elevated shift forces. 

lst/2nd gearshift now takes place in double cone synchromesh 
and single-cone synchromesh for 3rd/4th and 5th/6th gear. 

A central selector valve connects the gearshift with a shift gate on 
the inside forthe first time. Another new feature is the passive shift 
lock that guarantees distinctly greater locking reliability in addition 
to further optimized smoothness of operation. 

6-speed Automatic Transmission GM6 (6L45) 

The new automatic transmission GM 6 replaces the previous trans¬ 
mission GM 5 in the E83. The transmission has 6 forward drive 
ranges. The spread and gearratio are virtually identical to the GM5. 
Its main advantages include a 6 % reduction in fuel consumption 
and improved gearshift dynamics. 

The lowerfuel consumption results from the use of neutral idle 
control (N 1C), low converter slip thanks to the use of a turbine-tor¬ 
sion damper as well as reduced drag losses in the clutches. 

In the GM 6 is a one-way clutch to ensure stable shift quality when 
shifting from 1st to 2nd. Thanks to their high drive percentage with 
the clutch engaged, converters with turbine-torsion dampers pro¬ 
vide a direct connection to the engine. 

The transmission control unit is accommodated together with the 
hydraulic control unit in the transmission (mechatronics concept). 
This arrangement provides advantages in terms of package space 
and, due to the smaller number of interfaces, it also ensures 
increased system reliability. 



E83 Life Cycle Impulse Workbook 

7 




8 

E83 Life Cycle Impulse Workbook 


Chassis 


Electrical Systems 


Various modifications to the chassis of the E83 have been neces¬ 
sary to accommodate the higher performance N52K engine. Most 
of these modifications, however, are restricted to geometric adapta¬ 
tions (steering system and heat shields). 

DXC + 

In addition to the known features such as ABS, ASC, CBC, DSC 
and HDC, the following will be added: 

• Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) for ensuring maximum trac¬ 
tion irrespective of the driving surface 

• Hill starting assistance (Hill-holder) 

• Dry brakes in rain 

• Brake standby/brake travel reduction 

• Brake fading assistance 

RDC 

All E83 vehicles will be equipped with the tire pressure monitoring 
system RDC which was introduced in March 2006. 

Power Steering Cooling 

The DSC control unit has an additional program module forthe 
power steering cooling. 

This function increases the fan speed to secure the required cool¬ 
ing capacity under high load conditions (e.g. uphill/downhill driving) 
at low speed. The signals relating to the driving speed, power out¬ 
put (via HFM) and steering angle lock are used as the control data 
forthis purpose. 


EWS 4.4 

The E83 will be equipped with the EWS 4.4.This electronic con¬ 
trol provides increased anti-theft protection, and eliminates the 
need for DM E - EWS alignment. 

Lights Module 2 

The lights module 2 replaces the previous light switch cluster in 
the E83 LCI and combines the features of the AHL control unit. 

Rear Seat Heating 

Rear seat heating will be offered in all X3 models. 

Oil Level Indicator 

The oil level indicator is now integrated in the instrument cluster. 

Radio, CD 

The new radio platform of all E83 features a double tuner and sta¬ 
tion list expansion. 

An AUX-ln jack is provided on the center console forthe connec¬ 
tion of external audio sources. 

The Random function in the CD changer now only refers to the 
selected CD and no longerto all (up to six) CDs in the magazine of 
the changer. This reduced number of selection options substantial¬ 
ly shortens the pauses between the music tracks. 

Navigation 

The computer hardware is now lead-free and therefore recyclable. 





