TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Subject Page 


Adding Oil to the System.25 

Compressor .26 

Compressor Clutch.31 

Condenser .33 

Auxiliary Fan .35 

R-12 Receiver/Dryer .37 

Repair Procedure .38 

Proper Reading of the Sight Glass.39 

R-134a Receiver/Dryer .41 

Expansion Valve .42 

Evaporator.44 

Blower Motor.46 

Microfilters.47 
















COMPRESSOR 


The compressor in an automotive A/C system serves two important functions: 

• It creates a low-pressure zone at the compressor inlet, to draw refrigerant vapor from 
the evaporator. 

• It compresses the low-pressure refrigerant vapor into a high-pressure vapor and 
sends it toward the condenser. 


BMW A/C systems use various types of compressors. These inolude: 

• Seiko-Seiki rotary vane compressor 

• Nippondenso swash-plate design 



The Seiko-Seiki type is a five-vane rotary oompressor. It consists of a shaft with vanes, 
that maintain contact with the inner wall of a oavlty. The cavity is shaped like an ellipse. As 
the shaft rotates, oil pressure and oentrifugal force push out on the vanes, so that their 
outer edges stay in contact with the cavity. This creates spaces where the volume is 
expanded and contracted, to draw refrigerant vapor in, compress it, and force it out. 


26 
































REED 

VALVE 



REED 

VALVE 


LOW 

PRESSURE 

INLET 


HIGH 

PRESSURE 

OUTLET 

When the space between the shaft and the cavity is large, the pressure is low. Refrigerant 
vapor is drawn into the space. When the vane passes the inlet port, the space is sealed 
off; no nnore refrigerant vapor can be drawn in. As the vane sweeps through 180°, the 
space shrinks, compressing the refrigerant. The refrigerant is then forced out through reed 
valves, to the discharge ports. 


27 













10PA 


047200- 


R-12 DENSOOIL6 

. — . . , . ^ — - high side 30kg cm’ 

LEAKAGE TEST low side iskg/cm’ 

MADE IN JAPAN 





j 



“N_ 




- fO 

Q 





The Nippondenso compressor is a five- 
cylinder swash-plate compressor. The 
swash plate is set on an angle, and It 
rotates with the shaft. As it goes through 
one complete revolution, it drives pistons 
from one end of their travel to the other, 
and back again. As it drives a piston for¬ 
ward in its cylinder, the piston compresses 
the refrigerant in the cylinder. The com¬ 
pressed refrigerant is then discharged. As 
the swash plate pulls a piston baok, the 
piston draws refrigerant into the cylinder. 


COMPRESSION STROKE 



COMPRESSION STROKE 




28 



















































































































































COMPRESSOR REGULATION - COOLING 


The E39, 9/97 E38 750iL, E46 - 
IHKA uses a new variable dis¬ 
placement A/C compressor. 

The swash plate of the compres¬ 
sor Is hinged so that it can vary 
the piston travel based on the out¬ 
put requirements of the system. 
The swash plate position is con¬ 
trolled by the control valve located 
in the compressor. 

The control valve regulation is 
based on the low and high side 
pressures of the system. A “high” 
low side pressure (high load) will 
cause the control valve to close 
and block discharge pressure from 
entering Into the crankcase of the 
compressor. 

When the low side pressure 
decreases, the control valve 
opens. The swash plate moves to 
a position of minimum travel and 
consequently reduces the com¬ 
pressor output. 

The compressor output varies con¬ 
tinually based on the constant 
change In the contributing pres¬ 
sures. 



PRESSURE 



29 
























































































At low engine RPMs 
and/or high tennper- 
ature loads, the pis¬ 
ton travel (displaoe- 
ment) of the com¬ 
pressor pistons are 
at the maximum 
point. This allows 
the compressor to 
provide maximum 
cooling efficiency at 
idle speeds and 
when high output is 
required (heavy 
demand for cooling). 


SWASH PLATE POSITIONED 
FOR 100% OUTPUT 


HIGH SIDE 
PRESSURE 


STOP PLATE 


r^ 


a 

■ m 

■ 



LJ 

m m 



LOW SIDE PRESSURE (HIGH) 


At higher engine RPMs and when the load on the system is low, the swash plate moves so 
that the piston travel is shortened. 



This reduces the 
constant high load 
output of the com- 

. , SWASH PLATE POSITION CONTINUALLY 

pressor any time the moves to vary compressor 
A/C system is on. It output (<1 oo% - 5 %) 

also reduces the 
cycling of the com¬ 
pressor due to the 
low temperature of 
the evaporator 
(evaporator temper¬ 
ature sensor caus¬ 
ing the system to 
cycle at 3°C). An 
overall effect of this 
is improved fuel 
economy. 


NOTE: Refer to repair pro¬ 
cedures for proper com¬ 
pressor replacement and 
correcting oil level. 


HIGH SIDE 
PRESSURE 


LOW SIDE PRESSURE (LOW) 


30 



















































































































































































































































































































COMPRESSOR CLUTCH 


The compressor pulley is driven by a belt from the orankshaft; a oompressor clutoh is used 
to engage/disengage the pulley and driveshaft. The clutch is eiectromagnetic. When 
power is provided to the ciutch, the clutch engages and rotates the compressor drive 
shaft. When the power is cut off, the ciutch disengages and the compressor pulley free¬ 
wheels. On BMW A/C systems, the compressor is cycied on and off, according to evapo¬ 
rator temperature; it is also cycled off at full-throttle, standing start acceleration conditions. 



COMPRESSOR 

CLUTCH 


A diode is used to prevent induced current and voltage from damaging the controi mod¬ 
ule/relays when the clutch solenoid is disengaged. The diode allows the voltage spike cre¬ 
ated when the clutch solenoid is disengaged, to flow in a ioop back through the solenoid 
coil, until the energy is dissipated. Different vehicles use different control modules to con¬ 
trol the compressor clutch. 


COMPRESSOR 

CONTROL 



A/C 

COMP. 

RELAY 



The compressor olutoh is unit replaoeable. 


31 























































COMPRESSOR SERVICE 


• When troubleshooting a noisy oompressor oomplaint, make sure the noise is present 
only when the clutch is engaged. 

• If it is present when the clutch Is not engaged, remove the compressor drive belt and 
check again. 

• If the noise continues, it is not related to the compressor. 

• If removing the drive belt reduces or eliminates the noise, check the torque of the com¬ 
pressor and bracket mounting bolts. 

• Check the belt tension and condition, and tensioner pullies which can produce rattling 
noises that would sound like a defective compressor. 

• A loose/slipping belt can cause noise. 

• A belt that is too tight can damage the clutch bearings. 

• If the compressor Is noisy with the compressor clutch engaged, make sure the system is 
charged with the correct amount of refrigerant. 

• An over-charged system can cause compressor noise. 

• If the A/C system is overcharged with refrigerant, the liquid entering the compressor can 
damage it. 

• When troubleshooting a noisy compressor complaint, recover the refrigerant and 
recharge the system with the correct amount. 

• A failed compressor must be returned with the inlet and outlet ports sealed using the 
plastic caps from the replacement compressor. Otherwise the “failed” compressor will 
be damaged by moisture, and it will be impossible for Warranty to analyze it. 

• For details on compressor replacement, see the TIS, Group 64 


32 


CONDENSER 


The compressor pumps the refrigerant to the top of the condenser. Almost all of it is a 
high-pressure vapor, at this point. Beoause of its high pressure, the temperature at whioh 
it can condense is much higher. The high pressure allows the refrigerant to ohange from a 
vapor to a liquid, when ambient air, passing over the oondenser, carries some of its heat 
away. Most of the refrigerant is a high-pressure liquid by the time it reaohes the bottom of 
the condenser. The condenser (like the radiator and the heater oore) is also a “heat 
exchanger.” 


-11 1111 11 A AA 1 11 11^ 


CONDENSER 





I I I I I* I I I M I I I I I I 

CONDENSER 



RESISTOR 

(FOR NORMAL- LOW 
SPEED OPERATION) 


AUXILIARY FAN 




33 





























































































































































The condenser on BMW A/C systems is equipped with an auxiliary fan that provides addi- 
tionai air fiow through the radiator and condenser, when needed. 

Auxiiiary fan control systems vary from vehicle to vehicle. The following is a typical “basic” 
example of how an auxiliary fan is controlled. 

The auxiliary fan is controlled by two normally open relays, a normal-speed relay, which 
runs the fan at the “normal” speed; and a high-speed relay, which runs the fan at the “high” 
speed. 

The /VC control module grounds the normal-speed relay whenever the /VC system is 
turned on. This causes the fan to run at the normal speed. 

The relays are also energized by a (normally open) double temperature switch, which sens¬ 
es coolant temperature in the radiator. When coolant temperature rises above 180° F (82° 
C), the normal-speed half of the switch closes, powering the normal-speed relay, and the 
auxiliary fan runs at the normal speed, whether or not the snowflake button is depressed. 

When the temperature rises above 190° F (88° C), the high-speed half of the switch clos¬ 
es, powering the high-speed relay, and the auxiliary fan runs at high speed. 

There is also an intermediate pressure switch fitted to the receiver/dryer. This switch, 
which is normally open, closes when refrigerant pressure exceeds 260 psi. This energizes 
the high-speed relay and runs the auxiliary fan at high speed. 

The details of auxiliary fan controls on other BMW vehicles are different. Refer to the 
Electrical Troubleshooting Manuals (ETMs) for vehicle specific information. 


34 











AUXILIARY FAN - TYPICAL WIRING DIAGRAM 


STAGE 2 
TEMP. 
SWITCH 
CLOSES 
AT 190°F 


5 AMP FUSE 40 AMP FUSE 



35 



































































AUXILIARY FAN CONTROL - E46 & E38, E39 (as equipped) 


FAN MOTOR MODULE 


The Auxiliary Fan motor inoorporates 
an output final stage that activates the 
fan motor at variable speeds. 

The auxiliary fan is controlled by ECM. 
The motor output stage receives 
power and ground and activates the 
motor based on a PWM signal (10 - 
100Hz) received from the ME 7.2. 

The fan is activated based on the fol¬ 
lowing factors: 




POWER, GROUND & SIGNAL WIRES 


Radiator outlet temperature sensor input exceeds a preset temperature. 

IHKA signalling via the K and CAN bus based on calculated refrigerant pressures. 
Vehicle speed. 

Battery voltage level 


When the over-temperature light in the instrument cluster is on (120°C) the fan is run in the 
overrun function. This signal is provided to the DME via the CAN bus. When this occurs 
the fan is run at a frequency of 10Hz. 



RADIATOR 

OUTLET 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 


AUX FAN 
OUTPUT 
STAGE/MOTOR 


IHKA SIGNALING VIA CAN BUS: 
-Variable Speed Auxiliary Fan Control 

- IHKA on 

- Compressor Activation Status 


36 
























































































R-12 RECEIVER/DRYER 


SIGHT GLASS 



R-12 Receiver/Dryer 


From the condenser, liquid refrigerant under high pressure flows to the receiver/dryer. The 
receiver/dryer consists of a cyiindricai tank to hold the refrigerant and a soiid dryer (com¬ 
prised of a desiccant such as silica gel, for an R-12 system, or zeolite, for an R-134a sys¬ 
tem; moiecuiar sieves; and aluminum oxides). The receiver/dryer is designed to separate 
refrigerant vapor from liquid, so that oniy liquid is fed to the expansion valve. 

The liquid refrigerant enters the tank on the side and flows downward through the solid 
dryer. Contamination is filtered out by the screen. The dryer absorbs moisture, dirt and 
acid. However, the dryer eiement can only absorb a small amount of moisture (6-10 grams 
for an R-12 system; and 10-16 grams for an R-134a system).Early receiver/dryers have 
two pressure switches, a high-pressure cutoff switch and a low-pressure cutoff switch. 
Later receiver/dryers have a combination high/iow cutoff switch. These switches interrupt 
power to the compressor ciutch when pressure in the refrigerant circuit is too low or too 
high. 

R-134a receiver/dryers are now used to repiace R-12 receiver/dryers. 


37 






































Repair Procedure: 


Replace the high pressure switch along with the receiver/dryer if the fusible plug is found 
open. 

The foiiowing items shouid aiso be cheeked for proper function as the system should not 
normally operate at these high pressures: 

• Auxiliary Fan 

• 108°C Coolant Temperature Switoh (M Series Cars Only) 

• 150°C Compressor Temperature Switch (models so equipped) 

• Operating pressures - blockage or restriction in system 


38 


PROPER READING OF THE SIGHT GLASS 


On R-12 A/C systenns, look at the sight glass of the receiver/dryer. This will provide prelim¬ 
inary information on the condition of the refrigerant. With an R-12 system, there wiii be dif¬ 
ferences between the coid and hot weather appearance of the sight glass. Generally 
speaking, bubbles tend to appear in hot weather and are slow to appear in cold weather. 


• A few bubbles show up 2 - 3 
seconds after the compressor 
cycles on. 

• High-pressure side is hot and 
low-pressure side is cold. 

• Refrigerant is sufficient. 


• Bubbles flow continuously; oil 
streaks. 

• Almost no difference in tempera¬ 
ture between low- and high-pres¬ 
sure sides. 

• Likely to be very little refrigerant. 



39 







































• “Mist”-like flow, with bubbles total¬ 
ly absent. 

• No difference in temperature 
between the low- and hlgh-pres- 
sure sides. 

• Probably means no refrigerant. 



• A few bubbles show up intermit¬ 
tently, at Intervals of 1 - 2 seconds. 

• High-pressure side is warm and 
low-pressure side is fairly cold. 

• Refrigerant likely to be insufficient. 



40 





































R-134a RECEIVER/DRYER 


The basic design of R-12 and R-134a receiver/dryers is the same. However, while R-12 
systems typioally use silica gel as a desiccant, R-134a systems use Zeolite. The drying 
capaolty (per weight) of zeolite is only about 25% that of sllioa gel so R-134a reoelver/dry- 
ers are larger, to aooommodate larger amounts of desiooant. In addition, the hlgh-pres- 
sure outoff switoh is rated higher for an R-134a receiver/dryer, since the system operates 
at higher pressures. 



\ 



J 



R-134a RECEIVER/DRYER 

NOTES ON REPLACING DRYER FLASK 

The dryer flask must be replaoed when: 

• there are oontamlnents in the refrigerant circuit (e.g. compressor has seized) 

• the system is leaking and there is no more refrigerant in the system 

• the refrigerant oirouit was opened for longer than 24 hours during a repair. 


41 




EXPANSION VALVE 


REFRIGERANT 

TO FLOW FROM 

COMPRESSOR RECEIVER DRYER 



FROM TO 

EVAPORATOR EVAPORATOR 


The expansion valve controls the amount of refrigerant released into the evaporator. It is 
fitted to the evaporator iniet/outiet pipes. The valve separates the high-pressure side of 
the system from the low-pressure side. A small passage, or “orifice,” aliows only a small 
amount of liquid into the evaporator. The amount of refrigerant that it allows through 
depends on the evaporator temperature and pressure, and the temperature of the air 
passing through the evaporator. 

If too little refrigerant enters the evaporator, poor cooling results. If too much refrigerant 
enters, it might not completely boil away and liquid refrigerant might return to the compres¬ 
sor, causing damage to the system. 

A block-valve design of expansion valve is used on current BMW A/C systems. The 
refrigerant enters at the upper right inlet. At the left of the valve there is a capillary tube 
filled with an inert gas, that senses the temperature of the air coming into the housing 
from the plenum. When the air temperature in the plenum rises, the pressure in the capil¬ 
lary tube increases. This pushes down on a diaphragm and pushrod assembly, which 
increases the size of the orifice opening, allowing more refrigerant into the evaporator and 
providing more cooling. When plenum temperature falls, the pressure in the capillary tube 
falls. The spring pushes up on the pushrod, making the orifice opening smaller; less 
refrigerant is allowed into the evaporator, allowing less cooling. 


42 





























































































FROM 

TO REOEIVER 

OOMPRESSOR DRYER 



Refrigerant from the outlet of the evaporator passes through the bottom left opening of the 
block valve. When the pressure at the evaporator outlet is high, this increases the pres¬ 
sure needed by the capillary tube, to open the valve. Less refrigerant is provided to the 
evaporator (to prevent the evaporator from being flooded). When pressure at the outlet 
end of the evaporator is lower, less pressure is exerted on the bottom of the diaphragm. 
The diaphragm pushes down on the pushrod, allowing more refrigerant into the evapora¬ 
tor. 


NOTE: 

The R-134a system expansion valve uses a different operating pressure range. This 
enables the valve to work more efficiently with the new refrigerant. An expansion valve 
designed for use in an R-12 system, if installed in an R-134a system may not allow enough 
refrigerant into the evaporator. This may affect the performance. 

If moisture gets into this system, it may freeze and clog the expansion valve. The A/C sys¬ 
tem may operate normally for a while, but then stop cooling. Then, as system temperature 
increases, the ice melts. The system works again for a while, until moisture freeze-up 
causes it to stop again. For diagnosis and correction of this problem, see page 17. 


The expansion valve is unit replaceable; there are no adjustments or repairs. 


43 


































































































EVAPORATOR 


EVAPORATOR 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 





EXPANSION VALVE 


Evaporator 


From the expansion valve, the liquid refrigerant passes into the evaporator. Once the 
refrigerant passes the orifice in the expansion valve, its pressure drops. The liquid refriger¬ 
ant, now in the evaporator, immediately begins to boil. As it boils, it absorbs heat from the 
air that passes over the fins and tubes of the evaporator. This cools the air and heats the 
refrigerant. The refrigerant, now a vapor again, is then drawn back into the low side of the 
system by the compressor. 

The evaporator on current BMW 
cars is mounted crosswise in the 
housing. It is similar in construc¬ 
tion to a radiator (a copper or alu¬ 
minum coil with fins). The fins 
provide a large surface area to 
transfer heat from the air to the 
colder refrigerant inside the coil. 

The evaporator (like the con¬ 
denser) is a “heat exchanger.” 

As air passes over the evaporator fins, the moisture condenses on the fins as the air cools. 
Water collects in the bottom part of the housing and exits through one or two drains. 

Evaporator service: 

• Check water drains. 

• Straighten bent fins (a tool is available locally) 

• A frost ring on a tube indicates a restriction. (On some vehicles, the evaporator and 
expansion valve can be accessed by removing the glove box.) 


AIR heat 



44 




























EVAPORATOR TEMPERATURE SENSOR 



If the evaporator temperature is allowed to cool below 1 ° C, condensation can freeze on 
the evaporator. The ice then insulates it from the air passing over it, and it works much 
less efficiently. A temperature sensor is used to protect the evaporator from freezing, by 
signaling the control module to turn the compressor off, so that condensation cannot 
freeze on the evaporator. The compressor is typically disengaged at 34°-37°F (1 °-2° C). 
When the compressor is turned off, refrigerant flow is reduced and the evaporator temper¬ 
ature rises. 

The temperature sensor is a Negative Temperature Coefficient (NTC) thermistor whose 
resistance varies according to the temperature of the evaporator core. Resistance is high¬ 
er at lower temperatures, and decreases as the temperature rises. 


45 























BLOWER MOTOR 


BALANCE CLIP 



A dual squirrel-cage blower is used (on most BMWs) to propel air across the evaporator 
and/or the heater core and through the plenum to the vents. On BMW A/C systems, the 
blower speed is controlled by resistors/transistors that vary the amount of voltage applied 
to the blower, depending on the air volume control knob setting. In IHKA systems, the 
blower speed is controlled electronically. 


Whenever the A/C is 
switched on, the fan runs 
at speed “1” or higher. 
Without the fan working, 
the evaporator could ice 
up, as humid air comes in 
contact with the fins. 



46 












































MICROFILTERS 


Microfilters are used in BMW climate control systems, this includes all vehicles produced 
after 9/91 (except E30). In addition, all E31 vehicles have been equipped with microfilters 
sinoe start of produotion. 



Shown in the above example is an E38 microfilter and location. Fresh air is continuously 
filtered through the microfilters. Never operate an E38 without the microfilters installed, 
there is the danger of water being drawn into the heater and/or damage to the electrical 
system. 

The microfilter is designed to trap potentially irritating types of particles with very high effi¬ 
ciency. Some examples include: 

• Pollens 

• Spores 

• Dust 

• Vapors 

• Floating air pollution 

• Bacteria 

• Viruses 

Under normal operating conditions the microfilter(s) should be replaced every Inspection I 
and II (also every Oil Service 99 MY), except for M roadster or M coupe. The actual service 
life of the microfilter depends on the amount of contaminant and air flow rate reduction 
complaint, therefore; the replacement interval may be more frequent in dusty operating 
conditions. 

Refer to the repair manual for removal/installation procedure 

47 






















E38 models have additional filters for the recirculation air inlets which require replacement 
at every second inspection II. 



RECIRCULATING 
AIR INSERT 


48 







































TYPES OF REFRIGERANTS 


R-12 

R-12 or Freon ®, was used in BMW air conditioning systems prior to 1992. It is a member 
of the class of compounds called “chlorofluorocarbons” (CFC’s). 

Characteristics: 

• Very durable. 

• Transports heat very efficiently. 

• Non-explosive when mixed with air. 

• Odorless; not harmful to human health when handled correctly. 

• Boils at -22° F (-30° C). 

• Absorbs a large amount of heat when boiling. 

• Does not react with most metals (except lead). 

• Reacts with many synthetics. 

• Reacts with water to produce acid. 

• Mixes readily with mineral-based oil. 

Skin should not be exposed to liquid R-12. Since R-12 boils at -22° F (-30° C), It can 
cause severe frostbite or freezing damage. 

R-12 should never be exposed to an open flame. When It burns In air, it produces phos¬ 
gene, a poisonous gas. 

R-12 should be stored at room temperature, and not exposed to extreme heat. 


49 



