Table of Contents 

Subject Page 

Introduction .2 

Solar Radiation.3 

Solar Sensor.3 

Components .4 

System Operation .6 

Control Curves.7 

Blower Intervention.7 

Temperature Intervention.8 

Ventilation Intervention.9 

Diagnosis. 10 

Removal Hints. 11 


Initial Print Date: 023/2000 Revision Date: 3/17/00 














IHKA SYSTEMS - SOLAR SENSOR 

E38 IHKA - March 1999 (2000 M/Y) 

E46 IHKA - 2000 Model Year 

E39 IHKA - 2001 Model Year 


OBJ ECTIVES 

After studying this handout, you will be able to: 

• Desoribe the operation of the solar sensor as it applies to the IHKA systems. 

• List the output funotions effeoted by the solar sensor input. 

• Desoribe how the solar sensor affeots the various output funotions. 

Purpose of the System: 


The purpose of the solar sensor is to oompensate the olimate oontrol system’s output for 
the radiant heating effeot of the sun. This will aid the IHKA in maintaining a oonstant oom- 
fort level, in the vehiole’s interior, during all driving oonditions. 


The funotion of heating and air oonditioning systems in BMW vehioles is to provide the dri¬ 
ver and passengers a oomfortable atmosphere regardless of oonditions outside of the vehi- 
ole. Based on the temperature signal inputs, blower setting, flaps portioning, program set¬ 
tings in the oontrol module and influenoing variables, the IHKA oontrol module is able to 
prooess these inputs to aohieve the desired oomfort level. 


The following input variables are 
prooessed by the IHKA module: 

• Interior temperature 

• Heat exohanger temperature 
•Ventilation temperature (E38) 

• Evaporator temperature 
•Air volume setting 

• Engine temperature and RPM 

• Exterior temperature 



The prooessed variable ‘Y - faotor” is determined by using the above inputs. The Y - fao- 
tor then represents how muoh adjustment is neoessary by the IHKA module to aohieve the 
set temperature. 


2 


SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 



INTRODUCTION 


Solar Radiation 

Solar radiation, from the sun, passes through the earths atmosphere in the form of light 
(both visible and non-visible) and heat (sunshine). To date, the influenoe of solar radiation 
on the olimate oontrol system in the vehiole has only been oompensated for by an average 
value stored in the oontrol module and based on oontrol settings and outside temperature 
values. 


Solar Sensor 


The solar sensor oan deteot the amount of solar radiation that is influenoing the tempera¬ 
ture and olimate in the vehioles interior. The IHKA oontrol module monitors the input from 
the solar sensor and adds the value to its prooessing faotors. The settings of the olimate 
oontrol system are ohanged to oompensate for this additional influenoe. 



The settings of the following IHKA oomponents are adjusted to oompensate for ohanges 
in solar radiation: 

• Blower - The blower ourve is ohanged 

• Stratifioation (mixing flaps) - The stratifioation outlet air temperature is ohanged (not E46) 
•Ventilation - The opening angles of the ventilation flaps are ohanged. 

3 

SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 
































































Components of the System: 

In the E38, The solar sensor Is Integrated In the housing of the anti-theft warning system 
LED. The warning Indloator LED Is Installed on the outlet grille In the top oenter of the 
Instrument panel where solar radiation oan direotly reaoh the solar sensor. 

The DWA LED with solar sensor Is an additional wiring harness with a 4-pln plug oonneo- 
tor. 


DWA LED with integrated solar sensor 



DWA LED/SOLAR SENSOR MODULE 4-pln solar sensor plug oonneotor 


4 


SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 



The solar sensor oonsists of two photoresistors, whioh are integrated on the left and right 
sides of the DWA housing next to the DWA LED. The photoresistors sense the different 
intensity levels of the solar radiation. 



DWA LED dismantled; housing and pc-board with LED and solar sensor housing 


1 The photoresistor on the right is fitted under 
the plastio oover 

2 The photoresistor on the left is fitted under the 
plastio oover 

3 PC-board, DWA LED and solar sensor 

4 DWA LED housing 


The E46 solar sensor is looated in the right 
defroster outlet at the base of the windshield. 
The E46 sensor oontains one photoresistor for 
sensing solar radiation. 



5 

SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 



System Operation 

The solar sensor reoeives power (5 volts) and ground from the IHKA oontrol module. The 
module then reads the voltage drop aoross the photoresistor and determines the degree of 
solar heating based on the ohange In voltage. The voltage drop aoross the photoresistor 
Inoreases as solar radiation Inoreases. The IHKA oontrol module monitoring voltage will 
deorease Indloatlng an Inorease In solar heating. The module prooesses the Input every 10 
seoonds and oheoks It for plausibility based on a limit value monitoring funotlon. 

Values outside the limit Indloate a malfunotlon and the signal from the sensor Is Ignored by 
the module. 

As solar radiation levels Inorease, the oontrol ourves, stored In the IHKA module, for the 
blower fan, mixing flaps and ventilation (faoe vent) flaps are shifted to oompensate for the 
additional heat. 


The solar sensor Inputs to the IHKA oontrol module oan Influenoe the settings on the rele¬ 
vant side (drIver/front passenger) on the E38 and E39. No separate regulation Is possible 
on the E46. 

When driving at night, during oloudy periods or through tunnels, the oontrol maps are shift¬ 
ed baok to their base settings. 


6 

SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 




CONTROL CURVES OPERATION 


Blower Intervention 

The graph below illustrates the solar influenoe on the blower fan with a oonstant Y faotor 
and the solar influenoe ohanging from 0 th 100%. 


Blower power P in % 


Blower stage 
E38 E46 


100 ^ 
70 — 
56 — 
48 — 
39 — 
28 — 
25 — 

0 — 
-27 


Y-Factorin % 



,-14 

h13 

^11 

^9 

^6 

3 

^1 


8 

7 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 


Blower power curves 

The middle ourve illustrates a blower ourve without any solar influenoe. At a oonstant Y fao¬ 
tor of 20%, the solar influenoe on the IHKA oontrol module will oause the blower ourve to 
shift as the radiation inoreases from 0 to 100%. 

With a solar influenoe of 0%, ourve “B” is used, providing 25% power to the blower. 

As the solar influenoe inoreases, the ourve shifts upward until the solar influenoe reaohes 
100%. At this point, ourve “A” is used providing 36% power to the blower. 

During heating, the blower power deoreases as solar influenoe inoreases. 

While oooling, the blower power will inorease as solar influenoe inoreases. 


7 


SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 










stratification (Temperature Intervention) E38 only 


The mixing flaps will open less in the direction of heat for blending air as the solar influence 
increases. The graph below represents the influence of the solar sensor on the stratification 
flap settings 


Ventilation Temperature °F 


Mixing Flap Position 


113 

104 

95 

86 

77 

68 

59 

50 

41 

0 


Y-Factorin % 



warm 


To illustrate the influence of the solar sensor on the mixing flap position, the Y factor remains 
constant at 20%. 

With a solar influence of 0% curve “A” is adopted for the various outside temperatures. As 
the outside temperature decreases, the mixing flap is moved toward the warmer setting 
blending more heat. 

With a solar influence of 100% curve “B” is adopted for the various outside temperatures. 
As the outside temperature decreases, the mixing flap is still moved toward the warmer set¬ 
ting but it does not move as far. The solar influence is compensating to provide the same 
comfort level. 

With the mixing flap thumbwheel at 100 or 0% (full hot or cold), the flaps are in the default 
position and there will be no solar influence. 

The left and right mixing flaps are controlled independently based on the individual settings 
and left and right solar sensor inputs. 


8 

SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 








Ventilation Intervention (Center Vent Air Distribution) 

The influence of the solar sensor on the ventilation flaps is shown in the graph below. 

Ventilation flap in % 



The normal ourve “B” applies when there is no solar sensor influenoe 0%, or if the sensor 
is defeotive. 

The maximum ourve “A” applies when the solar influenoe is 100%. 

The ventilation flaps will olose less as the solar influenoe inoreases. This allows more oool 
air from the oenter vents as the solar radiation inoreases. 

This adjustment is also independently adjustable on the E38 based on the left/right solar 
sensor inputs. 


9 

SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 











DIAGNOSIS 


Troubleshooting of the solar sensor (left/right) is oarried out through the IHKA diagnostio 
program using the DIS or MoDiC. 

Status displays for the solar sensor input are available in percentages. The status displays 
oan be oheoked while applying a light or heat souroe to the solar sensor to view the ohange 
in value. 


The E436 diagnostio program for the IHKA 
system oontains a test module B6450- 
00011 for testing the operation of the solar 
sensor. 



The IHKA oontrol module monitors the solar sensor and will set a fault node for: 

• Shorts to B+ or ground 
•Open oirouits 

The IHKA oontrol module will funotion as a system without solar influenoe oorreotion if the 
sensor is defeotive. 

Reoognition of the solar sensor and its influenoing oapabilities is enabled via ZCS ooding. 
Remember to adopt the oode whenever possible to avoid loosing oar/key memory funotion 
ohanges. Also the IHKA oontrol module must be disoonneoted from B+ before ooding oan 
beoome permanent. 


10 

SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 







REMOVAL HINTS 


E38 vehicles 

To remove the solar sensor from an E38, refer fo TIS - RM 6422161, removal of the oenfer 
outlet grille at the top of the dash. After removal of the grille, dlsoonneot the plug oonneo- 
tor of the DWA Indloator and solar sensor and pull the sensor from the grille. 



E46 vehicles 

Removal of the E46 solar sensor requires removal of the Instrument panel. However, for 
testing purposes the oonneotor Is looates Inline attaohed to the harness oonneotor X610. 


11 


SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 



REVIEW QUESTIONS 


1. What is the advantage of using the solar influenoe in the operation of the IHKA oontrol 
system? 


2. What are the three funotions of IHKA operation influenoed by the solar sensor input oor- 
reotion faotor? 


3. What funotion is not oorreoted for with the E46 IHKA system? 


4. How oan you test the operation of the solar sensor? 


12 


SolarSensor/ST039/3/17/00 











