TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Subject Page 

Introduction.2 

IHKAE38 .3 

Control Panel/Module.4 

Changes to 7 series E38 IHKA control panel .9 

IHKA E38 control panel/model function.11 

Substitute Value Operation .11 

Housing Assembly.12 

Temperature Sensing .15 

IPO .16 

Air Intake.17 

Blower Control.19 

Air Distribution .21 

Temperature Regulation .22 

Temperature Mixing .24 

Compressor Control.27 

Auxiliary Fan Control.31 

Rear Window Defroster .34 

Parked Car Ventilation .36 

Special Functions 

Cold-Start Arrest.37 

Service-Station Feature.37 

“Rest” Feature .37 

Remote Recirculated Air .38 

Automatic Air .39 

IHKA Personalization - E38.40 

Diagnosis.41 



























INTRODUCTION 


The IHKA system is a fully automatic climate control system. The acronym IHKA is derived 
from the German words Integrierte Heizungs- und Klima-Anlage, which translates to 
“integrated heating and air conditioning system.” 

Interior heating and air conditioning (climate control) components and functions, separate 
on some earlier BMW systems, are integrated and work together to provide passenger 
comfort, regardless of ambient conditions. On IHKA systems, interior air discharge 
temperature is regulated by controlling the flow of hot engine coolant through the climate 
control system heater cores. 

IHKA is classified as a fully automatic system because air distribution, air temperature and 
blower speed can be controlled automatically by the system control module. 

IHKA systems also feature some “set and forget” automatic functions which serve to 
maintain interior comfort without any input from the vehicle occupants. 

IHKA first appeared in the U.S. on 1988 E32 (7-series) vehicles. E31 (8-series) vehicles, 
introduced three years later, use an IHKA system very similar to the E32 system. 

An updated version of IHKA is installed on E38 (7-series) vehicles, beginning with the 1995 
model year. The E36 (3-series), received IHKA in 1996, a system similar to the E38 system. 
The E39 (5-series) and E46 (3 series) have varied versions of IHKA 

This course covers the following IHKA systems: 

• IHKA E 31, 1991 - 8/97 • IHKA E39 1997 - present 

• IHKA E38, 1995 - present • IHKA E46 1999 - present 

• IHKA E36, 1996 - present 


l 


< -E32 Production-► 

IHKA E32 

-1-1-1—i-1-1-1-1- 


-*— E38- 

Production 

IHKA E38 

H- 


-► 

◄- E46 -► 
Production 

IHKA E46 

i 


i 

i 


86 87 88 89 


90 


91 




92 93 94 95 

IHKA E31 

_E31 Production_ 


96 


97 98 

IHKA E39 
- E39 Production 
IHKA E36 

_ E36 Production 

—" 


99 




IHKA Production Periods 


2 





















IHKA E38 


The E38 IHKA system is a further development of the IHKA climate control system, but is 

very different from earlier IHKA systems in both construction and operation. 

Important E38 differences (covered in detail later in this Handout) are listed below: 

• The control module is integrated into the control panel. 

• The blower speed control final stage unit is mounted on the blower motor assembly. 

• The control panel/module has separate blower speed thumbwheels for the driver and 

passenger to regulate airflow separately on the left and right sides of the cabin. 

• Face, footwell, and defroster vents can be opened individually or in combinations, 
using the separate “arrow” buttons on the control panel/module face. 

• Left and right desired temperatures are changed using control panel rocker switches. 

• Left and right desired temperatures appear in digital LED displays on the control panel 

face. 

• Two additional temperature sensors are used, one at the left side and one at the right 
side of the center face vent outlet. 

• Stratified air is available from the console rear outlet, and controlled by a thumbwheel 
at that outlet. 

• Flap stepper motors are “smarf’motors; each contains a microprocessor. 

• The microfilter assemblies are integrated into the vehicle hood. 

• The recirculating air function can be activated using a button on the steering wheel. 

• A new function, automatic recirculating air (AUC), is activated automatically when poor 
ambient air quality is sensed. 

• The control panel/module face includes a “REST” button for this new function, which 
uses the IHKA system to heat the passenger compartment for a short period after the 
ignition is switched “Off.” 

• The windshield base heater present on early E32 vehicles is again available. 


3 




IHKA E38 CONTROL PANEL/MODULE (up to 5/96 production) 



Functionally, the most significant difference between the IHKA E38 control panel and earlier 
IHKA control panels is that, on E38 vehicles, the control panel is combined with the control 
module. Despite this fact, the IHKA E38 control panel/module is about the same size as 
earlier control panels, and it has only three connectors. 


The control panel/module face is also quite different from previous IHKA control panels. 
Features are described below, from left to right: 

Air Distribution Buttons: There are four left (and three right) air distribution buttons. The 
driver can let the control module determine air distribution (automatic mode), or select up 
to three specific discharge locations (windshield, face vents, and/or footwells). The front 
passenger can also select automatic mode, or choose footwells and/or face vents. 




If the “up arrow” button is pressed, air flows from the 
windshield defroster outlets all along the base of the 
windshield. The face vent, footwell and console outlets are 
closed, and the mixing flaps move to the “warmest air” 
position. 

If the “left arrow” (or “right arrow”) button is pressed, air flows 
from the face-vent outlets on the left (or right) side of the 
instrument panel and the footwell outlets on that side of the 
interior close. 

Only the “left arrow” button affects defroster and console flap 
operation. If the “left arrow” button is pressed, the defroster 
and footwell outlets are closed. The console flap opens so 
long as the rear outlet thumbwheel indicates “open.” 


4 





























































































































































































If the left (or right) “down arrow” button is pressed, air flows 
from the footwell outlets under the the left (or right) side of the 
instrument panel and the rear seat outlets on that side, too. 
The mixing flap for the left (or right) side of the interior moves 
to the “warmest air” position. 

Only the left “down arrow” button affects defroster and console 
flap operation. If the left “down arrow” button is pressed, the 
defroster flaps are closed. The console flap opens so long as 
the rear outlet thumbwheel indicates “open.” 


"AUTO 


While there is an “AUTO” button for each side of the interior, 
the right button does not influence air intake location 
(fresh/recirc.), defroster flap operation, or console flap 
operation. 


The basic function of the left and right “AUTO” buttons is, however, the same. When 
“AUTO” is pressed, the control panel/module selects the air distribution points based on 
the desired temperature, interior temperature, ambient temperature, (all “Y-factor” inputs) 
and blower speed. 


When cooling is required, the face vent flaps are opened and the footwell flaps are closed; 
when heating is required, the footwell flaps are opened and the face vent flaps are closed. 



Left and Right Desired Temperature Displays: When the IHKA 
system is turned “On,” the left and right LED displays show the 
desired temperatures. LED brightness varies according to 
ambient light conditions. 



Left and Right Desired Temperature Rocker Switches: Desired 
temperatures are selected using rocker switches. Pressing the 
blue “down” arrow decreases the desired temperature by 1°F 
(or 1/2°C) each time the button is pushed. Pressing the red 
“up” arrow increases the desired temperature. Large changes 
can be made by pressing and holding the “down” or “up” 
arrow. 


5 


















Left and Right Blower Thumbwheels: There are separate 
blower control thumbwheels for the left and right sides. The 
control panel/module uses inputs from both to determine 
blower speed and face vent flap position. 

The left blower thumbwheel is referred to as the master 
controller since: 

• it has priority over other inputs when it is in the “0” and 
maximum-speed positions 

• it is also used to turn the IHKA E38 system “Off” and “On” 



Interior Temperature Sensor: Interior air is sampled using a 
temperature sensor located inside the control panel. Air 
reaches the sensor through an opening in the control panel 
face. Like other IHKA systems, IHKA E38 also uses a small 
electric fan to pull air over the temperature sensor. 







Panel Illumination Photocell: A small photocell, located to the 
left of the interior temperature sensor, monitors ambient light 
levels. The control panel/module adjusts the brightness of the 
desired temperature displays using this input. 



Maximum Defrosting Button: The maximum defrosting button 
has priority over all other IHKA system functions. When the 
button is pressed: 

• the fresh air flaps open fully and 

• the recirculating air flaps close fully and 

• the mixing flaps move to the “warmest air” positions and 

• the defroster flaps open fully and 

• all other air distribution flaps close fully and 

• the blower motor runs at maximum speed 

If engine coolant temperature (supplied over the K-Bus) is 
above 32°F (CPC): 

• the auxiliary coolant pump is activated 


6 


Neither the rear window defroster nor the A/C compressor 
turn on automatically, but will operate if the appropriate button 
is pressed. 













































































AUC/Recirculating Air Button: The recirculating air/AUC button 
controls air intake location. During normal operation, fresh air 
is drawn into the climate control system and heated or cooled. 

Pressing the recirculating air/AUC button once activates the 
automatic recirculating air function and lights the left LED. An 
AUC sensor, located in the engine compartment, monitors the 
level of oxidizable gases in ambient air and notifies the control 
panel/module when these gases reach a specified level. 
When this occurs, the control panel/module automatically: 

• closes the fresh air flaps and 

• opens the recirculating air flaps 

Refer to “IHKA E38 Special Functions” later in this Handout for 
more information on the AUC feature. 

Pressing the recirculating air/AUC button twice causes the 
control module to light the right LED and immediately: 

• close the fresh air flaps and 

• open the recirculating air flaps 




"rest 


Rear Window Defroster Button: Pressing the rear window 
defroster button activates rear window heating at full power for 
either 17 or 10 minutes, depending on ambient temperature. 
The defroster is then shut off. Pressing the button again runs 
the defroster for another 5 minutes. 

A/C Compressor Button: Pressing the “snowflake” button 
turns on the A/C compressor. The control panel/module 
activates the compressor directly, and interfaces with the 
engine control module for idle stabilization and auxiliary fan 
operation. 

“Rest” Button: The “Rest” button is used to activate the rest 
heating function. This function provides passenger 
compartment heating after the ignition is switched “Off.” 

Refer to “IHKA E38 Special Functions” later in this Handout for 
more information on the Rest function. 


7 



















Viewed from the bottom, the IHKA E38 control panel/module has the following features: 


26 PIN 

CONNECTION 
FOR INPUTS 
AND OUTPUTS 


3 PIN CONNECTION 
3 PIN CONNECTION (2 PINS USED) FOR 

FOR STEPPER THE INTERIOR 

MOTOR M-BUS TEMPERATURE 

(RIGHT SIDE) SENSOR FAN 


3 PIN CONNECTION 
FOR Kl. 30, Kl. 31 
AND COMPRESSOR 
OPERATION 



INTERIOR 
TEMPERATURE 
SENSOR FAN 


18 PIN CONNECTION 
FOR INPUTS AND 
OUTPUTS 


3 PIN CONNECTION 
FOR STEPPER 
MOTOR M-BUS 
(LEFT SIDE) 


8 
































































Since the beginning of production, setting the temperature selector on the driver side of the 
IHKA to its minimum or maximum values would result in overriding the temperature setting 
on the passenger side. Both sides would either have heater off and maximum cooling with 
air conditioner on (min. value) or full heat (max. value), regardless of the setting selected on 
the passenger side. 

As of production date 9/95, the override function of the passenger side temperature 
settings will no longer be performed (IHKA control units with part numbers #64118369781 
or #64118372482). Each side will work exactly according to its temperature setting, 
regardless of the temperature the other side has chosen. 

Since the original IHKA control unit of vehicles produced before 9/95 is no longer available 
spare part for the IHKA control unit will also have this function change. 

If replacement of an IHKA control unit becomes necessary on a vehicle which originally had 
the override function, the customer should be informed about this override function change 
in his car. 

Due to changes made to IHKA control panels on 7 series (E38), the older style panels are 
no longer available. If replacement becomes necessary the new style panel must be 
retrofitted, and a customer has to be informed about new features of the unit. 


Chages to 7 Series (E38) IHKA control panel: 



The IHKA control panel has changes in appearance and operation. The blower speed 
control wheels have been replaced by rocker switches. The push buttons for Front and 
Rear defrost, A/C control and AUC control are now mounted in a single row at the bottom 
center of the control panel 

• after 9/96 production 


9 
















































































































































The major changes in the operation of the system as of 9/96 are: 



A new “AUTO-symbol” is used in the 
LCD display in addition to the 
illuminated LED on the “AUTO-button”. 

• The “AUTO-symbol” in the LCD 
indicates the automatic fan speed 
program being activated. 

• The illuminated LED on the “AUTO- 
button” indicates activation of the 
automatic air distribution program. 


• When both are displayed, the 
system is in the fully automatic 
mode. 


If one of the manual distribution buttons is selected, the automatic air distribution is canelled 
and the “AUTO-button” LED goes out. 

If one of the manual distribution buttons is selected, the automatic air distribution is 
canceled and the “AUTO-button” LED goes out (e.g. on the illustration - passenger face 
vent button was selected). 



However, the fan speed remains in 
the auto mode, with “AUTO- 
symbol” being displayed on the 
LCD. 

If the fan rocker switch is pressed, 
when the system is in the AUTO 
mode, the blower speed is 
switched to manual control. The 
“AUTO-symbol” in the LCD 
display goes out. 

However, the air distribution 
remains in the automatic mode 
with the LED being illuminated on 
the “AUTO-button”. 


10 
















IHKA E38 CONTROL PANEL/MODULE FUNCTIONS 


The E38 control panel/module performs the same functions as the E31 control module. It 
controls: 


Blower speed 

Auxiliary coolant pump 

Auxiliary cooling fan 

Air intake flaps (fresh/recirculating) 

Air distribution flaps (face vent, foot 

well, defroster, console rear outlet) 


Mixing flaps 

Heater core temperatures 
Evaporator temperature 
Special programmed functions 
Windshield base/washer spray jet 
heaters 


In addition, it has an EEPROM to store fault codes. The EEPROM allows the module to “go 
to sleep” about 16 minutes after the ignition is switched to “Off,” to reduce power 
consumption without losing the contents of the memory. 


Fault codes stored cannot be erased by disconnecting the battery; the DIS/MoDiC must be 
used. A maximum of six fault codes can be stored at one time. 


NOTE: If the control module is replaced it must be coded. 

SUBSTITUTE VALUE OPERATION 


If an input potentiometer or sensor (or its circuit) fails, the control panel/module will ignore 
the faulty input and, in its place, use a replacement value which has been programmed 
into its memory for just this purpose. The replacement value, typically a mid-scale value 
for a particular input, allows the system to operate as normally as possible, despite the 
fault. 


Substitute values for IHKA E38 components are: 

• Desired temperature value (left or right) .75°F (24°C) 

• Interior temperature sensor.68°F (20°C) 

• Face-vent temperature sensor (left or right) .75°F (24°C) 

• Heater core temperature sensor (left or right).130°F(55°C) 

• Evaporator temperature sensor.32°F (0°C)* 

• Ambient temperature sensor.32°F (0°C)** 


* The substitute value for the evaporator temperature sensor is below the A/C 

compressor cycling point (1-3°C). Therefore, if the evaporator temperature sensor 
signal is not plausible, the substitute value will switch the A/C system off. 

** The IHKA control panel/module obtains ambient temperature information over the K- 
Bus, not from a dedicated IHKA system sensor. If the value received is not plausible 
(not between -40°C and +80°C), the control panel/module will ignore the supplied 
value and use the substitute value instead. 


11 












IHKA E38 HOUSING ASSEMBLY 


The IHKA E38 housing is very different in appearance and layout from earlier IHKA housing 
assemblies, but it has almost the same system components mounted inside or on it. 



Significant differences from earlier IHKA housing assemblies are: 

• The housing assembly mounts against a vertical area of the engine compartment/ 
interior bulkhead, with no parts protruding through the bulkhead. 

• The housing assembly does not contain the microfilter; the filter is incorporated into the 
hood-mounted air intake ducting. 


No ambient temperature sensor is mounted on the E38 housing. The control 
panel/module obtains ambient temperature from the instrument cluster via the K-bus. 


12 


The system control module is not mounted on the housing: it is combined with the 
control panel. 















































IHKA E38 uses ten stepper motors to position the various flaps. 


The stepper motors are mounted on the housing assembly as shown: 


FOOTWELL FLAP 



DRIVER'S SIDE 


DEFROST FLAP 



SEAT FLAP 

REAR VIEW 



PASSENGER'S SIDE 


DRIVER'S SIDE MIXING FLAP 


DRIVER'S FACE VENT 



PASSENGER'S SIDE MIXING FLAP 


PASSENGER'S FACE VENT 


TOP VIEW 


Only the fresh air flap stepper motor 
is a conventional stepper motor; it is 
linked to the control panel/module 
by four circuits. 

The other nine stepper motors are 
“smart” motors; each one contains a 
microprocessor. 

The smart stepper motor used at 
each position has a unique part 
number. 



13 































































































































































All nine “smart” stepper motors share the same power, ground, and signal circuits (referred 
to as the M-Bus), but the circuits split into two paths at the control panel/module: 


• The left side includes five motors and the connector is color-coded white. 

• The right side includes four motors and is color-coded black. 


DRIVER'S SIDE 


T 


V A 

l 


= 93 ^ 


REAR OUTLET 
FACE VENT 
MIXING 

RECIRCULATING 

FOOTWELL 



\\ 

i° 


1° 


1° V 


r™° 



-J 


FRESH AIR INLET FLAP 


PASSENGER'S SIDE 



- FOOTWELL 

- FACE VENT 

- MIXING 

- DEFROST 


IHKA E38 M-Bus 


The microprocessor in each motor gives it an “identity.” When the control panel/module 
wants a specific motor to run, it “names” the motor it wants to respond and issues a 
command. 


Since all the stepper motors share the same signal circuit, they all “hear” the command. 
Each stepper motor processes the command and determines whether it should respond. 


Only the stepper motor which “hears” its name follows the command. 


14 





















































































































































IHKA E38 TEMPERATURE SENSING 


The IHKA E38 control panel/module needs the same temperature inputs as earlier IHKA 
systems, but it does not get all of them from dedicated IHKA temperature sensors: 

• Ambient temperature - this is not provided by a dedicated IHKA sensor. On the E38, 
the ambient temperature sensor is located in the left front brake cooling duct, and 
supplies its signal to the IKE. The IKE then supplies ambient temperature information 
to any control modules requiring it over the K-Bus. 

• Evaporator temperature - this is provided by a dedicated IHKA sensor, inserted into the 
evaporator core through an opening on the left side of the housing assembly as on 
previous IHKA systems. 

• Heater core temperatures - these are provided by dedicated IHKA sensors, located in 
the IHKA housing rear cover as on earlier systems. On E38, though, the sensors are 
inserted in openings on top of the cover and they hang down, behind the heater cores. 

• Interior temperature - this is provided by a dedicated IHKA sensor, located inside the 
system control panel/module and, as on previous systems, it has a small fan motor. 

The IHKA E38 system processes two additional temperature sensor inputs: left and right 
face vent temperatures. These are provided by face vent temperature sensors, located just 
behind the center face vent outlets. 


LEFT 


RIGHT 

FACE VENT 

STRATIFIED AIR WHEEL 

FACE VENT 

TEMPERATURE 


TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 


SENSOR 


The control panel/module uses the information they provide (along with left and right 
desired temperature settings and the temperature mixing thumbwheel input) to control the 
left and right mixing flaps. 




15 






























































































IHKA E38 IPO (as introduced) 


KL 31 


KL 30 






KLR/15 




PHOTO 

CELL 




INTERIOR 

TEMPERATURE 




LEFT & RIGHT 
SIDE DESIRED 
TEMPERATURES 





LEFT & RIGHT 
SIDE DESIRED 
BLOWER SPEEDS 


ALL CONTROL 
PANEL SWITCHES 




'HUT' 

■ 

--- 

OP 

L- 


BH 



/ 

STRATIFIED AIR 
POTENTIOMETER 



FACE VENT 
TEMPERATURES 



REAR SEAT 
STRATIFIED AIR 
POTENTIOMETER 


REAR SEAT AIR 
ON/OFF SWITCH 


EVAPORATOR TEMPERATURE 


LEFT HEATER CORE 
TEMPERATURE 


RIGHT HEATER CORE 
TEMPERATURE 


REFRIGERANT 
PRESSURE SENSOR 



FULL LOAD SIGNAL FOR 
COMPRESSOR CUT-OFF 


AUC OXIDIZIBLE 
GAS LEVEL 


K-BUS 


- Coolant Temp. 

- Ambient Air Temp. 

- Vehicle Speed 


Recirc. from MFL Switch 
Parked Car Ventilation 
KL 15 and R 


E38 

IHKA 

CONTROL 

PANEL/ 

MODULE 


LEFT HEATER 
CORE WATER VALVE 


+ 


RIGHT HEATER 
CORE WATER VALVE 

BLOWER SPEED 
SIGNAL 


+ 


BLOWER 

ACTIVATION 

L 






v 

F 


FINAL 
STAGE 
UNIT 


BLOWER 

MOTOR 



M-BUS 


NINE STEPPER 
MOTORS 

ON TWO HARNESSES 
OF THE M-BUS 

A/C READY SIGNAL 


FRESH AIR FLAPS 
STEPPER MOTOR 



COMPRESSOR ON SIGNAL 



COMPRESSOR 

CONTROL 




COMPRESSOR 


WINDSHIELD 
HEATING 
RELAY 


M 



A L 

1^ 




f 



INTERIOR TEMP. 
SENSOR FAN 



<M> 


+ 


AUXILIARY 

FAN 

RELAY (UP TO 99 MY) 


REAR WINDOW 
DEFROSTER RELV\Y 


AUXILIARY COOLANT PUMP 


<M> 


+ 



AUC GAS 

SENSOR 

HEATER 


DIAGNOSIS AND CODING 





























































































































































































































IHKA E38 AIR INTAKE 


As on E32 and E31 vehicles, the IHKA systems can take in fresh air, recirculate air already 
in the interior, or do both at the same time (recirc. flaps fully open/fresh air flaps 30% open). 

Fresh air enters the IHKA E38 system through inlet grilles at the trailing edge of the hood. 
It flows downward and forward into a plenum which houses the activated-charcoal micro¬ 
filter. After flowing through the filter, the air flows rearward and downward into the housing 
through air intake ducts. 


AMBIENT INTAKE AIR 



IHKA E38 Fresh Air Intake Path 


To prevent objects from falling into the fresh air intake ducts while the hood is open, a 
spring-loaded flap is placed at the entrance to each duct. As the hood is opened, the flaps 
close automatically. When the hood is closed, pushrods mounted to the underside of the 
hood force the flaps open. 

Any water which enters the air intake ducts will flow to an area just ahead of the fresh air 
flaps. Rubber tubing then directs the water to the evaporator area of the housing, where it 
drains with any evaporator condensate. 

NOTE: System operation should not be checked or evaluated while the hood is open. 


17 





































Fresh Air Flap Position (% Open) 



As on previous IHKA systems, the fresh air flaps close with increasing vehicle speed to 
counteract the ram air effect. On E38 vehicles, however, blower speed also influences the 
amount the flaps close. At low blower speeds, the fresh air flap throttling effect is most 
pronounced (fresh air flap only 30% open at very high speeds). At higher blower speeds, 
however, the throttling effect is less significant. 


BLOWER SPEED > 73% OF MAXIMUM 
BLOWER SPEED < 73% OF MAXIMUM 
BLOWER SPEED < 45% OF MAXIMUM 
BLOWER SPEED < 32% OF MAXIMUM 



20 30 40 50 


60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 

Vehicle Speed (MPH) 


Vehicle Speed Influence on Fresh Air Flap Position 


18 


















































IHKA E38 BLOWER CONTROL 


While the basic operating theory for E38 blower control is similar to that of earlier IHKA 
systems, the number of components involved and their appearance is quite different: 

• The control panel and control module are combined into one unit. 

• The final stage unit is mounted directly on the blower motor assembly. 

• The control panel/module supplies the voltage to energize the blower relay. 

• The control panel/module has separate blower speed thumbwheels for the driver and 
passenger. 

IHKA E38 CONTROL PANEL /MODULE 



RELAY ACTIVATION 



BLOWER 

RELAY 


► 


RIGHT FACE VENT 

FLAP CONTROL A 


SPEED SIGNAL 


SIGNAL POWER 1 



^ LEFT FACE VENT 
FLAP CONTROL 



Each of the blower thumbwheels supplies a voltage signal to a processor inside the control 
panel/module. The processor always runs the blower motor at the higher selected speed 
to ensure adequate air flow on that side of the interior. 


The processor also influences face vent flap position. To achieve reduced air flow on one 
side of the interior, the face vent flaps of that side are partially closed. 


19 











































































































































































• The final stage unit is mounted directly on the blower motor assembly, between the 
dual impellers. 



IHKA E38 Blower Motor/Final Stage Unit 


• The E38 evaporator is coated with polyurethane, and has a plastic gauze-type screen 
placed against it’s outlet side. These changes improve condensate drainage. 


20 







IHKA E38 AIR DISTRIBUTION 



E38 Air Distribution Outlets 


The locations of E38 air distribution outlets are shown above. While flap operation 

strategies are similar to those on E31 vehicles, there are some significant differences. 

A new input helps determine face vent flap positions - blower speed request position: 

• The IHKA E38 control panel/module has separate blower request buttons for the driver 
and passenger, yet has only one blower motor assembly. Since the blower cannot run 
at two speeds at once, it always runs at the higher requested speed. For the side 
requesting the lower blower speed, the control module/panel partially closes the face 
vent flap to reduce air flow on that side of the vehicle. 

• For example, if the driver requests low blower speed and the passenger requests 
medium blower speed, the control panel/module will: 

Run the blower at medium speed 

Open the passenger side face vent flap fully 

Nearly close the driver side face flap for low air flow 


21 























IHKA E38 TEMPERATURE REGULATION 


K-BUS 


f 


AMBIENT TEMPERATURE SIGNAL 



S\ 




V 


A 




* 


72.0'F 

SB.,— 


68.0'F 


3 _ 


V 


A 


* 






AIJTQ 






□ [=□ 
('AT' * 



_> 

1 ) 

1 1 

3 

3 

r~ 



M 


AUTO 


WATER r 
VALVE 



WATER 

INLET 



AUX. 

COOLANT 

PUMP 


' WATER 
VALVE 


LEFT IN LEI 


HEATER CORES 


RIGHT IN LEI 


LEFT HEATER 
CORE 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 




J) 


RIGHT HEATER 
CORE 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 


▼ T 

WATER OUTLET 

Temperature regulation on IHKA E38 is accomplished in exactly the same way as on earlier 
IHKA systems: solenoid actuated water valves, normally held open by spring pressure, are 
pulsed closed by the IHKA control panel/module to regulate coolant flow through the cores 
(and, thereby, the core temperatures). 


The IHKA control panel/module pulses the water valves according to the following inputs: 

• ambient temperature 

• interior temperature 

• left and right desired temperatures 

• left and right heater core temperatures. 


22 










































































































































































































































































E38 vehicles also have an electrically powered auxiliary coolant pump to ensure that an 
adequate supply of hot water is always available to the heater cores. The control 
panel/module operates the pump directly (no relay), by supplying the ground circuit. Pump 
operating criteria are: 

• Engine coolant temperature (ECT)* and Y-Factor — ON with ECT > 32°F (CPC) and 
left or right Y-Factor > 5%; OFF with ECT < 32°F (CPC) and either Y-Factor < 0%, 
unless other inputs call for pump operation) 

• Maximum defrost mode status — ON when max. defrost is selected; OFF when 
max. defrost is turned off (unless other inputs call for pump operation) 

• Maximum heating requested on left side of interior - ON when max. heating is 
requested; OFF when max. heating is turned off (unless other inputs call for pump 
operation) 

• “REST” function request — ON when REST heating is requested; OFF when REST 
heating is turned off or “times out” 



Y-Factor Influence on Auxiliary Coolant Pump Operation 


* 


Engine coolant temperature information is supplied to the control panel/module over 
the K-Bus. 


23 












IHKA E38 TEMPERATURE MIXING 


Temperature mixing on IHKA E38 is similar to that on E31, except: 

• The E38 mixing flaps have two layers, instead of three. 

• There is a temperature sensor in each side of the center face vent outlet, so that air 
discharge temperature at this location can be better controlled. 


LEFT 

FACE VENT 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 


STRATIFIED AIR WHEEL 


RIGHT 
FACE VENT 
TEMPERATURE 
SENSOR 



E38 Center Face Vent 


NOTE: The face vent mixing flaps always move to the “warmest air” position whenever the 
“up arrow” (defrost), “down arrow” (footwell), or maximum defrost mode buttons are 
pressed. They also move to the “warmest air” position when the system is turned “off.” 


• For the first time on any 
IHKA system, stratified air 
is available from the 
console rear outlet. 

• The thumbwheel to the left 
of the outlet operates an 
on/off switch for airflow 
control. 

• An additional thumbwheel 
to the right of the outlet 
allows rear seat passen¬ 
gers to vary air discharge 
temperature as well. 



24 


AIR FLOW 
THUMBWHEEL 
(ON/OFF SWITCH) 


STATIFIED AIR 

POTENTIOMETER 

THUMBWHEEL 




























































































































The console outlet is almost always 
open when the IHKA system is “on” and 
the rear seat passengers request air 
flow. An exception is during windshield 
defrosting (and maximum defrost mode) 
when the console outlet flap is fully 
closed. 


The same flap and stepper motor, 
located on the IHKA E38 housing 
assembly, performs both the 
open/close and temperature control 
functions for the console outlet. 



The stepper motor is operated by the control panel/module using information from the 
console rear outlet thumbwheels and the control panel/module buttons (left air distribution 
only). 


IHKA E38 CONTROL PANEL /MODULE 



E38 Console Thumbwheel Controls 


25 
































































































































































































The housing assembly design allows a single stepper motor/flap assembly to provide 
both open/close operation and temperature mixing. 



COLD AIR FROM 
EVAPORATOR 


HOT AIR FROM 
HEATER CORES 


COMBINATION 
OPEN/CLOSE 
TEMP. MIXING FLAP 


AIR TO 

CONSOLE 

OUTLET 


26 





























IHKA E38 COMPRESSOR CONTROL 


IHKA CONTROL PANEL /MODULE 



IHKA E38 compressor control is significantly different from that on previous IHKA systems: 

• The engine control module (ECM) and the IHKA control panel/module communicate 
via three direct circuits; there are no relays. 

• The IHKA control panel/module powers the A/C compressor clutch coil directly; again, 
there is no relay. 


When the “snowflake” button is pressed, the control panel/module signals the ECM that 
engine load is about to be increased (signal AC). The ECM immediately boosts engine idle 
speed by 100 to 200 RPM, regardless of A/C compressor clutch status. 

• Signal AC is continuously active (high) while the “snowflake” button LED is illuminated. 

If evaporator temperature is above 37°F (3°C), the control panel/module then signals the 
ECM that it is about to engage the A/C compressor (signal KO). So long as the ECM does 
not signal back (signal KO-REL) that A/C compressor operation is not allowed, the control 
panel/module engages the compressor. 

• Signal KO cycles high and low as the IHKA control panel/module monitors evaporator 
temperature and cycles the compressor on and off. 


27 













































































































































































































If the ECM detects “full-load” conditions, it sends signal KO REL to the IHKA control 

panel/module to disengage the A/C compressor. The conditions for full load are: 

• Vehicle speed is less than 10 mph, and 

• Throttle is wide open or 

• Engine coolant temperature is too high 

The compressor is turned off for a maximum of 4 minutes. 

As on previous IHKA systems, refrigerant pressure switches can interrupt compressor 

operation, but cutout pressures are slightly higher on the E38 system: 

• The high-pressure switch opens if refrigerant pressure exceeds 479 psi (33 bar), and 
closes if pressure then drops to 334 psi (23 bar). 

• The low-pressure switch (still on the high side of the system) opens if pressure drops 
below 28 psi (1.9 bar), and closes if pressure rises to 41 psi (2.8 bar). 

IHKA E38 includes several additional compressor control strategies: 

• If the “snowflake” button is on at engine start-up, the control panel/module delays 
compressor clutch activation until engine speed exceeds 600 RPM for at least 5 
seconds. 


• As on E31 vehicles, if the driver 
switches “Off” the A/C ^ 
compressor while the vehicle is w 
moving, the control panel/ cc 
module continues to cycle the h 
compressor on and off (for g 
increasingly longer “off” times) for ^ 
up to 15 minutes. This allows the > 
evaporator to warm up gradually, 
helping to prevent windshield 
fogging. If the evaporator 
reaches ambient temperature in 
less than 15 minutes, the 
compressor is shut off sooner. 



OFF 


A/C Compressor Timed Shut Down 


• A unique E38 feature is ambient temperature compensation. When ambient 
temperature exceeds 68°F (20°C), the control panel/module activates the compressor 
at an evaporator temperature above 33°F (1°C), instead of 37°F (3°C). This provides 
additional cooling. 


28 






























A/C COMPRESSOR CONTROL 
(5/97 and later 740, 9/97 and later 750) 


Activation of the compressor clutch is an output control function of the IHKA module. 
Activation is carried out directly through a final stage in the module (no relay required). 


The signals KO and AC have been combined into one signal providing multiple data through 
a stepped increase in signal duty cycle. 


IHKA CONTROL PANEL /MODULE 



ENGINE 

CONTROL 

MODULE 


A/C SYSTEM STATUS (Signal KO) U 


SWITCHED GROUND SIGNAL FROM DME FOR 
COMPRESSOR ON/OFF CYCLING (Signal KO REL) 


COMPRESSOR 
ON POWER 



COMPRESSOR 

CLUTCH 

SOLENOID 


PRESSURE 

SWITCHES 



The individual switching 
stages are transferred by 
way of pulse width 
modulation with a 
frequency of 5 Hz. 

Diagnosis of the line is 
carried out by the ECM. 

SIGNAL KOREL: 


PULSE DUTY FACTOR IN % 

FUNCTIONS 

0 

Short to U-batt. or line break 

15 

Air conditioning off 

30 

Air conditioning standby (DME-AC) ON 

45 

A/C compressor ON, stage 1 = 5-10 Nm 

60 

A/C compressor ON, stage 2 = 10-15 Nm 

75 

A/C compressor ON, stage 3 = 15-20 Nm 

90 

A/C compressor ON, stage 4 = 20-24 Nm —^ 

100 

Short to ground 


Anticipated 
Load on 
Compressor 


The engine control module signals the IHKA (Signal KOREL) when the idle increase has 
taken place and the IHKA will then activate the compressor clutch, as long as all other 
compressor requirements are satisfied. Compressor cut off conditions include: 


• Evaporator temperature below 2°C 

• Coolant temperature > 117°C - causes the compressor to run in a pulsed operation. 

• Coolant temperature > 120°C - the compressor clutch is deactivated until the 
temperature drops below 117°C 

• Full acceleration at low speeds - below 10 MPH with a full throttle input will cause the 
compressor to shut off for 10 seconds 


29 









































































































































































AC COMPRESSOR CONTROL ‘99 MODEL YEAR 




□ 




□ 




AUTO 


-S', 


V 


A 


■0- 


72.0‘F 

aa..=:=: 


68.0‘F 

HHmn:: 




V 


A 


□ 


REST 



[=□ 

□ 

□ □ 


qp 


®o 


a SB ^ 

r %$) 

> 

_j 

1° v! 

J . 1 


□ 


AUTO 



Refrigerant pressure sensor 
(Located in the receiver/dryer) 

For ‘99 Model Year, both 740iL and 750iL IHKA now receive a variable input from the 
refrigerant pressure “sensor”. The sensor is mounted in the receiver/dryer. 


Based on the refrigerant pressure, the pressure sensor input allows the IHKA module to 
determine the “start up” torque of the A/C compressor. If the pressure is too low or high 
the compressor will be deactivated. The IHKA also anticipates the necessary auxiliary fan 
speed and passes this information on to the ECM via the K-bus. 


This change now removes the pressure sensor from the compressor activiation circuit. 



30 


























































































































































































































































































































IHKA E38 AUXILIARY FAN CONTROL (up to 96 MY) 

The auxiliary fan on E38 vehicles is a two-speed unit, and it operates similar to the auxiliary 
fan on previous IHKA systems. 


15 30 15 30 



• The IHKA control panel/module energizes the normal speed relay to run the fan when 
the A/C compressor is operating and ambient temperature is 50°F (10°C) or higher. 

• When refrigerant high-side pressure exceeds 290 psi (20 bar), the pressure switch 
contacts close, energizing the high speed relay. The fan runs at high speed. 

• When coolant temperature reaches 196°F (91 °C), the coolant temperature switch 
normal speed contacts close. The fan runs at normal speed. 

• If coolant temperature continues to rise and reaches 210°F (99°C), the coolant 
temperature switch high speed contacts close. The fan runs at high speed. 























































AUXILIARY FAN CONTROL 


The auxiliary fan is a three stage operation as introduced on the 1996 E38. 


Stage 1: Activated simultaneously with the compressor with an ambient air temperature 

>10°C (50°F). If the coolant temperature rises to >91 °C the fan will also be 
switched on. Fan Speed = 1250 RPM. 

Stage 2: Activated when the medium pressure switch on the receiver/dryer closes at 

17.5 bar. Fan Speed = 2000 RPM. 

Stage 3: Activated when the coolant temperature reaches 104°C at the double 

temperature switch. The stage 3 switched voltage circuit is protected by a 50 
amp remote fuse (red). The fuse is located in the electrical carrier forward of 
the glove box. 



DUAL 
TEMPERATURE 
SWITCH 



RED SINGLE 
FUSE LOCATED 
IN ELECTRICAL 
CARRIER 
FORWARD OF 
GLOVE BOX 



32 































































































































































AUXILIARY FAN CONTROL (‘99 MODEL YEAR - E38) 


The Auxiliary Fan motor incorporates an 
output final stage that activates the fan 
motor at variable speeds. 

The auxiliary fan is controlled by ME 7.2 
(ECM). The motor output stage receives 
power and ground and activates the motor 
based on a PWM signal (10-100 Hz) 
received from the ME 7.2. 

The fan is activated based on the following 
factors: 



FAN MOTOR MODULE 


POWER, GROUND & SIGNAL WIRES 


• Radiator outlet temperature sensor input exceeds a preset temperature. 

• IHKA signalling via the K and CAN bus based on calculated refrigerant pressures. 

• Vehicle speed 

• Battery voltage level 


When the over temperature light in the instrument cluster is on (120°C) the fan is run in the 
overrun function. This signal is provided to the ECM via the CAN bus. When this occurs 
the fan is run at a frequency of 10 Hz. 




RADIATOR 

OUTLET 

TEMPERATURE 

SENSOR 





o 

I- 

D 

O 

DC 
O 
CO 
C0 
LU 
DC 
CL 

2 

O 


LU 

DC 

O 

* 

CO 


o 

CO 


z < 


< z 


>: co 


dc 


< 


O 


DC 


< Q 


o 


OUTPUT 

STAGE 


AUX FAN 
OUTPUT 
STAGE/MOTOR 


IHKA SIGNALING VIA CAN BUS: 
-Variable Speed Auxiliary Fan Control 

- IHKA on 

- Compressor Activation Status 


CAN 

BUS 


nMJUinnjuumn^^ 

uuifTiJunmjuinniuim 


33 













































































































































IHKA E38 REAR WINDOW DEFROSTER 


On the E38, rear window defroster operating strategy depends upon whether ambient 
temperature is above or below 5°F (-15°C): 

• If ambient temperature is below 5°F (-15°C), pressing the rear window defroster button 
(ignition switch in “Run”), causes the control/panel module to turn on the defroster for 
17 minutes, and then switch it off. 

• If ambient temperature is above 5°F (-15°C), the control/panel module runs the 
defroster for only 10 minutes before switching it off. 

Reactivating the defroster by pressing the button again causes the defroster to run for an 
additional 5 minutes, regardless of ambient temperature. 

If the ignition is switched “Off,” the defroster is shuts off, but the timer keeps operating. If 
the ignition is then switched “On” again with time remaining, the defroster automatically 
turns “On” again until the timer runs out. 

If battery voltage drops below 12.2 volts, the defroster automatically switches “Off.” 

Unlike IHKA E32 systems, the rear window defroster is not automatically activated when 
maximum defrosting is requested. 

• Ambient temperature is supplied to the control panel/module over the K-Bus. 




K-BUS 


AMBIENT TEMPERATURE SIGNAL 


IHKA E38 CONTROL PANEL /MODULE 




p 

|° V 


(° w 


(" V 


AUTO 

V- 






V A 


'J 

~ 88 * 




72.0'F 

SSS..:: 


68.0'F 

ar¬ 


T 


v A 

i 


= £8 # 


rest 








□ □ 
flfcO 




AUTO 


dlf 


GENERAL 

MODULE 


15 30 






1 

1 

1 

1 

—i 

t 


REAR 

WINDOW 

DEFROSTER 

RELAY 



DIVERSITY 

ANTENNA 

MODULE 


34 























































































































































































E38 WINDSHIELD BASE/WASHER SPRAY JET HEATERS 


E38 vehicles are equipped with a windshield base/washer spray jet heater system similar 
to the one found on 1988 and 1989 E32 vehicles. On E38 vehicles, however, both heater 
systems are powered at the same time by the same relay: 

• The lower portion of the windshield contains electrical resistance heating elements 
(similar to those on a heated rear window) which, when powered, prevent the wiper 
blades from freezing to the glass. 

• The washer spray jet heaters are located on the underside of the hood and are 
designed to prevent ice from forming on and obstructing the washer nozzles. 

The control panel/module monitors the signal from the ambient temperature sensor (K-Bus) 
and automatically activates the windshield base/washer spray jet heater relay when: 

• Ambient temperature is lower than 38°F (3°C), and 

• The ignition is “on” and 

• Battery voltage is greater than 12.2 volts. 

When ambient temperature exceeds 43°F (6°C), the windshield base/washer spray jet 
heaters are switched off. 


/ 





^ K-BUS 

IKE 

AMBIENT TEMPERATURE SIGNAL J 


IHKA E38 CONTROL PANEL /MODULE 


(r 


h m 




V 


A 


1° M 


se * 


72.0'F 

SSa-.==:i: 


68.0'F 


T 


v A 

i 


■=■ 93 & 


REST 




%$ 


AUTO 






$ 


□ □ 
<*n 


%s 


AUTO 


-L‘ 



15 30 



WINDSHIELD 
BASE/WASHER 
SPRAY JET 
HEATER RELAY 




LEFT 

SPRAY 

JET 

HEATER 




RIGHT 

SPRAY 

JET 

HEATER 


35 



























































































































































































IHKA E38 PARKED CAR VENTILATION 



K-BUS 



IKE_ 

BC 



FRESH AIR FLAP 
STEPPER MOTOR BLOWER 

ACTIVATION 


On the E38, parked car ventilation operates the same way as the system on previous IHKA 
systems. At pre-programmed times, the IHKA control panel/module: 

• opens the fresh air flaps and face vent flaps, and 

• closes all other flaps, and 

• runs the blower at low speed for one-half hour. 

E38 system differences are: 

• A parked car ventilation dual relay is not used on the E38 - all switching is done 
directly by the IHKA control panel/module. 

• On the E38, desired ventilation “On” times are programmed into the IKE On-Board 
Computer (BC) using the Multi-Information Display (MID). 

• The BC in the IKE then communicates with the IHKA control panel/module over 
the l-bus and K-bus. 


36 











































































































































































SPECIAL FUNCTIONS 


Like previous IHKA systems, the E38 IHKA system control panel/module is programmed to 
perform some special functions automatically based on sensed inputs: 

Cold Start Arrest 

IHKA E38 includes an automatically activated cold start arrest function. The control panel/ 
module checks for the conditions necessary to activate the function at engine start-up: 

• IHKA system turned “on” (left blower thumbwheel not in “0” position) and 

• Maximum defrosting request is not present and 

• Left Y-factor is 100% (maximum heating required) and 

• Left side “AUTO” mode request is present and 

• Left heater core temperature is less than 86°F (30°C). 

If these conditions exist, the control panel/module will: 

• Open the defroster flaps and 

• Close all other air distribution flaps and 

• Operate the blower motor, A/C compressor, fresh air flaps, and recirc. air flaps 

according to control panel/module settings. 

When the left heater core temperature reaches 86°F (30°C), the cold start arrest function 
ends and all IHKA system functions depend upon control panel/module settings and 
sensed conditions. 

Service-Station Feature 

This function, introduced on IHKA E32, continues on IHKA E38. The control panel/module 

continues to power both coolant valves closed for about 3 minutes after the ignition is 

switched “Off.” This feature prevents the heater cores from being flooded with hot coolant 
when the engine is shut off for brief periods (e.g. during refueling). 

“Rest” Feature 

The “Rest” feature is a new feature, providing passenger compartment heating for a short 
time after the ignition is switched “Off.” The feature is activated by pressing the “Rest” 
button on the control panel/module, if the following conditions are met: 

• Ignition switch is “Off” and 

• The ambient temperature is less than 59°F (15°C) and 

• The left heater core temperature is greater than 158°F (70°C) and 

• Battery voltage is greater then 11.4 volts and 

• The time elapsed since the ignition was turned “Off” is less than 15 minutes. 


37 




Once the function is activated, the “REST” button LED illuminates, the blower runs at 
medium speed, the auxiliary coolant pump runs, and the air distribution flaps are positioned 
to provide maximum heating. Blower speed, flaps positions, and desired temperatures 
cannot be changed while the “Rest” function is active. 

The system continues to run until any one of the following occurs: 

• The ignition is switched “On” or 

• Battery voltage drops below 11.4 volts or 

• Coolant temperature drops below 86°F (30°C) or 

• The “Rest” button is pressed again or 

• 15 minutes pass. 

The “Rest” function can also be activated when the ignition switch is in the “Accessory” 
position (KI.R). In “Accessory,” blower speed, desired temperature, and air distribution can 
be changed, using the control panel/module rocker switches, thumbwheels, and buttons. 

Remote Recirculated Air 


K-BUS 


IHKA 




V A 



= # 



jmraJ 



1 72.0'F 
Isa ..—-1 

68.0'F 

sa.. 



□ ' CD CD 

®0 




v A 



= © * 





REST 

— jv 

1° ^ 


1° V 


AUTO 



i 




RECIRC. STEPPER 
MOTOR 


FRESH AIR FLAP 
STEPPER MOTOR 



l-BUS 


DATA 




I 

MFL-CM 

Early models only 


RECIRC. 

BUTTON 


The E38 multi-function steering wheel contains a button which the driver can use to activate 
the recirculating air mode without taking his/her hands off the steering wheel. 

Note that almost all aspects of this function are performed using bus communication. 


38 



















































































































































Automatic Recirculated Air (AUC) 




&G 



If the driver presses the recirculating air 
button once, the control panel/module 
takes over control of recirculating air 
mode. The control panel/module uses 
data from the AUC sensor to determine 
whether recirculating air mode is 
necessary. 

The AUC sensor, located in the lower 
right corner of the fan shroud, samples 
ambient air that has entered the engine 
compartment. The sensor contains a 
gas sensor, which measures the level of oxidizable gases in air. These include 
hydrocarbons, NO x , SO x and CO. The AUC sensor sends a voltage signal to the control 
panel/module according to the concentration of these pollutants. 


AUC Sensor Location 


If a high level of pollutants is detected, the control panel/module activates the recirculating 
air mode as follows: 

• In heating mode, recirculating air is used for a maximum of 3 minutes. 

• In cooling mode, recirculating air is used for a maximum of 10 minutes. 


If the level of oxidizable gases drops to an acceptable point before the time limit is reached, 
the IHKA system switches back to fresh air intake. If air quality has not improved at the end 
of the time limit, the system switches to fresh air briefly and then back to recirculating mode 
for another 3 or 10 minute period. 


39 






IHKA PERSONALIZATION - E38 


Important: Due to the variations in hardware and software, it is recommended that 
“Print List” is selected prior to programming. “Print List” will give an overview of 
the available Car and Key Memory options for that specific vehicle. 


Car Memory Options 
Key Memory Options 
Programming Procedure 

“Car Memory/Key Memory” 
is an additional step 
towards customization of a 
vehicle according to owner’s 
indicidual preferences. 
Those features are 
incorporated in ZCS 
Coding/Programming and 
the scope of customization 
of a vehicle. 


Heating/Air Conditioning/Ventilation 

Uflffi?_ 


Air recirculation 
memory 

active 

=not active” 

Interior air is recirculated when 
cooling in “hot country” setting. 

E38 1999 Model Year 

E39 1999 Model Year 

E38 prior to 9/98 

E39 prior 9/98 

Footwell closed 
when cooling 

E38 only 

normal 
=hot country 

Footwell flaps closed when 
cooling to allow more center vent 
air for maximum cold air in “hot 
country” setting. 

E38 1999 Model Year 

E39 1999 Model Year 

E38 prior to 9/98 

Defrost closed 
when cooling 
E38/E39 only 

normal 
=hot country 

Defrost vents closed to allow more 
center vent for maximum cold air 
in “hot country” setting. 

E38 1999 Model Year 

E39 1999 Model Year 

E38 prior to 9/98 

Ventilation when 
cooling 

normal 
=hot country 


E38 1999 Model Year 

E38 prior to 9/98 

Blower 

Automatic blower 
speed operation 
E39 only 

normal 
=hot country 

More fan output during cooling 
when “hot country” is selected. 

E3@ 1999 Model Year 

E39 prior 9/98 

Air Recirculation 

normal 
=hot country 

A larger portion of cooler air is 
recirculated when “hot country” is 
selected. 

E381999 Model Year 

E38 prior to 9/98 

Key Selective* 

^active 
not active 

*This selection is not yet 
functional on the E39 but is listed. 

E391999 Model Year 


Diagnostic Software version 16.1 (DIS/MoDiC III) allows for the selection of “Car Memory” 
choices in E38 and E39s produced prior to 9/98 depending on the vehicle 
hardware/software status. “Key Memory” is not available for E38 and E39s produced prior 
to 9/98. 


“Car Memory” includes functions which are activated regardless of the vehicle key being used. 


“Key Memory” contains functions which can be 
different depending on the vehicle key used. The 

vehicle key is identified during “unlocking”, 
only when remote control is used (function are 
inoperative during “manual” unlocking). Up to 

four different keys for the E46, and two keys for the 
E38 and E39 can be customized (upon delivery, the 
customer is provided with two remote control 
transmitters). 


These features are 
programmed using the 
coding/programming 
function of the 



DIS/MoDiC. 



IHKA 


| Print 

|Change | 

r 

| Services | 


BMW Diagnosis DIAGNOSIS REQUESTS 


1 CAR MEMORY 


2 KEY MEMORY 

3 ZCS CODING 

4 PROGRAMMING 

5 ADJUSTMENT EWS - DME 

6 ADJUSTMENT EWS - DME 



MoDiC 


DIS 


40 







































































































































































































DIAGNOSIS 


The DIS tester and E38 software are used to troubleshoot and diagnosis the IHKA system. 
The following displays and test programs are available, once the tester is connected and 
the diagnostic program is accessed: 

• Testing based on a fault symptom 

• Readout and testing based on the status list displays 

• Simulation of outputs 

• Readout and display of stored faults 

• Testing/troubleshooting based on fault displays 

• Canceling of the fault memory 


IHKA 



^ K-BUS „ 




Replacement values are stored in the control module that will allow the IHKA system to 
continue to function when various sensors fail. Output faults result in the switching off of the 
failed output. 

the fault memory is contained in a non-volatile RAM so that any stored faults will not be 
canceled when the system is switched off or the battery is disconnected. A maximum of six 
faults can be stored in the fault memory. 


41 































































































































































































