Table of Contents 


BMW FEATURES 


Subject Page 

•E39 IHKR.02 

• System Components.02 

• E39 IPO.03 

• Funotion Desoription.04 

- Air Distribution 


- Biower Adjustment 

- Temperature Controi 

- Fresh Air / Recircuiation 

- Air Conditioning 

- Rear Window Defroster 

- Washer Jet Heating 

- K-Bus Communioations 


Revision Date: 
12/00 







E39 IHKR 


The 525i/it will be fitted with IHKR as standard 
equipnnent. IHKA will be available as an option 
on those vehioles by ordering the Convenience 
package: SA 466. 


IHKR Is a semi-automatically regulated heating 
and alr-conditloning system. The components 
are similar to the IHKR system used In the X5 
3.01. 

The E39 IHKR Is a single zone system that regulates the temperature of the cabin based 
on the occupants desired temperature, selected by a temperature setting dial. Blower con¬ 
trol, air distribution settings and stratification flap are manual. 

System Components 

The E39 IHKR consists of the following components: 

• IHKR control unit with operating controls 

• IHKR Integrated heater and air conditioning case 

• 1 Heater core temperature sensor 

• Evaporator temperature sensor 

• Interior temperature sensor (located In drivers footwell) 

• Double cage blower motor and final stage 

• 1 Water valve (duty cycle controlled) 

• Auxiliary water pump 

• 1 Fresh air/re-circ stepper motor 

• Auxiliary fan (DME controlled) 

• Refrigerant Pressure Sensor 

• Left and right fresh air micro-filters 



2 

















E39 IHKR I.P.O. 



1^ 

T 30 -: 

— + 


riiiiii 




K-BUS 



KL31 



4 

¥ 






EVAPORATOR 



> 


> 



REFRIGERANT PRESSURE 


> 








C INTERIOR TEMPERATURE 
^ (FOOTWELL) 

- 


► 


LCM 


58G 

-► 



> 


WASHER JET HEATER 

-f'An 


BLOWER MOTOR OUTPUT STAGE 



AUXILIARY WATER PUMP 



FRESH AIR/REGIRG MOTOR 



REAR WINDOW DEFROST RELAY 

KL30 KL15 

I I 



OOMPRESSOR OONTROL 



OOMPRESSOR 
SHUT OFF/ON 
SIGNAL KOREL 



















































































































































































IHKR control unit with operating controls 

The IHKR control unit is incorporated into the oontrol panel. The control panel oonsists of 
three buttons and three rotary dials. 


1. Temperature control potentiometer 
2. Air distribution mechanical knob 
3. Fan control potentiometer 



4. Recirculation 

5. Air conditioning request 

6. Rear window defroster 



3 cables Blue - vent flaps 

Red - defrost flaps 
Green - footwell flaps 


X18341 
3 pin 



X611 


X610 


12 pin 


26 pin 


Functional Description: 

• Air distribution: is oarried out using the meohanioai rotary diai acting on three 
bowden oables. 

• Blower adjustment: is earned out using the rotary dial potentiometer (22 steps). The 
control unit signais the final stage via a variable voltage signal. 

• Temperature control: The desired interior temperature is set with the rotary diai 
potentiometer on the control panel. Temperature regulation is based on the Y-factor. 
The inputs used to determine the Y-faotor are: 

• Position of the temperature control potentiometer diai 

• Heater core temperature 

• Cooiant temperature 

• Exterior Temperature 

• Interior Temperature 

Control of the interior temperature is earned out by the oontrol unit oyoiing the water 
valve to regulate the temperature of the heater core. During heater operation the 
auxiliary water pump will be switched on to inorease eoolant circulation through the 
heater oore. The servioe station feature is earned over to the E39 IHKR. 

• Fresh air/recirculation: Reoiroulation is requested by an input to the control panel 
button or the MFL. The oontrol unit actuates the fresh air/re-circ stepper motor for 
control of the flap position. Ram effeot air is compensated for. 

• Air conditioning: The request for air conditioning is made by means of a push button. 


4 





The IHKR control module communicates with the DME via the K-Bus/KOMBI/CAN Bus 
iink to request permission for compressor activation. The controi of the compressor 
ciutch is directiy by the IHKA moduie via a final stage. 

• Rear Window Defroster: The rear window defroster is controlied via a request from 
the button on the panel. After switching on for the first time, the rear window is heated 
for 10 minutes. Output voitage to the window is provided by the K13 rear defogger 
relay. After automatic switch off, if the button is pressed once again the control unit wiil 
provide a clocked operation alternating at 40 seconds on and 80 seconds off. If the 
vehicle voltage drops below 11 AM during this second heating operation the function is 
stopped, however the LED on the button will not be extinguished. If voltage increases 
past 12.2V for at least one second, clocked operation will resume. Clocked operation 
continues until the button is pressed again or the ignition is cycled. 

• Washer Jet Heating: The IHKR provides operating current to the washer jet heaters 
based on outside temperature. The washer jets are heated below an outside 
temperature of 37” F. 

• K-Bus Communication: The IHKR control unit is on the vehicle K-bus and receives 
and sends information concerning: 

• Engine temperature, RPM, KL61, KL50, compressor request, auxiliary fan request, 
compressor load (DME) 

• Outside temperature KL15 and road speed (KOMBI) 

• Diagnosis and coding (DIS/MoDiC) 

Left side of IHKR case Defrost Flap 



5 





