Table of Contents 


E46 IHKR 


Subject Page 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components.4 

IHKR Control Unit 
IHKR Housing. . . 

Principle of operation 


Blower adjustment. 

Air Distribution. 

Temperature Control. 

Engine Map Cooling. 

Service Station Feature. 

Air Conditioning Control.1 

Air Intake.11 

Ram Effect Air Compensation.11 

Rear Window Defroster..12 

Workshop Hints.13 

Review Questions.15 


Initial Print Date: 10/30/00 


Revision Date: 10/30/00 


o CD CD 00 N N “*sl OOGO 



















E46 IHKR 

Model: E46 (325i/it/Ci/Cic, M3) 

Production Date: From 9/00 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the climate control functions performed by the IHKR system. 

• Identify the changes compared to the E46 IHKA system. 

• Understand the method of temperature control used by the IHKR. 

• Describe how the A/C compressor is controlled. 


2 


E46 IHKR 




Purpose of the system 

The 325i/it/Ci/Cic and M3 will be fitted with IHKR as standard equipment. The IHKA 
system will be available as an option on these models. 

IHKR is a semi-automatically regulated heating 
and air-conditioning system, similar to the 
IHKR introduced for the 2001 E39. 

The purpose of the system is to allow the 
vehicle occupants to select the desired 
temperature, air outlet distribution and volume 
manually. 

The system then automatically regulates the 
temperature of the cabin based on the manual 



settings. 


The functions provided by the E46 IHKR are: 

• Control of the blower. 

• Air distribution control. 

• Stratification flap controlled by a bowden cable 

• Temperature Control 

• Service Station feature 

• Air conditioning request to DME 

• Recirculation air 

• Ram effect air compensation 

• Rear window defroster 


3 


E46 IHKR 












System Components 

The E46 IHKR consists of the following components: 

• IHKR control unit with operating controls 

• IHKR integrated heater and air conditioning case 

• Heater core temperature sensor 

• Evaporator temperature sensor 

• Refrigerant circuit pressure sensor 

• Double cage blower motor and final stage 

• Water valve 

• Air distribution micro-switch 

• M-bus with 3 smart stepper motors: 

- Air distribution 

- Fresh air/re-circulation left (high speed motor) 

- Fresh air/re-circulation right (high speed motor) 

• Compressor relay (DME controlled) 

• Auxiliary fan (DME controlled) 

• Rear window defroster relay 

• K-bus interface 

The following signals are transmitted and received over the K-bus: 

- Vehicle speed 

- Engine speed 

- Coolant temperature 

- Outside temperature 

- Terminal 15, 61, 50,58G (panel lighting) 

- Compressor load 

- Diagnosis and coding 

- Compressor request 

• Fresh air Micro-filter 


4 


E46 IHKR 




E46 IHKR I.P.O 


KL31 


KL30 



Tp3-E_r 

+ 


riiiin 





FAN SPEED 


A/C REQUEST 


| H 3 RE-CIRCULATION 




REAR DEFROST 



TEMPERATURE 

CONTROL 



AIR DISTRIBUTION 
POTENTIOMETER 



EVAPORATOR 

TEMPERATURE 


REFRIGERANT PRESSURE 

^-*• 


o o 


AIR DISTRIBUTION 
MICRO-SWITCH 



HEATER CORE 
TEMPERATURE 


LSZ 


PANEL 

ILLUMINATION 58G 


E46 

IHKR 


BLOWER MOTOR OUTPUT STAGE 



WATER VALVE 


KL30 




M-BUS 

- FRESH AIR/RECIRC LEFT 

- FRESH AIR/RECIRC RIGHT 
-AIR DISTRIBUTION 



REAR WINDOW DEFROST RELAY 
KL 15 KL 30 

I l 



COMPRESSOR CONTROL 



AUXILIARY FAN CONTROL 


K-BUS 



5 


E46 IHKR 















































































































































































































IHKR control unit with operating controls 

The IHKR control unit is incorporated into the control panel. The control panel consists of 
three buttons and three rotary dials. The control unit communicates over the K bus. 



1. Blower control potentiometer 

2. Recirculation button 

3. Temperature control potentiometer 

4. Air distribution potentiometer 

12 3 4 


5 6 

5. Air conditioning request button 

6. Rear window defroster button 


X613 XI8341 

3 pin M-bus 6 pin 


X608 X610 

6 pin 18 pin 


IHKR Case 


The E46 IHKR case is similar in design to the E46 IHKA heating and A/C case. 

1. Heater Core Temp. 



6 


E46 IHKR 








Principle of operation 

Blower adjustment 

The blower rotary dial potentiometer has four settings. Each progressive step represents a 
25% increase in blower volume. The control unit determines the desired blower setting by 
the signal from the potentiometer and then sends a voltage signal to the final stage unit. 
The voltage signal to the final stage unit ranges from 1,8V to a maximum of 7.1 V (Normal 
blower power in Key Memory). 

The final stage unit then regulates blower motor voltage to control the blower volume. 
There is no automatic influence on the blower setting. 

The blower control potentiometer is the master on/off switch for the IHKR system. The 
water valve is closed (energized) in the blower zero (off) position. The LEDs for re-circulat- 
ed air and air conditioning are switched off and the compressor is switched off. The rear 
defroster operation is not affected by the system being switched off. 

Air distribution 

The selection of air distribution is carried out using the rotary dial potentiometer (42 steps). 
Each step of the potentiometer represents a percentage. The percentage indicates the 
desired air distribution setting. 



Movement of the stratification flap for face ven¬ 
tilation is carried out by rotating a thumb wheel 
between the face vent discharge nozzles. The 
thumb wheel is connected to a bowden cable 
that moves the flap. 

The air distribution for defrost, ventilation and 
footwell is performed by a single air distribution 
stepper motor that is connected to the M-bus 
and controlled by the IHKR control unit. 


7 


E46 IHKR 



The stepper motor drives a cam/lever assembly (1) that articulates all three air distribution 
flaps. The position of the cam is confirmed by the air distribution micro-switch (2). 


The air distribution micro-switch is provided 
5V by the IHKR control unit. The micro 
switch is closed by the rotating cam lobe in 
two positions: 


• Full defrost 97% to 0% 

• Mixed face vent/footwell 37% 

(quick confirmation) 

When the switch is closed the signal at the 
control unit goes low, informing the control 
unit that it has reached that particular 
position. The display in diagnosis recog¬ 
nizes this position as “off”. 

A reference run is initiated the first time KL30 is switched on the IHKR control unit. The 
reference run is required to determine the position of the cam disc. The cam disc is 
rotated until the micro-switch sends a signal to the control unit. After the reference run is 
completed, the control unit recognizes what position the cam disc is in and thus the 
position of all three air distribution flaps. 

If the air distribution micro-switch is not able to produce a signal at the correct position, the 
control unit will continue to operate the stepper motor at an estimated position. Eventually 
the air distribution setting will not match the actual output. The air distribution micro-switch 
circuit is fault monitored. 



Located on the right side of the IHKR case 


Temperature control 

The desired interior temperature is set with the rotary dial potentiometer (34 steps). The 
face of the dial itself has no marked temperatures, just a blue, white and red line that rep¬ 
resents a comfort zone. 

All of the air flowing into the IHKR housing must pass through the evaporator first before 
being re-heated by the heater core. This is the principle used by all IHKR and IHKA sys¬ 
tems. 

The IHKR maintains the temperature of the discharge air by cycling the water valve to reg¬ 
ulate the temperature of the heater core. The duty cycle applied to the water valve is based 
on the “Y-factor” (correcting variable) and other variables. 


8 


E46 IHKR 



The Y-factor of the E46 IHKR is determined by: 

• Setting of the temperature control dial 

• Outside temperature (from Kombi via the K-bus) 

• Heater core temperature 

Automatic temperature control is switched off when the temperature control dial is turned 
all the way to the left (blue: water valve closed) or right (red: water valve full open) stop. 

Each step of the potentiometer represents a temperature from max. cold (10°C) to max. 
warm (49.5°C). This temperature value is combined with the outside temperature to form 
a calculated set-point. The E46 IHKR does not use an interior temperature sensor. 

The Y-factor is then determined by comparing the calculated set-point to the actual value 
of the heater core sensor which is in the stream of air to the outlet ducts. 

In addition to the Y-factor, the control unit evaluates coolant temperature and engine RPM 
to determine water valve opening time. The valve opening times are: 

• 0 ms at max. COLD 

• 3600 ms at max. WARM 

Engine map cooling 

Map cooling is used by the DME MS 43.0 for the M54 engines. This can create very high 
coolant temperatures which could be damaging to the climate control system. If the heater 
core temperature exceeds 80°C, the water valve is closed until the temperature drops 
below 80°C. 

If the temperature at the heater core increases above 93°C (i.e. water valve faulty), the IHKR 
will signal the DME (via K-bus/Kombi/CAN) to energized the map cooling thermostat. 


Service Station Feature 

The service station feature prevents the vehicle occupants from getting a blast of hot air 
after the vehicle is restarted following a short stop. The water valve is powered closed by 
the IHKR control unit for three minutes after shut-off. This prevents the heater core from 
being flooded with hot coolant. 


9 


E46 IHKR 



Air Conditioning control 

The air conditioning system is switched on by pressing the snow flake button and having 
the blower dial on position 1 or greater. The LED in the button signals that the A/C is in 
stand-by. 

The IHKR control module sends the following signals to the DME over the K-bus-Kombi- 
CAN -bus connection: 


• IHKR on stand-by (signal AC) 

• Request for A/C activation (signal KO) 

• Calculated compressor load 

• Request for auxiliary fan 


The IHKR determines the load torque for compressor activation and required auxiliary fan 
speed from the pressure sensor mounted on the high side line next to the receiver dryer. 

The refrigerant pressure sensor provides a voltage input signal (0-5 volts) to the IHKR. The 
voltage value increases as pressure in the high side refrigerant circuit increases. The IHKR 
processes this signal to determine the calculated load that will be placed on the engine 
when the compressor is switched on. Pressure values that are too high or too low will 
cause the compressor to be switched off. 


Once all of the criteria for compressor operation have been met, the DME control module 
will activate the compressor relay to energize the compressor magnetic clutch. 


Control of the evaporator temperature is carried out by the IHKR signalling the DME to shut 
off the compressor when the evaporator reaches the freezing point. 


K-Bus: Signal AC/KO 


IHKR 


Evaporator Temp. 


Refrigerant 

Pressure 


KOMBI 



Auxiliary 

Fan 


The IHKR cycles the compressor 
at 1°C if the outside temperature 
is above 68°F. The compressor 
is cycled at 3°C if the outside 
temperature is below 68°F. 


K19 relay 


Compressor 


10 


E46 IHKR 





























































Air Intake 


The fresh air/re-circulation flaps are controlled 
by a separate stepper motor for the left and 
right side. 


The stepper motors are controlled by the M- 
bus and are located on the left and right sides 
of the housing inside the passenger compart¬ 
ment. 

The fresh air flaps are closed and the re-circ 
doors are opened when the re-circ. button is 
pressed with the system switched on. 

When the key is turned off with re-circulation on, the fresh air flaps will open. Re-circula- 
tion memory in the IHKR control unit is 15 minutes. If the vehicle is started within 15 min¬ 
utes the re-circulation setting will be restored. 

If the system is shut off with the blower switch, the re-circulation function will have to be re¬ 
enabled. 



Ram effect air compensation 

Similar to IHKA, when the fresh air flaps are open their position is affected by vehicle road 
speed. This is to prevent an increase in air volume to the cabin with increasing vehicle 
speed. 

The IHKR receives the vehicle speed input every 2 seconds over the K-bus from the Kombi. 
At a speed of 36mph the fresh air flaps will close progressively until the vehicle reaches 
96mph, at which time the opening of the flaps will be 20%. 

100 % 


60 % 

40 % - 
30 % - 
20 % - 


0 36 62 96 

ROAD SPEED (MPH)-—► 




E46 IHKR 










Rear window defroster operation (All models) 

The rear window defroster is controlled via a request from the button on the panel. After 
switching on for the first time, the rear window is heated for 17 minutes. Output voltage to 
the window is provided by the K13 rear defogger relay. 

After automatic switch off, if the button is pressed once again the control unit will provide 
another 17 minutes of operation. If the vehicle voltage drops below 11,4V during this sec¬ 
ond heating operation the function is stopped, however the LED on the button will not be 
extinguished. If voltage increases past 12.2V for at least one second, operation will 
resume. The control circuit of the convertible varies slightly due to the folding top. 


Defroster operation specific to Convertibles 



When the button is pressed on the IHKR control panel, relay K13 is energized. K13 sup¬ 
plies KL 30 to defroster relay K99. Relay K99 is energized when the KLR is switched on 
and the soft top is closed and locked to the windshield frame. This completes the circuit 
and allows the rear window to be heated. 

If the soft top is lowered during defroster operation, voltage to relay K99 is interrupted by 
the CVM to prevent the rear window grid from heating when the top is lowered into the stor¬ 
age compartment. 



E46 IHKR 






























































Workshop Hints 

Diagnosis 

Diagnosis of the E46 IHKR system is carried out using the DISplus or MoDiC. The IHKR is 
connected to the diagnostic bus via the K-bus/Kombi connection. The system uses the 
E46 test module driven diagnostic concept for troubleshooting faults with the system. 


Control Unit Functions: 

Expert mode diagnosis available at 
any time during troubleshooting. To 
enter: press the Control Unit 
Functions button at the lower right 
corner of the screen. 

The contents are: 

Identification 
Clear Fault Memory 
Read Fault Memory 
Component Activation 
Status Requests 



5W.. I 

1 



■ 





Service Functions: 

Provides access to special¬ 
ized test modules used as 
post repair procedures. To 
enter: 

• Function selection 

• Service Functions 

• Body 

• Heater- A/C control 

Deactivate transport-lock 
function 


Test Modules: Faults with the E46 IHKR can be diagnosed using fault or symptom driven test 
modules. To begin diagnosis: 

• Perform the Short Test 

• Select a vehicle symptom from the Symptom Selection page 

• Select a test module from the Test Plan page 

• Press the Test Schedule button 

Test module are written in the E46 diagnosis style. 



E46 IHKR 











































































































Coding 

Coding must be performed if the IHKR control unit is replaced. ZCS coding is found in the 
Coding and Programming selection from the start screen or when pressing the Change 
button. Follow on-screen instructions to remove KL 30 power to the IHKR control unit. 
This step is necessary to complete the coding process. 


Car and Key Memory 

When troubleshooting complaints with the E46 IHKR it is important to note that because 
the Car/Key Memory feature can change the operation of the system, a review of the set¬ 
tings should be made prior to beginning troubleshooting. 



Only Key Memory selections are possible for the E46 IHKR. The selections are: 

• Set Blower Power (Raise, Normal, Lower) 

• Correction Set Temperature (raise/lower) 

• A/C on at key on (Automatic activation of the compressor control when the ignition is 
switched on.) 



E46 IHKR 



































































Review Questions 


1. What is the Voltage range of the control signal from the IHKR to the blower final stage? 


2. Which components are responsible for the movement of the air distribution flaps? What 
role does the air distribution micro-switch play?_ 



3. How does the IHKR determine a Y-factor if the system does not use an interior 
temperature sensor?_ 



4. How does the IHKR signal the DME when compressor activation is requested? Discuss 
what information is exchanged._ 



5. What three stepper motors are located on the M-Bus? What is an M-Bus? 



6. Which additional component is used in the rear defrost circuit of a convertible E46, as 
compared to a hard top?_ 



15 


E46 IHKR 









