Table of Contents 


Subject Page 

Central Body Electronics (ZKE IV) .2 

Objectives of the Module .2 

Purpose of the System.3 

System Components .4 

Power Distribution .5 

Windshield Wiping/Washing. 6 

318ti Rear Window Wiping/Washing.8 

Central Locking .9 

Door Lock Heating.19 

Power Windows/Sunroof .20 

Sunroof.23 

Interior Lighting .25 

General Functions .27 

Consumer Cut Off/Overload Proteotion.27 


Review Questions 


28 


















CENTRAL BODY ELECTRONICS (ZKE IV) 

Models: E36 and Z3 

Production Date: E36 1994 MY (including 318ti) to End of Production 
Z3 Coupe, Roadster (including M) 1997 MY to Present 

Manufacturer: Hella 

Pin Connectors: 6 - Black 18 pin, Black 15 pin. Yellow 26 pin. 

Green 26 pin. Natural 26 pin. White 15 pin 


Objectives of the Module 

After completing this module, you will be able to: 

• List the funotions direotly oontrolled by the GM IV. 

• Desoribe how the GM IV reoognizes the key position from the driver’s door. 

• Explain the “Gomfort Glosing” feature. 

• Understand the differenoe between “single” and “double” look. 

• Desoribe Windshield Wiper Blooking Proteotion. 

• Explain how EWS affeots the Gentral Looking System. 


2 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 




Central Body Electronics (ZKE IV) 


Purpose of the System 


The Central Body Electronics (ZKE IV) system manages the following functions: 


GM IV (1. in Diagram) 

• Interior Lighting 

• Centrai Locking 

• Door Lock Heating 

• Power Windows/Sunroof 

• Consumer Cut Off/Overioad 

• Diagnosis 


Washer/Wiper Module 
(2. in Diagram) 

Windshield Wiping/Washing 


E36 Viewed with Glovebox 
Removed 



Relay Module (3. in Diagram) 

• Power Windows (rear doors - 
on 4 door and Convertibie only) 



Convertible Top Module 

• Power Window Interface 

• Top Comfort Close 

• Trunk Lockout when top 
is in operation 


The ZKE IV system was introduced on the E36 Convertible and is also used in the Z3. Most 
of the functions operate the same on these vehicles with minor changes and added fea¬ 
tures to the system. ZKE IV is the fourth generation of central body control systems. 


The GM IV is responsible for controlling most of the Body Electronic Functions from one 
central module. 


3 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 














































System Components 


General Module (GM IV): The GM is a micro¬ 
computer that is the central component (heart) 
of the Central Body Electronics. The GM is loc¬ 
ated behind the glove box. 

The main objectives for using the GM are: 

• Increase Overall Reliability 

• Centralize Electronic Systems 

• Decrease Assembly and Service Repairs 

• Centralized Diagnosis of all ZKE Components 

• Individualization of Features (Coding) 



The GM requires input data to perform Central 
Body Electronics functions. The inputs are sup¬ 
plied by digital switched signals such as: 

• Driver’s Door Lock Microswitch: supplies vol¬ 
tage (KL 30) to the GM when switched. A 
path to ground is provided by the GM (inter¬ 
nally). The GM monitors the input voltage. 

• Centrai Lock Button (E36 from 96 MY): sup¬ 
plies a ground circuit to the GM when switc¬ 
hed. The GM supplies and monitors a refer¬ 
ence voltage (5v) that is “pulled” low when the 
switched ground path is provided. 


Driver’s Door Lock Microswitch ,,, .. 

Signal Monitor 



12520101.eps 


The GM processes the input information and 
contains “coded” instructions that allow a spe¬ 
cific output control of functions. 

The GM will produce output controls using int¬ 
ernal transistors to switch relays allowing cur¬ 
rent flow (providing voltage or ground) through 
circuits and actuators. Actuators ( such as 
relays and motors) are used by the GM to oper¬ 
ate or control various output functions. 



4 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 






















































Power Distribution 


The power distribution box whioh 
inoludes the fuses for the E36 
and Z3 is looated in the engine 
oompartment. 


A fuse designation label is also 
looated on the inside lid of the 
fusebox. The label notes: 

• Fuse rating in amps 

• Looation 

• Cirouit listing by fuse 



ABS 
RELAYS 


HORN 


ER RELAY 


FUEL PUMP 
RELAY 


LOWBEAM 


FOGLIGHT 


E36 Shown 


ENGINE MAIN HAZARD 
RELAY (< 97) FLASHER 


Looated under and to the left of 
the steering oolumn is: 

• Cheek Control Module 

• Common oonneetor plates 
(splioe box) 

• Window/Sunroof Relay 

• Crash Alarm Relay 


CHECK CONTROL 
MODULE 


RELAY CARRIER 



CRASH ALARM 
RELAY 

(>94 Model year) 

' # 


5 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 








Windshield Wiping/Washing 

Purpose of the System 

The windshield wiping/washing functions are controlled by a separate wiper module 
(WWM). The system has never been directly controlled by the ZKE, even though it is a body 
eleotrioal system. 

The system has four wiping stages inoluding one interval wip¬ 
ing speed when the ignition is in position KL R or KL15. The 
wiper motor output oontrol is by the WWM boated behind the 
glovebox. 

System Components E 36 Wiper stalk 

- with Principle of Operation 

Wiper Stalk Switch Input 

The wiping stage inputs are through a ooded oombination switoh that supplies a ground 
signal to the WWM. The wiping stages inolude: 

Single (S): Momentarily holding the wiper switoh down in the single position provides a 
momentary ground signal to aotivate a single sweep in slow speed. 

Slow (I) and Fast (II): The stage I and stage II wiping speeds are road speed dependent. 
Stage I switohes to intermittent when the vehiole is stopped and stage II switohes to stage 
I when stopped. 

Windshield Washing: The wash request provides a switohed ground input to the WWM 
by pulling the stalk rearward. The WWM aotivates the windshield washer pump direotly. 
When the washing funotion is aotivated, the pump runs as long as the switoh is held. The 
wipers switoh on and will oontinue to for 3 wiping oyoles after the switoh is released. 

Intermittent: The interval time of the wipers is vehiole speed dependent. As the vehiole 
speed inoreases, wiping interval times deorease. This timed interval is set in the oontrol 
module and is not programmable. The programmed intermittent oyoles are as follows: 



0-10 mph 

10-25 mph 

25-50 mph 

50-69 mph 

69-93 mph 

>93 mph 

14 sec’s 

8 sec’s 

7 sec’s 

6 sec’s 

5 sec’s 

4 sec’s 


6 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 















Blocking Protection 


The wiper module receives a feedback signal from fhe wiper mofor when the wipers are 
switched on. If this feedback signal is missing for several seconds after the wipers are 
switched on, the module will switch the motor off. 

The wiper switch must be moved to the off position before another attempt can be made 
to turn the wipers on. If this blocking protection has activated several times, the ignition 
must be cycled before the wipers can be switched on again. 

The wiper module is not connected to the diagnostic link for troubleshooting purposes. 
Standard troubleshooting procedures using an ETM and DISplus multimeter must be 
employed to diagnose the wiper/washer. 


System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



SPEED 
SIGNAL "A" 


Switch Logic 

1 

2 

3 

Single Wipe 

H 

H 

L 

Intermittent Wipe 

H 

L 

H 

Slow Wipe (Stage 1) 

H 

H 

L 

Fast Wipe (Stage II) 

L 

H 

L 



7 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 




















































318ti Rear Window Wiper/Washer 


The rear glass of the 318ti has a wiper/washer. This system has an additional set of oon- 
taots in the wiper stalk switoh that operates the rear window system as well as front win¬ 
dow wiper/washer system. Operation is as follows: 


• Intermittent Wiping: Push the wiper switoh away from the steering wheel briefly to aoti- 
vate intermittent wipe. Pressing a seoond time will switoh the wiping off. 


• Wash/Wipe: Push the lever away from the steering wheel and hold, this will aotivate the 
washer pump and the wiper as long as the switoh is held. 


System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



8 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 



























Central Locking 

Purpose of the System 

The Central Locking System provides locking/ 
unlocking of the entire vehicle from one central 
exterior point. 

From the driver’s door, passenger’s door or lug¬ 
gage compartment (>96 MY), a lock/unlock 
request will lock/unlock all exterior doors, lug¬ 
gage compartment and the fuel filler flap (and 
glove box E36iC only). 

Locking from the luggage compartment lock 
cylinder and leaving the lock cylinder in the hori¬ 
zontal position will manually lock the luggage 
compartment in the “valet” position. 

From inside, the vehicle can be locked using one of the front 
door lock knobs or a central locking button (>96 MY E36 
which also unlocks the vehicle) located in the center console. 

The doors can be unlocked by pulling twice on the Interior door 
handle. 

Locking the vehicle from the central switch or door lock knob 
will “single lock” all doors, luggage compartment and not lock 
the fuel filler flap (or glovebox on the E36IC). 

The Central Locking System utilizes the GM IV to carry out all of the locking/unlocking fea¬ 
tures: 

• When locked from the outside, the vehicle will double lock and arm the alarm system (only 
if equipped with DWA, not the accessory Alpine Alarm). The ignition must be switched 
off and the driver’s door must be opened and closed. 

• The EWS II is interfaced for double lock monitoring and unlock function(>1/95 Production 
Date). With the presence of an accepted EWS II key and switching the ignition “on”, the 
GM IV will unlock the vehicle. 

• In the event of an accident (ignition must be switched on), the GM IV will be signalled to 
unlock all of the doors. 

Central Body Electronics ZKE 




< CD 



• Anti-theft drive away protection feature with double lock (>1/95 Production Date when 
locking the vehicle from the exterior). 

• Comfort closing of the windows is posible from both front door locks if held in the lock 
position. 

• 1996 E36 - Sunroof added to comfort closing feature. 

• E36iC - The trunk is locked out when the convertible top is in operation. Fully automatic 
convertible top added to comfort closing feature (97 MY and later vehicles). 


Hardware Features 


• The door lock buttons are mechanically uncoupled from the 
lock actuators when locked. The door lock buttons also 
“mechanically” lock the individual doors. This provides man¬ 
ual locking in the event of a central locking malfunction. 

• Child safety locks (located in the rear doors on a four door 
vehicle) are actuated by sliding a lever. The door can now 
only be opened from outside. 


• The luggage compartment can be manually locked with a 
“Master Key” and leaving the lock cylinder in the horizontal 
position which prevents opening by any other method (sec¬ 
ured for valet). 

• The Fuel Filler Flap mechanical release is found in the right 
side of the luggage compartment. 


• The glove box has a lock cylinder to secure the contents by 
manual locking with a “Master Key” and leaving the lock cyl¬ 
inder in the horizontal position which prevents opening by 
any other method (secured for valet). 


The valet key is not mechanically capable of entering either of 
these lock cylinders. 



10 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 




Central Locking - ZKE IV 

The locking and unlocking of the lock actuators is controlled from three relays in the GM. 
The door lock actuator “Pin Contacts” and lock micro-switches provide the inputs to the 
GM for locking/double locking and unlocking of the doors, trunk, fuel filler flap (and glove 
box on the E36iC only). The relays in the GM provide both power and ground depending 
on the direction of actuator movement (lock/unlock). 


System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 


KL 30 


RELAY# 

CENTRAL 

LOCK 

DOUBLE 

LOCK 

UNLOCK 

1 

HIGH 

HIGH 

LOW 

2 

LOW 

HIGH 

LOW 

3 

LOW 

LOW 

HIGH 


DOOR LOCK 
ACTUATORS {4X) 



CONVERTIBLE 
TOP STORAGE 
LID SWITCH 


GRAY COLORED 
COMPONENTS ARE 
FOR CONVERTIBLE 
MODELS ONLY 


11 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 

























































































































Lock Actuator Operation 

The lock actuators contain the electrical motor drive, the lock/ 
unlock switch contacts and the integral single/double lock lim¬ 
iting switch. 

The actuators control the mechanical locking/unlocking func¬ 
tion of the doors by sliding two protruding levers. The precise 
positioning of the levers provides the unlock, single lock and 
double lock positions of the latch mechanism. 

The electro-mechanical operation of all the lock positions are 
provided on the following pages: 



LOCK ACTUATOR 


LOCK 

LEVERS 


LATCH 
MECHANISM 


UNLOCKED-NEUTRAL POSITION 

UNLOCKED-NEUTRAL POSITION 



ZKEIV 

GENERAL 

MODULE 



AS OF 1-94 PRODUCTION 
THE DOUBLE LOCK 
■KEY POSITION" WAS 
ELIMINATED. LOCKING 
FROM THE VEHICLE 
EXTERIOR PROVIDES A 
DOUBLE LOCK REQUEST 


o 


• All switch contacts are in their rest positions. 


• The lock actuator/latch mechanisms are in the unlocked position. 


• Raising the door handle or pulling the interior door latch will mechanically open the door. 


12 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 






Central Locking System Terminology 

“Single lock”, “Central lock”: Vehicle is locked via the lock knob, or the oonsole mounted 
oentral look button (>12-95 prod). 

“Double lock”, “Central arrest”: Vehiole has been looked from the exterior with the key at 
the driver’s door, passenger’s door or trunk. 


SINGLE LOCK - Phase 1, mechanical lock at door and lock signal generation 

SINGLE LOCK - Phase 1, mechanical lock at door and lock signal generation 





AS OF 1-94 PRODUCTION, 
THE DOUBLE LOCK 
"KEY POSITION" WAS 
ELIMINATED. LOCKING 
FROM THE VEHICLE 
EXTERIOR PROVIDES A 
DOUBLE LOCK REQUEST 


• The lock button and key mechanically rotate the lock lever which decouples the exterior 
door handle from the latch. 

• When rotated, the lock lever also slides an internal switch ramp to the left closing the lock 
microswitch. 

• This provides the lock signal to the GM (cont’d on next page.) 


13 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 





SINGLE LOCK - Phase 2, activation of actuators at all door locks 


When the GM receives the lock signal it activates internal relay #1, providing power through 
the closed single lock contact to the aotuator motor. Ground is provided through the mod¬ 
ule’s olosed oontaot of relay #3. 

All of the vehiole’s aotuator motors are energized until the single look oirouit is opened by 
the gear driven slider. The aotuators stop at the single looked position. 


At this point, the external door handles are deooupled from the latoh meohanism prevent¬ 
ing entry from outside of the vehiole. 



ZKE IV 

GENERAL 

MODULE 


AS OF 1-94 PRODUCTION, 
THE DOUBLE LOCK 
"KEY POSITION" WAS 
ELIMINATED. LOCKING 
FROM THE VEHICLE 
EXTERIOR PROVIDES A 
DOUBLE LOCK REQUEST 


If the internal door handle, the look buttons or the oentral look button on the oenter eon- 
sole are operated, the door returns to unloek meehanieally and ean be opened. 


14 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 






DOUBLE LOCK - Electrical Activation 


Turning the key from any outside look oylinder oauses the external double look mioro-switoh 
to olose. The GM reoognizes this high signal as a double look request. 


The GM aotivates internal relay #2, providing oontinued motor operating power through the 
olosed oontaots of the internal double look oirouit. Ground is provided through the GM’s 
internal relay # 3. The aotuator motors are energized until the internal double look oirouit is 
switohed baok to the single look oirouit by the gear driven slider. 



ZKEIV 

GENERAL 

MODULE 


AS OF 1 -94 PRODUCTION, 
THE DOUBLE LOCK 
"KEY POSITION" WAS 
ELIMINATED. LOCKING 
FROM THE VEHICLE 
EXTERIOR PROVIDES A 
DOUBLE LOCK REQUEST 


Notes: 


15 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 









DOUBLE LOCK - Mechanically Decoupled 


When the slider switches the circuit back to single lock it also pushes the double lock lever 
to the left until it stops. In this position, the double look lever deoouples the look button from 
the latoh meohanism. The look button oan be pulled but will not unlook the door sinoe it is 
not ooupled to the meohanism. Spring pressure pulls the button baok down when released. 


At this point, unlook is only possible when a key is turned to the unlook position from an outside 
door look or if the GM reoeives the unlook signal from the EWS II oontrol module. 



ZKEIV 

GENERAL 

MODULE 


MECHANICALLY 
DECOUPLED 




AS OF 1-94 PRODUCTION 
THE DOUBLE LOCK 
"KEY POSITION" WAS 
ELIMINATED. LOCKING 
FROM THE VEHICLE 
EXTERIOR PROVIDES A 
DOUBLE LOCK REQUEST 


o 


Notes: 


16 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 







UNLOCK FROM DOUBLE LOCK 

When the GM receives the unlock request from a key location it activates internal relay #3 
providing operating power to the aotuator motor in the opposite direotion. 

The single and double look oirouits (internal relays 1 & 2) are not aotivated at all during the 
unlook funotion providing ground for the motor to bring the aotuator baok to the fully un- 
looked position. 





^ KL30 

RELAY #1 




• m loQQpOrj 

i spS 

O J fl] 

, R z 2r 

r “1 

M 

DOUBLE 
LOCK INPL 


ZKEIV 

GENERAL 

MODULE 


KL30 T ' ' 

A /!» / i 


i DOUBLE 
f-^LOCK 

' ^ 'swrrcH 



\ 


AS OF 1 -94 PRODUCTION, 
THE DOUBLE LOCK 
"KEY POSITION" WAS 
ELIMINATED. LOCKING 
FROM THE VEHICLE 
E>CrERIOR PROVIDES A 
DOUBLE LOCK REQUEST 




Notes: 


17 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 







Locking Protection 

Power protection for the door locking circuit is provided by a “time monitored” activation of 
the door lock actuators by the GM. The door lock actuators are provided power for the 
duration of time needed to run the actuator to the desired position. 

• The maximum on time for the actuators is 0.7 seconds. 



Crash Signalling 

The Supplemental Restraint System control module provides a switched signal to the GM 
in the event of an accident. This signal was previously provided by the Crash Alarm locat¬ 
ed in the left front kick panel on earlier models (<97 MY). 

The signal is an output function of the control module and becomes active when the impact 
threshold has been exceeded. The GM unlocks the vehicle, switches on the interior lights 
and signals the Crash Alarm Relay to flash the exterior lights when this signal is active. 


18 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 




















































Door Lock Heating (optional) 

Purpose of the System 

The Driver’s door look cylinder is surrounded by a heating coil to warm the lock cylinder if 
in case it is frozen due to moisture and below freezing temperatures. 

Principle of Operation 

The GM controls the lock heater by providing voltage through a final stage transistor. The 
heater is switched on by raising the driver’s door handle. Prerequisites for heater operation 
include: 

• Vehicle locked 

• Door handle raised for approximately 3 seconds 

Power is applied to the heater for a maximum of 32 seconds. A timed arrest of 16 minutes 
is activated after 3 heating attempts. The door lock heater is switched off immediately after 
unlocking the door. 

System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



19 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 










































Power Windows/Sunroof 


Purpose of the System 

The features of the power windows and sunroof system inolude: 

• One-fouoh operation in both direotions (up/ 
down) on the front windows, down only on 
the rear windows. 

• Anti-trap detention is on the front windows 
only (initialization required for one touoh oper¬ 
ation). 

• The oontrol of the rear windows is oarried out 
through a Relay Module (RM IV). 

• The switohes in the oenter oonsole oontrols 
all four windows and the rear window look 
out feature. 

Principle of Operation 

All window operation request signals are digital inputs to the GM. 

• Comfort Closing of the windows from the driver’s or passenger’s look oylinder when held 
in the looking position. 

• When the ignition key is in aooessory or “ON” press the switoh to open or olose the win¬ 
dows. Window operation is possible with the ignition switohed off until a front door is 
opened or 16 minutes (maximum) has elapsed. 

• Power proteotion against a jammed or seized motor is monitored by the hall sensors in 
the window motors. The GM will interrupt the power to a jammed motor. Rear windows 
utilize ourrent sensing for shut off. 

• The one-touoh funotion is aotivated by momentarily pressing the window switoh to the 
seoond detent. Window travel will oease when the full up or down position has been rea- 
ohed. One-touoh oan be oanoeled by pressing the window switoh a seoond time. Anti¬ 
trap is provided by the GM monitoring the door glass movement from the hall sensor. If 
the door glass enoounters resistanoe in the olosing direotion (>100Nm) the motor 

will stop and reverse direotion for 50 mm of travel. 



20 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 



Window Operation specific to the E36 Convertible: 

• Central Window Switch: Located in the center console, the switch will raise or lower all 
four windows at the same time. The window lowering has the one-touch feature. 


Convertible top operation: Prior to lowering 
the top, the top control module signals the 
CM to lower all four windows half way. 

- If the top switch is held after the top is fully 
lowered, the windows will close fully. 

- If the top switch is held after the top is fully 
closed the CM will close the windows. 

With the introduction of the fully automatic 
convertible top, the comfort close feature of 
the convertible was also added. 



Window Operation specific to the Coupe, Convertible and Z3 Coupe: 

The design of the E36 Coupe, Convertible and Z3 Coupe required changes in the window 
operation. 

• When opening the door, the door glass is automatically lowered by approximately 10mm. 
When the door latch opens (switch closes), the window will drop. It remains down until 
the door contact switch opens when the door is closed. The window will then raise back 
into the door seal. 

• When the door is closed, the glass is raised 
back into the seal. 

This allows the glass to drop out of the door 
seal when opening the door and provides a 
tighter seal when the door and glass are 
closed. 


• The window motor contains a Hall sensor for 
this feature that is monitored by the CM. 



21 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 




System Components 

Window Switches: The signals from the window switohes 
are monitored by the GM. 

The power window switohes have a seoond detent position 
for the purpose of signalling the one touoh feature. 


CLOSE OPEN 



Relay Module: The RM IV was added for rear window oper¬ 
ation in the 4 door and oonvertible models only. 

Similar to the front window relays in the GM, the Relay Module 
oontains the relays for the rear window motors on these vehi- 
oles. 

The RM IV is looated behind the glove box in the eleotrioal ear¬ 
ner next to the GM. 



System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



22 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 



















































































































Initialization of Window Circuits 


Initialization of the window oirouits is required for the one-touoh and anti-trap features to 
funotion. Closing the window and holding the switoh for an additional two seoonds will ini¬ 
tialize the system. However the window drive motor switohes off automatioally after the 
motor oeases rotation for approximately 0.3 seoonds. 


Sunroof 


Purpose of the System 


When the ignition key is in the aooessory or “on” 
position press the switoh to lift (1), olose the sun¬ 
roof (2) or open the sunroof (3). 

When lifting, the headliner retraots several inoh- 
es. The sunroof oan oontinue to operate after the 
ignition has been switohed off (up to 16 minutes) 
as long as one of the front doors has not been 
opened. 



E36 vehioles are equipped with the steel roof 
while the Z3 Coupe is equipped with the glass 
(moon) roof. Meohanioally, the sunroofs are sim¬ 
ilar in design. 




Principle of Operation 

The motor inoorporates a sunroof module (>96 MY) whioh reoeives inputs from the sunroof 

switoh (1) for operation. This sunroof system has the one touoh open funotion. 

The sunroof module is linked to the CM for two purposes: 

• The oomfort olosing feature when the key is held in the look 
position in one of the door look oylinders. 

• Unloader signal. This signal (30h) informs the sunroof motor 
module to stop running the sunroof motor when the CM 
reoeives a start signal (KL 50). 



23 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 




System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 



Notes: 


24 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 























































Interior Lighting 


Purpose of the System 

The GM controls the interior lighting automatioally with the 
status ohange of several monitored inputs. 

The lighting oan also be manually oontrolled using the interior 
light switoh (2). 

In addition to the various time oontrols, the interior lights are 
also subjeot to the 16 minute shut down of the GM (oon- 
sumer proteotion). 


Principle of Operation 

The interior light switoh is a rooker switoh that will aotivate the interior lights “On or Off” 
(left/right positions). When the light switoh is in the oenter position (automatio): 

• If the interior lights are switohed “ON” by the button with the ignition switohed ON, the 
interior lights will remain on until they are switohed off by the button. 

• If the interior lights are switohed “ON” when the ignition is switohed OFF, the lights will 
remain on for 16 minutes (oonsumer outout). 

• Looking the vehiole from the outside will immediately switoh off the interior lights. 

The ON/OFF oonditions for the interior lights in the automatio mode are as follows: 

ON Conditions 

• Door Open. 

• Switohing off ignition after exterior 
lights have been switohed off. 

• Grash Alarm/MRS input. 


25 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 


OFF Conditions 

• All doors olosed with ignition on. 

• All doors olosed with ignition off after 20 
seoonds. 

• 20 seoonds after switohing off ignition with 
lights off. 

• 8 seoonds after switohing the ignition off. 

• 16 minutes with door(s) open. 

• When doors are looked. 





System Components: Inputs - Processing - Outputs 




26 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 




































































































General Functions of ZKE IV 


Consumer Cut Off 


The Consumer Cut Off function interrupts battery voltage to circuits preventing inadvertent 
battery drain if one of the consumers were to remain activated. The CM will deactivate the 
interior lights after 16 minutes if one of the doors is left open. Convertibles also have the 
following lighting circuits controlled by this feature: 

• Glove Box Light 

• Trunk Light 


The circuit will switch back on when any monitored wake up trigger such as the door con¬ 
tacts or the lock/unlock signals become active. 

Overload Protection 

The Central Locking circuit of the GM is protected against overloads and short circuits by 
the electronic Overload Protection which is an integral part of the GM. 


• Power protection for the door locking circuit is provided by a “time monitored” activation 
of the door lock actuators by the GM. The door lock actuators are provided power for 
the duration of time needed to run the actuator to the desired position. The maximum on 
time for the actuators is 0.7 seconds. 





























































Review Questions 


1. List the functions directly controlled by the GM IV, 


2. How does the GM IV reoognize the key position from the drivers door?. 


3. What is the “Gomfort Glosing” feature? 


4. Desoribe the differenoes between “single” and “double” look regarding the look aotua- 
tors. _ 


5. What oirouits are oontrolled by Gonsumer Gut Off? 


6. What funotions will deaotivate the Interior Lighting? 


7. Desoribe Blooking Proteotion: 


8. What affeot does EWS have on the Gentral Looking System? 


28 

Central Body Electronics ZKE IV 



