Table of Contents 


DRIVER INFORMATION SYSTEMS 

Subject Page 

E36 Driver Information Systems.3 

Instrument Cluster.6 

Instrument Cluster Display Functions.8 

Cluster Display Changes.11 

Instrument Cluster Testing.12 

Check Control.21 

On-Board Computers/Clock Displays.24 

BC V Operation.25 

BC V Test Functions.28 

Multi Function Clock.29 

Multi-Function Clock Test Functions.30 

Digital Clock/ Outside Temperature Display.31 

Z3/318H Digital Clock/ On-Board Computer.32 

On-Board Computer Test Functions.33 

Instrument Cluster Module (IKE).35 

Instrument Cluster.37 

I.P.O’s.39 

Dynamic Digital Inputs.41 

Analog Input Signals.42 

Digital Input Signals.43 

Output Signals.44 

Redundant Data Storage.45 

BC Test Functions.46 

Check Control Module.51 

Check Control Module.52 

CC Display Procedures.54 

Electronic Oil Level Sensor.56 

Base Instrument Cluster (KOMBI).57 

Base Instrument Cluster.58 

Digital Dynamic Inputs.61 

Analog Input Signals.62 

Digital Input Signals.63 

Output Signals.64 

KOMBI I.PO.65 

Redundant Data Storage.66 

Base Version On-Board Computer.67 

Base BC/ instrument Cluster Test Functions.68 








































E36 DRIVER INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
Model: E36, E36/5, E36/7 
Production Date: From Production Start 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the different variations of E36 instrument clusters. 

• Know the procedure necessary to replace and code a replacement instrument cluster. 

• Understand how to perform an instrument cluster self test on a variety of different 
models. 

• Identify what items are monitored by the E36 Check Control System 

• Demonstrate how to perform a self test on the BC V or Z3 BC. 


3 

Driver information Systems 




Introduction 


The driver information systems found on the E36 and Z3 models consists of the following 
components/systems: 


INSTRUMENT CLUSTER 





i«*» nil© i 



CHECK CONTROL 

(EQUIPPED WITH THE 

ON-BOARD COMPUTER 

OR THE MULTI-FUNCTION CLOCK) 


ONE OF THREE 
INFORMATION 
DISPLAY SYSTEMS: 

• ON BOARD COMPUTER 

• MULTI-FUNCTION CLOCK 

• CLOCK W/ OUTSIDE 
TEMPERATURE DISPLAY 



Different systems are found on the E36s depending on the Model Year, standard/optional 
equipment and/or specific vehicle. 

There are two different instrument clusters used on the E36 and Z3 depending on the 
Model. Although they look the same and function generally the same there are differences 
between the models and over the model years. 

One cluster is connected to 
the diagnostic link for trou¬ 
bleshooting purposes and 
the other incorporates self 
contained test functions. 

The latest models have 
both features. 



4 

Driver information Systems 






















































The higher line models incorporate a check control warning system for various lamp failures 
and low fluid levels. The majority of system failure warnings are through the instrument clus¬ 
ter warning lamps positioned on the face of the cluster. 



The high line models also have the 
option of the full touring On-board 
Computer system. 

This system incorporates the display 
matrix for the check control system. 

The Multifunction Clock incorporates 
the Check Control system and a digital 
clock. 




Standard equipment is the digital clock 
which contains an outside temperature 
display. 


A limited function Board Computer is 
offered as an option for the E36ti and 
Z3 models. 




5 

Driver information Systems 








































































































Instrument Cluster 


Overview 

The instrument cluster in the 
E36/Z3 consists of the main circuit 
board with the microprocessor, 
driver electronics, LCD display 
block and the instrument mount 
with the analog gauges. 

There are several different varia¬ 
tions of the cluster depending on 
the model and year. 

The general breakdown of cluster 
variations is as follows: 

E36 4 door/Coupe/Convertible/M3: from 1992 to 1996 model year. 

• Cluster is on the diagnostic link. The cluster communicates with the DIS for diagno¬ 
sis and coding functions. This variation uses the central coding key (ZCS) for model 
specific coding. This cluster also stores the ZCS for replacement control modules in 
need of coding. 

E36/5 (318ti): from 1995 to 1998 model year, E36/7 (Z3): from 1996 to 1998 model year 

• Cluster is not on the diagnostic link. This variation uses a separate coding plug for 
model specific coding, mileage and service interval information transfer into a replace¬ 
ment component. 

E36 4 door/coupe/Convertible/M3: from 1997 model year to production end. 

• Cluster is on the diagnostic link. The cluster communicates with the DIS for diag¬ 
nosis and coding functions. This variation also utilizes the separate coding plug for 
mileage and service interval information transfer to the replacement component. 

E36/5: Model year 1999, E36/7: from 1999 model year to production end. 

• Cluster is on the diagnostic link. The cluster communicates with the DIS for 
diagnosis and coding functions. This variation uses a separate coding plug for mileage 
and SIA data transfer to the replacement component. This cluster is also connected to 
the CAN bus. 



6 

Driver information Systems 



Though the instrument cluster assembly is the sum of many parts, it is only available as a 
complete replacement unit with only the indicator lamps and backlighting bulbs being ser¬ 
viceable. The rear of the cluster has pictograms of the indicator symbols for easy identifi¬ 
cation as shown in example below. 



Replacement instrument clusters that are connected to the diagnostic link require coding 
with the DIS tester or MoDiC using the central coding key (ZCS). 



The software and hardware of the cluster are being continuously updated and revised. This 
requires careful attention to the latest Service Information Bulletins for the latest information 
and data on cluster compatibility from one version to the next. 

7 

Driver information Systems 












































































Instrument Cluster Display Functions 

All the gauges on the cluster are electronically driven analog needle displays. The inputs to 
the cluster are processed by the main circuit board as follows: 

Road Speed - The signal from the rear axle reed contact is processed by the cluster for 
display. The processed signal is also transmitted as an output of the cluster as “Speed 
Signal A” to other control modules that require road speed as an input. 



8 

Driver information Systems 


When the fuel reserve threshold is 
reached, the low fuel warning LED is 
illuminated. 



























Engine Speed - The “TD” signal is a processed output of the engine control module that 
the cluster uses for the tachometer display. This signal is provided by the CAN bus from 
1999 for the Z3. 



Economy Display - The cluster uses the “Ti” 
and road speed input signals to determine the 
instantaneous fuel consumption for display 
on the gauge. 

This gauge is not equipped on 318ti and 
roadster instrument clusters. 


Coolant Temperature Gauge - The input signal 
from the engine coolant temperature sensor is 
processed for display on the temp gauge. 

The overheat warning LED is illuminated if the coolant 
temperature exceeds approximately 125°C (240°F). 


9 

Driver information Systems 






















Total Mileage/Trip Odometer - The signal 
from the rear axle reed contact is also 
processed for accumulated mileage display. 

The processed signal is displayed in the LCD 
block below the speedometer. Depending on 
model and year, the total mileage reading is 
stored electronically as follows: 

• 1992-1996 E36 4 door/coupe/convertible/M3 in an EEPROM on the main circuit board. 

• 1995-1999 318ti in an EEPROM on the main circuit board and in the instrument cluster 
coding plug. 

• 1996-2002 Z3 in an EEPROM on the main circuit board and in the instrument cluster 
coding plug 

• 1997-1998 E36 4 door/coupe/convertible/M3 in an EEPROM on the main circuit board 
and in the instrument cluster coding plug. 

Service Interval Indicator - SI information is 
also displayed in the LCD block with the 
mileage - when the ignition is switched on. All 
models use SI II processing for “Oil 
Service”and “lnspection”intervals. 


OIL SERVICE 


I 




INSPECTION 



Indicator and Warning Lamps - The various lamps are positioned at the top center and 
along the bottom of the cluster display. They are controlled internally by the cluster or exter¬ 
nally by other sensors and modules where required by legislation. 







10 

Driver information Systems 
































































Cluster Display Changes 

Minor changes have occurred to the face of the cluster as follows: 

• 1995 model 
year: 

The maxi¬ 
mum 

mileage dis¬ 
play for the 
speedome¬ 
ter was 
changed 
from 

160MPH to 
155 MPH 

• 1997 model year: The temperature gauge 
display was changed - the middle bar on the 
face of the gauge was deleted. 




11 

Driver information Systems 







Instrument Cluster Testing 

1992 - 1996 E36 - 4 door/Coupe/Convertible/M3 

The instrument cluster is connected to the diagnostic link. The majority of the diagnosis and 
troubleshooting will be carried out using the DIS tester and diagnostic procedures. 

There is a self test that can be carried out on the cluster by pressing the trip odometer reset 
button and switching the ignition to KL R. All gauges move from the zero position to the 
maximum display and back again. The warning lamps are illuminated as a bulb check. 

In addition, vehicle specific data is displayed in the LCD matrix as follows: 



DATA DISPLUMED HERE 

9 


1. PUSH AND 
HOLD 




2. SWITCH IGNIITON TO KL R 


8 / 74 / PART NUflBER (6 digits) 
CODE NUABER (5 digits) 

HNUABER{4 digits) 


CHASSIS NUABER (5 digits) 
SOFTUARE VERSION (3 digits) 
REVISION II1DEX (2 digits) 


The self test is canceled by switching the ignition off or to KL 15. 


12 

Driver information Systems 






































1995 - 1998 E36/5 (318 ti) 

1996 - 1998 E36/7 (Z3 roadster) 

1997- 1998 E36 4 door/Coupe/Convertible/M3 

The 318ti and Z3 clusters prior to 9/98 are not connected to the diagnostic link for trou¬ 
bleshooting. However they do incorporate several built in test values that can be accessed 
through the LCD matrix display. 

Starting with the 1997 model year production, the balance of the E36 line also has these 
test functions in addition to the diagnostic link for troubleshooting purposes, there are 15 
different test functions that can be used to check various outputs of the cluster and the sta¬ 
tus of various input signals. 

• Test functions 1-4 are unlocked tests and can be called up at any time for display. 

• Test functions 5 -14 are locked and require unlocking the test mode before they can be 
displayed. 

• Test functions 2-14 can be selected at any time when the cluster is unlocked, even when 
the vehicle is moving. 

• Test function 15 is the lock/unlock function. 

TEST FUNCTION SUMMARY 
TEST NO. 15 

LOCK/UNLOCK - Press and hold the 
mileage reset button while switching “ON” 

KL R. “tESt” appears in the digital display. 

Pressing the reset button will scroll 
through the test functions until “tESt 15 L 
ON” is displayed. 

Pressing and holding the reset button for three seconds will cause the display to cycle back 
and forth between ON/OFF. With “tESt L OFF” displayed any test function can now be 
accessed. 

TEST NO. 01: 

INSTRUMENT CLUSTER SELF TEST - All of the gauges are activated and the warming 
lamps are illuminated as an output test as described on the previous page. At the end of 
the test, the cluster exits the test mode. 

13 

Driver information Systems 


~ht h + 

15 

l or, 

OIL SERVICE 

3 

INSPECTION 







TEST NO. 02 


ENGINE DATA - This display is an “engine factor” value that is stored in the coding plug. 
The instrument cluster processor uses this factor in addition to the “TD” signal from the 
DME control module to process and display tachometer RPM based on the engine 
installed. For example: 

• ENGINE FACTOR 2 = 4 CYLINDER 

• ENGINE FACTOR 3 = 6 CYLINDER 

• ENGINE FACTOR 4 = 8 CYLINDER 

TEST NO. 03 

SI ELAPSED DISTANCE - The total mileage in kilometers since the last reset. Which ser¬ 
vice is due at the next inspection (OIL SERVICE or INSPECTION). 

TEST NO. 04 

SI ELAPSED DAYS - No value for U S vehicles. Relates to Euro annual inspections. 

TEST NO. 05 

SI EVALUATION FACTORS - For engine speed and temperature thresholds being passed. 

Display: n = 0 or 1. engine speed 

t = 0 or 1. engine temperature 


TEST NO. 06 


FUEL LEVEL AND COOLANT TEMPERATURE - Display of hexadecimal codes in relation to 
gauge position. 


FUEL GAUGE 


• A (empty) 


• End of reserve 


• L) 


• u 

“H” 




• t (tull) 



ENGINE TEMP GAUGE 

• “A”-► 

• “B”-► 

• “C"- 

• “D” (center)- 

• “E”->- 


HEX VALUE 

Od 

37 

54 

90 

c4 

to 

HEX VALUE 

ce 

6d 

5c 

4f-23 

1e 



TEST NUMBER 


14 

Driver information Systems 



TEST NO. 07 


ENGINE SPEED - Display of current engine speed. 

TEST NO. 08 

ROAD SPEED - Display of current road speed in km/h. 

TEST NO. 09 

DISTANCE READING Test - 09 allows the total stored mileage to be updated if one of the 
storage components has to be replaced. This test step will be used if the manipulation dot 
is illuminated in the cluster display. The display will show the component with the lower 
mileage for example: 

Display of: 01065H I indicates that the mileage in the internal EEPROM is lower than the 
mileage stored in the coding plug. 

Display of: 000305 E indicates that the mileage in the external coding plug is lower than the 
total mileage stored in the internal EEPROM. 

Pressing the reset button for 4 seconds will over write the lower mileage with the higher 
mileage and cancel the manipulation dot. The SI data will also be transferred at the same 
time. 

TEST NO. 10 

STATUS BITS (INPUT SIGNALS) - The status of digital inputs to the cluster are displayed 
as 0 or 7. 

Display: 0 = input low 
7 = input high 

(mileage display) 

- EGS transmission failure 

- SI reset = 0, for reset = 0 

- Clock button pressed 

Door contact, door open = 0 
Ignition lock contact, key inserted = 0 
Belt contact, seat belt fastened = 0 


15 

Driver information Systems 



TEST NO. 11 

STATUS BITS (OUTPUT SIGNALS) - The status of digital outputs is displayed. 

Display: 0 = output inactive 
7 = output active 

(mileage display) 

-LCD manipulation dot 

-Seatbelt lamp 

-EGS lamp 

-Low fuel warning lamp 

-Brake warning lamp 

_Gong output 

TEST NO. 12- NOT USED 


TEST - 13 

COUNTRY CODE OF CLUSTER - The display indicates the country version of the cluster. 
This cannot be changed in the workshop. 

Display: USR OS 


TEST NO. 14 

SOFTWARE RESET - The reset must be carried out if any faults are present that are not 
plausible before any components are replaced. After the reset, the system will exit the TEST 
mode and the lock will be reactivated. 


16 

Driver information Systems 




1999 E36/5 (318 ti) 

1999 - 2002 E36/7 (Z3 coupe and roadster) 


For model year 1999 the 318ti and the Z3 received an updated instrument cluster. In addi¬ 
tion to the fault memory and diagnostic link the instrument cluster also contains 21 test 
functions similar to the base cluster of the E39/E53. 

• Test functions 1 & 2 are always unlocked. 

• Tests 3 through 21 are only accessible after unlocking the test function. Test 19 is the 

unlock function. 

Test Function Summary 

TEST 01. - Vehicle specific data including: 


SubTests: 


12345 

1.0= VIN 


4663 

1.1 = K-value 


414061 

5_1.2 = Part number of cluster 


029000 

1.3= Coding/Diagnosis/Bus index 


_2197 

1.4= Manufacturing date (calendar week/year) 


01_700 

1.5= Hardware/software # of cluster (HW:01, 

SW:7.00) 

FFF_04 

2_1.6 = Injection status, number of cylinders, 

engine factor 

_02_00 

_1.7 = Can Index 



TEST 02. Cluster System Test - activates the gauge drivers, indicators and LEDs to con 
firm function. 

TEST 03. SIA data 

Sub Tests: 

1500 3.0 = Z3-Consumption in liters since last SI reset. 

318ti-Distance in miles since last reset. 

0 3.1 = Periodic inspection days (not applicable for US). 


17 

Driver information Systems 



TEST 04. - Momentary Consumption 

Sub Tests: 

0267 4.0= 26.7 liters/1000km 

0073 4.1 = 7.3 liters per hour 

TEST 05. - Not used 


TEST 06. - Fuel level sensor inputs in liters 

Sub Tests: 

237415 6.0= Fuel level averaged • LH sensor input = 23.7 liters 

• RH sensor Input = 41.5 liters 

0652 6.1= Total tank level averaged = 65.2 liters 

0667 1_6.2 = Indicated value and tank phase • 1 = both sensors OK 

• 2 = one sensor fault 

• 3 = implausible input 

Note: Z3 only shows one sensor reading. 


TEST 07. - Temperature and Speed 


Sub Tests: 

032 7.0= Coolant temp input 32°C 

7.1= Not used 

5283 7.2= Engine speed 5,283 RPM 

058 7.3= Vehicle speed 58km/H 

TEST 08. - Input values in HEX form 


Sub Tests: 

XXX 8.0 - 8.3 = Hex code, Instrument cluster inputs 
TEST 09. - Battery voltage 

Sub Test: 

125 9.0= KL30 12.5 volts 


18 

Driver information Systems 



TEST 10. - Country Coding 

Sub Test: 

02 10.0 = USA 

TEST 11. - Cluster code 

Sub Test: 

FFFF08 11.0 = Cluster code 
TEST 12. - Not used 
TEST 13. - GONG test 

Sub Test: 

9on9 13.0 = Activate gong by pressing button (gong response is delayed). 

TEST 14. - Fault memory Hex code (not for diagnosis) 

TEST 15. - Not Used 

TEST 16. - Transfer of total stored mileage data 

This step is used if the total mileage is to be transferred between the coding 
plug and the internal EEPROM of the cluster. This step extinguish the red 
manipulation dot after components have been replaced and restore normal 
data exchange between the two components. 

Sub Test: 

123459 l_16.0 = Memory location with lower stored mileage 

1= internal EEPROM, E= external coding plug 

COPY _16.1 = Copy from higher to lower memory location. 

Note: 2 miles must accumulate on cluster before disconnecting battery, otherwise step 16 will have to 
be repeated to extinguish the manipulation dot. 

TEST 17. - Time of day 

Test 18. - Not Used 


19 

Driver information Systems 



TEST 19. - LOCK/UNLOCK 

Sub-Tests 

L-ON... 

L-OFF 19.0 = 


Display changes from “L-ON” to “L-OFF” every second. To unlock test functions, press 
the cluster button immediately when it changes to “L-OFF”. 

Tests are automatically locked when exiting test functions. 

TEST 20. - Average fuel consumption - correction factor 

The factor follows previous systems, with adjustment range of 750 to 1250. The adjust¬ 
ment method is new for the base cluster. If adjustment is necessary, enter into test 20 using 
the cluster button. 


The correction factor number is changed by using the sub-tests for the “ones, tenths and 
hundreds of the factor number. The digits will automatically scroll through 0-9 within each 
group (ones, tenths, hundreds). 


Sub-Tests: 



20.0 

= Press the 

XXX9 

20.1 

= Press the 

XX5X 

20.2 

= Press the 

12XX 

20.3 

= Press the 


button to reset display to 1000 
button when the correct “ones” position is attained, 
button when the correct “tenths” position is attained, 
button when the correct “hundreds” position is attained. 


TEST 21. - Software reset 


Sub-Test: 

reset 21.0 = Reset software 


20 

Driver information Systems 



Check Control 


1992 - 1998 E36 4 door/Coupe/Convertible/M3 


The Check Control is an active warning system that displays various lighting circuit failures 
and low fluid level warnings. It is only available on the listed models if they are equipped 
with the Multi-Function Clock or On-board Computer. Failure warnings are displayed in the 
matrix of the LCD panel on these units. 

The complete system consists of the following components: 

• Check Control Module - located below the left side of the instrument panel. The mod¬ 
ule processes the inputs from the monitored components. 

• Check Control display - located in the matrix of the BC or Multi-function clock. 

• Check waring lamp - located in the instrument cluster. 


• Monitored lamps and fluid reservoirs. 



21 

Driver information Systems 



























































The following circuits are monitored by the check control system: 


• Windshield washer fluid 

• Low beam headlights 

• Brake light circuit - including brake light switch 


• Coolant level 

• Tail lights 

• License plate lights 


The lighting circuits are warm monitored only - a fault will only be detected when the circuit 
is on. If a fault occurs in one of the monitored circuits, the check control will post the warn¬ 
ing in the 20 digit matrix display and the check warning lamp will illuminate in the cluster 
depending on the priority of the failure. 



22 

Driver information Systems 








































































































CHECK CONTROL MESSAGE PRIORITIES 


There are three priority fault displays in the check control system 

PRIORITY 1: The brake light circuit is the only priority 1 fault display. 

A failure of the brake light 
circuit (with the exception 
of one bulb) will be posted 
in the matrix display when 
stepping one the brake 
pedal. 

The warning triangles in the display will flash and the check warning lamp in the cluster will 
also flash for 20 seconds, then remain on steady, pressing the check button on the matrix 
panel will cancel the display for 5 seconds and then it will reappear in the display. 

PRIORITY 2: These failures will appear in the display as soon as they occur. The warning 
triangles will illuminate steady and the check lamp in the cluster will also illuminate. 

Priority 2 failures are only posted for 20 seconds and then are canceled. The warning tri¬ 
angles remain illuminated and the failure message can be recalled by pressing the check 
button. 

The following circuits are priority 2 displays: 

• One brake light bulb 

• Low beam headlights 

• Tail lights 

• License plate lights 

• Washer fluid 

PRIORITY 3: Low Coolant Level is the only priority three display. This condition will not be 
displayed while driving. 

A low coolant level condi¬ 
tion is held in memory and 
posted when the ignition 
is switched off. 

The warning is also posted for 20 seconds when the ignition is switched on, however the 
condition is held in memory until the problem is corrected. The low coolant level display 
can also be recalled at any time by pressing the check control button. 





23 

Driver information Systems 









On-Board Computers / Clock Displays 

There are several variations of the On-Board Computer/ digital clock display systems found 
on the E36 and Z3 roadster depending on model and year of production. 

1992 - 1998 E36 - 325/328/M3 - ON-BOARD COMPUTER V (BC V) 

The optionally equipped On-Board Computer V is the highest level display system available 
for the E36. 



In addition to serving as the check control display block, the BC V offers the following func¬ 
tions: 


• Clock/Date with Memo warning (separate display block) 

• Fuel Consumption calculation (CONSUM) 

• Outside Temperature display (TEMP) 

• Average miles per hour calculation (SPEED) 

• Distance and arrival time to destination (DIST) 

• Estimate driving range on remaining fuel (RANGE) 

• Anti-theft code function (CODE) 

• Maximum speed limit warning (LIMIT) 

• Stop watch function (TIMER) 


24 

Driver information Systems 

















































































































BC V Operation 


Fuel consumption - Two average fuel consumption values can be monitored. Pressing the 
l»«l button once will display the first value and pressing it a second time will call up the 
second value. The BC calculates the average fuel consumption based on the “ti”and road 
speed (signal A) inputs. 

Pressing bid clears the displayed value allowing the BC to start a new calculation. 

Outside temperature - Pressing the bud button will display the current outside tempera¬ 
ture. The temperature sensor is located in the front air dam. The sensor’s input is damp¬ 
ened when the vehicle is stopped so that engine heat will not influence the temperature dis¬ 
play. 

The BC includes an ice warning that will sound the gong and display the outside tempera¬ 
ture when it drops below 37°F. The temperature reading will flash anytime it is displayed 
when the temperature is below this value. 

Average miles per hour - Pressing the dual button will display the average miles per hour. 
The BC calculates this value based on the road speed signal input and the time. Pressing 
the bid button will start a new calculation. 

Distance/Arrival time - The feature allows you to program a distance to a destination with 
the input keys. Press the bid button, an area for the total distance in miles to be entered 
will display. Using the numerical buttons, enter the mileage. Press the bill button and the 
BC will calculate the estimated arrival time based on mileage remaining, average miles per 
hour the vehicle is traveling and existing clock time. 

Driving range on fuel in tank - The estimated driving range on the remaining fuel in the 
tank is calculated by the BC from the “ti”signal and current road speed input signal. A 
“+”sign along with the mileage indicates a full tank. 

Maximum miles per hour - A speed limit warning can be programmed into the BC with 
the input number keys. Once set, the warning gong will sound and the set speed will flash 
in the display block of the BC. 

The current driving speed can be set as the warning by selecting bull and pressing the 
bad button while driving. 

Timer Function - The timer operates as a stop watch. Pressing the bid button with the 
function called up on the display will start/stop the watch. Pressing the bill button with 
the watch running will give a lap time. Pressing the lull button with the watch stopped will 
reset the timer to zero. 


25 

Driver information Systems 












Code Function - A four digit anti-theft code can be entered into the BC after pressing the 
button when the ignition is switched to KL R. After entering the code and pressing 
li-aMal, the code function is accepted. Switching KL R off arms the function. 


The code function is d isarmed by entering the code when the ignition is switched on and 
then pressing the kraml button. 


When active the code function disables the engine management system. 


POWER & 
GROUND 



ANTI THEFT DEVICE INTERFACE, 
MODEL YEAR SPECIFIC. 

ALWAYS REFERENCE CORRECT ETM. 


26 

Driver information Systems 
















































































































Steering Column Stalk Switch 

The BC display functions can be called up using the turn signal lever. Pressing the lever in 
will cause the BC functions to be displayed in the matrix. The functions are displayed in a 
rolling manner each time the lever is pressed. 

The remote operation can be programmed to display the number and sequence of BC 
functions as follows 

• Press and hold the turn signal lever - PI is displayed 

• Press the desired functions and sequence of displays 

• Press “SET/RES”to activate the program 

To return the BC to its original display functions, press and hold the lever until “P1”is dis¬ 
played - then press the “SET/RES. 


2. DISPLAY — 

STALK SWITCH SHOWS 



’ *• j... 


1. PRESS AND HOLD ^ 


i 

i -1 

wmmu 


1000 

100 






10 


J 

L - 




[ 







| 

CONSUM 

TEMP 

SPEED 

DIST 

CHECK 


CLOCK 

DATE | 

i o1 o| c 

■1 




■■■■ 


km/mls 


MEMO-H 

SET/RES 


3. SELECT SPECIFIC BOARD COMPUTER FUNCTIONS. 
PRESS SET/RESET. WHEN PRESSING STALK SWITCH, 
ONLY THE SELECTED FUNCTIONS WILL DISPLAY. 


t 


27 

Driver information Systems 






















BC V Test Functions 


The BC contains test data values that can be accessed for troubleshooting purposes. The 
following is a list of the test functions and numbers that are stored in the BC: 

1. Display test - test all of the LCD segments in the display matrix 

2. Momentary consumption (L/IOOKm) - based on the current “ti”signal and road speed 

3. Momentary consumption (L/h) - based on current “ti”signal only 

4. Range consumption - 

5. Momentary range (Km) - range left on fuel in tank when reserve light is on 

6 . Not used 

7. Fuel level from the instrument cluster - average value 

8. Momentary speed (Km) - current speed averaged over 2 seconds 

9. Operating voltage - available to BC from KL R 

10. Language for display - 

11. Units readout - for display of mileage/gallons - etc. 

12. Average speed for arrival time function 

13. Momentary arrival computed 

14. ROM - date 

15. Readout of fault memory - vendor use only 

16. I/O port status - vendor use only 

17. Encoding of vehicle specific data - vendor use only 

18. Alarm mode - for BC code function - pulse or continuous tone 

19. Lock/Unlock function 

20. Fuel consumption correction factor 

21. Software reset function 

The test functions are accessed by pressing the “1000” and “10” buttons simultaneously. 
Test functions #1, #10, #14, #19 and #21 are unlocked and can be called up by entering 
the number and pressing SET/RES. 

The other test functions are locked out and test #19 must be used to release the test func¬ 
tions for display. The unlock procedure is as follows: 

• Call up test #19 - “ LOCK ON” is displayed in the matrix display. 

• Use the number input buttons to enter the sum of the day and month displayed on the 
clock. 

• Press SET/RES and the computer is now unlocked for display of all test functions 

To relock the test functions when through with the testing, call up test #19 and press 
SET/RES twice. 

28 

Driver information Systems 



Multi-Function Clock 

1992 - 1998 E36 - 325/323/328/M3 

The Multi-Function Clock is standard equipment on the listed models. It is similar in appear¬ 
ance to the BC V, however its functions are limited to: 

• Digital clock and date display 

• Outside temperature display with freeze warning 

• Display of check control warning messages 



The time and date are set the same as the BC V and the temperature and warning also 
function the same as the BC. There is a change over button on the panel for switching the 
temperature display between °F and °C. 

The check control functions are identical to those of the BC V. 


29 

Driver information Systems 























Multi-Function Clock - Test Functions 

Several internal test functions can be called up and displayed on the matrix of the multi¬ 
function clock. The test functions are not locked and can be accessed at any time. 

To call up the test functions the “1000” and “10” input buttons must be pressed simulta¬ 
neously. the desired test number is then entered followed by the SET/RES button. The fol¬ 
lowing is a listing of the test functions available with the Multi-function clock: 

0 Display test - same function as the BC 

1. Language change - Six languages are stored in the clock for the check control display 
test including: English UK, French, Italian, Spanish, English US and German. The lan¬ 
guages are selected by scrolling with the “1 "button, followed by the SET/RES to select 
the desired language. 

2. Time Mode - the clock display can be switched from a 12 hour to a 24 hour mode with 
this test function. Scroll with the “1” button followed by SET/RES to select. 

3. Date mode - the date can be switched from a month/day to a day/month display with 
this test function. Scroll with the “1 ” button followed by the SET/RES button. 

4. Temperature Mode - the display of the temperature can be switched from F to C with 
the test function. Scroll with the “1 ” button followed by the SET/RES. 

5. Compensation factor - information only 

6. Display status (HEX) information only 

41.Road speed display (Km) 

53.Display of “K”number - correction factor for speedometer 

The test function will cancel after several seconds or it can be canceled by pressing the 
clock button 


30 

Driver information Systems 



Digital Clock / Outside Temperature Display 

1992 - 1998 E36 - 318i - 4 door and coupe models 

The digital clock with outside temperature display is standard equipment on the 318 mod¬ 
els. The basic difference is that the check control has been deleted from these models. 

The temperature display still includes an ice warning when the temperature drops below 
37° F and the display can be changed from F° to C°. 



TEST FUNCTIONS 


The digital clock has an audible test function for activation of the gong. This test function 
was ommited from later production (approximately 9-96 production). 

To activate the gong output stage press the “°C/°F” and “MEMO” buttons simultaneously. 


31 

Driver information Systems 










































Z3/318ti Digital Clock / On-Board Computer 

1995- 1999 318ti 
1996 - 2002 Z3 


DIGITAL CLOCK 


The digital clock is standard equipment on the ti and Z3 mod¬ 
els. The time can be displayed in either the 12 or 24 hour 
modes, the modes is selected by pressing the “H”and “M”but- 
tons simultaneously. 

To set the clock - press the “H”button until the correct hour is 
displayed. The minutes are set by pressing and holding the 
“M”button until the correct minute is displayed. 



ON-BOARD COMPUTER 


The Z3 and 318ti offer an On-Board Computer with limited functions as optional equip¬ 
ment. The digital clock function of the BC is as follows: 






The time can be displayed for up to 8 seconds with the key 
switched off. When the key is switched on, the clock is 
always displayed unless a BC function is called up. 

The time is set using the clock and S/R buttons. Pressing 
and holding the clock button will put the clock into the time 
setting mode (the colon will flash). Set the hour first by 
pressing the clock button until the correct hour is dis¬ 
played, press S/R, then set the minutes in the same fash¬ 
ion. Finally, press S/R to activate the clock with the new 
time. 



32 

Driver information Systems 



















































On-Board Computer Functions 


• The BC is coded on the assembly line for the specific country version. 

• It can be changed in the dealership using the DIS tester or MoDiC. 

• All vehicle specific data for the BC’s operation is stored in the NVRAM of the BC. 


• The BC functions are called up by pressing the turn signal lever. 


In addition to the clock it offers the following functions: 


OUTSIDE TEMPERATURE - the temperature display is 
dampened, as with other displays to prevent underhood tem¬ 
peratures from influencing the sensor when the vehicle is 
stopped. 

The warning gong will sound when the outside temperature 
drops below 37°F as with other BC displays. 

AVERAGE FUEL CONSUMPTION - the average fuel con 
sumption is displayed in MPG. As with other BCs it is calcu¬ 
lated from the “ti”and road speed signals. 

Pressing S/R with the MPG displayed, will start a new calcula¬ 
tion. 



RANGE - the estimated distance on the remaining fuel is displayed. The range value is 
determined from the “ti”and road speed signals as with other BCs. 

AVERAGE ROAD SPEED - The average road speed corresponds to other BCs, pressing 
the S/R button will start a new calculation. 


33 

Driver information Systems 







On-Board Computer Test Functions 

There are four test functions available for the Z3/318ti board computer. Press and hold the 
clock and S/R buttons simultaneously to enter the test functions. Scroll through the test 
steps by pressing the stalk switch. 



TEST 1. - 12/24 hour clock mode. Press the clock button to switch between 12/24 hour 
display. 

TEST 2. - Display test. Pressing the S/R button will illuminate all of the LCD segments of 
the display, the BC will then return to the test mode. 

TEST 3. - Correction factor for the MPG display. The correction factor corresponds to 
other BC factors. The value can be corrected from 750 to 1250 by scrolling with 
the clock button. When the new value is reached it is stored by pressing the S/R 
button. 

TEST 4. - Acoustic test. Pressing the S/R button will test the temperature warning gong. 


34 

Driver information Systems 










INSTRUMENT CLUSTER MODULE (IKE) 

Model: E38, E39, E53 

Production Date: All from start of production. 


Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Know how various input data arrives at the IKE. 

• Recognize the various changes made to the IKE. 

• Understand the IKE’s role as a Gateway Module. 

• Describe how redundant data is stored. 

• Know how to properly code the IKE after replacement. 


35 

Driver Information Systems 




Introduction 


The instrument cluster is the main Driver Information display unit. The instrument cluster is 
made up of the IKE and a display unit. This type of cluster is known as a “High version”. 

As introduced, the IKE control module 
was mounted on the back of the 
instrument cluster and was connected to 
the cluster with a 46 pin ribbon connector. 

The two additional connectors contained 
the D, I and K Busses and the input and 
output leads to the IKE. 

Since 9/97 the external IKE control 
module was integrated into the display 
unit creating an integrated component. The CAN bus was also linked to the instrument 
cluster starting model year 98. 

The IKE contains all of the processing electronics for the Instrument Cluster and On-Board 
Computer. 

The Instrument Cluster is merely a display unit and performs no processing. On Board 
Computer data can be displayed in the MID/BMBT or the matrix display in the cluster. 

Signals that are intended for a component that is on the l/K-BUS must be passed on by 
the IKE. Also, diagnostic data must be passed through the IKE to the “I” and “K” busses 
as communication between DIS and control modules takes place. 

The IKE incorporates an EEPROM for storing the Central Coding Key (ZCS). 


46 PIN RIBBON 



36 

Driver Information Systems 



Instrument Cluster 

The instrument cluster incorporates the five familiar analog gauges along with 
indicator/warning lights and Liquid Crystal Displays. 



1 ? 3H 5& ’13.0'F 

► 30 DIGIT RERDOUT 


PRI1DH35 


All the indicator/warning lights are LEDs and are not replaceable. Critical warning indicators 
use two LEDs for safety. There are five conventional bulbs for the back lighting of the LCD 
which can be replaced if necessary. 

The LCD provides: 


• 6 digit total mileage 

• 4 digit trip mileage 

• Manipulation DOT 

• Outside temperature display 


• 20 digit read-out with reminder arrows 

• Service Interval Indicator 

• Automatic transmission selector position 

• Automatic transmission driving program 


(□□□□□- 1 ] 


OIL SERVICE 


INSPECTION 




When KLR is switched on, mileage and temperature are displayed. All displays are 
illuminated from KL15. 


The back lighting intensity of the LCD’s is dependent on available light and is controlled by 
a photo-transistor in the lower left corner of the cluster. When the parking lights are 
switched on, the dash mounted dimmer wheel controls the intensity of the back lighting. 


37 

Driver Information Systems 






























Service Interval Indicator (SIA) 

The Service Interval Indicator of the E38 up to 
M.Y. 96’ operates using SIA II. SIA III is used 
after M.Y. 96’ to present vehicles. 

The reset of Service Indicator is carried out with 
the reset tool, DIS, or cluster reset mode (reset 
mode after 9/00 only). 


□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

1 


OIL SERVICE 


INSPECTION 


Total Mileage/Trip Mileage 

Mileage can be displayed with the key off for 25 seconds if the trip meter button is pressed. 
Total mileage is stored in non-volatile memories of the IKE and LCM to protect against loss. 

Automatic Transmission Selector Position/Driving Program 

As introduced, the selector lever position and driving program were signaled to the IKE from 
the AGS control module over a single wire circuit. These signals are passed along by the 
CAN after the CAN bus was connected to the integrated IKE. 


► 

Dedicated wire 
up to 9/97. 

CAN bus signal 
after 9/97. 



AGS 


Analog Instruments 

Analog instruments are controlled by the IKE from signals it receives over separate inputs 
or the CAN bus. 


38 

Driver Information Systems 



















KLR 




KL15 
KL 50 


FUEL LEVEL SENSOR 1 



AIR 


ENGINE COOLANT 
TEMP 

r*- 

’ ENGINE OIL TEMP 
S.l. RESET 

"N._ 

AMBIENT AIR TEMP 
INSTRUMENT PANEL BUTTON 




CHECK CONTROL 


LlA 

1 BUTTON 

1 


PHOTO TRANSISTOR VARIED DC SIG. 


BC STALK CONTROL 



1 _ ID _1 

■ 

Li 

U1RJU 



ONE WAY DATA SIG. 

f ^i 5? BRAKE PAD 
WEAR 
SENSORS 



njTjrn^ 


LEFT REAR 
WHEEL SPEED 
SENSOR 


ABS 




ABS 

ASC 



ZAE 


CHECK ENGINE (DME) 


CHARGING (FROM ALTERNATOR) 


ENGINE OIL PRESSURE 


GR II (Cruise Control) ON 


PARKING BRAKE ON 


BRAKE FLUID LEVEL 


46 PIN 

RIBBON 

CONNECTOR 


S2 - SEPARATE 
CONNECTOR FOR 
INDICATOR 
CONTROL 




(AE) Instrument Cluster 

- Gauge Drivers 

- LED Drivers 

- LCD Drivers 


As introduced 


39 

Driver Information Systems 







Integrated IKE as of 9/97. 


40 

Driver Information Systems 











































































































































Dynamic Digital Inputs 

Distance signal - This information is supplied to the IKE by the ASC/DSC control module 
with a square-wave signal. Pulses from the left-rear wheel speed hall sensor are used to 
produce signal. The IKE processes this for the cluster display and provides a speed signal 
output on the I / K busses. 

Engine speed signal - The TD signal is produced by the DME and sent to the IKE. This 
is a CAN bus signal on vehicles produced after 9/97. Engine speed is re-transmitted over 
the l/K buses by the IKE. Note: The wiring continues to exist as in the earlier systems but the 
cluster is coded to only accept the information from the CAN. 

Injection Signal - The DME supplies the signal to the IKE for fuel consumption evaluation. 
This signal is also transmitted via the CAN on later vehicles. 



IKE 


Dimmer signal - This is a pulse-width modulated signal from terminal 58, of the Lamp 
Control Module. It is used to control back lighting of instruments and the LCD and is also 
transmitted through the l/K buses. 

Transmission Interface - This single-wire is a serial one-way interface that provides the 
IKE with selector lever position, driving program and the fault message. This information is 
provided over the CAN on vehicles from 9/97. 


41 

Driver Information Systems 




Analog Input Signals 


Battery Voltage - The system voltage is monitored by the IKE and sets a fault if it exceeds 
16 volts. 

Fuel tank level - Two lever action sensors are wired in parallel to the IKE. The two variable 
resistor inputs are processed by the IKE and used to operate the fuel gauge. The reserve 
light is controlled by the IKE from the sensor inputs. 

Photo transistor - A variable voltage signal, that is dependent on ambient light, is used 
for LCD back lighting. 

Coolant Temperature - A NTC sensor is used by the IKE to measure coolant temperature. 
This is a CAN bus signal from the DME on vehicles produced from 9/97. Note: The dual 
sensor and wiring continue to exist as in the earlier systems but the cluster is coded to only accept 
the information from the CAN. 

Outside Temperature - A NTC sensor is used by the IKE to measure outside temperature 
for display in the cluster. Other systems that require outside temperature receive this 
information on the l/K Buses. 





FUEL LEVEL SENSOR 1 


M i 


SENSOR 2 


PHOTO TRANSISTOR 
VARIED SIGNAL 



Driver Information Systems 


IKE 







Digital Input Signals 


The normal power-up and KL 50 inputs to the IKE processor: 

• Terminal R • Terminal 15 • Terminal 50 

Various functions are dependent on the ignition switch positions. 

Steering column switch - This switch is used to call up BC functions into the cluster 
matrix. 

Oil Pressure Switch - This status is transmitted to the LCM over the l-BUS. The LCM 
compares the switch status with engine speed to evaluate oil pressure. IKE can store faults 
with the oil pressure switch and circuit. 

Parking Brake Switch - Switch status is transmitted to the LCM for evaluation. 

Trip Odometer Reset - The left button on the cluster is used to reset the trip mileage if 
the key is on and display mileage if the key is off. 



43 

Driver Information Systems 





Output Signals 

Speed Signal “A” - The vehicle speed is made available to control modules that require a 
precise speed value. The ASC/DSC wheel speed input is reduced by a factor of 5:1 to 
produce a speed signal “A” that these control modules can process as an input. 

Gong Outputs T-|, T2, T3 

• T-j - Activates memo (hourly reminder) 

• T2 - Activates the tone for the freeze warning 

• T3 - Activates the tone for check control functions 

• T1-T2 - Activated simultaneously produces the tone for code and limit functions. 


IKE 



Buses - The l/K , D and CAN buses are used by the IKE to transfer data to other control 
modules as output signals. 


44 

Driver Information Systems 



Redundant Data Storage 

This specific information is: 

• Vehicle ID number 

• Total mileage 

• Service Interval information 

To guard against the loss of 
vehicle information, it is stored in t 
IKE and the lamp module (LCM). 


This data is compared each time 
switched on. If the data check r 
mismatch, the manipulation 
illuminated. 

Because of this redundant storage feature, the following points must be noted: 

1. If the vehicle ID number is not the same in both modules, the manipulation DOT is 
activated and there is no data exchange between the IKE and LCM. All functions of 
both modules will continue to work (car can be test driven). 

2. Data is only accepted from the LCM by the IKE if the ID number is the same and the 
IKE is at 0 miles. 

3. The vehicle ID number is input into a module by way of the DIS tester and only 
accepted if the mileage recorder in the module is at 0 miles. 

4. The LCM mileage data can only be over written with a higher mileage and is updated 
every 60 miles (100 km). 

5. If the distance differs by more than 120 miles (200 km) and the ID numbers are the 
same, the IKE stores a data transfer fault. 

6. If the 1-Bus link to the LCM faults, the IKE stores this fault and continues to record the 
mileage driven. 

The condition that controls the redundant date exchange and allows only new components 
to be used as replacement. 

If the IKE from another car is used for testing purposes, test driving the car should be 
avoided if possible. If the vehicle is test driven, the IKE will record mileage and this mileage 
will be added to total mileage of the original car. 

45 

Driver Information Systems 






E38 BC Test Functions 


The BC test functions are used to check inputs, outputs and functions of the IKE. There 
are 21 possible test steps. With the exception of Test #1,, #2, and #19, all other tests are 
locked but can be released through test #19. 

The test functions are displayed in the instrument cluster. Test #01 is called up by pressing 
the CC button for 10 sec. The same activation can be initiated by pressing and holding the 
CC button while switching on the ignition. 



Each time the CC button is pressed, the next test number is displayed. 

After selecting a test number, the information from the test is posted by pressing the trip 
odometer reset button. Several tests have sub-functions which are called up by pressing 
the reset button while in the test. 

Unlocking test functions: 

• Call up test #19 - This is automatically done if attempting to enter a locked test 

• Using the trip meter reset button enter by pressing the sum of the last 5 digits of the 
chassis number, example : VIN GB11111,-1+1+1+1+1 =5, press the reset button 5 times. 

• Confirm entry by pressing the CC button. 

The test function can be cancelled by switching the ignition off or pressing the CC button 
for approximately 2 sec. 


46 

Driver Information Systems 

















TEST NO. 01 


The IKE supplies the following data, which appears on the 20 digit cluster matrix display: 

• Vehicle Identification number = F85T8R: 8811111 

• K value = ft 5135 

• BMW part number: B88T8R. 13808813 

• Encoding, diagnosis and bus index: Cl: 81 81: 01 81:81 

• IKE production date: 881 58/88 

• HW/SW number: 88: 5858:88 

• Motor: Z5L-.8 

8:8 5:588 

• ROM Date: ROB-. 83.88.58 

TEST NO. 02 

The following displays and instruments are activated (system test): 

• Speedometer, tachometer, coolant temp gauge, fuel gauge. 

• LC displays (segment test) 

• Indicators and Warning Lights 

This test can only be called up with the vehicle at a standstill, engine turned off, with KL R 
or 15 switched on. 

TEST NO. 03 

The following SI data can be displayed: 

• SI km since last reset: 5188: 1858 

• SI automatic transmission kilometers: 5 l-GETR - 88 83388 

47 

Driver Information Systems 




TEST NO. 04 


Momentary Fuel Consumption is displayed: 


• VBR: 0.0L100K0 
VBR: 0.0 L/H 


TEST NO .05 

This function shows the range calculation data: 

• Range at measured fuel consumption: RU-08R: 13.5 L/100 ft/7 


TEST NO .06 

In this function, the fuel tank volume for the right and left half of the fuel tank and the current 
total tank volume are shown in the Instrument Cluster matrix display. 

This enables the function of the float level sensors to be checked. 

Display: 777ft S3.5/38.S/63. 7 L 
Tl'iliRI'IZ 50.Si PHRSE 1 

The first numerical value in line 1 shows the contents of the left half of the fuel tank, the 
second, the volume of the right half of the tank. The third value is the current total value. 
If a level sensor is defective, it’s value reverts to 0. 

Line 2 shows the current average value (displayed value) for the contents of the fuel tank. 
The numerical value after the word phase refers to the valid computed number. 

Phase 1: Regular computing method by way of sensors (both sensors OK). 

Phase 2: Calculation in progress from TKVA signal (sensor faulted) 

Phase 3: Fuel tank contents cannot be computed, fuel gauge reads 0 (at least one sensor 
is faulted). 


TEST NO. 07 


Momentary coolant temperature, ft//7P.- 015° C 

Momentary engine speed: /V.-5 S38 0/010 
48 

Driver Information Systems 




TEST NO. 08 


Momentary Road Speed V: 08 5 K/7/W 


TEST NO. 09 

Battery voltage (terminal 30) 08-. 18.5 V 


TEST NO. 10 

Preset national market codes list. The number is encoded in the IKE with the central code 
key 

Display: US8 08 


TEST NO 11 

The unit code is entered in the EEPROM by the DIS after IKE has been installed and can 
be read out by means of test function 11. 


TEST NO. 12 

This test function shows the data for computing the vehicle’s estimated time of arrival. 

• Average speed for calculating arrival time: k'fl/YK 083.1 Kfl/H 

• Current arrival time: fl/Yft- 13.03 


TEST NO. 13 

This test function enables the gong to be tested, Display: 00008 

• After confirming by pressing the trip odometer reset button, the four audible warning 
signals are triggered off once in succession. 

• Gong T1 (Memo signal) 2.0s 

• Gong T2 (Outside temperature) 1.5 s. 

• Gongs T1 and T2 (LIMIT/CODE warning) 1.5 s 

• Gong T3 (Check Control Gong) 

49 

Driver Information Systems 



TEST NO. 14 


This function shows the contents of the fault memory in a hexidecimal code. 
Display: DIRS: D1 81 033 


TEST NO. 15 

Not assigned to any test function. 


TEST NO. 19 

Procedure for unlocking the BC test functions. See page 32. 


TEST NO. 20 

BC consumption value correction factor. This test adjusts the correction factor for the 
consumption value displayed in the MID. The production line installed value is 1000. The 
value ranges from 750 to 1250. 

To adjust the correction factor press the trip meter reset button once for a reduction of 1. 
For each press of the reset button the value decreases by 1 until it reaches 750. After 750 
the number will reset to 1250 and begin to count down again. 

To accept the set correction factor press the CC button. 

The consumption correction factor (VK) is calculated from the actual amount of consumed 
fuel (VBR 1ST) and the displayed value (VBR ANZ): 

VK = (Actual MPG / Displayed MPG) X 1000. 

TEST NO. 21: 

This function resets the software at the IKE. This reset is necessary after replacing for 
example one of the fuel tank level sensors. Otherwise the damping function in the software 
will prevent the actual value from being shown only after a long time duration. 

Display: RESET F 

If the test is terminated without a software reset, the ignition switch must be turned back 
to “0” or the CC button pressed. 

50 

Driver Information Systems 



CHECK CONTROL MODULE 
Model: E38 

Production Date: E38: From start of production to 9/95. 

Objectives: 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize how different priority messages are displayed. 

• Identify the different methods used to recall CC messages. 

• Understand the operation of the electronic oil level sensor. 


51 

Driver Information Systems 




Check Control Module (E38 start of production up to 9/95) 


The Check Control System in early E38 
models utilizes a self-contained Check 
Control Module (CCM). 

The CCM is located in the electrical carrier in \ 
front of the glove box. 

This module collects and evaluates all check 
control data, including messages from the 
Lamp Control Module (LM). 


ABS/ASC+T 


■ 


N 


111> 













SPLICE BLOCK 
CCM 


RELAYS 


H 

i 

i 

1 

ZJ c 

i r 

■ n 

i r 

¥ 

w 

L 

err,™ 



GM III 


When the driver needs to be informed of a 
problem, the CCM signals the IKE over the I- 

BUS. The IKE will then post the message in the instrument cluster matrix display. 



\> 

► 

r i 
l r 

J C I 
1 C 1 

L K 

cor 

ii 

r □ 

i i\ 

0 

L OK i 


The text and operation of the E38 check control was changed to improve message 
interpretation and reliability, for example: 

• GONG. Pre E38: Gong with every new display. 

E38: Only activated for first display in group. 

Advantage: Reduces driver’s irritation. 

• DISPLAY: Pre E38: “Owner’s Handbook” used repeatedly 

E38: “Owner’s Handbook” phrase deleted. Actual text for situation with 

recommended action. 

Advantage: Driver can asses situation without reading the Owner’s Manual. 


52 

Driver Information Systems 


























All the warning messages fall into one of four priority groups. 

Priority Group PI - Faults that directly affect the safety or operation of the car and the 
drive should be addressed immediately. The text is displayed with a flashing arrow on the 
right and left sides. 


■ la 3HSG 


miles .l?2.H 


>12.0"F 

1 

!► C H E C 

' \ t / □ o o 1 / c Cl 

.11 UNflllL 1 ! 

LI ! D 4 

_— B 


Priority Group P2 - Faults that do not affect vehicle’s safety or operation directly and the 
driver need not respond to immediately. These messages are displayed only once when 
the fault occurs and have to be called up again with the CC button. 


■ 1234581 

' j ! 



+ 3 2 .LTF 

I 

(►ROD 1 

JR 1 

5MER F LU 1 [ 

4 


Priority Group P3 - These faults are shown when the key is turned on before a trip. The 
faults in P3 are mainly fluid levels which are not assigned to P2. The lights on reminder is 
a Priority 3 item. With the key in position 0 with the light switch On initiates this reminder. 


11 234 58 


r ,es .122.4 


+ 12.0° F 

I 

[ThER[ 

3 L1 G H 1 S L 

3 1 s ! i 


Special warnings - These are top priority messages and won’t be overridden when 
displayed. Seat belt/ignition key in lock with door open are some of fhese messages. 


1 i 2 3 4 5 b 


r es .lE2.H 


I* 1 ? .OF 

1 

!► i&nn 

'10 

N ecu IN 
II II C 3 III 

! U L Ki ^ 


When the key is switched off, all registered check control faults are displayed. 
The language of the check control messages is set with the central coding key. 


53 

Driver Information Systems 










































































CC DISPLAY PROCEDURES 


Special Displays - These messages will overwrite all other displays. If more than one 
special display request is received by the CCM, the one with the highest priority will be 
delivered. 

PI Group - PI displays remain posted as long as the fault is present. If several PI 
warnings have been received by the CCM, they are displayed one after another in 3 second 
intervals. 

P2 and P3 Groups - The messages in both groups are displayed when KL15 is switched 
on for a maximum of twenty three (23) seconds and P3 messages are not displayed after 
the trip is started. P2 and P3 warning that have been registered by the CCM can be 
recalled during the trip by pressing the CC button. 

Reminder Symbol “> < “ - The “+” symbol is no longer used. If more than one PI check 
control message is present, the reminder symbol “> < “ is illuminated permanently. If a P2 
or P3 message is extinguished, the reminder symbol informs the driver that a CC message 
has been posted. The symbol will flash when a new PI warning is recognized. 

CC Button - Check control messages can 
be recalled, for up to 3 minutes, after the 
ignition is switched off using the CC button. 

The highest priority message is displayed 
first with following messages in a priority 
descending order. After the lowest 
message has been displayed, pressing the 
CC button will clear the matrix. 

“Check Control OK” is posted when the CC 
message present. 

Steering column switch (LSS) - Pressing 
the steering column switch will clear the 
matrix display if low priority messages are 
being posted. This will allow the display to 
be utilized for other information. 

Gong - The warning gong is activated by 
the IKE when the CCM sends the proper 
data over the I Bus. The gong is activated 
only when higher priority warnings are 
posted. 

54 

Driver Information Systems 



button is pressed and there are no warning 





CCM DISPLAY 

GONG PRTY 

SCOPE OF MONITOR 

OPERATING CONDITIONS 




Release Parking Brake 

©©r 

PI 

Warning displayed above 3 MPFI 

Door open with ignition 
key in position KL 15 


P2 

Warning displayed when a door is open or opened above 3 MPFI. 

Trunk Open 

@=f 

P2 

Warning displayed above 3 MPH when trunk opens or was left open prior to 
pulling away. Displayed once only. 

Stop! Engine oil pressure 


PI 

Warning displayed oil pressure has fallen below safe level. 

Coolant Temperature 

©©r 

PI 

Warning displayed when coolant rises above maximum temperature 

Check Brake Lights 

Check low-beam headlights 
Check high-beam headlights 
Check parking lights 

Check front fog lights 

Check license plate lights 

©©r 

P2 

The LM monitors certain vehicle lights and circuits. When a fault is detected 
the CCM is notified to post a display. 

Check brake pads 


P2 

Warning issued when brake pad wear limit is reached. 

Lights on? 

@s! : 

P3 

Warning displayed when key is in position 0 if driver's door is opened with 
light switch on. 

Ignition key in lock 

©©r 

S 

Warning is displayed when key is left in ignition switch in position R or 0. 

Please Fasten Seatbelt 

©©r 

S 

Warning is displayed for a 6 second period after “Ignition on" with seatbelt 
fastened or not. If seatbelt is fastened the intermittant gong is switched off. 

Remote Battery 


S 

When remote key battery voltage drops below 4.5 volts 

FLUID LEVELS 




Check Brake Fluid 

©©r 

PI 

Warning is displayed when brake fluid is too low. 

Check engine oil level 


P2 

Warning is displayed when the engine oil level is too low. The E38 is equipped 
with a new electronic oil level sensor. (see E38 Complete Vehicle for function 
and operational description). 

Check coolant level 


P2 

Warning is displayed when coolant level is too low. The warning is only posted 
when the ignition key is first turned on. 

Add washer fluid 

©©r 

P2 

Warning is displayed when washer fluid level is low. This warning is displayed 
at any time the level becomes low to provide an early warning 

NOTE: The fluid level warnings are monitored in 25 second intervals. 

This time interval prevents false displays from occuring due to bumpy roads, fluid sloshing, etc. 

CONTROL SYSTEM FAULT DISPLAYS 



Emergency transmission 
operating program 

©=! 

P2 

If a fault occurs in the AGS control system Check control displays the 
message. The message is orriginated from the AGS CM to IKE over a one 
way serial data line. From there IKE notifies the CCM over the 1 Bus. 

EEPROM IKE 


S 

When IKE and LM data differ (for testing purposes). 


55 

Driver Information Systems 




Electronic Engine Oil level Sensor 


The E38 began production utilizing the electronic oil 
level sensor, it was later phased into production on 
other models and engines. 


The electronic level sensor is located in the engine 
sump mounted to the engine oil pan. 

The oil level sensor contains an integral micro¬ 
processor and two sensing elements. The sensing 
elements are inside of a plastic shield and are 
immersed in the oil. 

• One element measures the oil temperature. 

• The second is heated to 10°C above the temperature of the oil and then switched off to 
cool . 

The length of time it takes to cool the heated element is how the sensor determines the 
engine oil level. When the oil level is high it covers a larger portion of the probe submersed 
in the oil sump. The engine oil around the probe cools the heated element faster than if the 
level is low. 

monitors engine above oil temp and The micro-processor in the base of the sensor 

as it cools supplies a signal to the CCM/LCM with a 
varying pulse width and frequency. 


The “high” or “on” time of the signal is 
dependent on oil temperature, this means the 
hotter the oil is, the longer the sensing element 
has to be heated to reach 10°C above. 


The “low” or “off” time of the signal is dependent 
on the oil level. The lower the oil level is, the 
longer the “off” time of the signal is. 

Cool down times are averaged over a minimum 
of 350 measurements to take account of slosh 
in the oil pan while driving. If the average is over 
the warning limit the low oil warning is set. 

Please refer to S.l. 11 09 00 for a table of the warning 
levels of individual vehicles. 

56 

Driver Information Systems 


FOR CALCULATION 


TIMED 






















































BASE INSTRUMENT CLUSTER (KOMBI) 

Model: E39, E53 

Production Date: From start of production 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Describe how the various input signals for the Check Control system arrive at the 
KOMBI. 

• Explain what information is used to calculate the Service Interval. 

• Know how to perform the instrument cluster self-test. 


57 

Driver Information Systems 




Base Instrument Cluster 


The base instrument cluster consists ot tive analog gauges. The processing electronics and 
drivers tor the gauges are contained in the cluster. The tive gauges include: 


• Fuel Gauge 

• Speedometer 

• Tachometer 

• Fuel Economy Gauge 

• Coolant Temperature 



Three Liquid Crystal Display blocks are provided tor the: 

• Check Control Display - pictogram 

• Mileage, Outside Temperature and BC Display 

• Transmission Range and SI Display 

Warning lamps and indicators are positioned to the left and right ot the display blocks. The 
number of warning lamps is greater on the base cluster for the display of several check 
control warnings. All of the warning lamps and indicators are LEDs and not replaceable. 
Critical warning lamps use two LEDs for a safety margin. 

There are replaceable lamps for the back lighting on the liquid crystal display units. 


58 

Driver Information Systems 



























The LEFT DISPLAY BLOCK contains a pictogram for various check control warnings. 
LEDs within the display will illuminate for: 


• Lighting failures for headlight (low beam), 
taillight and brake lights. 

• Open doors or trunk 

• Low washer fluid 



Additional circuits monitored by check control include the engine oil level and transmission 
emergency program. These warnings are indicated by lamps positioned in both indicator 
display areas on the left and right sides on the bottom of the instrument cluster. 

Due to the ability to illuminate multiple warning LEDs, there is no priority displays for the 
pictogram check control. If multiple faults exist, each corresponding LED will illuminate. 

The LED will remain illuminated as long as the fault exists. The only exception is the washer 
fluid which will go out 60 seconds after KL 15 is switched ON. 

All check control and lamp control circuits are monitored by the Light Check Module (LCM). 
When failures or faults exist, the messages are passed to the cluster for display over the K-Bus. 

The MIDDLE BLOCK contains the displays for the Total Mileage, Trip Mileage and Board 
Computer. 


The total mileage is stored in non-volatile 
memories in the cluster EEPROM and the LCM. 

The mileage can be displayed with the key off 
for 25 seconds if the mileage reset button is 
pressed. 

Board Computer information can be displayed by pressing the turn signal lever. 



59 

Driver Information Systems 

































The RIGHT BLOCK contains the displays for 
the automatic transmission driving range and 
the Service Interval Indicator III. 

The display of the Service Indicator on the E39 
is the same as the “High” clusters. The 
processor for the intervals is located in the 
cluster electronics. The processing method for determining interval times uses the Service 
Interval III system. Interval times are based on fuel consumption instead of mileage and 
starts. This system was introduced on the 1996 E38 - 750iL . 

Using fuel consumption offers several advantages over the SIA II method for determining oil 
service. 

• First, the processing electronics are less involved in that only one value is needed for the 
processing. 

• Second, the use of fuel consumption is a more accurate method of determining engine 
load and the need for service. 



• Third, resetting of the indicator before the scheduled time will not effect the time to the 
next service. 


A set volume of fuel (in liters) is stored in the EEPROM of the SI. The volume of fuel is 
dependent on the vehicle and engine size. The processor receives the “ti” signal as the 
vehicle is used. As 20% of the stored volume is consumed, 
one of the green LEDs will go out. Each successive 20% of 
fuel consumption will cause the next LED to go out until 
100% of the stored volume has been consumed. At this 
point the yellow LED will come on indicating the service is 
due. At 108% of the volume, the RED LED will illuminate 
indicating an over due service. 



o 


o 


1 | 1 J 


o 


o 


o 


o 


With each reset (oil service ore inspection), the total volume 
of fuel is restored in the EEPROM and the calculation starts 
over again. 



VP 


o 

o 


CO 

o 



SI LAMP 
CONTROL 


TI SIGNAL 

^Rjmnn 


CONSUMPTION 

CALCULATION 


IKE 


60 

Driver Information Systems 


































Dynamic Digital Inputs 


Distance Signal- This input is supplied to the cluster by the ASC/DSC control module as 
a square wave signal. Pulses from the left rear wheel speed sensor are processed by the 
DSC module to produce this signal. The cluster electronics process the input for the cluster 
display and pass the signal along on the K bus as speed signal “A” for other control 
modules requiring the vehicle speed signal. 


Engine Control Module Signals - The “Ti” & “TD” signals are produced by the Engine 
control module and sent to the cluster. As first introduced on the E39, these signals were 
delivered to the cluster via hard wire. On models produced after 9/98 these signals are 
delivered by the CAN Bus. 


The cluster processes the signals for the 
tachometer and fuel economy indicator 
displays. The Ti signal is used by the cluster for 
the SI indicator. The cluster also passes the TD 
signal out over the K Bus. 


ruirui 


LEFT REAR 
WHEEL SPEED 
SENSOR 


Note: Diagram 
represents vehicles 
produced before 
9 / 98 . 




=L 




Ti rLRjiiifiaRTiririniiniinjL 




ONE WAY DATA SIGNAL 

- Selector position 

- Program 

- Fault Lamp 


Transmission One Way Data Signal- The AGS control module provides a one way 
data signal to the instrument cluster for signalling of the range selector position, driving 
program and for fault lamp activation. This signal is provided over the CAN Bus on vehicles 
produced after 9/98. 


DIMMER SIGNAL - This is a pulse-width modulated signal from the LCM. It is used to 
control the intensity of the back lighting of the instruments and the LCDs when the lights 
are switched ON. This signal is also output over the K-Bus. 


K-BUS Signalling - The Cluster receives signals for the Check Control Pictogram over the 
K-Bus. 


61 

Driver Information Systems 





















































Analog Input Signals 


Battery Voltage - Battery voltage is monitored by the cluster and a fault is stored if the 
voltage exceeds 16 volts. 


Fuel Tank Level - Two lever action sensors are wired in parallel to the cluster. The two 
varying voltage signals are processed by the cluster for fuel gauge and low fuel warning 
display. 





AIR 



AMBIENT AIR TEMP 



Coolant Temperature - A NTC sensor is used to measure coolant temperature, the 
cluster uses this input for temperature gauge display. This is also a CAN bus signal on 
vehicles which have the CAN bus link to the cluster 


Outside Temperature - A NTC sensor is used to measure the ambient temperature. The 
signal is processed by the cluster and passed out over the K Bus to modules requiring this 
input for processing. 


62 

Driver Information Systems 































Digital Input Signals 


The normal ignition switch terminals (KLR, KL15 & KL50) are input to the cluster. Various 
functions are dependent on ignition switch position. 

Steering Column Switch - The turn signal stalk provides a momentary ground signal 
that is used to call up BC functions. 


Brake Pad wear Sensor - The pad sensor inputs are used to illuminate the brake pad 
warning indicator. 



Instrument Panel Button - The reset button is used to reset the trip - odometer as in 
the past. It will also display the mileage, if pressed with the key switched OFF. This button 
is also used for the Base BC/instrument cluster test functions. 

Inputs for Warning Lamps - Various switches are used to signal the cluster for warning 
and indicator lamp illumination. Many of these inputs are provided over the CAN or K-bus. 


63 

Driver Information Systems 











































Output Signals 

Speed Signal “A” - The vehicle speed signal is available as an output for control modules 
that require precise vehicle speed information. 

K-Bus Interface - The K Bus is used to transfer data between the cluster and other 
modules on the link. The diagnostic interface also passes over the K Bus for 
troubleshooting with the DIS. 

Low Fuel - Based on the processing for the low fuel indicator lamp, this output is also sent 
to the Engine control module. The signal is stored along with a mis-fire detection fault for 
troubleshooting purposes. 

Gong Output - T3, The T3 tone is used for check control warnings. 



LCM 

IHKA 

GM 


SPEED SIGNAL "A" 

GONG 


t 


LOW FUEL LEVEL 
(MISFIRE DETECTION) 


CAN bus signal after 




64 

Driver Information Systems 













































m 

K BUS 





SPEED SIGNAL "A" 


GONG 




DIAGNOSIS BUS 
(RXD & TXD) 



* As Introduced 


65 

Driver Information Systems 
































































































































Redundant Data Storage 

The specific information stored redundantly includes: 

• Vehicle ID number 

• Total mileage 

• Service Interval data 

The data is stored in the cluster 
and in the Light Check Module 
(LCM). The storage of this data 
follows the redundant storage 
of the IKE. It prevents the loss 
of total mileage or SI data in the 
event of a cluster processor 
failure. 

The data is compared each time KL 15 is switched ON. If the data does not match, the 
manipulation DOT in the mileage display is illuminated. 

Because of this redundant storage feature, the following points must be noted: 

1. If the vehicle ID number is not the same in both modules, the manipulation DOT is 
illuminated and no data transfer takes place. All functions of both modules will continue 
to operate. 

2. Data will only be accepted by the cluster from the LCM if the ID numbers match and the 
cluster mileage is zero. 

3. The vehicle ID number is input into the cluster through coding and will only be accepted 
when the cluster is at zero mileage. 

4. The LCM stored mileage can only be overwritten with a higher mileage and is updated 
every 60 miles. 

5. If the mileage differs by more than 120, and the ID numbers are the same, the cluster 
will continue recording the mileage and set a fault for data transfer. 

6. If the K Bus link to the LCM fails, the cluster will continue to record mileage and store a 
fault for the data link. 

These conditions will only allow new components to be installed for replacement purposes. 
However, a used component can be installed for testing purposes. If a cluster from another 
vehicle is used fortesting purposes, road testing of the vehicle should be avoided, because 
the cluster will accumulate mileage. 



66 

Driver Information Systems 





























Base version On-Board Computer 

The On Board computer information on the base variant cluster can only be displayed in 
the center matrix. The following information can be displayed: 


• OUTSIDE TEMPERATURE 


• FUEL CONSUMPTION 



• AVERAGE SPEED 




• ESTIMATED DRIVING RANGE 
ON REMAINING FUEL 



On 97 M.Y. vehicles, when KL R is switched ON, the outside temperature will be displayed. 
To call up any other function, the turn signal lever must be pressed and released. The other 
functions are than displayed one after the other. A blank field is provided after the average 
speed display to allow the driver to switch off the display. Vehicles produced from M.Y. 98 
the display last called up will be remembered and displayed when KLR is switched back 
on. 


A freeze warning is incorporated in the BC. If the temperature drops below 37°F, the gong 
will sound and the temperature display will flash in the BC. Pressing the turn signal lever will 
cancel the display. 

Two of the displays “Average Fuel Consumption” and “Average Speed” can be reset to start 
new calculations. To reset the displays, press and hold the turn signal lever, for longer than 
one second, when the function is called up. The BC will than start to compute a new 
average value. 


67 

Driver Information Systems 




































Base BC/lnstrument Cluster Test Functions 


In addition to the fault memory and diagnostic link, the base instrument cluster contains a 
series of test functions that can be accessed to check various functions and values. The 
test functions are displayed in the mileage LCD block. There are a total of 21 test functions. 
The test functions are similar to those of previous Board computers and contain similar 
tests. 


• Tests 1 & 2 are always unlocked. 

• Tests 3 -21 are only accessible after unlocking the test function. Test 19 is the unlock 
function for accessing the displays. 


1. Switch Off 



© 




2. Press and Hold 



3. Switch to KL R 




Test 01. main menu is displayed 


4a. Do nothing and display will 
automatically go into sub tests 
of main menu 0.1 









Scrolling through the 
numbered test 
functions is achieved 
by pressing the 
instrument cluster 
button when the test 
number is displayed. 


• 1. (press button) 

= test #2 


• 1.0 (press button) 

= sub-test #1 


This signals the BC to 
display the sub-tests 
of the displayed main 
test menu or continue 
on to the next main 
test menu. 


68 

Driver Information Systems 
















































































TEST 01. - Vehicle specific data including: 


SubTests: 

12345 1.0 = VIN 

4812 1.1 = K-value 

834762 6_1.2 = Part number of cluster 

010203 1.3 = Coding/Diagnosis/Bus index 

3495 1.4 = Manufacturing date (calendar week/year) 

04_600 1.5 = Hardware/software # of cluster (HW:04, SW:6.00) 

415_06 3_1.6 = Injection status, number of cylinders, engine factor 


TEST 02. - Cluster System Test - activates the gauge drivers, indicators and LEDs to 
confirm function. 


TEST 03. - SI data 


Sub Tests: 

1500 3.0 = Liters 

0 3.1 = Periodic inspection days (not applicable for US). 

TEST 04. - Momentary Consumption 

Sub Tests: 

0267 4.0 = 26.7 liters/1000km 

0073 4.1 = 7.3 liters per hour 

TEST 05. - Distance Gone Consumption 

Sub Tests: 

0195 5.0 = 19.5 liters/100 km 

226 5.1 = momentary distance to go (226km) 

TEST 06. - Fuel level sensor inputs in liters 

Sub Tests: 

237415 6.0 = Fuel level averaged • LH sensor input = 23.7 liters 

• RH sensor Input = 41.5 liters 

0652 6.1= Total tank level averaged = 65.2 liters 

0667 1_6.2 = Indicated value and tank phase • 1 = both sensors OK 

• 2 = one sensor fault 

• 3 = implausible input 


69 

Driver Information Systems 



TEST 07. - Temperature and Speed 


Sub Tests: 


032 

7.0 

= Coolant temp input 32°C 

245 

7.1 

= Outside temp input 24.5°C 

5283 

7.2 

= Engine speed 5,283 RPM 

058 

7.3 

= Vehicle speed 58km/H 


TEST 08. - Input values in HEX form 

Sub Tests: 

XXX 8.0 - 8.3 = Hex code, Instrument cluster inputs 
TEST 09. - Battery voltage 

Sub Test: 

125 9.0 = 12.5 volts 

TEST 10. - Country Coding 

Sub Test: 

02 10.0 = US 02 

TEST 11.- Cluster code 

Sub Test: 

000003 11.0 = Cluster code 
TEST 12. - Not used 
TEST 13. - GONG test 

Sub Test: 

Gong 13.0 = Activate gong by pressing button (gong response is delayed). 
TEST 14. - Fault memory (not for diagnosis) 

TEST 15 to 18 - Not used 


70 

Driver Information Systems 



o ^ 

g§ 

O DC 
LLI UJ 
CO f- 


TEST 19. - LOCK/UNLOCK 

Sub-Tests 

L-ON... 

L-OFF 19.0 = 


Display changes from “L-ON” to “L-OFF” every 
second. To unlock test functions, press the cluster 
button immediately when it changes to “L-OFF”. 

Tests are automatically locked when exiting test functions 


9 


TEST 20. - Average fuel consumption - correction factor 


The factor follows previous systems, with adjustment range of 750 to 1250. The 
adjustment method is new for the base cluster. If adjustment is necessary, enter into test 
20 using the cluster button. 


The correction factor number is changed by using the sub-tests for the “ones, tenths and 
hundreds of the factor number. The digits will automatically scroll through 0-9 within each 
group (ones, tenths, hundreds). 


Sub-Tests: 

20.0 

XXX9 20.1 
XX5X 20.2 
12XX 20.3 


= Press the button to reset display to 1000 
= Press the button when the correct “ones” position is attained. 

= Press the button when the correct “tenths” position is attained. 

= Press the button when the correct “hundreds” position is attained. 


TEST 21 . - Software reset 


Sub-Test: 

reset 21.0 = Reset software 


71 

Driver Information Systems 




























