Table of Contents 


ON-BOARD MONITOR AND NAVIGATION SYSTEMS 

Subject Page 

On-Board Monitor .2 

On-Board Monitor System Introduction.2 

Components, Locations and Removal Information.4 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation system interfaces.7 

On-Board Monitor Controls and Indicators .8 

Screen Samples of the On-Board Monitor Functions.11 

Wide Screen Board Monitor. 15 

Introduction.16 

Component Overview.17 

Principle of Operation.20 

Workshop Hints.20 

Mark I Navigation System .23 

Global Positioning System (GPS).24 

Navigation System Inputs.27 

Mark I Navigation System Operation .30 

Mark I Navigation System Calibration Overview.35 

• Vehicle Owner Calibration .35 

• Dealership Calibration Procedures .38 

Mark I Navigation System Software Loading.50 

Mark I Diagnosis and Troubleshooting .51 

Mark II Navigation System .53 

Mark II Navigation System Introduction/ Component Locations .54 

On-Board Monitor and Mark II Navigation System Interface.58 

Mark II Navigation Diagnosis Mode Displays.60 

Mark II System Calibration.63 

Mark II System Diagnosis.63 

Mark III Navigation System .64 

Purpose of the System.65 

System Components.66 

Workshop Hints.72 


Review Questions 


77 


































ON-BOARD MONITOR SYSTEM 
Model: E38, E39, E53, E46 

Production Date: E46 1999 to 2002, all others 1997 to 2001. 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Describe the controls possible from the On-Board Monitor. 

• Explain the purpose of the ARCNET. 

• Know how to operate the various features controlled from the On-Board Monitor. 


2 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 




ON-BOARD MONITOR SYSTEM 


The On-board Monitor System was introduced as optional equipment on the 1997 MY 
E38s and E39s. It was made standard on the E38 750iL for 1999 and standard for all E38s 
in 2000. It uses the latest advances in electronic technology to bring new levels of comfort 
and convenience to the driver and passengers for control of the audio/communication 
systems. In addition the Mark I Navigation system is incorporated into the total scope 
of On-board Monitor Control. 


NOTE: The E39 six cylinder models with the On-board Monitor option are equipped with 
the high version IKE and On Board Computer functions. 


The On-board Monitor is 
essentially a control and 
display unit. All data 
processing and calculations 
are carried out by the 
individual system control 
modules. The display data 
is sent to the On-board 
Monitor over the various 
interfaces. 

The On-board Monitor is 
mounted in the center dash 
console. It replaces the 
RadioTTape Player, MID and 
DSP control panel (E38) if 
equipped. 



It consists of control knobs and buttons for programming and operating the various 
systems. 


There is a 5 1/4 inch, color LCD screen for display of all system functions. The tape player 
drive is also part of the On-Board Monitor unit. However, the radio receiver/amplifier module 
is now mounted in the trunk. The audio system is controlled from the on-board monitor. 
Additionally, the systems controlled and programmed through the On-board Monitor include: 


• On Board Computer 

• Navigation system 

• Telephone 

• Code Function 

• Set (on-board monitor setup) 


• Television (Early production only) 

• Digital Sound Processor (DSP) 

• Auxiliary Ventilation 

• Emergency (provides vehicle location and 
automatically dials telephone for help). 

• Monitor Off (Switches the monitor off). 

3 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 
























































































COMPONENTS 


ON-BOARD MONITOR ASSEMBLY 

The on-board monitor assembly is mounted in the center console. It consists of the 
following components: 



• BMBT. BMBT is a German acronym meaning, “Board Monitor Bedien Tiel”. Translated 
to English this means On-Board Monitor Control Module/Panel. The BMBT is 
connected to the l-BUS. It provides the same function as the pushbutton inputs and 
output illumination of the LEDs of the familiar MID. 


REMOVAL OF ON-BOARD MONITOR ASSEMBLY FROM CENTER CONSOLE 


The on-board monitor is removed from the center console 

as an assembly as follows. 

1. Remove the wood trim from the dash on both sides of 
the on-board monitor. 

2. Unscrew the metal plates (E38) or unhook the latches (E39) 
from each side of the on-board monitor and loosen the 
recessed screw from the lower edge of the wood trim. 

3. Remove the on-board monitor wood trim 

4. With the on-board monitor wood trim removed, 
unscrew the four large torx™screws as shown. 

5. Pull the on-board monitor assembly out of the center 
console. 



For complete procedures refer to group 65 repair manual in TIS. 

4 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 





The following components are mounted in the trunk on the left side behind the 
trim cover 



Mark I 
NAVIGATIO 
COMPUTER 
MODULE 


It contains a micro¬ 
processor and CD 
drive for navigation 
system operation. 


The navigation 
computer is linked 
directly to the 
video module 
which provides the 
visual and audio 
output instructions 
for the navigation 
system. 


AUDIO SYSTEM 
AMPLIFIER 


RADIO 

RECEIVER 


AUDIO SYSTEM 
CD CHANGER 


DEO MODULE 


The video module 
generates the Red, 
Green and Blue 
video signals for the 
on-board monitor 
LCD screen. The 
RGB signals are for 
all functions of the 
on-board monitor 
including the nav. 
system. 


The video module 
also serves as a 
data memory for the 
navigation system. 
As needed the 
video module 
instantly provides 
the RGB signals to 
change the on¬ 
board monitors 
display and sends 
the audio signals to 
the audio system 
amplifier. 


GLOBAL POSITIONING RECEIVER MODULE (GPS) 


The module determines the exact position of the vehicle from known orbits of GPS 


satellites. The GPS receiver 
determining the vehicle position. 


interfaces with the Navigation computer module for 


NAVIGATION COMPUTER REMOVAL: 


To remove the nav. computer from the mounting 
bracket insert four small phillips head 
screwdrivers into the four holes on the face 
plate. Push the screwdrivers in past a slight 
detent. Pull the nav. computer out of the mounting bracket 



SCREWDRIVER INTO EACH HOLE 


5 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 






The following components are located on the rear parcel shelf under the trim 
panel. 



MAGNETIC FIELD SENSOR 


The magnetic field sensor is a 
small micro processor. It is used 
while the navigation system is 
operating to determine the 
vehicle’s direction of travel. 


GLOBAL POSITIONING 
RECEIVER ANTENNA 


The antenna picks up the signals 
from the satellites and transmits 
them to the GPS module. 


Carry over components that are part of the On-Board Monitor / Navigation system 
include: 

• Instrument Cluster Control Module (IKE) for On Board Computer calculations 

• Multi-Function Steering Wheel (MFL) for radio and telephone control functions. 

• Telephone handset for operation of the phone. 

• ASC control module for the two front wheel speed sensor inputs. 


6 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



ON-BOARD MONITOR AND NAVIGATION SYSTEM INTERFACES 


I BUS - The On-board Monitor Control Module/Panel is connected to the 1-Bus for 
communication with the other 1-Bus components. Data communication takes place over 
the 1-Bus between the BMBT and the following modules: 


• IKE 

• Telephone Handset 

• Multi-Function Steering Wheel (MFL) 


• Radio Receiver 

• Video Module 

• Audio System Amplifier 


ARCNET - The Attached Resource 
Computing Network is a high speed (2 
MB/sec) digital data link. The Navigation 
Computer and Video Module are 
connected by the ARCNET for isolated 
high speed navigation system 
communication. 

The ARCNET is made up of two data 
wires and a shield similar to the familiar 
CAN data link. The shielded ARCNET 
cable has its own triaxial type connector 
ends that are pushed onto their mating 
connectors on the modules. 



Navigation data for board 
monitor display. 

Request for navigation data 
Nav voice output data 
Rear Window Defroster ON 
Diagnosis 


NAVIGATION 

COMPUTER 


Video Module Red, Green Blue (RGB) output - The On Board Monitor is connected to 
the Video module through the RGB connection for the LCD screen displays. Each of the 
three color signals is shielded. 


7 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



















ON-BOARD MONITOR CONTROLS & INDICATORS 


AUDIO SYSTEM 


Operation of the audio system (radio/tape/CD) is similar to current systems installed in other 
models. The major difference is that the display of stations and settings is through the LCD 
panel. 


Tape program and 
eject buttons. 


1-6 buttons correspond to stored radio stations (12+6 
Auto) and CD selections (CD 1-6 selection). 

Weather Band, FM - AM, Dolby and Mode Selection. 

Mode = Radio, Tape or CD function. 



Switches the 

Toggles the 

audio system 


audio display in 

on/off (PUSH) 


the monitor 

and adjusts the 


back to the 

volume 


previous 

(ROTATE). 


screen. 

Both the radio 


Amber LED 

and the 


illuminated 

monitor display 


when radio is 

are switched 


on. 




\ 


Arrow rocker switch. 
Adjusts the tone settings 
and is used for the 
seek/scan function for the 
radio, tape and CD track. 


\ 


TONE-SELECT 

Tone: Adjusts the bass, treble, balance and 
fader using the tone & arrow buttons. 
Select: provides choice of station selection 
method, ie: Manual, Scan, Scan Sensitivity. 


8 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 







































































































TELEPHONE BUTTON AND INDICATORS 


Send/End button. As on previous systems this button sends the call to the displayed 
telephone number in the On-Board Monitor display or ends the current call. 

The telephone LEDs correspond to the E38/E39 MID: 

Green = Phone call in progress 
Red = Phone is on 

Amber = Steady: Roaming in same type system as home system 

Flashing: Roaming in different type system as home system 


Fan Symbol: Flashing indicates the park car ventilation system is programmed for 
activation. Steady indicates the parked car ventilation is currently on. 


Clock Button: Displays the time with the key switched OFF. Additionally, this button 
also switches the parked car ventilation system to off when it is on. 


ON SCREEN CONTROLS 

There are two main controls for all of the monitor screen displays. 


MENU BUTTON 

The menu button is used 
to call up the Main Menu 
as shown at right. 

This Menu provides 
access to all of the On- 
Board Monitor functions 
including: 


■HZ 


□ 


n 




On-board computer Television 
GPS-Navigation DSP 

Telephone Aux. Ventilation 


Code 


Monitor off 


07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM 


ROTARY KNOB 

PUSH = Switches the monitor on or activates the selected program displayed 
in the monitor. 

ROTATE = Selects the desired function for programming or display 


9 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 










































































GPS 

AERIAL 


n 



GPS 



RECEIVER 



NAVIGATION 

COMPUTER 


WHEEL SPEED SIGNALS 


10 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 





























































































































SCREEN SAMPLES OF THE ON-BOARD MONITOR FUNCTIONS 


ON BOARD COMPUTER 

The functions of the On Board 
Computer remain the same as 
previous systems. All On Board 
Computer calculations are still 
performed by the IKE. 

The OBC is called up from the On¬ 
board Monitor main menu by 
highlighting the BC and pressing the 
knob. 

Once the computer functions are 
displayed, all programming and 
resetting of the displays is carried out 
using the rotary knob. 



MARK I GPS NAVIGATION 

The on-board monitor provides 
access to the new Navigation system. 

The Mark I Navigation system is 
controlled and displayed via the on¬ 
board monitor. 




□ 




r 


GREER 
SC 101 


nj 


Instruction 
Route map 
New route 
Information 



GA 403 N. LAWRENCEVILLE 


| 07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM | 


11 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 














































































TELEPHONE 


Selecting the Telephone function on 
the Monitor screen will call up a rotary 
dial display. The telephone can be 
dialed with the rotary knob by turning 
the knob and pressing it when the 
desired digit is highlighted. Once the 
number is input, the call is initiated by 
pressing the send/end button at the 
left of the Monitor. 

All telephone programming is carried 
out through the handset as on other 
telephone models. 

Other features of the monitor 
telephone control include: 

• Memory storage and recall 

• Information on signal strength and 
call timer 

• Top 8 number storage 

• Emergency call feature 

- Displays 911 or Assist. 

- Displays the vehicles current 
coordinates in latitude and 
longitude along with the street 
name (if the street is on the 
digitized map database). 


CODE FUNCTION 

The familiar BC code function is 
carried over to the On-board Monitor 
system. A four digit code can be 
entered into the system that will 
disable the vehicle from starting as 
with previous systems. 



12 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



































































SET (On-Board Monitor Setup 
Utility) 

The Set Menu provides the on-board 
monitor display set up. This includes: 

• Language Selection 

• Time/date set and format 

• Etc. 

The “Audio+BC” selection at the 
bottom of the list switches the BC 
display off when the audio display is in 
the monitor. 

TELEVISION 

Early production only! The 

television function will be selectable 
from the main menu. Though audio 
is heard, television images will not 
display in the On-board Monitor. 

E38: vehicles are prewired for 
television viewing in the rear seat. A 
TV monitor connector is located in the 
rear of the center console for this 
purpose. This is only possible with 
owner purchased equipment. The 
On-board monitor will only serve as 
the controller for rear seat television. 


DIGITAL SOUND PROCESSOR 
(DSP) 

The DSP system, introduced with the 
E38 is controlled and programmed 
through the On-board Monitor. 





NOTE: US Law prohibits television 
display in the front seat viewing 
area. 

























































AUXILIARY VENTILATION 

The control and programming of the 
auxiliary ventilation feature is done 
with the on-board monitor. Use the 
rotary knob to program the on times 
for system operation. 


EMERGENCY 



The Emergency function provides the 
exact location of the vehicle including: 

• Street and Town (if on digitized map) 

• Longitude and Latitude 
Coordinates 

If the vehicle is equipped with a 
telephone, 911 or Assist (BMW 
roadside assistance) can be called 
directly from this screen. 

If the vehicle is not equipped with a 
phone the emergency program 
provides your location. 



MONITOR OFF 


Pressing the “Monitor Off” button switches the monitor to a blank screen. All programs are 
still functioning but not displayed in the monitor. The monitor is turned back on by pressing 
or turning any button on the on-board monitor. 


14 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



























































WIDE SCREEN ON-BOARD MONITOR 

Model: E39,E38,E46,E53 

Production Date: E38,E39 from 9/00 

E53 from 1/01 

E46 Cabrio from 3/01 

all other E46 models from 9/01 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Describe the benefits of the wide screen monitor over the previous versions. 

• Understand how to operate the wide screen monitor. 

• Review the procedures to access the Service Modes. 


15 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 




Introduction 


While the instrument cluster provides all of the important vehicle status information to the 
driver, the on-board monitor is designed as an additional display that can be viewed by both 
the driver and vehicle passengers. Information relating to the vehicle, navigation, audio sys¬ 
tem and telephone can be displayed and controlled from a central location. 


The wide screen on-board monitor replaces both the 5.5” versions in the E38 and E39, and 
the 5” board monitor from the E53 and E46. The wide screen display has a screen size of 
6.5” and an aspect ratio (length:height) of 16:9. 

The benefits of the wide screen design are: 

• Larger display area and higher resolution (400X234 pixels). 

• Improved display screen technology (Ad-TFT LC). 

• Bigger text size. 

• Soft keys replace country specific audio function keys. 

• Used for all board monitor applications in all markets reducing variants. 


• Larger display area makes split screen and magnification features possible (future 
software enhancements). 



16 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 










































Component Overview 



Cassette Drive 

The cassette drive is located behind the on-board monitor screen. In order to access the 
cassette, press the “eject” button, the display screen tilts forward to uncover the cassette 
slot. The images will remain displayed on the screen. 

After pressing the “eject” button again or automatically after 15 seconds the display returns 
to its normal position (cassette must be completely inside or removed). The tilt mechanism 
for the display screen utilizes anti-trap, if the board monitor detects a sudden change in 
speed, the display will reverse direction. 



17 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 


















Display Screen and Control Panel 


The display screen has a diagonal width of 6.5” and an aspect ratio of 16:9 compared to 
the previous monitors that had a ratio of 4:3. The new screen also uses a Ad-TFT display 
(Advanced Thin Film Transistor). This type of screen uses ambient light in addition to back¬ 
lighting in order to illuminate the display. The advantage is a constant contrast and 
brightness level at all ambient lighting conditions. 6 5 | NCH display 

16:9 ASPECT RATIO 



RADIO CONTROL KNOB \ PHOTOCELL SENSOR 
RADIO STATUS LED = Signal from 


ON-BOARD MONITOR CONTROL 
KNOB 


radio via l/K bus. 


AUXILIARY FAN INDICATOR LED 



INFO = Activates the soft key menu for RDS and PTY 



1-6 BUTTONS = Audio presets and CD selection 


L M .. , 


AM/FM SELECTION 



MODE/DISPLAY = Mode selects between audio functions. Display alternates between 
radio display and other displays. BC,TEL,NAV etc. 


TELEPHONE STATUS LEDs / EJECT = Tilts monitor to access cassette drive. 


TELEPHONE = Send/End button 

TAPE REVERSE/CLOCK = Clock: Pressing with key off displays time. Aux. ventilation 

can be switched by holding button longer. 

TONE/SELECT=Tone: Dolby (cassette only) and audio adjustments. 

Select: Choose between station search methods (a,m or scan). 

FAST FORWARD/REVERSE / STATION SEARCH 
MENU = Returns display to main menu 
18 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 















Wide Screen Board Monitor Interface 



Telephone 
PSI Box 



AUDIO SIGNALS 
FOR AMPLIFICATION 


CD 

PLAYER 

AUDIO 

SIGNALS 


n n 


t 


TAPE PLAYER 
AUDIO SIGNALS 



MFL-CM 




Example of E38/E39 with Wide Screen Board Monitor 


19 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 





















































































Principle of Operation 

The on-board monitor is an input and display device that performs no internal calculations. 

Inputs from the control panel buttons and knobs are converted into l-bus (K-bus E46) 
signals by the BM control panel. All of the devices controlled by the BM are connected to 
the l/K bus interface. 

The navigation computer contains the graphics stage integrated into the navigation 
computer housing. Request for on-board monitor displays are made to the navigation 
computer via the l/K bus. The navigation computer generates the RGB video signals and 
transmits them via 3 shielded wires. 

Audio signals generated by the cassette drive are sent via traditional audio wires (4) to the 
radio (located in the trunk or cargo area) for output to the audio system amplifier. 


Workshop Hints 

Service mode 

Access for the radio, on-board monitor and navigation service modes is available through 
the on-board monitor screen. 

To enter the radio service mode: 

• Turn the ignition key to position 1 (KLR). 

• Turn the radio on, then off, then on again. 

• Press the “INFO” button. From the selection list choose “RDS”. 

• Press and hold the on-board monitor control knob for at least 8 seconds. 

• The audio display window will show the radio serial number as the first display. 

• The station search < > buttons are used to scroll through the various settings. 

• Turn off the radio to “set” any changes made. 



Note: See the “NG” Radios 
module for a list of the 
tests and settings available 
in the radio service mode. 


20 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 


























To enter the On-Board Monitor and Navigation Service Mode: 

• Turn the ignition key to position 1 (KL R). 

• From the Menu screen select “SET”. 

• Once in the Set screen, press and hold the “MENU” button for 8 seconds. 

• The Service Mode menu will appear on the display. 

• Select “On-board monitor” for monitor specific tests. 



Press and hold for 8 seconds after entering Service Mode main menu display 

the “SET” screen. 



-£- M AM 




6 


ON-BOARD MONITOR VERSION 


Sw level 
Hw level: 

Diag. Index: 

Bus index: 
Encoding index: 
Supplier 


11.13.2000 Thursday 


< 


◄ return 
Version 
Key function 
Brightness 


TQNE.SELECI 



Functions 


10:17 


o 


Tests and adjustments available for the on-board monitor are: 

• Version Information 

• Key Function (button and rotary knob test) 

• Brightness (Screen brightness adjustment) 


21 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 
























































Diagnosis 


Fault driven diagnosis is possible using the DIS/MoDiC Diagnosis Program. The Diagnosis 


Program features: 

• Identification 

• Read/Clear fault memory 

• Diagnosis requests 

• Fault driven test modules. (E46 concept) 



22 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



Mk-1 NAVIGATION SYSTEM 
Model: E38, E39 
Production Date: 10/96 to 9/97 


Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Understand the principles of GPS Navigation. 

• List the components used in the Mk-1 system. 

• Recognize the reasons that would require a system calibration. 


23 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 




GPS - NAVIGATION SYSTEM 


GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM (GPS) 

The BMW Navigation system operates in conjunction with the Global Positioning System 
(GPS). Utilization of the GPS improves the accuracy and provides redundancy for the 
Navigation system which also incorporates a dead reckoning system. The GPS was 
designed by the US Government in the 1970s for military purposes. In recent years it has 
been made available for civilian use. 



There are 24 satellites equally divided among six orbits that are positioned 11,000 miles out 
in space. Each satellite continuously emits a radio signal. The signals contain short 
information messages including: 

• The exact time the message was broadcast. 

• Current latitude and longitude positions relative to the orbit. 

24 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 










A GPS receiver device on earth receives these signals from the satellites and determines its 
own location by: 


Comparing its internal clock signal with the satellites. 
This determines the distance from the satellites 
location. 

Through triangulation computation, the receiver 
module calculates its own longitude and 
latitude position. This is only possible when it 
receives a minimum of three satellite signals. ^ 



SATELLITE B 


SATELLITE C 



IF SATELITE "A" IS THERE, 

"B" IS THERE AND "C IS THERE, 

MY CALCULATIONS TELL ME THAT 
I AM AT THESE COORDINATES: 


GPS SIGNALS 
INCLUDE: 

• EXACT TIME OF SIGNAL 

• CURRENT 
SATELLITE 
COORDINATES 


In a sense, GPS can be compared to navigation methods used by sailing ship navigators 
years ago. They used a sextant to plot the changing locations of known stars to determine 
their own position. This, in conjunction with compass navigation, proved an accurate 
method of sailing across the seas. 



On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 

































The BMW navigation system is based on the CARiN™ system developed by Philips 
Electronics. CARiN™ = Car Information and Navigation System. 

The BMW Navigation system is a CD driven, on board, active route mapping computer. The 
driver can enter a destination through the On Board monitor and the navigation system will 
select a mapped route, from the current location, to the destination. 


The route maps are stored digitally on a 
navigational database CD that is installed in 
a dedicated CD drive in the navigation 
computer. 


The U.S. is divided into 7 mapped CD 
database areas ranging from: 

• Area 1- California and Nevada, through 

• Area 7 - Covering the South Eastern States. 




In addition to the digitized route maps, other information such as hotels, restaurants, 
service stations, dealerships, points of interest and local sight-seeing attractions along with 
their addresses are stored on the database CD. 

The map CDs are currently being updated twice a year. As the updates occur, more streets 
and roads will be added. In addition, more local information will be added with regards to 
businesses, hotels, motels, local attractions, etc. 


26 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



















MARK I NAVIGATION COMPUTER INPUTS 


The Mark I Navigation computer relies on the digitized map CD data to calculate the routes 
to the selected destinations. The Nav. computer also relies on accurate input signals from 
the vehicle to calculate the exact coordinates of the vehicle at all times. 




GPS SIGNALS 
INCLUDE: 

• EXACT TIME 

• CURRENT 
SATELLITE 
COORDINATES 



GPS INPUT SIGNAL: The GPS receiver 
module communicates with the 
navigation computer over a four wire bi¬ 
direction interface. 

The Navigation computer requests the 
exact coordinates of the vehicle over the 
RXD-RXDN link. The GPS receiver 
module responds with the data over the 
TXD-TXDN link. 


4 RXD ITULJR—fUlJlJlJTJTJi 

t RXDN 

4 WIRE, BI-DIRECTIONAL DATA INTERFACE 


"UTimjrnjL^^ 


UinrLJiJiJirTrirLJi 


TXDN 


REQUEST FOR 
VEHICLE POSITION 


CURRENT VEHICLE 
TXD POSITION (COORDINATES) 


TXDN 



BMW NAVIGATION SYSTEM O 


KL 31 


Each two wire link is similar to the CAN line signal but unidirectional. When a data burst is 
transmitted it is mirrored on the other wire as a self check of the data transmission. 


The GPS receiver module is provided KL 30 to maintain vehicle position in memory. When 
KL R is switched on the receiver module resumes monitoring the satellite radio signals 
picked up from the GPS aerial. The link to the GPS antennal is a gold plated coaxial 
connector. 


27 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 
























MAGNETIC FIELD SENSOR 


In addition to the vehicle’s current position, the navigation computer also needs a direction 
of travel input. The magnetic field sensor is used for this purpose. 

The sensor consists of a ferromagnetic ring with two coils of wire placed 90° apart. Signals 
from the two coils become the vehicle’s directional input when the navigation system is in 
operation. 


MAGNETIC 

FIELD 

SENSOR 


BMW Test system Oscilloscope display 
v 


<51 m 


y 












. INTERSECTING 
-MONITORING 


■COMPARED WITH A TABLE 
IN THE NAV COMPUTER 
EQUALS EXACT DIRECTION 



SENSOR OPERATION 

The sensor receives its operating power and ground from the navigation computer. When 
the system is switched on, magnetic fields are induced into the coils. The coils produce a 
voltage signal that is input to the navigation computer. 

As the vehicle turns to the left or right, the earth’s magnetic field influences the coil’s 
magnetic fields causing them to increase and decrease. 

The changing strength of the magnetic fields causes the voltage signal induced in the coils 
to increase and decrease linearly. This creates a changing voltage drop at the monitor in the 
navigation computer. 

The navigation computer determines the direction of travel of the vehicle by plotting the 
simultaneously changing voltage signals. 


28 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 










































































FRONT WHEEL SPEED SENSORS 


The navigation computer is provided with the front wheel speed signals to track the vehicle 
speed/distance and turning. 


LEFT FRONT 
* WHEEL SPEED 
i\ SIGNAL 



RIGHT FRONT 
* WHEEL SPEED 
SIGNAL 



r- 




MORE 


S 

SIGNAL 


\ 

PULSES 


\ 

FROM 

\ 

THAN \ 

RIGHT 

\ 

LEFT j 


l_ EFT | 


\ RIGHT 

FRONT | 

1 lit 

| FRONT 

WHEEL | 

if ||f 

1 WHEEL 

- 


V 



REVERSE GEAR SELECTED 


The nav. computer receives a 12 volt signal from the LCM when the back up lights are 
illuminated. This signal informs the nav. computer that the vehicle is being driven in reverse. 

REAR WINDOW DEFROSTER ON SIGNAL 


When the rear window 
defroster is switched on the C€=[MJJ! 
nav. computer is informed 
via the vehicle bus system: 


IKE 


REVERSE GEAR 
SELECTED - 


• IHKA to the IKE (Kbus) 

• IKE to video module (Ibus) 

• Video module to the nav. 
computer (ARCNET) 

When the nav. computer receives 
the signal, it compensates for the 
magnetic influence from the rear 
defroster. 

This compensation is derived 
from the dealership calibration 
procedure. 


REAR WINDOW 
DEFROSTER ON 



WDDE© 

MODULI 


ARCNET 



NAVIGATION COMPUTER 




RIGHT REAR 

REVERSE 

LIGHT 


29 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 












































































MARK I NAVIGATION SYSTEM OPERATION 


NOTE: There are several methods for 
entering destinations into the 
navigation system computer. The 
following example uses the rotary knob 
to input a destination from the input 
destination screen. 

Enter the navigation system by 
pressing the GPS-Navigation button 
from the main menu. 

After acknowledging the system 
warning, any previously entered 
destination is displayed. This destination 
must be deleted or overwritten in order 
to input a new destination. 

The rotary knob is used to enter a 
city/town from an Alpha-Numeric 
menu or the destination can be 
selected from the index of listed 
locations that are mapped on the CD. 

Next the desired street is entered in the 
same fashion. The street number can 
also be entered at this time. If the 
street number is on the database CD, 
the nav. system will guide the driver 
directly to the house number. 

There are two choices for route 
preference available from this screen, 

• “most use of highways” 

• “least use of highways” 

With either selection, the system will 
pick the most direct route to the 
destination, based on the selection. 

Once the location has been entered, 
the navigation system is ready for 
guidance. Press the directions button. 
30 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 




n 


mm 


Please drive safely, wear your safety 
belt. The navigation system is no 
substitute for the observance of 
traffic laws and constant attention 
to actual traffic situations. 

For your safety do not enter data into 
the navigation system while driving. 
Please press the rotary knob to accept. 


1 07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM 







INPUT DESTINAT 

UNITED STATES 


GREER 


SC 101 

Most use of highways 


Delete 

destination 


Information 

| Directions 

07/24/96 Wednesday 

7:05 PM 


































































The system will guide the driver via: 


• The graphical direction display - which consist ot arrows and text that show the 
current location, the destination and direction ot travel. When turns or intersections 
approach, a voice command will inform the driver when to turn. 


ENTERED DESTINATION 

DISTANCE TO 
NEXT 

INTERSECTION 

DIRECTION 
OF ROAD 

PRESENT 
LOCATION 
(ROAD, TOWN) 


MILEAGE TO DESTINATION 


GREER 
SC 101 


300 YRDS 



Instruction 
Route map 
New route 
Informatior 


A 403 N. LAWRENCEVILLE 


07/24/96 Wednesday 


"HEADING DIRECTION" 

TO DESTINATION 
INPUT SCREEN 

AUDIO INSTRUCTION 
("STRAIGHT ON") 

TO GRAPHICAL 
MAP DISPLAY 

CALCULATES 
ALTERNATE 
ROUTE TO ENTERED 
DESTINATION 

TO INFORMATION 
SCREEN 


• The graphical map display - which consists of a digital road map showing the entered 
route, destination and vehicle position. 


NORTH HEADING 


"HEADING DIRECTION" 


GRAPHICAL 

DESTINATION 


GRAPHICAL 
MAP DISPLAY 



GPS INDICATOR 


MILEAGE TO 
DESTINATION 


DISTANCE TO 
NEXT 

INTERSECTION 


VEHICLE 

CURSOR 


In either display mode a voice command will inform the driver when to turn when turns or 
intersections approach. 

The navigation screen display can be turned OFF (from main menu) and the system will 
remain in operation. The voice command will continue to inform the driver when to turn. 


31 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 













































GRAPHICAL MAP SCALE 


The graphical map display can be 
scaled up or down from 400 feet to 50 
miles depending on the distance to the 
destination. 

This function is activated by turning the 
knob one click, and a sub menu will 
display on screen. Choose “Scale” 
and adjust as needed. 




GRAPHICAL MAP POSITIONING 


The graphical map can be displayed “North Pointing” or “Direction of travel”. This function 
is also accessed by turning the knob one “click” as described above. 


m 

□ 




n 


0 

1 



SURPRISE 

LAKE 


lakeside DrV^ 


07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM 



North Pointing = Top of map is 

always facing north. 


□Bn 

n 


5 



WOODLAND 

PARK 


/o 



* 

130 mi. 


3700 yd 



EH J?- 
o 


J 


07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM 





w 


Direction of Travel = Top of map 

is always facing direction of vehicle 


32 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 











































































































































GPS INDICATION 


Satellite reception, by the navigation system, is indicated in the upper right corner of the 
display screen. The number of satellite signals being received by the system is indicated 
by small white dots in the display that surround the picture of the globe. In addition, the 
GPS logo is displayed at the bottom of the graphic. 


NO SATELLITE SIGNALS 


SATELLITE SIGNALS RECEIVED 
BUT NOT CONSISTANT ENOUGH 
TO CALCULATE ACCURATE 
VEHICLE POSITION 


SATELLITE SIGNALS RECEIVED 
AND CONSISTANT FOR 
CALCULATION OF ACCURATE 
VEHICLE POSITION 



The number of dots indicate the number of satellite signals that the navigation computer is 
receiving. 

If only the globe graphic is displayed, without the dots or logo, the vehicle is in a poor 
reception area or the signals are being blocked by some obstruction. The dead reckoning 
function of the compass and wheel sensors provide adequate navigation in this situation. 

If the dots and logo fail to display in a known good reception area, than a fault is indicated 
and troubleshooting should be carried out according to the fault symptom ‘GPS Problems”. 


33 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 














NAVIGATION SYSTEM INFORMATION SCREEN 


The Information screen provides access to the balance of the navigation system features 
including: 



POINTS OF INTEREST AT 
ENTERED DESTINATION 


POINTS OF INTEREST AT 
CURRENT LOCATION 


ROUTE 

PREFERENCE 

(SAME FUNCTION 

FROM 

ENTER 

DESTINATION 

SCREEN) 


NAVIGATION AUDIO 
VOLUME CONTROL 


fo on destination \7 


Info on current location 
Route preference 
Point to destination-Th 
Addressbook ' 
Volume-Navigation 
Vehicle Position 


07/24/96 Wednesday 


POINT TO DESTINATION 
(X / Y CURSOR POSITIONING 
FOR DESTINATION ENTRY) 


7:05 PM 


ADDRESSBOOK 
(SAVE ENTERED 
DESTINATIONS FOR 
FUTURE USE) 

ACCESS TO SYSTEM 

CALIBRATION 

FUNCTION 

- OWNERS MENU 

- DEALERSHIP MENU 


Information on destination or current 
location provides a detailed list of 
stored points of interest such as: 

• Gas stations 

• Banks 

• Restaurants 

• Hotels, etc., 

This feature allows the user to enter the 
point of interest and change the route 
to guide the driver to the entered point. 



VEHICLE POSITION 

The vehicle position selection from this 
screen provides access to the 
Calibration function of the navigation 
system. 



34 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 
























































MARK I NAVIGATION SYSTEM CALIBRATION 


The Mark I navigation system will require “calibration” at some point in it’s service life. The 
reasons that cause the necessity of a calibration procedure are as varied as inaccurate 
navigation display data, after the installation of a new set of tires, to the replacement of a 
shattered rear window. 

Calibration procedures are divided into two categories 

• Vehicle Owner Calibration - Calibration that the vehicle owner can perform. 

• Dealership Calibration - Procedures only an authorized dealer can perform. 

This section is divided into these two categories. Always consider what the owner of the 
vehicle could have inadvertently changed when troubleshooting and/or calibrating the vehicle. 
Check these data inputs before you embark on a full dealership calibration procedure. 

VEHICLE OWNER CALIBRATION 

The vehicle owner’s manual contains the information on how to set the vehicle position and 
adjust the tire calibration. Both of these adjustments are found on the vehicle position 
screen which is accessed from the information screen as shown on page 24. 

“The Owner Calibration Procedures shown on pages 25-27 are for information 
purposes only. A full Dealership Calibration is the recommended method for 
accurate system calibration.” 

1. RESETTING VEHICLE POSITION 

A mis-located vehicle is caused by driving in and out of the digitized map areas or starting 
a vehicle after it has traveled on a flat bed or train. The system will eventually relocate itself 
automatically through GPS but it can be entered through the on-board monitor for 
immediate resetting. 


From the Vehicle Position Screen, rotate 
the knob to “city:” and push the knob. 

Enter the city and street information as you 
would enter a destination. Press the 
“Intersection” button and select the 
closest intersecting street from the 
displayed index. 

Drive to the entered intersection and press 
the “Crossing the intersect.” button when you cross. 


n 


rwi 


n 


Setting of car parameters 


Wheelbase E39 

Track width 1512 





Drive the vehicle to see if it is 
positioned correctly. 


35 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 






















2. ADJUSTING TIRE SIZE 


Tire calibration is a required input for the Nav computer to base, tire rotation: distance 
covered ratio. It should be checked to determine that the entered tire size is the same as 
the tires equipped on the vehicle. 


Additionally, if the vehicle does not have factory equipped tires installed, the tire calibration 
will need to be changed to match the new tire size. 


Press the “Tire Calibration” button from 
the vehicle position screen. The 
following message is displayed noting 
the overwrite of existing values once 
the procedure is completed. 

Press continue to access the tire 
adjustment screen. 

Press the tire size and rotate the knob 
to see if the tire size is listed. 

Select the correct tire size and press 
the button once again. Note that the 
tire circumference size automatically 
changes to the set tire size. 

If the tire size is not listed the tire 
circumference value must be entered 
manually by rotating the tire size button 
to the “???” position. 

Press and adjust the actual tire size 
dimension in millimeters. 

This value is available from the tire 
manufacture or it can be measured as 
illustrated on the next page. 



"Overwriting" the front tire size 
cancels the former values. Prior to 
fine-adjustment check accuracy of the 
indicated distances over a period 
and make only minor corrections. 


Continue 


1 07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM 



Once the correct tire size or circumference has been entered, press the return button to 
return to the information screen or press the continue button to go on to the Precision 
Adjustment screen. 


36 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 


















































TIRE CIRCUMFERENCE MEASUREMENT 


1. PLACE A STRAIGHT EDGE UP AGAINST 4. PLACE STRAIGHT EDGE AGAINST TIRE. 

THE TIRE DIRECTLY IN THE VERTICAL MOVE VEHICLE PRECISELY TO ALIGN 

CENTERLINE OF THE TIRE THE MARK WITH THE STRAIGHT EDGE. 



2. MARK TIRE AND GROUND 
AT SAME POINT 


5. MARK GROUND. MEASURE DISTANCE. 


PRECISION ADJUSTMENT 


This screen activates a “Regulator” function that “fine tunes” the tire adjustment with regard 
to the displayed distance to an intersection measurement. 

If the displayed measurement is 
consistently “0” before the intersection 
is reached slide the regulator bar 
towards the end of the scale. 


If the displayed measurement is 
consistently “0” after the vehicle has 
passed the intersection, slide the 
regulator bar towards the “+” end of 
the scale. When finished press the 
Ready button. 

It will require a little “trial and error” to 
achieve precision adjustment. 

Keep in mind that distance displays that are 30’ to 60’ out of intersection, in either direction, 
are within the design tolerances of the system and are acceptable. Don’t expect major 
results from using the regulator function. 

If there is an unacceptable displayed distance (more than 150’), the most effective method 
to calibrate the system is to keep the regulator adjustment at “0” and perform a full 
dealership calibration procedure. 



37 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 































DEALERSHIP CALIBRATION 


Calibration of the navigation system must be checked or performed when various 
components of the system are changed or when the troubleshooting procedures of the 
diagnostic module call for it. 

The calibration procedures are stored in the Navigation computer module and are called up 
for display on the LCD screen. 

Complete or partial calibration is required when the following components are changed: 

• Navigation Computer Module - Complete calibration automatically required. 

• Magnetic Field Sensor or rear window (defroster replacement) - Sensor Check and 
Compass Calibration 

• Tires/Wheels - Setting of tire size in tire calibration screen (from Owner Calibration 
Section) and wheel sensor calibration. 

Additionally, if the vehicle has had body work (new sheet metal or welding work) a sensor 
check and Compass calibration should be performed . 

The following preconditions must exist before a successful calibration can be 
carried out: 

• No faults stored in the Navigation system. 

• The correct tire size set in the tire calibration screen. Tires inflated to correct pressures. 

• Known location of: 

- A large flat parking lot with enough width to allow the vehicle to be driven in tight 
circles to the left and right. 

- A “back street” (no traffic) with a minimum 100 meter (approx 330 ft) straight path. 

• There should be no overhead power lines/transformers in the immediate vicinity of the 
parking lot to create any magnetic interference with the magnetic field sensor. 

• All electrical consumers should be switched off - Rear window heating, Radio, seat 
heating, air conditioning, etc. 

TOOLS NEEDED FOR DEALERSHIP CALIBRATION 

• Metric tape measure (minimum 8 meters). 

• Piece of white chalk. 

• 2” X 2” angle iron (6’ long). 

38 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



CALIBRATION PROCEDURES 

The navigation system calibration 
screen menu is called up trom the 
information menu screen. 

Select “Vehicle Position” from the 
information screen, then press and 
hold the menu button for a few 

seconds. The system will enter the 
calibration mode. 

Press “Continue” to proceed with the 
desired system calibration. 





You are starting the nav calibration. 
Switch off all electrical consumers 
and carefully perform 
the following steps. 



07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM | 


The first Dealer calibration screen provides five selections. A full dealer calibration 
procedure consists of carrying out all five selections. 




H 


dpi 


Though they can be done individually 
with positive results, it is recommended 
to complete all five steps to achieve 
consistent positive results. 

Start at “Setting Car Parameters” and 
end with “Finish Calibration”. 

NOTE: If a new navigation computer is 
being calibrated for the first time, the 
individual buttons will not be 
selectable. 


The system will automatically go into a 
“fixed sequence calibration” requiring all steps be performed. 





petting of car parameters 
Sensorcheck 
Wheel sensor 
Compass 
Finish Calibration 




1 07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM 


39 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 


















































1. SETTING OF CAR PARAMETERS 


There are two settings in the 
parameters screen: 


• The vehicle’s track which is as 
follows for the different vehicles: 


• The vehicles wheel base which will 
be an E38 long/short wheel base or 
an E39. 


E38 - long = 1549 
E38 - short = 1549 
E39 =1512 



Changing these settings is not required unless a new Navigation computer is installed in the 
vehicle. If a new nav computer is being calibrated for the first time, enter the vehicle type. 

NOTE: These settings should be checked as part of the troubleshooting procedures to 
verify that they are correct. If the displayed setting does not match the figures 
above, momentarily select another vehicle type and switch back to the correct 
vehicle. The track width value will change to the displayed values as shown above. 

AFTERMARKET WHEELS OR SUSPENSION MODIFICATIONS: 

If the vehicle is equipped with aftermarket wheels or has modified suspension components, 
the track width may need to be manually adjusted. Do the following to obtain this figure: 

1. With the vehicle on the ground (suspension loaded), measure the distance between the 
two front rims (inner rim tire bead lips) in millimeters and note the measurement. 

2. Measure the thickness of one front rim (inside lip to outside lip) using calipers and note 
the measurement. 

3. Add these two figures together. The total is the measured track width. 

Turn the rotary knob to the vehicle type. Then turn the knob “one click” to the LEFT to 
access the track measurement. Turn the knob to enter the value manually. Press knob 
when finished. 


40 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 























2. SENSOR TEST 

The Sensor Test performs a functional check of the wheel speed sensors and magnetic field 
sensor inputs to the navigation computer. 

This test must be carried out if the navigation computer is replaced. The DIS will also call 
for this test to be carried out as part of the troubleshooting procedures. 




□ 






SENSOR CHECK 
Slowly drive a full circle 
to the left. 

Please select START at the beginning 
and STOP at the end of the circle. 




The test requires driving the vehicle in a tight circle at a speed of 6 MPH or less. 

If there are no faults with the inputs, the system will display “Calibration Successful”. At this 
point the calibration procedures can be continued or the vehicle can be returned to the 
workshop to continue the diagnostic procedures. 


41 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 






























3. WHEEL SENSOR 


This procedure is necessary when the navigation computer or wheel/tires have been 
changed. The procedure calibrates the wheel circumference/speed sensor input to the 
navigation computer so that the distance traveled input is correct. 


The tire inflation pressure must be 
checked and correctly set prior to 
carrying out this test. 

NOTE: The screen instructions will 
indicate a 4 and 6 meter distance in 
this procedure. Field testing has 
proven that a distance of 8 meters 
provides a more precise wheel 
sensor calibration. 

1. Make sure the front wheels are 
facing forward. Place the angle iron 
against the back side of the rear tires. 



r 


OVERHEAD VIEW 


^ 1.6'X 2" X 2" ANGLE IRON 




8m 


5. MARK 
GROUND 
WITH 
CHALK 



4. MARK 
GROUND 
WITH 
CHALK 



3. STARTING AT 0, 
MEASURE OUT TO 
4 AND 8 METERS 



2. MARK 
GROUND 
WITH 
CHALK 


0 


2. Mark the road with the chalk where the angle iron contacts the road. This is your 
starting point. 


3. Using a metric tape measure, measure out 4 and 8 meters from the starting point 

4. Mark the distance on the road surface at four (4) meters. 

5. Mark the distance on the road surface at eight (8) meters. 

42 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 
































6. Press the start function on the On-board monitor. 


7. Drive the vehicle slow and continuously forward (don’t stop) until the rear tires are 
between the 4 and 8 meter marks (go as close to the 8 meter mark as possible) and 



MEASURE EXACT 


DISTANCE 

4m 0 


9. PLV\CE ANGLE 
IRON UP AGAINST 
THE REAR OF THE 
TIRES AGAIN AND 
MARK GROUND 


stop. 

8. Press the stop button on the 
monitor. Set the parking brake. 

9. Place the angle iron up against the 
rear of the back tires again and 
mark the ground with the chalk. 


10 Precisely measure the distance 
from the starting point to the end 
point (tolerance < 1cm) and input 
this value using the rotary knob. 

Then press continue. 

Drive the vehicle to the known 

minimum 100 meter street or area. 

Press the start button by driving the vehicle straight ahead for a distance of at least 100 

meters. 

• The vehicle speed must also be < 40 KMH and the steering wheel must be held straight. 

• Once you have travelled at least 100 meters stop the vehicle and press stop. 

• The monitor screen will display the calibration has successfully completed. 



43 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 

































3. COMPASS (MAGNETIC FIELD SENSOR CALIBRATION) 


The magnetic field sensor must be calibrated if: 


• The field sensor is replaced 

• The navigation computer is 
replaced 

• The rear window with the heating 
grid is replaced 

• Body work (welding, reconstruction) 

Calibration of the field sensor is a 

three step process that includes: 




H 







COMPASS CALIBRATION 
Select calibration via CIRCLE 
or drive around a BLOCK of houses 




Circle 


Block 


| 1 07/24/96 W ednesday 7:05 PM | 



COMPASS STEP 1 . Allowing the sensor to read all directions of travel. This is carried out 
in one of two different methods; 

• Driving the vehicle in several tight “circles”, or 

• Driving several times around a “block” (“city block”, “block of houses”) 

One of these methods must be selected on the monitor before beginning. 


44 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 





































Preferred Method- CIRCLE 


Driving the vehicle two complete 
circles - both counterclockwise and 
clockwise - will cover all directions. 

Press Start, the speed of the vehicle 
must not exceed 6 MPH during the 
calibration. 

Press Stop when you have completed. 
The monitor will indicate that the 
navigation computer has seen all 
directions of travel by displaying 
“Calibration Successful”. 



B 




r 


IEI 


if 



Alternate Method - BLOCK 

Driving the vehicle around a block 

several times will also allow the 
navigation computer to see all 
directions of travel. 

The monitor will automatically indicate 
when this section of the calibration is 
completed. 



45 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 









































COMPASS STEP 2. Calibration of the 
magnetic field sensor input to the 
navigation computer. 

This procedure is only possible after 
STEP 1 has been completed. Step 2 is 
carried out in one of three different 
methods; 

• Calibration using a digitized 
address. 

• Calibration using the GPS satellite 
signals. 

• Angular calibration using the 
direction of a long section of road. 



Preferred Method - DIGITIZED 
ADDRESS 

This procedure can only be used 
within a fully digitized CD map 
area. 

The actual location is entered into the 
on-board monitor and the navigation 
system will display a route between 
two road intersections, along which the 
vehicle must be driven. 



1. If the town is not already displayed, 
enter it in the same method as 
entering a destination. 

2. Enter the street at which you want 
to start the calibration. 

3. Press the intersection button. 



46 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 















































































4. Select the street from the list of 
intersecting streets that is close to where 
the vehicle is at this point. 

5. Press the “In direction” button. This 
brings up a list of streets that are in the 
direction of your planned calibration drive. 

6. Select the street that is in your planned 
direction of travel. 

7. Press Start when you begin to drive. 





□ 


Parkway Drive -> Patton Ave. 
|Roche Street -> Aton Blvd. 

o 





1 07/24/96 Wednesday 


7:05 PM | 





After Start Drive in 


direction wait for 


results or select 


Stop. 


J Start 

Stop 

07/24/96 Wednesday 

7:05 PM 




The screen will automatically confirm that the calibration was successful. Press the 
continue button to go to Compass Step 3; Rear Window Defroster grid compensation 
calibration 


47 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 





































































































COMPASS STEP 2 (Continued) 

Alternate Method - GPS 

This requires driving the vehicle in all 
directions until the navigation computer 
fixes the field sensor inputs. 

This may require several minutes of 
driving to complete this step. The 
roads should be as straight as possible 
and free from any overhead 
obstructions that might block the 
upward view to the satellite signals. 

The screen will automatically confirm 
that the calibration was successful. 

Press the continue button to go to 
Compass Step 3; Rear Window 
Defroster grid compensation 
calibration 



SIS 


F*l 





COMPASS CALIBRATION 
After start, drive some some long, 
straight distances in several directions. 
Watch for clear sight to the sky 
wait for the result or select stop. 




I 07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM | 


Last Method - Angle 

Angular calibration using the direction 
of a long section of road. To use this 
method, the geographical angle of the 
road must be known and input into the 
navigation computer to within ±1 °, then 
the vehicle must be driven along this 
route. 


n 


□ 









Calibration Successful. 


Continue 


| 07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM 



Any of these three described methods 
will perform the second step in the compass calibration. Once this step is complete, the 
last step can be carried out. 


48 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 











































































COMPASS STEP 3 - REAR WINDOW DEFROSTER COMPENSATION 


This procedure is only possible after 
steps #1 and #2 have been 
successfully completed. 

The navigation computer determines 
the magnetic field generated by the 
defogger grid so it can compensate for 
this when the rear defogger is switched 
on. 


• Switch the rear defogger ON and 
confirm the input on the Monitor 
screen. Wait for acknowledgment 
by the navigation system. 

• Switch the rear defogger OFF and 
confirm the input on the monitor 
screen. Wait for acknowledgment 
by the navigation system 


FINISH CALIBRATION 

Once all of the required calibration 
procedures have been carried out, 
press the finish calibration button. 

This will display whether the calibration 
process was successful or if faults or 
problems have occurred that require 
troubleshooting with the DIS . 






REAR WINDOW HEATING 
Please wait a moment. 






REAR WINDOW HEATING 
Stop Car. 

Switch ON rear 

screen heating and select ON, 

then switch OFF and Select OFF. 




07/24/96 Wednesday 7:05 PM 


49 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 









































































MARK I NAVIGATION SYSTEM SOFTWARE LOADING 


As new operational software becomes 
available, it will be necessary to update existing 
navigation computers with this latest version 
software. 

As with other BMW systems, the software will 
be distributed on a CD. It will be introduced by 
an SI or IDC bulletin describing the revisions of 
the new CD and the loading procedures as 
outlined below. 

The software loading procedure is also 
required if the troubleshooting procedures of 
the DIS tester call for it.. 



The procedure for loading the updated software is a s follows: 


• Remove the existing digitized map 
database CD. 

• Turn the ignition switch On. 

• Insert the new software CD. 

• Any currently running program will be 
interrupted and the message “Please Wait” 
will be displayed on the monitor screen. 

• The new software will automatically be 
installed. When the procedure is 
complete, the screen will display 
“Software Loaded Successfully”. 

• The software loading must be 
acknowledged by pressing the rotary 
knob and removing the software CD. 

• The digitized map CD is then reinstalled - 
followed by a map guided test drive to 
ensure proper operation of the navigation 
system. 





50 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 















































MARK I DIAGNOSIS AND TROUBLESHOOTING 


There are three diagnostic programs for the On Board Monitor system with the Mk-1 
Navigation Computer with video module. 

Based on the customer complaint, one or more of these systems will need to be accessed 


with the DIS Tester for diagnostic purposes. 

CONTROL MODULE ID: BOARD MONITOR 



CONTROL MODULE ID: NAV COMPUTER 


CONTROL MODULE ID: VIDEO MODULE 



The On Board Monitor system must be fully 
functional before any visual displays, inputs 
or programming can be carried out. 

The Video Module must be fully functional 
before any graphical displays can be 
transmitted to the Monitor unit. 

The Navigation Computer must be fully 
functional before any programmed 
destinations can be called up for display 
and directions. 


In all cases fault troubleshooting should begin with the “Fault Symptom” troubleshooting 
paths provided by the DIS. 

In the case of positioning errors or faults with the Navigation System, the DIS will request a 
“Sensor Test” be performed prior to carrying out the diagnosis. This test procedure is 
outlined in the calibration procedures. 


51 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 




The navigation system diagnostic software 
has a “SELECTION” screen that is unique 
to any previous system. 

• The choice, 1 - “Start diagnosis 
again”, means to start the diagnostic 
session (either the first time or restart a 
fresh diagnostic session.) 

• 2- “Sensor test has already been 
carried out, reassume diagnosis.”, 

means to resume the diagnostic 
session. This selection is used when 
you have first started a session and the instructions on the DIS screen request that you 
disconnect the vehicle and bring it outside for a sensor check or another “field test” of 
some type as described in the diagnostic pages. When you return to the DIS, Select 
#2 to resume the diagnostic session started previously. 

The Navigation Service Functions contains 
calibration data screens to review the 
vehicles present state of calibration 
(calibration status list). The calibration data 
(#2) is set up for E38 vehicles only at the 
time of navigation system introduction. 

Calibration data of wheel-sensor 
calibration provides a printout page of the 
vehicles actual distance to wheel sensor 
pulse. This screen will prove helpful when 
dealing with the technical hotline if 
additional data is requested from them on 
wheel sensor calibration data values. 

NAVIGATION COMPUTER FLASH CODES 

The “ON LED” of the navigation computer 
automatically provides flash codes for when a 
fault is present. 

• Single Flash = Internal control module fault. 

• Triple Flash = ARCNET data link problem 
(open, short). 





52 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



































































MK-2 NAVIGATION SYSTEM 
Model: E38, E39, E53, E46 
Production Date: From 9/97 to 9/00. 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Explain the differences between Mk-2 and Mk-2 Navigation. 

• List the components used in the system. 

• Describe the operation of the Gyro Sensor. 


53 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 




MARK II NAVIGATION SYSTEM 

The Mark II Navigation system became available as factory installed optional equipment for 
all E38/E39 vehicles starting with 9/97 production. Manufactured by Phillips, the Mark II 
system is the second generation Navigation system based on the Mark I system introduced 
in October 1996. 

To the operator, the Mark II system changes are almost transparent. The overall system 
function and most of the systems components carry over from the Mark I system. 

The Mark II system provides: 

• Reduction in the total number of components, 

• Simplified control module interface, 

• Automatic calibration procedure. 


COMPONENT LOCATIONS AND CHANGES 

Trunk area: At first glance, the reduction of Board Monitor/Navigation system components 
in the left side trunk area, is immediately recognized. 

• Though the Navigation Computer looks the same as the Mk-1 from it’s installed posi¬ 
tion, it is actually a different component. It provides expanded capabilities and simpli¬ 
fied system interface compared with the same component of the Mark I system. 


• The GPS receiver module is 
also a different component. It 
has an ELO connector for 26 
pin breakout box compatibility. 

• The radio and audio system 
amplifier are the same compo¬ 
nents of the previous system. 

• The Video Module of the Mark I 
system is not utilized with the 
Mark II system in the US market. 


All of the Navigation system/Board monitor functions previously handled by the 
video module are controlled by the Mk-2 navigation computer. 



54 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 







Parcel Shelf Mounted Components: 


The GPS Receiver Module Antenna is the only compo¬ 
nent of the Mark II system mounted on the parcel shelf. 

The antenna component has a slightly different appear¬ 
ance but provides the same function of the Mark I system 
antenna. 

The parcel shelf mounted Magnetic Field Sensor of the 
Mark I system is not used for the Mark II system. 


Board Monitor: 

The physical characteristics of the Board Monitor are unchanged from the Mark I system. 
It provides the visual display information and control for: 

• Audio system (radio, tape, cd and DSP systems) 

• Board Computer V 

• Mark II Navigation system 

• Telephone (if equipped) 

• Emergency function (Mayday programming) 

• Owner customized Board Monitor settings 



Since the limited television audio capabilities of the Mark I system are not available with the 
Mark II system, the Television function has been removed from the Board Monitor main 
menu. 



55 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 

















































































MARK II NAVIGATION COMPUTER 

Though the front bezel is identical to Nav computer of 
Mark I system, the Mark II Navigation computer is an 
different new component. 

Standardized ELO connectors replace the “blade 
type” connectors of the Mark I system. This ensures 
circuit integrity and allows simplified 26 pin breakout 
box connection for diagnostic purposes. 

The expanded capabilities of the Mark II Nav comput¬ 
er has made it possible to delete the following required 
connectors of the Mark I system: 


• the magnetic field sensor input connector, 

• the ARCNET triaxial connector, 

• the 3 amp fuse has also been deleted. 

INTEGRAL ELECTRONIC PIEZO GYRO SENSOR 

The nav computer contains an elec¬ 
tronic gyro sensor that detects 
changes in the vehicle’s driven direc¬ 
tion (changes in vehicle yaw). Similar 
to the Rotation Rate Sensor of the 
DSC III system, the gyro sensor mea¬ 
sures the motion of the vehicle on it’s 
vertical axis. 

This is an internal component of the 
Nav Computer. It is not serviceable 
nor does it require calibration. 

Do not open the Nav computer, this will void it’s warranty. Photo is only intended to pro¬ 
vide functional understanding 

The gyro sensor provides status of vehicle turning maneuvers in the form of a changing voltage 
signal that the Nav computer uses as an input signal. 

The Nav computer requires the gyro sensor’s input signal along with the digitized map CD, the 
vehicle speed signal, and the GPS signals together to calculate, continually update and display 
the exact vehicle position on the LCD. 




56 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 











Gyro Sensor Operation: 

• The internal control electronics of the sensor maintain a constant set frequency which is 
applied to the oscillation elements causing a calculated vibration to occur. The frequency is 
also simultaneously monitored by the phase detector. 

• The vibration passes up to the pick-up elements of the tuning fork causing them to vibrate 
and be suspended in a free floating state, easily influenced by rotational movement. 



(turned/veered left, or 
turned/veered right) 

• When the vehicle turns, the free-floating upper ends of the tuning fork flex. This generates a 
millivoltage signal proportional to the turn. 

• The signal amplifier receives the signal and passes it on to the phase detector which com¬ 
pares it to the original set frequency. 

• The phase detector determines what direction the vehicle has turned and passes the result 
on to the frequency filter. 

• Since the piezo gyro sensor is also picking up other vibrational movements in the vehicle, the 
frequency filter isolates the pertinent yaw signals and provides a DC voltage signal proportional 
to the left/right turning movement of the vehicle. 


57 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 

























ON-BOARD MONITOR AND NAVIGATION SYSTEM INTERFACE 


• The 1-Bus is the main communication link. 










The video module of the Mark I system is not used with the Mark II system in the US market 
(reduced cost, simplified system, faster operation). 

The Mark II nav computer communicates directly on the 1-Bus (ARCNET not used). It 
generates the RGB video signals and sends them to the On-Board Monitor LCD. It also 
provides improved quality audio signals directly to the amplifier for navigation specific 
audio instructions (“right turn ahead”). 

The Mark II nav computer receives two wheel speed sensor signals from the DSC sys¬ 
tem for monitoring vehicle speed and distance covered. 

The Mark II nav computer incorporates an electronic gyro compass which takes the 


place of the magnetic field sensor of the previous system. 




CD 

PLAYER 

AUDIO 

SIGNALS 



IMFL-CM 





58 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



















































































































CHANGES TO THE BOARD MONITOR BASIC FUNCTIONS 


At first glance the system looks and 
operates similar to the previous Mk-1 
system. Only when looking further 
into the control settings and features 
is a change noticed. 

Automatic Date/Time display: 

When a door is opened the GM sig¬ 
nals status of “door open” on the K 
bus. Via the I Bus, the IKE passes the 
signal onto the Nav computer which 
generates the RGB signals for display 
of the Date/Time on the bottom edge 
of the LCD. 

The Set function of the opening menu 
provides additional owner customized 
settings for the board monitor display. 

After selecting set from the main 
menu, scroll down to the bottom of 
the list, an additional three items are 
included: 

• BC display: Provides selection of 
either the outside temperature 

or estimated arrival time of the 
set distance set in the board com¬ 
puter functions. These items are 
displayed along with the other BC 
functions when the Audio + BC is 
set function is “On”. 

• Color set: Provides three set vari¬ 
ations of screen color schemes. 

• Day/night: Provides a deviation 
of the selected color set when the 
headlights are switched on. 




Though subtle, these changes provide added convenience and provide the owner the 
opportunity to slightly customize their vehicle’s On-board monitor display. 


59 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 































































NAVIGATION SYSTEM DIAGNOSTIC MODE DISPLAYS 


The Mark II system does not commu¬ 
nicate with the DIS. It does however 
provide an onboard diagnostic mode 
on screen display function. 

These screens provide system hard¬ 
ware/software identification numbers 
and status of Navigation specific func¬ 
tions for use as a diagnostic tool. The 
screens are accessed as follows: 

• From the main menu select “Set”. 

• Once in the Set function, press 
and hold the menu button for 8 
seconds. 

• The first screen to appear is the 
SERVICE MODE menu. 

The On-board monitor and Video 
module selections are not functional 
even though they are displayed. 

The first accessible function is the 
NAVI/GRAPHIC ELEMENT. This screen 
is for identification of hardware/ soft¬ 
ware specific index versions for the 
installed system. 

The next available selection from the 
service mode menu is GPS. Pressing 
GPS brings up the GPS version dis¬ 
play. 

This display provides the GPS receiv¬ 
er module hardware version number 
and date of programmed software. 

Pressing the functions button in the 
lower right corner of this screen pro¬ 
vides a sub-selection menu of addi¬ 
tional GPS system status. 




n 



JOn-board monitor 
NAVIGATION / GRAPHIC ELEMENT 
Video module 
GPS 

Sensor check 
VIN 







SW level: 

HW level 
DIAG index: 
BUS index: 
Encoding Index 
Supplier: 


0103708. 





I 

□ 


n 




Receiver Version 
Receiver SW Date: 



7.51 

EE 

1.1.97 




(Functions 

1 08/24/97 Sunday 

7:05 PM 


r 



60 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 
























































The sub-selection menu additionally 
includes GPS “Status” and “Tracking” 
choices. 

• GPS Status provides information on the 
exact coordinates of the vehicle based 
on the calculations of the GPS receiver 
module. 

• GPS Tracking provides information about 
the individual satellites currently sending 
signals to the GPS receiver module. 





The next selection available from the SERVICE MODE menu is “Sensor check” which provides: 










Wheel speed input (only one wheel speed signal, displayed in the right side window), 


Total number of GPS satellites 
currently providing signals, 

What mode the GPS receiver module 
is currently in; (ie: Search) 

The Gyro status provides the millivolt- 
age value the Nav computer is utilizing 
for the current vehicle position. This 
area also includes an icon represent¬ 
ing what direction the vehicle is head¬ 
ing in. 



• The direction status relates to what gear the vehicle is currently in (forward or reverse). 


61 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 
















































































































The last selection available in the Service Mode menu is the VIN entry display. The VIN is 
entered at the VPC when prepped prior to distribution. This is tor the VIN display in the 
Emergency program if needed when calling the Cross Country Group Roadside Assistance 
Program. Additionally, if the vehicle is equipped with a Phase V phone the system will auto¬ 
matically utilize the entered VIN as follows. 

Similar to the previous phone system, the Phase V phone has the capability to contact Cross 
Country Group using the “Assist” or “Emergency” button from the Emergency or Telephone 
functions. 

What’s new for the Phase V system is the use of dual tone multi frequency (DTMF) signalling. 

DTMF signalling provides a download 
of the VIN, the telephone number of 
the Phase V phone and the vehicle 
coordinates when the assist button 
was pressed. This information is dis¬ 
played on a computer screen of the 
Cross Country Group “assist” person¬ 
nel prior to any verbal communication 
taking place. 

Through a data base, the VIN pro¬ 
vides the Owner’s Name. This, in con¬ 
junction with the vehicle coordinates 
and the phone number provides the 
“assist” personnel with crucial prelimi¬ 
nary information. 

When the call is patched in from the vehicle, the assist personnel can answer appropriate¬ 
ly for an “assist” or “emergency” situation. This quick response with the owner’s pertinent 
information provides an added personnel touch and time savings in an emergency situa¬ 
tion. 

The VIN is entered at the VPC for all vehicles (with or without a Phase V phone). If the VIN 
has been incorrectly entered it can be changed by turning and pressing the rotary knob 
when the correct letter or digit of the last seven character of the VIN is displayed. 



62 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 

























MARK II NAVIGATION SYSTEM CALIBRATION 


The calibration procedure of the Mark I system is not required with the Mark II system. This 
system self calibrates automatically as the vehicle is driven after following the steps below. 

• System must be fully functional with no faults present in fault memory. 

• Correct Map data base CD installed for your area. 

• Vehicle outside with an unobstructed overhead view. Switch ignition on and allow sys¬ 
tem adequate time to receive a minimum of three GPS signals. This is confirmed by the 
green GPS indicator in the map display. 

• Set the map display to the 400’ scale and drive the vehicle on digitized roads. Make fre¬ 
quent turns at intersections where possible. 

While driving, the system utilizes the map CD, the received GPS coordinates, the Gyro sen¬ 
sor to determine turn activity and the wheel speed sensor input. It compares all of these 
variables and automatically pinpoints the vehicle position. 

MARK II NAVIGATION SYSTEM DIAGNOSIS 


The reduction of Nav system components also reduces the scope of diagnosis. The Nav 
computer and Board monitor are the systems which must be considered for when diag¬ 
nosing the total system. 


The Mark II Navigation computer does not communicate with the DIS tester. Use the 
onboard diagnostic screens outlined on the previous pages for navigation system specific 
diagnosis. 


Follow the fault symptom path of the DIS Diagnosis Program for detailed 
diagnostic procedures for the board monitor and LCD panel. 



63 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 





Mk-3 NAVIGATION SYSTEM 

Models: E38, E39, E46, E52, E53 

Production Date: E46 from 6/00, all others from 9/00 

Objectives 

After completing this module you should be able to: 

• Recognize the changes to Mk-3 from the previous Mk-2 navigation system. 

• Identify the components used in the system. 

• Describe how to properly code and program the Mk-3 computer. 


64 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 




Purpose of the System 


The Mk-3 navigation system is a factory installed navigation system that replaces the 
previous Mk-2 version. The purpose of the system remains the same as previous 
navigation systems: To provide the driver with navigation instructions to an entered 
destination based on the vehicles current position and the roads available selected from 
a digitized road map. 


The principle differences of the Mk-3 system over the previous Mk-2 are: 

• GPS receiver is integrated into the MK-3 computer. 

• Optimized memory and faster processor resulting in faster start-up and operation. 

• New split screen and magnifying feature when equipped with wide screen monitor, 
(software feature) 

• Same navigation computer used for color board monitor or monochrome MIR display 
units. 


65 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 



System Components 

Mk-3 Navigation Computer 

The Mk-3 navigation computer is located in 
the left side of the vehicles trunk or cargo area. 
(In the case of the Z8 it is installed in the stor¬ 
age box behind the passenger seat.) 

The navigation computer housing contains: 

• Map CD drive 

• Hardware for navigation function 

• GPS receiver 

• Gyro sensor 

• Output for audio interface 

• Output for visual display 

• Cooling fan for unit 



There are two different hardware versions available dependent on the angle of installation 
in the vehicle (horizontal or vertical). The Mk-3 is compatible with both board monitor or 
MIR display units. (See workshop hints for configuration instructions) 


Identification of the Mk-3 computer over the previous versions is easy due to a change in 
the face plate design and the elimination of the “CD-IN” LED. 


Mk-3 Navigation 
Computer 




Mk-1 and Mk-2 
Navigation Computer 


66 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 

































Mk-3 computer 



GPS antenna 
connection 


18 pin ELO 
connectors: 


XI313: Violet 
X1312: Blue 


Integrated GPS receiver and Gyro (rotation) sensor 


GPS (Global Positioning System) Receiver 

The GPS receiver module of the previous Mk-2 system is integrated into the housing of the 
Mk-3 computer, further reducing the complexity and the number of components used in 
the system. The receiver is not serviceable. 

The GPS receiver is responsible for receiving the satellite signals and providing the vehicle’s 
position information to the navigation computer. 

Information provided by the GPS receiver to the navigation computer can be displayed in 
the service mode (see workshop hints) but is not typically used in diagnosis. 


Gyro (Rotation) Sensor 

The navigation computer contains the electronic (piezo) Gyro sensor that detects rotation 
(yaw) of the vehicle as a confirmation that the vehicle is turning. The signal provided by the 
gyro is a mili-voltage that changes as the vehicle rotates. The navigation computer uses 
the input to track the vehicle along the digitized map and display the exact vehicle position. 

The signal is available in the sensor test page of the service mode for diagnosis. The 
sensor is not a separately serviceable item and does not require calibration. 


67 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 






GPS Antenna 

The GPS antenna is directly connected to the navigation computer via a coaxial cable. 
Locations of the antenna in the vehicles are as follows: 


E38: 

E39 sedan: 

E39 Sport Wagon: 
E46 sedan/coupe: 
E46 Sport Wagon: 
E46 Convertible: 
E52: 

E53: 


Under the rear parcel shelf. 

Under the rear parcel shelf. 

Behind the dashboard on the left side. 
Under the rear parcel shelf. 

Above the rear glass under the spoiler. 
Behind the instrument cluster. 

Left front corner behind the dashboard. 
Above the rear glass under the spoiler. 


Display Units 


Based on the particular model, the factory installed Mk-3 system is displayed using a color 
board monitor or on a smaller monochromatic screen (MIR). 


E52 MIR (Multi Information Radio) 




E46/E53 Color Board Monitor 


E38/E39 Wide Screen Color Board Monitor 
(phased in for E53 1/01, E46 9/01) 



68 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 










































































Navigation System Interface 




FOR AMPLIFICATION 



CD 

PLAYER 

AUDIO 

SIGNALS 


TAPE PLAYER 
AUDIO SIGNALS 



MFL-CM 





Example of E38/E39 with Mk-3 navigation 


69 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 

























































































Information/body bus Interface 

The navigation computer is integrated into the vehicle bus system as it’s main communica¬ 
tion link with the vehicle. 

Communication occurs with the following modules: 

• BMBT - Control inputs 

• Radio - Display data 

• GM - Door open 

• IKE/Kombi - On-board computer data 

• Telephone PSE Box - Monitor display data, mayday function 

• DISplus - Coding data 

PSE = Portable Support Electronics 

Video/Audio Signals 

Board Monitor (Top Navigation) 

The RGB video signal for all display functions of the board monitor are produced by the 
navigation computer graphics stage via three output signals. The Red-Green-Blue signals 
are direct inputs to the board monitor. The audio signals for navigation instructions to the 
radio are sent via two separate lines. 

GPS ANTENNA 



MIR (Radio Navigation) 

Since a color display is not used for the MIR, the navigation information for the display is 
sent via a NAV bus. The NAV bus is a single dedicated line between the Mk-3 computer 
and the MIR. Audio signals for navigation instructions are sent to the radio via two 
separate lines. 



AUDIO SIGNALS 

NAV BUS 



E52 MIR 


70 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 
































































Speed Signals 

A speed signal is provided to the navigation computer for detection of distance traveled and 
vehicle speed to calculate the vehicles position on the digital map. The input is a processed 
signal provided by the vehicles DSC control unit. 

• E46: The speed signal used is from the left rear wheel. 

• E38/E39/E52/E53: The speed signal used is from the left front wheel. 

Reverse Gear Input 

The reverse gear input is used by the navigation computer to distinguish between the 
vehicle backing up or turning around. 

• E38/E39/E52/E53: The reverse input is a high signal produced by the LCM III. 



• E46: The reverse input is a high signal supplied by a splice from the back-up lights. 


Automatic Transmission KL15 KL30 



Reversing 
Light Relay 
K6325 


71 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 









Workshop Hints 


Replacing the Mk-3 navigation computer 

When replacing the Mk-3 navigation computer be aware that there are two hardware 
variants depending on the installation position (vertical or horizontal). 

The ignition should be in position 0 during removal and replacement of the computer. After 
installing, close all doors, hood and trunk. A bus line reset will be carried out within two 
minutes. Resetting allows the gyro to perform a calibration run. Do not move the car 
during this reset period. 

The coding sequence for the Mk-3 navigation computer has been changed from the 
previous Mk-2. There is now an additional step (configuration) that must be done before 
the software can be loaded. 


After resetting, a configuration signal is needed to allow the computer to load the correct 
software for use with a board monitor or MIR. This is performed using the DIS coding pro¬ 
gram (CD 22.0 onward) and the Navigation System operating software (CD VI 5.0 onward). 

Note: Vehicles using the wide screen BM require CD V16.1 onward. 


1. From the DIS/MoDiC Coding /Programming 
select “1 ZCS Coding” 

2. Select the appropriate series 
(E46,E39,E38,E52,E53) 

3. Select “4 Conversion” 

4. Select “3 IKE?Kombi” 

5. Select “2 language” 

6. At the prompt “is the CD ROM present?” 
select yes , but do not install the operating 
software CD ROM yet. 

7. First select the main language and then an 
additional language, (i.e. English-spanish) 

8. Select the gender of the navigation audio 
voice. 

9. Select “automatic coding-yes” 




72 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 






















































10. After coding is done the DIS/MoDiC 
instructs you to follow the instructions on 
the monitor for the installation of the 
Navigation System CD ROM. 

11. Place the navigation system software in the 
navigation computer CD drive. 


12. Once loading has been completed, remove the 
CD and then confirm completion by pressing 
the rotary push-button on the monitor. 



Important: Do not switch the ignition off during the 
software loading procedure. Do not use any soft¬ 
ware for the Mk-3 earlier than CD V15.0. 


13. Turn off the key for 10 seconds, then turn it 
back on and conduct a functional check. 

14. After this step has been finished, encode the 
navigation computer using the “Recoding” path 
in ZCS Coding. The coding process involves 
coding vehicle specific data: VIN, Model, 
Telematics data etc. 




n 

= 1 

Software Update 

r I 

1 - 

Programming 

r - 1 

[ ' 1 

( 1 

Application Software Version 2.0 

Language 1 : Amerikan 

Language 2: Spanish 

Progress 


^ j 


i_i 

re 

O 1 



^ J 


The software status can be confirmed from the 
“Set” screen for Mk-3 systems. 

• 3 = Third generation system Mk-3. 

• 1 = Device variant (1 =Color screen, 2= MIR 

monochrome screen). 

• 20 = Software version of the graphic 

component (Version 2.0). 



ursday 


10:17 


e 


After the navigation computer has been successfully programmed and coded the vehicle 
should be left in an area with a clear view of the sky with the key in KL R for at least 15 min¬ 
utes to complete the calibration process. 


73 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 





































Service Mode 


Just as Mk-2, Mk-3 provides an on-screen service mode for diagnosis. The service mode 
provides five different test screens: 


• On-board monitor 

• Naviqation/Graphic element 

• GPS 

• Sensor Check 

• Telematics 


To enter the Navigation Service Mode: 

• Turn the ignition key to position 1 (KL R). 

• From the Menu screen select “SET”. 

• Once in the Set screen, press and hold the “MENU” button for 8 seconds. 

• The Service Mode menu will appear on the display. 

• Select from the Service Mode menu for navigation specific tests. 


r-"-—i 







Press and hold for 8 seconds after entering Service Mode main menu display 

the “Set” mode 


Diagnosis 


Diagnosis is carried out using Test Modules in the Diagnosis Program as well as on-screen 
in the Service mode.The Sensor Check display is intended to be used while test driving the 
vehicle. The following pages contain charts with explanations of the Service Mode display. 




74 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 


















































































STATUS DISPLAY 

WHAT SHOULD BE DISPLAYED 

WHAT TO DO IF NOT OK 

Wheel Sensors: 

As the vehicle is driven, the 
number should increase with an 
increase in vehicle speed. 

Check fault codes in DSC 
system. If necessary carry 
out wheel speed sensor 
test. 

GPS Satellites: 

With unobstructed upward view 
of sky the display should be > 3 

Check for interference of 
signals to GPS antenna, 
Check integrity of circuit 
from GPS antenna to nav 
computer. 

GPS Status: 

“See Legend below” 


Gyro: 

Direction icon moves with vehicle 
turning movement. 

Milli voltage display value should 
be approx 2500 mV (+/- 400mV) 
when the vehicle is stationary or 
driven straight ahead. 

When the vehicle is turning, the 
signal voltage should increase on 
right hand turns and decrease on 
left hand turns. 

Replace Navigation 
computer. 

Direction: 

Reverse is displayed when range 
selector is in reverse. Forward in 
any other range. 

Check back up light 
signal input. 


GPS Status Text Display 

Description 

1. “GPS fault” 

Problem with GPS system. Swap nav computer and or 
antenna from know good vehicle after checking GPS 
status display information 

2. “Reception Interference" 

Problem with GPS system. Same as above. 

3. “No Almanac” 

No Data yet stored from satellites. The GPS almanac is a 
memory account of received satellite signals. If the vehicle 
battery has been disconnected or after replacing a nav 
computer it has an empty memory and requires satellite 
signals to become functional. After the nav computer 
receives battery voltage and ground, it must be left outside 
with an unobstructed sky above with the ignition switched 
to KL R for approximatly 15 minutes. 

4. “Satellite search” 

GPS is currently searching for satellite signals. 

5. “Satellite contact” 

At least one satellite is found 

6. “Position known” 

Vehicle’s Latitude and Longitude known. Navigation is 
possible. 


75 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 


































Menu 

Display 

Explanation 

GPS/Status 

G-speed 

Relative speed over the ground 


Heading 

Direction of travel 


Rec status 

Search/track/position receiver status 


Pos-src 

Number of satellites available for analysis 


PDOP 

Accuracy of the calculated location 


HDOP 

<8=sufficient determinations of location 


VDOP 

<4=very good determinations of location 

G PS/Tracking 

CH 

Channel 

info 

PRN 

Satellite detection 


S/N 

Better reception as the value increases 


Visible Sat 

Number of visible satellites, receivable 

Signals, depending on time of 
day/configuration 


Almanac 

Satellite database, loaded automatically after 
15 minutes 

Telematics 

VIN 

VIN (Automatically assigned during coding) 


Color 

Color code or text 


GSM 

Telephone network/contract number 


BMW info 

Customer specific info 


Emergency call out 

On/off status 


Initialization 

Telematics services on/off status 


Logging off 

Logging off telematics services 


PDOP Position Dilution of Precision 

HDOP Horizontal Dilution of Precision 

VDOP Vertical Dilution of Precision 

S/N Signal/noise relationship 

Gyro Piezo gyro sensor (in navigation computer) 

Dir Direction of travel 


76 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 













Review Questions 


1. List the most significant changes made to the Mk-2 navigation computer over the 
previous Mk-1. Describe the changes between Mk-2 and Mk-3._ 



2. How can the signal provided by the gyro sensor to the navigation computer be 
checked?_ 


3. Describe how the display signals are transmitted from the navigation computer to the 
MIR and board monitor._ 



4. What step is necessary before loading the navigation computer operating software CD 
on a newly replaced Mk-3 navigation computer? Where can the software status be 
confirmed after it has been loaded? 



5. How is the VIN entered into the Mk-2 or Mk-3 navigation computer? 


6. Describe the situations that would require a full calibration be performed on a Mk-1 
navigation computer._ 


7. How are the On-Board Monitor input signals (function requests) received by the Nav. 
computer, Radio, IKE, IHKA and Telephone?_ 



77 

On-Board Monitor and Navigation Systems 










