Table of Contents 

2007 EngineTechnology 

Subject Page 

New Technology for 6-Cylinder Engines .3 

Turbocharging.4 

Turbocharging Terminology .4 

Basic Principles ofTurbocharging .5 

Direct Injection .8 

Direct Injection Principles .9 

M ixture Formation .10 

High Precision Injection .12 


Initial Print Date: 09/06 Revision Date: 











2007 EngineTechnology 


Model: All with 6-cylinderfor2007 
Production: from 9/2006 

■MICIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the technology changes to the NG6 family 

• Understand basic turbocharging principles 

• U nderstand the basics of second generation of direct injection (H PI) 


2 

2007 EngineTechnology 


New Technology for 6-Cylinder Engines 


In 2005, the first of the new generation 6-cylinder engines was introduced as the N52. 
The engine featured such innovations as a composite magnesium/aluminum engine 
block, electric coolant pump and Valvetronic forthe first time on a 6-cylinder. 

To further increase the power and efficiency of this design, three new engines have been 
introduced forthe 2007 model year. These engines are designated the N54 and the 
N52 K. The third engine, the N51, will be also be broughtto the marketto meetthe 
SULEV II requirements in the required states. 

The N54 engine is the first turbocharged powerplant in the US market. In addition to 
turbocharging, the N54 features second generation direct injection and Bi-VANOS. 



The N52K (N52KP) engine is the naturally aspirated version of the new 6-cylinder 
engines. The "K" designation indicates that there are various efficiency and cost 
optimization measures. This engine can also be referred to as the "KP” engine. 

The measures include new optimized components such as the consolidation of various 
items such as the crankcase ventilation system into the cylinder head cover. 

The N51 engine is introduced to comply with SULEV II requirements. The N51 features 
much of the same measures and technology as the previous SULEV engine, the M56. 

This training module discusses the latest 6-cylindertechnology including Direct Injection 
and turbocharging. 


3 

2007 Engine Technology 




Turbocharging 

As far as gasoline engines are concerned, turbocharging has not been in widespread use 
at BMW. As a matter offact, the last turbocharged BMW production vehicle was the E23 
(745) which was not officially imported into the US. The previous "turbo” model before 
that was the legendary 2002 tii turbo in the early 1970's. This 2002 tii turbo was also not 
officially imported into the US. 



Until now, BMW has built a reputation for building high performance engines which are 
naturally aspirated. M uch research has gone into the development of an efficient engine 
design which meets not only the expectations of the customer, but complies with all of 
the current emissions legislation. 

Currently, the global focus has been centered around the use of alternative fuels and 
various hybrid designs. While BMW recognizes these concerns, there is still much 
developmentto be done on the internal combustion engine. Therefore, at leastforthe 
time being, BMW will continue to build the some of best internal combustion engines in 
the world. 

Turbocharging Terminology 

An engine which does not use any form of "forced induction" is referred to as a "naturally 
aspirated" engine. This means that the air which is entering the engine is at atmospheric 
pressure. Atmospheric air enters the engine due to the low pressure created during the 
intake stroke. 

An engine which uses "forced induction" is referred to as supercharged. This means that 
the air entering the engine is under pressure (above atmospheric). As far as terminology 
is concerned, supercharging is the broad term forthis type of technology. 

Supercharging can be broken down into two categories, those engines which use a 
mechanical supercharger and those which use an exhaust driven supercharger. Today, 
BMW is only using turbochargers, which are exhaust driven. 


4 

2007 Engine Technology 













Basic Principles ofTurbocharging 

In orderto make an engine more efficient, it is necessary to ensure an adequate supply of 
air and fuel on the intake stroke. This mixture can then be compressed and ignited to 
create the desired engine power output. A normally aspirated engine relies on the basic 
principle of gas exchange without the use of forced induction. 

The volumetric efficiency refers to the ratio between the theoretical cylinder volume and 
the actual amount of air (and fuel) filling the cylinder during the intake stroke. A naturally 
aspirated engine has a volumetric efficiency of between .6 and .9 (60-90%). With the 
turbocharged engine, volumetric efficiency can peak at over 100%. 

A turbocharger is driven by waste (exhaust) gasses and in turn drives a compressor which 
forces air into the engine above atmospheric pressure. This increase pressure allows for 
an air charge with a greater density. The result is increased torque and horsepower. 



5 

2007 Engine Technology 






The turbocharger consists of a turbine and compressor assembly (l)on a common shaft 
inside of the turbocharger housing. The turbine wheel is driven by waste exhaust gases 
and in turn drives the compressor wheel. 

The compressorforces air into the intake manifold of the engine. The air entering the 
engine from the compressor is above atmospheric pressure. The increased atmospheric 
pressure allows for an air-charge that is more dense and therefore contains more oxygen. 

This increased density during the intake stroke ultimately adds up to the creation of more 
engine output torque. Of course, this increased density much be accompanied by 
additional fuel to create the desired power. This is accomplished by engine management 
system programming to increase injector "on-time" and enhance associated maps. 

To prevent the turbochargerfrom providing too much boost, a "wastegate" (6) is added to 
allow exhaust to bypass the turbine. This provides a means on control forthe turbocharg¬ 
er system. The wastegate is actuated usually via a vacuum diaphragm (6) which is con¬ 
trolled via vacuum fed from solenoids. These solenoids are usually controlled via the 
engine management system. 

Once the intake air is compressed, it is also heated which is not desirable for maximum 
efficiency. To combat this situation a heat exchanger (2) is added between the compres¬ 
sor and the engine intake. This heat exchanger is commonly referred to as an intercooler. 
The intercooler is usually an air-to-air heat exchanger which is installed in the air stream 
ahead of the radiator. The intercooler lowers the intake air charge to achieve the maxi¬ 
mum density possible. 

The use of an exhaust driven turbocharger is used to create more engine powerthrough 
increased efficiency. In the case of the new N54 engine, the turbocharger is used in 
conjunction with direct fuel injection. This provides the best combination of efficiency 
and powerwith no compromise. 

For more information on the N54 bi-turbocharging system, referto the training module 
"2007 Engine Management". 



6 


2007 Engine Technology 



4 


5 ) 


6 , 
7 ^ 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Compressor and turbine wheel 
(on common shaft) 

5 

Exhaust bypass from wastegate 

2 

Charge aircooler (intercooler) 

6 

Wastegate (and diaphragm) 

3 

Engine 

7 

Vacuum control for wastegate diaphragm 

4 

Exhaust outlet from turbine housing 




7 

2007 Engine Technology 


































































Direct Injection 

The term "direct injection" refers to a fuel injection system which injects fuel directly into 
the combustion chamber ratherthan into the intake manifold. This technology has been 
around since the 1930's, but has not been in widespread use until the late 20th century. 

The early development of this type of injection system took place in Germany in 1937 on 
an aircraft engine. The first passenger car to run on direct engine was a car called the 
"Gutbrod" in 1952. 



Due to the complexity and cost of the direct injection system, the technology did not take 
hold. Later, the development of more cost efficient components and the need for a more 
efficient internal combustion engine, the Dl engine made a comeback in the late 1990's. 

The first application of this technology on a BMW was in 2003 on the 760Li. The new 
N73 V-12 engine utilized direct injection with the combination ofValvetronic and the 
latest direct injection technology. 

Forthe 2007 model year, BMW has introduced a new 6-cylinder engine with directfuel 
injection. The N54, which is turbocharged, uses the second generation of direct injection 
(Dl 2), which is referred to as High Precision Injection (HPI). 


8 

2007 Engine Technology 



Direct Injection Principles 

As the name suggest, the direct injection (Dl) system use a fuel injector which sprays fuel 
directly into the combustion chamber. The fuel injection pressure (N73) is from 80 to 
120 bar. The A/F mixture in a Dl engine is formed inside of the combustion chamber. 


In comparison, a manifold injection system sprays fuel into the intake manifold or into the 
intake port near the intake valve. In this case, the A/F mixture is formed outside of the 
combustion chamber. The injection pressure on most manifold injection systems is 
between 3 and 5 bar. 




nxgcci 


The Dl system allows for increased engine efficiency and has several distinct advantages 
over manifold injection systems: 

• The fuel is evaporated and atomized in the combustion chamber, which provides a 
"cooling effect" on combustion. A cooler combustion chamber allows an increase in 
air density, which allows for more available oxygen. In addition, cooler combustion 
allows for an increase in compression ratio which equates to improved efficiency and 
engine power. 

• By injecting the fuel directly into the combustion chamber, there is less possibility for 
fuel to condense or accumulate on the manifold walls orthe back of the intake valve. 
This results in less fuel needed to achieve the desired A/F ratio. 

• The increased injection pressure causes the fuel droplet size to be reduced. This 
allows for improved atomization and therefore improved mixture formation. 


9 

2007 Engine Technology 




Mixture Formation 

In a conventional (manifold injection) engine, the airfuel mixture is formed outside of the 
combustion chamber. In contrast, the mixture must be formed inside the combustion 
chamber in a Dl engine. 

A Dl fuel system has two basic operating concepts: 

• Homogeneous Mixture Formation - A homogeneous mixture means that the 
A/F ratio is stoichiometrically controlled much in the same way as a manifold 
injection system. This means that the A/F mixture is evenly spread throughout the 
combustion chamber. One of the primary advantages of this arrangement is that a 
conventional three-way catalytic converter can be used. Also, the sulfur content of 
the fuel is not a factor which allows the engine to be used in all global markets. 
Currently, BMW only uses engines which operate in this mode. The N73 and N54 
both operate mostly at Lambda = 1. 


• Stratified Mixture Formation - In the stratified injection method, a homogeneous 
mixture is only created around the area of the spark plug. A lean (inhomogeneous) 
mixture exists in the rest on the combustion chamber. Therefore the overall A/F 
mixture in the combustion chamber is lean (lambda > 1). This results in increased 
combustion chambertemperature, and subsequently increased NOx emissions. 

The increased NOx requires the use of a DeNOx catalyst which is not effective when 
sulfur is present in the fuel. Therefore, sulfurfree fuel must be used which is not 
readily available in all markets. Forthe time being, BMW does not have any engines 
which operate as "stratified charge" engines. 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

Manifold injection 

2 

Homogeneous direct injection 

3 

Stratified direct injection 


10 

2007 Engine Technology 









Nd i i 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Lean, charge stratification 

2 

Lean, homogeneous 

3 

Homogeneous 

Nd 

Engine torque 

n 

Engine speed 


As the above chart shows, the use of load stratification (1) is only possible in a limited 
load and speed range. Over and above this load and speed range, the engines can only 
be operated in homogeneous mode (2-3). 

Through the deployment of Valvetronic, the N73 engine in the middle torque/speed range 
(1) demonstrates the same consumption advantages as engines of other manufacturers 
with charge stratification. 

Because large-capacity engines are mainly operated in the lowerto middle load and 
speed range, it is only advisable to use load stratification in these engines. 

Smaller-sized engines are mainly operated in the high load and speed range and thus in 
homogeneous mode. 

Both the N73 and N54 engines operate mostly in the homogeneous mode with a lambda 
value of 1. In the US market, BMW does not use a "stratified charge" engine due to the 
fact that these engines emit high NOx levels. 


11 

2007 Engine Technology 
















High Precision Injection 


The new BMW High Precision Injection (HPI) is the latest development of BMW direct 
fuel injection. This is the second generation of of direct injection (Dl 2) for BMW. The 
first generation was on the N73 engine in 2003. 

The term "high precision” refers to the precise metering and directional control of the 
atomized fuel. Also, the injection process now allows for multiple injection events due to 
the use of piezo injectors. The HPI system represents a key function in the concept for 
the most economical use of fuel without compromising performance. 



High precision injection allows for a more precise metering of the fuel injection process 
and therefore permits a higher compression ratio of 10.2 to 1. This compression ratio is 
quite high considering the N54 is turbocharged. However, the "spray guided” injection 
process cools the air charge and decreases the possibility of unwanted engine knock. 
The operating pressure ofthe HPI system is up to 200 bar. 

For more information on HPI, referto the training module "2007 Engine Management". 


12 

2007 Engine Technology 




13 

2007 Engine Technology 



