Table of Contents 

E63/E64 Life Cycle Impulse 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

Body.4 

Exterior.4 

Front Lights .5 

Rear Lights.6 

Interior .7 

Drive .8 

Engine .8 

Transmission.8 

Chassis and Suspension .8 

Electrical Systems .9 

Lane Departure Warning System .9 


Initial Print Date: 10/07 Revision Date: 















Life Cycle Impulse 

Model: E63 and E64 

Production: From 9/2007 Production 





After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the changes made in the E63 and E64. 

• Explain the operation of the lighting on the E63 and E64 LCI. 


2 

E63/E64 Life Cycle Impulse 




Introduction 


The BMW 6 Series Coupe and Convertible redesign will be launched in autumn 2007. 
The E63 and E64 now incorporate model year upgrade features that were introduced in 
March 2007 on the E60 and E61. They include the following features: 

• Lane departure warning 

• Favorites buttons 

• Active cruise control with Stop & Go function. 

The topics listed above have already been described in detail in various other product 
information documents and are therefore not dealt with any further in this document. 
The table below details which product information publications deal with the various 
topics. 



The model year upgrade will also see the introduction of crash-sensitive head restraints 
as standard. Crash-sensitive head restraints can reduce or completely prevent cervical 
vertebral column injuries from rear impacts. 


The crash-sensitive head restraints are explained in a separate product information doc¬ 
ument. 


3 

E63/E64 Life Cycle Impulse 























Body 


Exterior 

The front apron of the E63/E64 LCI features wide web sections while the spoiler lip has 
a distinctive shape. The round headlights include the daytime driving lights function 
while the direction indictor lights now feature LED technology. 

In the same way as the spoiler lip, the side sill panel features a new shape, giving the 
appearance that the vehicle is lower set when viewed from the side. 

The trailing edge of the rear spoiler has also been newly designed giving the BMW 6 
Series a wider appearance. The direction indicator lamps in the rear lamp clusters also 
feature LED technology. The lower light units are designed narrower and wider thus 
boosting the width impression. 

In addition to these design modifications, the BMW 6 Series additionally features textile 
inner wheel arch trim panels, a completely tight bonnet seal and a closed underbody. 

A distinctive feature in the rear area of the E63 LCI is the third brake light which is now 
also integrated in the rear lid on the Coupe as was previously the case on the 
Convertible (E63/E64 LCI common part). 



4 

E63/E64 Life Cycle Impulse 


















Front Lights 

The front turn signal indicators on the E63 and 
the E64 are now composed of 26 LEDs on 
each side. Four more LEDs are used for the 
side marker lights on each side. 

The light module operates the turn signal indi¬ 
cators. It provides the power supply and moni¬ 
tors its outputs for overload/circuit breaks. If an 
overload or circuit break occurs, the light mod¬ 
ule issues a Check Control message. 



Check 

Contro 

1 Icon 

Meaning 

Explanation 

Front right indicator failure 

Indicator 

Front right indicator has failed. 

Have the fault checked by your nearest BMW dealer. 



i 

1 

&■ 

Front left indicator failure 

Indicator 

Front left indicator has failed. 

Have the fault checked by your nearest BMW dealer. 


The function of the LEDs in the turn signal indicators and side marker lights is monitored 
by electronic circuitry. The electronic circuit board is located on the top of the indicator 
casing. 

The flashing indicator signal is provided by the light module. The electronic circuit board 
provides the actual power supply for the LEDs. 

If an LED fails, the electronic circuit board completely switches off the power supply for all 
of the LEDs. The light module then detects the lower power consumption and initiates 
the Check Control message. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Electronic circuit board 


Electronic circuit board on E63/E64 
turn signal indicator 



5 

E63/E64 Life Cycle Impulse 





























No retrofit option is offered for vehicles built before the model year upgrade. 



Schematic circuit diagram for E63/E64 front turn signal indicator 

Note: The function of the LEDs is only monitored when the LEDs are switched 
on. If a diode fails, the legally required minimum luminosity can not be 
guaranteed. Therefore, the turn signal indicator has to be replaced. 
That applies both to the front and the rear turn signal indicators. 


Rear Lights 

The rear turn signal indicators on the E63 and E64 similarly use LEDs as their light source. 



6 

E63/E64 Life Cycle Impulse 








































Interior 



In the interior, specifically targeted redesign as well as new material and color composi¬ 
tions point the way to the future. As already implemented in the spring on the E60/E61 
LCI, the controller, control elements for air conditioning and audio system as well as the 
door openers are of a higher grade design. 

The controls for the air Conditioning/Controller have been given a new trim design 
(Chrome Pearl Gray). The accent surrounds on the instrument cluster and the gear lever 
knob have been matched to the new trim design. 

The 6 Series Convertible is available with leather trim with sun-reflective technology that 
can reduce the surface temperature by up to 20°C with the sun shining on it. 

The round instruments in the instrument cluster now feature chrome rings. An oil tem¬ 
perature gauge is integrated in the rev counter. 

The interior rear-view mirror is new and can now also accept the camera for the optional 
lane departure warning. 

The crash-active head restraints that reduce the risk of cervical vertebra (neck) injuries 
are also fitted new in the BMW 6 Series. 


7 

E63/E64 Life Cycle Impulse 



















Drive 


Engine 


The well-proven N62B4801 engine with 270 kW(367 bhp) output and a maximum 
torque of 490 Nm is retained in the BMW 650i. 



Transmission 

As already known from the E60/E61 LCI, the E64/E64 LCI is fitted with the electronic 
automatic transmission designated GA6HP24Z TU. 

An automatic gearbox and a 6-speed sports automatic gearbox are available. 

The gearshift paddles on the steering wheel on the 6-speed sports automatic gearbox 
have been redesigned (same as SMG paddles). The rev counter is dynamic, i.e. in sports 
mode pointer activation is tighter thus suggesting a faster increase in engine speed. 

Chassis and Suspension 

The lightweight chassis and suspension of the BMW 6 Series combines a high degree 
of driving stability with precision steering response, optimum grip and long-distance 
comfort. No technical changes have been made as part of the model redesign. 

The rim offset for the "Wheels with mixed tires" option has now been reduced by 4mm, 
thus increasing the rear track of the correspondingly equipped E63/E64 LCI by 8 mm. 


8 

E63/E64 Life Cycle Impulse 
















Electrical Systems 


The E63/E64 LCI now features several drive assistance systems known from other 
model series. Active cruise control with stop & go function and lane departure warning 
are now optionally available for the BMW 6 Series. 

Favorite buttons - 6 freely programmable buttons will be added to the iDrive as from 
autumn 2007. The CID features new graphics and high-contrast presentation. The 6 
Series Coupe and Convertible are also available with the adaptive headlight including 
turn-off light function with variable and speed-dependent light distribution. 

The BMW Individual High End audio system is now also optionally available for the 
E63/E64 LCI. 

The center console features a USB interface as standard. 

Lane Departure Warning System 

The lane departure warning function used on 
the E60/E61 has now been adopted on the 
E63/E64. 

The lane departure warning is switched on 
and off using a button on the steering wheel. 

When the ignition is switched on, the lane 
departure warning system always reverts to 
the status that was active when the ignition 
was last switched off. 

The lane departure warning can be switched 
on as of terminal 15 ON. The system is available from a speed of 70 kph upwards. 

The lane departure warning system is also primed if lanes are detected. If the lane 
departure warning is switched on at speeds under 70 kph, a message will appear on the 
instrument cluster for 3 seconds indicating availability above a speed of 70 kph. 

The way in which the activation speed is indicated has slightly changed. 

In future, an indication of the lane departure warning activation speed is only shown 
when the lane departure warning is activated by pressing the button. 

The warning standby indication, on the other hand, has not changed. 

The lane departure warning control unit and the camera are located respectively on the 
glove compartment device mounting bracket and the rear-view mirror, as on the E60. 



9 

E63/E64 Life Cycle Impulse 





