Table of Contents 


E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 


Subject Page 

Suspension.3 

Double Pivot Spring Strut Front Axle.4 

Rear Axle .8 

Rear Axle Components .9 

HA 5 Links.10 

Advantages .11 

Manufacturing Costs.11 

Light Construction .11 

Production .11 

Kinematics.11 

Crash Requirements .12 

Rigidity/Acoustics.12 

Setting .13 

Development of BMW Rear Axles .14 

Steering Column.15 

Electronic Steering Lock (ELV).16 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 06/05 



















Suspension & Chassis Components 


Model: E90 

Production: From Start of Production 

IBIICHtflS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Identify the changes in the front axle 

• Identify the changes in the rear axle 

• Understand the changes to the steering column 


2 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 


Suspension 


The chassis and suspension of E90 represent a new step forward in the mid-size class, 
both at the front axle as well as at the rear axle. The front axle utilizes a double pivot 
spring strut axle (MacPherson strut) in aluminium. 



Front and rear axles in the E90 

BMW has used the double pivot spring strut front axle design in several models since its 
initial introduction. The double pivot spring strut front axle design has previously been 
used on all 5, 7 and 8 series vehicles and will now be used on the new 3 series. 

On the E90 the front axle design will see the addition of a new reinforcing strut. The bal¬ 
ancing components - control arm and tension strut mounts plus the engine and trans¬ 
mission mounts have also been modified for application on the E90. 

The rear axle has been completely redesigned as a five-link axle. 


3 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 




Double Pivot Spring Strut Front Axle 



The double pivot system establishes a geometrical “axis” that is formed by the suspen¬ 
sion links, which in turn create pivot points, one upper and two lower. Two lower pivot 
points (double pivot) established by the control arm and tension strut create a “imaginary” 
pivot point, that is extended further out on the wheel carrier. This design allows pivot 
points on the wheel carrier to be selected in order to effectively accommodate larger 
brakes. 



Double pivot spring strut front axle/determining the lower pivot point 


Imaginary pivot point 


Double pivot point 


Additional advantages of double pivot system are: 

• Ability to reduce body roll while cornering. 

• Reduces front end dive tendencies during severe braking situations. 

• Utilization of a small positive steering offset, which offers improved handling if friction 
levels while braking is different on both wheels. 

• Improved caster position, improving straight line stability at higher speeds, plus bet¬ 
ter steering return after small steering inputs. 


4 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 



On the double pivot spring strut front axle the position of the control arm and tension 
strut, with respect to each other, determines the size of the Steering/Kingpin Offset 
(Steering Roll Radius) as well as the Steering Axis Inclination/kingpin angle. 

The Steering Offset (R 0 ) is the distance between the projected line of contact for the 
steering axis at the road surface and the center line of a tires contact patch at the road 
surface. 





1. A positive Steering Offset (R 0 ) exists when the steering axis line is inside the center 
line of the tires contact patch. 

2. A negative Steering Offset (R 0 ) exists when the steering axis line is outside the center 
line of the tires contact patch. 

3. A zero Steering Offset (R 0 ) exists when the steering axis line is exactly on the center 
line of the tire contact patch. 

Note: When using the double pivot spring strut front axle, a slightly positive 
Steering Offset is defined. 



Steering Axis Inclination 


5 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 




Both tension struts are mounted with hydraulic mounts in the front axle carrier. 

The greater the distance of the tension strut and control arm pivot points at the swivel 
bearing the greater the steering “reset”force, force reguired to return wheels to straight 
head/center position. 


6 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 


Components of E90 Front Axle 


Explanation 

Front Axle Carrier 
Wheel Hub 
Stabilizer Link 
Control Arm 

Rack-and-Pinion Steering 


Tension Strut 


Explanation 

Stabilizer Bar 
Swivel Bearing 
Hydro-Mount 
Spring Strut 
Reinforcing Strut 













Technical Data 

(Front Axle) 


Explanation 

Value 

Explanation 

Value 

Total Toe-in 

14’ 

Steering/Kingpin Offset 

6,1 mm 

Track Width 

1500 mm 

Wheel lock 

41° 5’ 

Camber 

-18’ 

Wheel lock, outer 

33° 18’ 

Kingpin/Steering Axis 
Inclination 

14° 7’ 

Offset 

34 mm 

Caster Angle 

LO 

O 

Tire Size 

205/5 R 16 

Caster 

19.8 mm 




7 

90 Suspension & Chassis Components 





Rear Axle 


The newly developed rear axle with the development designation "HA 5" was used for 
the first time in the E87 and is featured again in the E90. 

It is designed as a multi-link independent rear suspension axle with 5 different link arms. 
The designation "HA 5" does not refer to the five links but rather represents the consecu¬ 
tive development designation used at BMW (refer to “Development of BMW Rear Axles” 
table at the back of this section). 



The rear axle carrier and the links are made from high strength steel. The wheel carrier is 
cast from GGG 40. 

Minor differences exist between the HA 5 versions being used on the E90 variants. 

• On the AWD version the wheel carrier is modified slightly as it utilizes bigger wheel 
bearings. 

• In all variants the rear axle transmission mounting is matched to the relevant drive- 
train. 


8 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 




D 


9 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 


Rear axle from front left (bottom) 


Rear Axle Components 


Rear axle from rear left (top) 


Index 


Explanation 


Explanation 


Rear Axle Carrier 


Stabilizer Link 


Thrust Rod 
Traction Strut 


Toe Link 


Semi-Trailing Arm 
Camber Link 


Wheel Hub 


Control Arm 


Wheel Carrier 










HA 5 Links 



Top view of left rear axle 

The two upper links (blue in the illustra¬ 
tion) form a triangle in the top view as do 
the two lower links (purple in the illustra¬ 
tion). 

The rear link (orange in the illustration) 
represents the toe rod. 




Explanation 


Explanation 

1 

Semi-Trailing Arm 

4 

Toe Link 

2 

Traction Strut 

5 

Camber Link 

3 

Control Arm 




10 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 












Advantages 

Compared to previous rear axles the HA 5 offers the following advantages: 

Manufacturing Costs 

The lower costs are attributed to the fact that the use of high strength steel has made it 
possible to reduce the wall thicknesses of the rear axle carrier and the links. 

Compared to the integral IV, a considerable cost saving measure has been utilized by 
manufacturing the entire axle from high strength steel plus the weight of the HA 5 rear 
axle is not excessively high. 

Light Construction 

A bending moment occurs only in the camber link, as it provides the support function for 
the spring and damper. The remaining four links are not subjected to moments of force 
thereby enabling a lightweight and rigid design. 

Thanks to the straight design of the links and the connection by means of ball joints, 
except for the camber link, the wheel control with this axle is subject to only minimal elas¬ 
ticity and is very precise. 

Production 

The HA 5 rear axle can be completely preassembled and adjusted with the brake system 
as well as the suspension and damping. 

Kinematics 

The very small positive kingpin offset guarantees less sensitivity to longitudinal forces 
even in connection with wide tires. 

The relatively large caster ensures a defined degree of lateral force understeering and 
therefore improves vehicle handling/stabilization and offers faster response. 

The change in toe as part of the suspension action enables outstanding directional stabil¬ 
ity with a relatively short wheelbase and exceptional self-steering characteristics while 
cornering. 

The change in camber as part of the suspension action is selected in order to establish 
an optimum camber with respect to the road surface while cornering. 

The long toe link has a positive effect on the toe-in characteristics over the spring 
travel range. 

A low roll center has a particularly beneficial effect on the rolling motion. 

The "propping" effect while cornering has been largely minimized by improving the 
roll center change rate. 


11 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 



The braking support has been set to 70%. Racing cars generally have a support angle of 
0% in order to constantly achieve maximum contact force. On these vehicles, the disad¬ 
vantage of a dive motion while braking and starting off is compensated by the taut sus¬ 
pension. The braking support (anti-dive) realized on the E90 represents an optimum 
compromise between comfort, safety and driving dynamics reguirements. 

The use of five links enables free selection of the pivot axle for the design layout. This 
means that the movement of the wheel in interaction with the suspension can be opti¬ 
mized without compromise under braking, acceleration and lateral forces. This largely 
determines all important variables such as toe, camber, brake support (anti-dive) angle, 
roll center and roll center change rate. 

Crash Requirements 

The HA 5 rear axle permits a considerably more favorable progression of the side mem¬ 
ber, resulting in specific advantages particularly at low impact speeds. 

Added to this, the large rear axle carrier is connected directly to the rigid frame side mem¬ 
ber, allowing it to transmit the applied crash forces more favorably. The semi-trailing arm 
features crash beading (in the semi-trailing arm of the HA 5 rear axle) to ensure the fuel 
tank is not damaged. 

Rigidity/Acoustics 

The rear axle carrier of the HA 5 rear axle extends up to the rigid frame side members of 
the body with its axle mounting points and even up to the sill with its thrust rods. This 
provides a very large support face for the applied forces and moments. The resulting 
advantages include, considerably lower stress and strain on the body (rear axle break¬ 
away) and the option of designing the rear axle bearing mounts relatively soft. This 
arrangement and the double flexible mounting, provide outstanding insulation against 
road noise and tire rolling noise. 


12 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 



Setting 

Toe and Camber adjustment points: 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Toe Adjusting Screw 

2 

Camber Adjusting Screw 


Technical Data 

(Standard Suspension 7Jxl 6) 


Description 

Explanation 

Wheelbase 

2760 mm 

Track width 

1513 mm 

Offset 

34 mm 

Tire radius (static) 

291 mm 

Total toe-in 

18’ 

Camber 

o 

CO 

o 


13 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 



Development of BMW Rear Axles 

BMW chassis and suspension systems and therefore the sportive and dynamic character 
of the individual models have long been based on the special axle designs and, of course, 
on the integral optimum chassis and suspension tuning. 

The following table shows the development history of BMW rear axles: 


Explanation 

Distinguishing Features 

Model 

HA 1 

Semi-trailing arm axle 

E3, E9, El 2, E21, E28, 
E30, E36/5, E36/7, El 14 

HA 2 

Screw-link axle 

E23, E24, E32, E34 

HA 3 

Central-link rear axle 

Z1, E36/2, E36/3, E36/4, 
E36/C, E46, E83, E85 


Double lateral control arm axle 

E26 

HA 4 

Experimental study 


HA 5 

Dispersed double control arm axle 

E87, E90 

Integral 1 

Experimental study 


Integral II 

Experimental study 


Integral III 


E31 

Integral IV 

Steel, spring, damper tower 

E38 

Integral IV 

Aluminium, spring, damper tower 

E39 

Integral IV 

Aluminium, spring on body and damper on axle carrier 

E39/2 

Integral IV 

Steel axle carrier, aluminium link and steel wheel carrier, spring and 
damper separated but both supported on body 

E53 

Integral IV 

Aluminium axle carrier with cast node technology and cast swing arm, 
spring strut shock absorber tower 

E65 

Integral IV 

Aluminium axle carrier with cast node technology and cast swing arm, 
spring strut shock absorber tower 

E6x 


14 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 
















































Steering Column 


The steering column adjustment range has been extended plus the new adjustment unit 
now supports the airbag and the steering column. An integrated crash element (metal 
tube) located in the upper area of the steering column are designed as load bearing 
parts. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

ELV 

4 

Catch for Steering Column Adjustment 

2 

Crash Element 

5 

Steering Sleeve 

3 

Adjusting Lever 

6 

Steering Spindle 


15 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 




The metal tube is pre-perforated in a defined longitudinal area at the upper end of the 
steering column. In the event of an impact, this metal tube begins to crack at the prede¬ 
fined points. This perforation is reguired for the purpose of converting energy in the 
event of an impact. 

IMPORTANT: The steering column must always be replaced 

after an airbag has been triggered or the steering 
shaft is replaced! 

The steering spindle sleeve or collar is also new. On the E46, this collar was held in posi¬ 
tion by the pedal assembly. The new collar is connected in the bulkhead and is double¬ 
sided, which results in a lower reset force for the steering column height adjustment. 

Together with the Electric Steering Lock (ELV) System, the steering column forms one 
component and may only be replaced as a complete unit. 

Electronic Steering Lock (ELV) 

The system was first installed on the E52 (Z8) and consists of a start/stop button, a 
remote control, the Car Access 2 (CAS2) control module and the ELV. The ELV in turn 
consists of electronic and mechanical components. 

Refer to to the General Vehicle Electrical section of this manual for additional 
information regarding ELV. 



16 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 



17 

E90 Suspension & Chassis Components 



