Table of Contents 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 

Subject Page 

Dynamic Stability Control System.5 

Fading Support.7 

Braking Readiness.7 

Brake Disk Drying.8 

Soft Stop .8 

Start Assist .9 

Electronic Control Brake (ECB) Actuation Interface .9 

Yaw Moment Compensation.9 

System Components .10 

Inlet & Distribution Valves.10 

Wheel-Speed Sensors .10 

DSC Sensor.10 

DSC Module .11 

Steering-Angle Sensor .11 

DTC Button .11 

Brake Fluid Level Switch.11 

Brake Light Switch.11 

Parking Brake Warning Switch.11 

Sensor Information .13 

General Overview .14 

Anti-lock Braking System(ABS).15 

Electronic Brake Force Distribution (EBV).15 

Cornering Brake Control (CBC).15 

Automatic Stability Control (ASC).15 

Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) .16 

Engine Drag Torque Control (MSR) .16 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC).16 

RPA: Tire Defect Indicator.17 

CBS: Condition Based Service .17 

Longitudinal Dynamics Management.20 

Functions Implemented by LDM .21 

Operator Interface.22 

Display Interface .22 

Status Control.22 

Vehicle Speed Controller .22 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 06/05 






































Subject Page 

Lateral-Acceleration Controller .22 

Prioritizer .22 

Interference Factor Estimator.22 

Acceleration Controller .22 

Drive/Brake Coordination .23 

Monitoring .23 

Diagnosis/Service Information.23 

LDM Overview.24 

Dynamic Cruise Control (DCC).28 

Function.28 

Advantages.29 

Components Involved with DCC Function.30 

Cruise Control System Steering-Column Stalk .32 

LDM Control Module (LDM) .32 

Instrument Cluster .32 

DSC: Dynamic Stability Control.32 

Digital Engine Electronics (DME/ECM) .32 

Junction Box Electronics (JBE).33 

Accelerator Pedal Module.33 

Brake Light Switch.33 

Clutch Module (manual transmission only) .33 

Steering-Column Switch (SZL) Cluster.33 

Footwell Module (FRM).33 

Car Access System (CAS) .33 

Car Communication Computer (CCC) & 

Central Information Display (CID) .33 

Electronic Transmission Control (EGS) orSMG.33 

System Deactivation.34 

Active Cruise Control (ACC).36 

Difference between 2nd Gen. and 1st Gen ACC .37 

Functions of ACC .37 

Monitor Object Ahead.38 

Cruise Control.41 

System Activation.41 

System Deactivation .42 

Lens Heating.42 

Low-Voltage Cutout and High-Voltage Protection .43 

Self-Diagnosis and Compensation .44 








































Subject Page 

Active Front Steering (AFS).46 

Benefits of AFS .47 

Enhanced Agility.47 

Enhanced Comfort.47 

Enhanced Safety .47 

Functions .48 

Standard Functions of AFS .48 

Variable Steering Ratio .48 

Linked with Servotronic.48 

Linked with DSC.48 

New Functions with E90.48 

Variable Steering Coding.48 

Additional Yaw Rate Sensor.48 

DTC Switch .48 

Yaw Moment Compensation .49 

Components of AFS System .50 

Motor-Position Sensor.50 

Total Steering-Angle Sensor and Steering Angle Sensor .50 

DSC Sensor.51 

Active Front Steering (AFS) Control Module .51 

Junction Box Electronics (JBE).51 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) .51 

Digital Engine Electronics (DME/ECM) .51 

Car Access System .52 

Planetary Gearbox.52 

Hydraulic Steering with Servotronic Valve.52 

ECO Valve in the Power-Steering Pump.52 

Warning Light and Check Control.52 

System Activation.53 

General System Information.53 

Track Setting .53 

Power Supply.53 

Calibrating the Steering Angle Sensors.54 

Radio-Reception Interference .54 

Servotronic Valve .54 






































Dynamic Driving Systems 


Model: E90 

Production: From Start of Production 

IBIICTI1BS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Establish an understanding of the changes in the DSC system 

• Understand the importance of the LDM 

• Explain the operation of DCC 

• Explain the operation of ACC 

• Identify the changes in AFS 


4 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 


Dynamic Stability Control System 


The E90 in the U.S. is equipped with a new Dynamic Stability Control System (DSC) 
referred to as MK60E5, manufactured by Continental Teves, which builds upon the sys¬ 
tems used in other BMW models. With this system several new functions are intro¬ 
duced that result in significantly improved comfort during brake intervention (due to uti¬ 
lization of a PWM signal on the input control valves) and more precise wheel braking. 

New functions introduced with MK60E5: 

• Fading Support 

• Braking Readiness 

• Brake Disk drying 

• Soft Stop 

• Start Assist 

• Electronic Control Brake Actuation (ECBA) 

• Yaw Moment Compensation with AFS 

These new functions contribute to increased directional stability, optimized comfort, 
enhanced system availability/response plus reduce the minimum braking distance. 

In the MK60E5 the designation "E5" represents the 5 pressure sensors which are inte¬ 
grated into the hydraulic control unit: 

• A combined pressure sensor on the inlet side which monitors the plausibility of the 
pressures of the tandem brake master cylinder (THZ) 

• Four further sensors on the outlet side which measure the braking pressure of the 
assigned wheel brake 

Note: That the labeling of the DSC button has been changed to DTC and the 
MK60E5 system will also be used on the New M5. 


5 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 





The new functions available on the MK60E5 DSC system are a result of the following 
additional components: 

• Solenoid valves with variable map for flow rate - utilizes a PWM signal 

• 5 brake pressure sensors integrated in the new DSC module 

• 4 active wheel-speed sensors with direction of rotation detection 

• 1 longitudinal-acceleration sensor on the circuit board of the DSC control module 

• DSC sensor taken with redundant signals on vehicles with Active Steering (2x rate of 
yaw, 2x lateral acceleration) 



6 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Fading Support 


High temperatures (>550°C) can occur at the brake discs when brakes are applied over a 
long period (i.e. brakes applied while traveling downhill) or as a result of multiple 
“extreme” brake applications (i.e. applied pressure >80 bar). As the temperature of the 
brake disc increases, the level of friction that can be generated when the brake pads are 
applied is decreased (coefficient of friction is reduced as brake disc temperature increas¬ 
es), which can result in a diminishing brake effect (fading). 

In order to reduce the brake “fading” effect the DSC system (MK60E5) calculates the 
temperature of the brake discs, based on: 

• Applied brake pressure 

• Duration of brake application 

• Rate of vehicle deceleration 

In the event the DSC system detects fading, brake pressure is increased in line with the 
calculated temperature model in order to maintain a constant ratio of brake pedal force to 
vehicle deceleration (if necessary, pedal travel is increased to compensate for the fading 
effect). 

The DSC system detects fading as follows: 

• DSC compares the current vehicle deceleration with a nominal value based on the 
current brake pressure. 

• DSC increases brake pressure until the nominal deceleration is achieved or until all 
wheels are subject to ABS control. 

• Process is ended when the brake pedal is released. 

Note: The increase in brake pressure depends on road speed (under 100 km/h). 

At the time this function is activated, a Check-Control message (brake warning light) 
appears in the LCD display in the instrument cluster (warning threshold 1). If the brake- 
disc temperature increases further, the legally stipulated brake warning lamp is also acti¬ 
vated (warning threshold 2). 

Braking Readiness 

If the DSC system notices that the accelerator pedal is released guickly, the brakes are 
immediately pretensioned, to shorten the brake apply response time. To accomplish this 
task the DSC system generates a low braking pressure by applying a PWM signal to the 
solenoid valves, without creating any measurable deceleration of the vehicle. By applying 
a small amount of brake pressure the working clearance between the brake pads and 
brake disc is reduced. If the brakes are not applied within a certain time, the brake pres¬ 
sure that was applied is reduced. 

The pre-tensioning of the brakes depends on the vehicle's speed (above 70 km/h). 


7 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



The Brake Readiness function is activated under the following conditions: 

• Vehicle speed > 70 km/h 

• Minimum time between rapid accelerator pedal release and brake application < 8 
sec. (DME provides the signal regarding rapid release of accelerator pedal to DSC 
via PT-CAN) 

Brake Disk Drying 

Brake disk drying removes moisture that gathers on the brake disks while traveling on wet 
roads or in the rain. 

In order to dry the brakes while the vehicle is traveling down the road, the DSC module 
generates a low brake pressure which ‘lightly” applies the brakes disks and “wipes down” 
the disks without creating a measurable deceleration of the vehicle. 

The application of the low brake pressure signal is done on a cyclical (regular) basis and 
is dependent on: 

• Road speed (greater than 70 km/h 

• Signal from rain sensor indicating continuous wiper operation (e.g. stage 1 or 2) 

The drying action cycle is performed approximately every: 

• 200 sec during stage 1 operation 

• 120 sec during stage 2 operation 

Note: The cycle is altered if the brakes are applied by the driver during these 
times. 

This function results in a shorter response time if the brakes are applied during the cycli¬ 
cal low brake pressure application. 

Soft Stop 

Soft stop prevents a “jerky” stop causing the occupants to "lurch" forward, when braking 
the vehicle to a standstill. 

Activation of function: 

• Light brake application (<25 bar) under constant pressure 

• Road speed (under 5 km/h) 

The soft stop function reduces the braking pressure at the rear axle just prior to the vehi¬ 
cle reaching a complete stop in order to reduce “jerking/jolt” effect normally encountered 
when reaching a standstill. The DSC system calculates the moment that standstill can be 
expected based on the current road speed plus rate of deceleration and reduces braking 
pressure accordingly. 


8 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Start Assist 


The start-off assistant prevents the vehicle from moving unexpectedly, based on the 
degree of incline, as the driver releases the brake pedal and moves to the accelerator 
pedal (ie. when pulling away on a hill). 

The “start assist” function is accomplished as follows: 

• Gradient (degree of incline) is determined by the longitudinal-acceleration sensor 
located in the DSC control module. 

• Based on the degree of incline, the necessary braking torgue or engine torgue is cal¬ 
culated by the DSC module. 

• Brake pressure needed to hold the vehicle is momentarily maintained (approx 2 sec). 

• Brake pressure is reduced as soon as the available engine torgue is sufficient to 
move the vehicle or accelerator is not depressed within approx. 2 sec. 

The function can be activated when driving forward or backwards and is deactivated 
when the parking brake is applied and can not be activated if the transmission is in neu¬ 
tral. 

Note: If no move is made to pull away within approx. 2 seconds of the brake 
pedal being released, the start-off assistant will be deactivated. 

Electronic Control Brake (ECB) Actuation Interface 

The interface between Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) and Active Cruise Control (ACC) 
has been improved with the introduction of the Longitudinal Dynamic Management 
(LDM) system, which is responsible for the transmission of the signals associated with 
ACC/cruise control operation. 

The software in the DSC control module has been enhanced and allows the demands of 
the ACC to be evaluated more guickly thereby allowing pressure at the brakes to be built 
up or reduced more efficiently with regard to vehicle deceleration and comfort. 

Yaw Moment Compensation 

With conventional systems, the driver has to actively steer the vehicle in a straight line 
if the brakes are applied on a road surface with non-uniform traction levels ("split |i"). 

In this situation counter steering keeps the vehicle in its track and helps to achieve 
acceptable braking distances. 

On the E90, if the vehicle is eguipped with the Active Front Steering (AFS) option and 
brakes are applied on a road surface with non-uniform traction levels ("split jx"), DSC in 
conjunction with AFS, initiates the active steering actions in order to stabilize the vehicle 
and shorten the braking distance. The function is accomplished by having the DSC con¬ 
trol module calculate the yaw rate plus interpret information from the front steering angle 
sensor and transmit the information to the AFS control module, which establishes the 
yaw-moment compensation correction angle needed for stabilization/counter steering. 


9 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



System Components 

The DSC system consists of the following: 

Inlet & Distribution Valves 

These solenoid valves used to be digitally actuated: either OPEN or CLOSED. 

On this system the inlet valves for the wheel brakes and distribution valves are actuated in 
such a way that the flow rate is variably controlled via a PWM signal. 

Wheel-Speed Sensors 

Four active wheel-speed sensors measure the speed of the individual wheels. This type 
of sensor is also able to recognize the direction of wheel rotation. 

DSC Sensor 

The DSC sensor on vehicles equipped with active steering utilizes 2 yaw rate sensor ele¬ 
ments to transmit redundant signals capturing the rate of yaw (rotation about the vertical 
axis) and lateral acceleration to the AFS module via the chassis CAN (F-CAN) 



10 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 





DSC Module 

The DSC module consists of the hydraulic module and the DSC control electronics. 

All 5 brake pressure sensors are integrated into the valve block of the DSC module. 

Note: The circuit board of the DSC control module also contains an integrated 
longitudinal-acceleration sensor which is used for the start assist func¬ 
tion. 

Steering-Angle Sensor 

The steering angle sensor is located in the steering column switch cluster (SZL) and 
optically measures the angle of rotation of the steering wheel. 

Signal path to the DSC control module: Steering column switch cluster -> F-CAN 
(looped through JBE) -> DSC control module 

DTC Button 

The DTC button is located in the center console between the central air vents and has 
three operating modes: 

1. DSC operational (standard setting) 

2. DTC operational (If DTC button is depressed once DSC switches Off) 

3. DSC and DTC completely deactivated (If DTC button is depressed for extended period) 
Signal path to the DSC control module: DTC button -> JBE -> PT-CAN -> DSC module 
The instrument cluster receives the signal through the K-CAN. 

Brake Fluid Level Switch 

If the brake fluid level is too low, this will be detected (via a reed contact in the expansion 
tank) and an appropriate message is sent to the DSC control module. 

DSC is deactivated if there is insufficient brake fluid. 

Signal path to the instrument cluster: DSC module -> PT-CAN -> JBE -> K-CAN -> 
Instrument cluster 

Brake Light Switch 

Together with the signals from the brake pressure sensors, braking actions are recog¬ 
nized. 

Parking Brake Warning Switch 

DSC will recognize skidding that has been deliberately initiated by the driver and regula¬ 
tion will not take place, since a handbrake turn should remain technically possible. 


11 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



E90 - DSC Hydraulic Circuit 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Brake Fluid Expansion Tank 

12 

Inlet Valve (Analog), Right Front 
with Switching Orifice 

2 

Rear-axle Brake Circuit 

13 

Inlet Valve (Analog), Right Rear 

3 

Front-axle Brake Circuit 

14 

Inlet Valve (Analog), Left Rear 

4 

Pressure Sensor, Push Rod Circuit 

15 

Outlet Valve, Left Rear 

5 

Pulsation Damper 

16 

Outlet Valve, Right Rear 

6 

Isolating Valve 

17 

Outlet Valve, Left Front 

7 

Electric Changeover Valve 

18 

Outlet Valve, Right Front 

8 

Self-Priming Return Pump 

19 

Wheel Brake, Right Front 

9 

Damper Chamber 

20 

Wheel Brake, Left Front 

10 

Accumulator Chamber 

21 

Wheel Brake, Right Rear 

11 

Inlet Valve (Analog), Left Front 
with Switching Orifice 

22 

Wheel Brake, Left Rear 


12 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 
































































Sensor Information 


Sensor 

Functional principal 

Manufacturer 

Active wheel-speed sensors* 

Magneto-resistive principle 

Teves 

Steering angle sensor (LWS) in steering column 
switch cluster (SZL) 

Optoelectronic 


Yaw rate sensor 

Twin tuning fork principle 

Teves 

Lateral-acceleration sensor 

Capacitive principle 

Teves 

Longitudinal-acceleration sensor** 

Integrated in DSC control module 


5 pressure sensors 

Integrated in hydraulic block 


Brake light switch 

Hall principle 


Brake-fluid level switch 

Reed contact switch 



* Wheel-speed sensors with grey shield = MK60E5 with direction-of rotation detection 
(the braking response when traveling in reverse is different then it is for vehicle traveling 
forwards, output to navigation system, EGS etc.) 

* Wheel-speed sensors with black shield = MK60psi (Used on E87 Non U.S. Model) 
does not have direction of rotation capability 

** For the start assist function 


13 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 


























General Overview 


The DSC system is a Driving Stabilization System and offers the following advantages: 

• DSC optimizes driving stability when pulling away, accelerating, braking and coast¬ 
ing. 

• DSC recognizes and reduces unstable driving conditions such as understeering or 
oversteering. 

• DSC improves traction, especially with Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) 

Within the limitations of the laws of physics, DSC helps to keep the vehicle on a safe 
course. 

To do this, DSC must know the following parameters regarding the vehicles driving 
dynamics: 

• Yaw rate as a measure of rotary movement of the vehicle around the vertical axis 

• Lateral acceleration 

• Road speed 

• Longitudinal acceleration 

In addition, the driver's intentions are recognized via input from: 

• Steering angle sensor 

• Brake pressure sensor 

• Throttle setting/ accelerator pedal position 

The values are used to establish the actual condition in which the vehicle is currently 
moving and to compare these values with those calculated by the DSC control module. If 
the actual values differ from the calculated values, DSC is activated and initiates brake 
actions or engine control functions. 

Advantages: 

The DSC system counters all dynamically unstable driving conditions within the physical 
limitations dictated by the laws of physics, to enhance driving comfort and safety. 


14 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Anti-lock Braking System(ABS) 

ABS prevents the wheels from locking when the brakes are applied. 

Advantage: Optimum utilization of road surface friction - the vehicle remains stable and 
steerable. 

Brake pressure is regulated at all wheels to ensure that each wheel runs with optimum 
slip. When this happens, slip is controlled so that the maximum possible braking and lat¬ 
eral stability forces can be transmitted. 

Electronic Brake Force Distribution (EBV) 

EBV is a component of ABS and controls the brake force distribution between the front 
and rear wheels. 

Advantage: Regardless of the vehicles load state, the best possible braking distance is 
achieved while maintaining driving stability. 

Modern vehicles have relatively large brakes on the rear axle to shorten braking distances. 
To prevent the rear wheels from being overbraked in certain driving situations, EBV per¬ 
manently monitors wheel slip and controls rear axle slip independent of the front axle. 

Cornering Brake Control (CBC) 

CBC is an extension of ABS. CBC enhances driving stability if the brakes are applied 
when cornering. 

Advantage: If the brakes are applied in a corner, optimum brake force distribution ensures 
tracking stability. 

When cornering, even very light braking can shift the axle-load distribution to the left or 
right so that driving stability is impaired. If required, CBC generates a stabilizing load 
moment when the brakes are applied lightly outside the ABS intervention range. 

Automatic Stability Control (ASC) 

ASC prevents the wheels from spinning when the vehicle is accelerating. 

Advantage: Improved traction and vehicle stability. 

If one of the wheels of the drive axle is on a high-grip surface and the other is on a slip¬ 
pery surface, the wheel tending to skid is braked. 

ASC also intervenes in the engine control (to reduce the ignition angle, injection quantity, 
throttle valve setting) in order to reduce/inhibit vehicle acceleration in the event of wheel 
slip. 


15 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Dynamic Traction Control (DTC) 

The functions of the DTC correspond to those of DSC with a slightly modified regulating 
characteristics. DTC is activated by deactivating DSC (DTC button depressed). DTC 
intervenes in the braking actions to imitate the function of a conventional differential lock. 

Advantage: DTC allows better traction. 

Vehicle stabilization intervention (e.g. reduced power output) is delayed slightly, compared 
to DSC, which enhances traction with a slight loss of driving stability. 

This function offers a compromise between driving stability and traction, especially when 
accelerating and/or driving uphill on a loose surface or snow-covered road surface (sur¬ 
face friction requiring more slip). 

DSC provides a high degree of driving stability with adequate traction, however DTC 
offers better traction with a slight reduction in stability. Therefore, the deactivation of 
DSC should be reserved for emergencies (driving in deep snow, for example). 

Engine Drag Torque Control (MSR) 

If the vehicle is operated in low gear while coasting downhill or if is the vehicle is suddenly 
shifted into a lower gear, the drive wheel may be slowed down by the engine braking 
effect to rapidly which can result in an unstable operating condition, resulting in the drive 
wheels locking up. 

Engine Drag Torque Control (MSR) provides protection against locking of the drive 
wheels. 


Advantage: The drive wheels retain their lateral stability in overrun mode. 

The wheel speed sensors tell MSR as soon as the wheels are about to lock. MSR then 
briefly reduces the engine's drag torque by opening the throttle slightly. 

Dynamic Brake Control (DBC) 

DBC supports the driver in emergency braking situations. It does this by automatically 
increasing braking pressure if the brake pedal is not depressed with sufficient force. 

Advantage: Shortest possible braking distances in emergency braking situations by 
achieving ABS regulation on all four wheels. 

The brake pedal is frequently not depressed strongly enough in emergency braking situa¬ 
tions. The ABS feedback control range is not reached (or not on all 4 wheels). 


16 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



RPA: Tire Defect Indicator 

RPA is not a driving dynamic function. 

DSC uses the Run Flat Indicator (RPA) to monitor the tire pressure throughout the jour¬ 
ney. 

The RPA records the wheel speeds using the wheel-speed sensors of the Dynamic 
Stability Control (DSC). The RPA compares the speeds of the individual wheels with the 
average speed. In this way the RPA is able to detect a loss of tire pressure. 

The RPA detects a drop in pressure below about 30% ± 10% of the initial value. The 
RPA indicator and warning light indicates a drop in tire pressure. 

The RPA will indicate this after just a short distance, as a rule after a few minutes, from a 
certain minimum speed (e.g. 25 km/h) up to the permissible top speed. 

Initialization is started manually. Then (after a journey has started), initialization runs auto¬ 
matically. In other words, the circumference of individual tires are recorded and evaluated. 

The initialization phase lasts approx. 5 to 15 minutes for the individual speed ranges. 

CBS: Condition Based Service 

CBS is not a driving dynamic function. 

Condition Based Service, as the name suggests, is a means of ensuring that the car is 
serviced as and when necessary. CBS comprises various maintenance operations, e.g. 
engine oil, spark plugs and brake pads. 

The remaining distance for the front and back brake pads are calculated separately in the 
DSC control module. 

When making the calculation, the condition of the brake pad wear sensors is taken into 
account (reference point at 6 mm and 4 mm). 


Important!!! 


Refer to ST056 Chassis Dynamics for more detailed informa¬ 
tion regarding the operation of the DSC System Functions. 


17 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 




Workshop Exercise - Dynamic Stability Control 


Check procedure for initialization of steering angle sensor using diagnostic eguip- 
ment (DISplus/G Tl). 


18 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 





Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What new function are introduced with the MK60E5 system and what do they do? 


2. On what other vehicle will MK60E5 be used? 


3. What is the purpose of the 5 pressure sensors? 


4. What is Yaw Moment Compensation? What option must the vehicle have 
installed? 


5. What is different with the DSC button?? 


6. What is different with the wheel speed sensors used on the E90? 


19 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 






























Longitudinal Dynamics Management 


In previous BMW vehicles acceleration control was calculated by different modules 
(DME, DSC, ACC etc.) in order to activate the corresponding actuators with the relevant 
control signals. To take control of the increasing system complexity and reduce the 
number of possible variants that can exist, a new Longitudinal Dynamics Management 
(LDM) system is installed in the E90 which serves as the primary controller for DCC or 
ACC operation. 

The LDM module records/monitors the requests/inputs received, calculates the corre¬ 
sponding setpoint/threshold values and forwards the information to the various control 
systems (i.e. DME, EGS, AFS, ACC, DSC, etc.). 

The Longitudinal Dynamics Management (LDM) 

system is an independent control module (1) that 

is located behind the light switch in the E90. SBB- 


20 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 




Functions Implemented by LDM 

The Longitudinal Dynamics Management (LDM) control module evaluates all relevant 
data for cruise control (i.e. ACC sensor sends the monitored vehicle information to the 
LDM control module for evaluation) and transmits information via PT-CAN to the other 
control modules (DME, EGS, DSC, ACCII, etc.). 



WUP 

D-Bus K-Bus 

K-CAN K-Bus (protocol) * 

PT-CAN LIN-Bus 

MOST BSD 

F-CAN 


21 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 























































The following functions are implemented within the LDM module: 

Operator Interface 

Receives data from the steering column stalk, such as acceleration, deceleration, activa¬ 
tion or deactivation reguest. 

Display Interface 

Controls the output of information to the driver (ie. display of desired speed, desired dis¬ 
tance, driver takeover reguest). 

Status Control 

Evaluates the drivers specifications (speed (v), setpoint/actual and yaw rate) and assigns 
each to one of the three responsible processing modules. 

Vehicle Speed Controller 

Calculates the acceleration/deceleration setpoint variable on the basis of the desired 
speed and the actual speed. 

Lateral-Acceleration Controller 

Reduces the lateral acceleration in the bend/curve to an appropriate value and if neces¬ 
sary initiates an intervention when cornering. The actual lateral acceleration is calculated 
from the actual speed and a fault-corrected yaw rate. 

Prioritizer 

Decides which acceleration setpoint value is used by the cruise control and if necessary 
adaptive cruise control plus identifies how the Acceleration Controller can best 
alter/adjust vehicle acceleration or deceleration. 

Interference Factor Estimator 

Estimates the acceleration interference factors (e.g. uphill/downhill gradient, rolling resis¬ 
tance) from the actual wheel drive torgue and the changes to the vehicle mass due to the 
additional mass of a trailer and calculates an acceleration/deceleration interference cor¬ 
rection variable. 

Acceleration Controller 

Converts the selected setpoint acceleration into an overall manipulated variable (total 
wheel torgue) for drive and brake. The acceleration controller has to ensure that the spec¬ 
ified setpoint acceleration of the vehicle (drive) is also achieved with the presence of 
external interference factors, such as e.g. uphill/downhill gradient. The acceleration con¬ 
troller ensures comfort typical for drive assist systems, such as e.g. jolt-free performance. 


22 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Drive/Brake Coordination 

Coordinates and controls the system partners DME, EGS and DSC, by outputting a set- 
point wheel braking torque and a brake release signal to the DSC and a setpoint wheel 
drive torque with drive release to the DME. 

Monitoring 

Monitors all the signal variables coming into the LDM. The programmed 
safety measures are also implemented here. 

The in the E90 LDM has the following interface parameters: 

• Steering column switch cluster (SZL) 

• Instrument cluster (KOMBI) 

• Brake (DSC) 

• Drive (DME and EGS) 

• Active Cruise Control (ACC sensor; optional extra) 

- Driver's footwell module (FRM; direction indicator) 

- Anticipatory Action for the overtaking assist function (direction indicator) 

Only with ACC! 

• Car Access System (CAS; terminal status) 

Diagnosis/Service Information 

The LDM is: 

• Codable 

• Programmable 

• Capable of self-diagnosis 

An LDM failure is not signalled directly to the driver but is visible in the form of DSC/ACC/ 
DCC indications in the instrument cluster. 


23 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



LDM Overview 

The LDM is a control module that is used for drivetrain and brake coordination purposes , 
plus provides significant improvement with regard to automatic cruise control (ACC or 
DCC) with a general control function capability ranging from reguesting acceleration to 
reguesting braking (integrated function). 

Interface: PT-CAN 

The LDM serves two primary functions: 

• Variant handling - LDM functions are configuration dependent (coding-relevant func¬ 
tion) 

• LDM safety functions are ensured by a central monitoring and redundancy check. 



ACC 

DCC 




DSC 

DME 

EGS 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Wheel Torque for Braking 

DME 

Digital Motor Electronics/Digital 

2 

Wheel Torque for Accelerating 

DCC 

Dynamic Cruise Control 

3 

Gearshift Request 

DSC 

Dynamic Stability Control 

4 

SZL Switch Inputs 

EGS 

Electronic Transmission Control 

A 

+/- setpoints / F-CAN 

LDM 

Longitudinal Dynamics Management 

ACC 

Active Cruise Control 




24 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 























Longitudinal Dynamics Management - Input/Output 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

ACC sensor (if equipped) 

2 

LDM Module 

3 

DSC Module 

4 

DME/ECM Module 

5 

Kombi 

6 

Cruise Control with Braking Function (Integrated in LDM) 

7 

Cruise Control Stalk with DCC 

8 

Cruise Control Stalk with ACC 


25 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 

























Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. Where is the LDM located? 


2. What function is integrated into the LDM module? 


3. With what modules does the LDM interface? 


26 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



















27 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Dynamic Cruise Control (DCC) 


For the U.S. market, the new E90 provides the customer with the ability to choose 
between two cruise control systems (DCC or ACC) which are available for the 6 cylinder 
engine variant. 

Option 544: Dynamic Cruise Control (DCC) with braking function 



Function 

The new Dynamic Cruise Control (DCC) with brake function maintains the set speed at a 
constant level even on downhill gradients. 

• Accelerating to the set speed - Engine intervention via the DME (acceleration of 
approx. +1.2 m/s 2 ) 

• Decelerating to the set speed - Independent brake intervention via the DSC (DCC 
achieves a maximum deceleration of -2.5 m/s 2 ) 

• Lateral acceleration is restricted to max. 4.0 m/s 2 

In order to realize these functions the system requires the use of the Longitudinal 
Dynamics Management (LDM), which is used to supply data/driver request signals to 
the DME. 


Important!!! 


Cruise control does not relieve the driver of his personal 
responsibility. Cruise control is a comfort system. 
Adjustments by the driver will always have a higher priority 
than cruise control. 


The driver should decide whether (and how) the system is 
used based on road and traffic conditions and visibility. 


28 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 






When the cruise control is active, the brake lights are actuated during automatic braking 
(required by law). If automatic braking is actuated, a signal is sent from the DSC to the 
Footwell Module (FRM). 

Advantages 

The advantage of the Dynamic Cruise Control with the brake function compared to a 
Cruise Control system without a braking function are: 

• Constant road speed, even downhill is maintained as a result of brake intervention via 
the DSC 

• Lateral acceleration in bends is restricted to a comfortable level 

• Indicator disc in the instrument cluster shows the set speed 

• Brief display in the LCD display of the instrument cluster when a speed is selected 
or previous setting is changed 


29 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 


















Legend for Components Involved with DCC Function 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Longitudinal Dynamics Module (LDM) 

14 

Brake Light Switch 

2 

Central Information Display (CID) 

15 

Cruise Control functions on SZL 

3 

Car Communication Computer (CCC) 

16 

Steering Column Stalk (SZL) 

D 

Controller (CON) 

17 

Junction Box Electronics (JBE) 

5 

Instrument Cluster 

18 

Accelerator Pedal Module (FPM) 

6 

Footwell Module (FRM) 

19 

Digital Engine Electronics (DME/ECM) 

D 

Car Access System(CAS) 

Kl. 15 
WUP 

Activation wire from CAS (Terminal 15 
wake-up) 

8 

Clutch Module 

KL.30g 

Terminal 30g active 

9 

To Digital Engine Electronics (DME/ECM) 

F-CAN 

Chassis CAN 

10 

Electronic Transmission Control (EGS) 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

11 

N/A 

LVDS 

LVDS 

(Low Voltage Differential Signalling) data line 

12 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

PT- 

CAN 

Powertrain CAN 

13 

To Footwell Module (FRM) 




31 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 

























































Cruise Control System Steering-Column Stalk 

Cruise control is set and called up using the cruise control system steering-column stalk. 

LDM Control Module (LDM) 

The LDM is the interface to the engine and to the brake system. 

In the LDM, the driver's entries regarding the cruise control system are monitored and 
evaluated. The Dynamic Cruise Control with brake function is integrated in the LDM. 

If the Active Cruise Control option is installed, the LDM evaluates the data sent from the 
ACC sensor. 

Instrument Cluster 

The instrument cluster shows all displays for cruise control. 

• Indicator disc in the round instrument shows the set speed. 

• LCD display briefly shows the newly selected set speed (for approx. 6 seconds). 

• LCD display also shows a Check-Control message. 

DSC: Dynamic Stability Control 

The current status of the vehicle is determined by the DSC by evaluating the following 
sensor signals: 

• Yaw rate (measure of movement of the car about its vertical axis) 

• Steering angle 

• Brake pressure 

• Wheel speeds (measure of the car's Road speed) 

The DSC transmits data regarding the current vehicle status to the LDM, such as: 

• Function reguest for current deceleration 

With automatic braking, the brake lights are activated depending on the deceleration 
values (legally prescribed). 

Example: The DSC is notified of a function request from the LDM via the PT-CAN to 
reduce the road speed. To fulfill this request, DSC intervenes in the brake 
system (goal: comfortable brake deceleration. No DSC intervention with 
regard to enhanced operating stability.) 

Digital Engine Electronics (DME/ECM) 

The DME controls engine intervention (for example, reduction in engine output to reduce 
Road speed): 

• Current torgue reguest data is transmitted by the LDM to the DME 

• Driver's command (signals from accelerator pedal module) data is transmitted to the 
LDM from the DME 


32 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Junction Box Electronics (JBE) 

The JBE is the data interface/gateway between the K-CAN and the PT-CAN. 

Accelerator Pedal Module 

The accelerator pedal module signals the driver's command. This signal is reguired to 
check the respective driving status and is evaluated via the DME. 

By pressing the accelerator pedal, the speed setpoint of the cruise control can be overrid¬ 
den at anytime. 

Brake Light Switch 

With the signals from the brake pressure sensors, braking actions are recognized. Cruise 
control is deactivated if braking actions are necessary. 

Clutch Module (manual transmission only) 

Clutch engagement/disengagement is recognized by a signal from the clutch module. 
During the clutch engagement/disengagement process, the engine speed is maintained 
at an optimal speed range by the DME. After the clutch has been reengaged, the DME 
will adjust back to the current torgue reguest from the cruise control. 

If the engine speed is too low or too high, the driver will be reguested to change gear. 

This reguest is issued in the form of an acoustic signal and a Check-Control message. 

Steering-Column Switch (SZL) Cluster 

The SZL processes all data from the cruise control system steering-column stalk. The 
evaluated switch signals are transmitted onto the F-CAN as a CAN message. 

Signal path: Cruise control inputs via stalk -> SZL -> F-CAN -> DSC ->PT-CAN -> LDM 

Footwell Module (FRM) 

When cruise control is in operation, the brake lights are actuated during automatic brak¬ 
ing (legal reguirement). To do this, a signal must be sent from the DSC to the footwell 
module via the PT-CAN. 

Car Access System (CAS) 

The CAS provides input signals relating to terminal status (e.g. terminal 15 ON). 

Car Communication Computer (CCC) & Central Information Display (CID) 

The CCC serves as the interface to the CID. The CID displays detailed information about 
the Check-Control messages. To back up the Check-Control message, CCC emits an 
acoustic warnings through the loudspeakers. The instrument cluster controls these 
warnings by means of the K-CAN. 

Electronic Transmission Control (EGS) or SMG 

The evaluated cruise control data is sent from the LDM to the DME. The EGS evaluates 
the data from the DME. The adaptive transmission control (component of the electronic 
transmission control) adjusts the shift characteristics of the driving program to the driver's 
commands and the driving situation. 


33 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



System Deactivation 

DCC can be activated from 30 km/h (settable up to max. 250 km/h ) and is deactivat¬ 
ed in the same manner as conventional/previous cruise control systems: 

• Brake pedal actuation • Active DSC intervention 

• Deactivation of DSC • Deactivation by the driver 

• Activation of DTC • Speed is reduced below 20 km/h 

• In automatic transmissions: selection of "N" 

• For manual gearboxes the system remains activated during a gearshift: 

Only if the clutch is deactivated for more than approx. 4 to 6 seconds, does the 
cruise control shut down. (If no gearshift or change in engine speed is made 
within 5 seconds of such a signal, cruise control will be deactivated.) 

In the event of an operational/system error, the following Check Control (CC) message 
will appear: 



Automatic Deactivation System Malfunctions 

Note: Unlike conventional cruise control, the driver with a manual gearbox can 
actuate the clutch and perform gearshifts without the system being 
deactivated. If however the driver does not pay attention to the gearshift 
request, the DCC is deactivated during slower driving at very high or very 
low engine speeds. 


34 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 




1 . 



Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


What is DCC ? 


2. What is the advantage of DCC over previous conventional cruise control systems? 


3. What function does the Junction Box Electronic Control Module serve with the 
DCC system? 


4. What is the purpose of the Footwell Module (FRM) in the DCC system? 


35 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 























Active Cruise Control (ACC) 


The 2nd generation ACC system was introduced on the E63/E64 (6 Series), with some 
minor modification this further developed ACC is offered in the E90. 



The Active Cruise Control (ACC) option provides cruise control function plus is able to 
maintain comfortable spacing from the vehicle a head. 

The distance from the vehicle ahead can be selected from 4 fixed timed separations. As 
speed changes, so does the distance to the vehicle ahead. The legally prescribed mini¬ 
mum distance is not undershot in the adjusted status. 

Differences between the Active Cruise Control option in the E90 and the Active Cruise 
Control option in the E63/E64: 

• In the E90, the data for the Longitudinal Dynamics Management is evaluated in the 
LDM control module. 

• In the E63/E64, the data for the Longitudinal Dynamics Management is evaluated in 
the ACC control module. 


Important!!! 


Cruise control does not relieve the driver of his personal 
responsibility. Cruise control is a comfort system. 
Adjustments by the driver will always have a higher priority 
than cruise control. The driver should decide whether (and 
how) the system is used based on road and traffic conditions 
and visibility. 


36 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 







Difference between 2nd Gen. and 1st Gen ACC 



• ACC sensor (control unit) is 60 % smaller than previously 

• 4 instead of 3 radar beams 

• Horizontal opening angle of the radar sensor now ±8 instead of ±4 

• Also new signal processing due to the higher data density (opening angle, 4 beams) 

• Anticipatory acceleration action by ACC in the event of an imminent lane change 
through setting of the direction indicator by the driver. 

Functions of ACC 

The Active Cruse Control (ACC) option contains several differences when compared to a 
conventional system such as: 

• Monitor object ahead 

• Cruise control 

• Lens heating 

• Low-voltage cutout and high-voltage protection for ACC sensor 

• Self-diagnosis and compensation for minor horizontal adjustments 


37 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 


TF04-6260 







Monitor Object Ahead 

The ACC systems views any vehicle traveling in the same lane as the subject vehicle, as 
an object. The operating limits of the system are as follows: 

• Object Detection 

The range of the ACC sensor is limited (approx. 120 meters). 

• Vehicle Deceleration 

The LDM is only able to effect limited deceleration (max. 2.5 m/s 2 ) via the Dynamic 
Stability Control (DSC). This means that the LDM is only able to compensate for a 
limited relative speed. 

If the limit of the functional range is reached, the driver is requested to act, as follows: 
Display for the monitored vehicle flashes red and an acoustic signal sounds. 

• Lateral Monitoring Range 

The lateral monitoring range of the ACC sensor is limited, meaning that a monitored 
vehicle ahead could be lost due to a tight bend. 

In such cases, cruise control will not accelerate to the set speed for approx. 2 sec¬ 
onds. This will prevent the vehicle from accelerating too close to the vehicle ahead, 
which may only momentarily not be monitored. 

When driving straight ahead, this can cause a delayed reaction to another vehicle 
which may closely cut in front of the subject vehicle. The vehicle cutting in will not 
be monitored by the ACC system until it is clearly in the same lane as the subject 
vehicle. 

• Lateral Acceleration 

The LDM limits the lateral acceleration up to approx. 4.0 m/s2 in favor of driving 
comfort. The LDM is unable to work in an anticipatory manner when the vehicle is 
cornering. It is only able to react to existing lateral acceleration when it is already on 
the bend. For this reason, the driver is responsible for ensuring that an appropriate 
speed is being driven as the vehicle enters the bend. 


38 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Index 

Explanation 

A 

Distance between Vehicles Constant 

B 

Distance between Vehicles Increasing 

C 

Distance between Vehicles Decreasing 

1 

Object being Monitored 

2 

Radar Wave from ACC Sensor 

3 

Reflected Radar Wave from Monitored Object 

4 

Vehicle with ACC option (Subject Vehicle) 


The radar waves received cannot distinguish between animals, vehicles and traffic signs. 
Traffic signs and parked vehicles standing next to the vehicle's lane could incorrectly be 
assigned to the lane. In order to prevent incorrect reactions, stationary objects and traffic 
in the other direction is ignored in the distance control. 


39 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 








Vehicles that are operating/traveling in other lanes are of generally of no interest for the 
ACC system. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1-4 

Radar Beam 

A 

Signal Amplitude 

5 

Strength of Reflected Signal 

F 

Frequency 


If an object is in the monitoring range, the reflected radar waves are received depending 
on the angle between the wheel axis and the object 

4 antennas receive different amplitudes, depending on the amplitude of the signal 
received the system will react accordingly. 

The ACC uses the turn signal indicator signal from the Footwell Module (FRM) for quick¬ 
er recognition when changing lanes. In other words, if the turn signal indicator is activat¬ 
ed prior to overtaking/passing, the vehicle being overtaken is ignored more quickly. On 
the other hand, in the event of a change to the previous lane, a vehicle driving there is 
monitored more quickly. 


40 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 






Cruise Control 

The Active Cruise Control option differentiates between 2 driving conditions: 

• Cruise control with specified set speed - A selected set speed (range 20 mph - 

1 lOmph) is automatically maintained on open roads without vehicles driving ahead. 

• Cruise control with speed adapted to that of vehicle driving ahead - If a slower vehi¬ 
cle is detected on the vehicle's own lane, the vehicle's own speed will be adapted to 
that of the vehicle driving ahead. 

At the same time, a driver selected preset following distance for the vehicle is estab¬ 
lished (4 fixed, timed separations can be selected). The timed separation from a 
vehicle driving ahead is no less than 1.5 seconds under normal driving conditions. 

In certain conditions (e.g. when a vehicle cuts in a short distance ahead), this timed 
separation may briefly be less than 1.5 seconds. 

System Activation 

• Cruise control operation is only possible in speed range 30 km/h to 180 km/h 

• The LDM limits the acceleration (approx. + 1.2 m/s 2 ) & deceleration (max. -2.5 m/s 2 ). 
Note: Acceleration when cornering is limited. 

• The LDM can only conditionally compensate for high speed situations. (Safety con¬ 
cept, i.e. interference from the next lane or fast approach to a truck) 

If the deceleration induced by the cruise control is not sufficient, the driver will have 
to intervene directly. 

• The timed separation from a vehicle driving ahead is no less than 1.5 second. In 
certain conditions (e.g. when a vehicle cuts in a short distance ahead), this timed 
separation may briefly be less than 1.5 second. 

If the deceleration induced by the cruise control is not sufficient, the driver will have 
to intervene directly. 

• If the ACC sensor is blinded, the Active Cruise Control option shuts down. 

(Blinding, e.g. due to extremely heavy snowfall, through a layer of ice on the sensor 
or through dirt) 

Cruise control can be reactivated after the ACC sensor has been cleaned. 

• System remains activated during a gearshift. 

Only if the clutch is deactivated for more than approx. 4 to 6 seconds, does the 
cruise control shut down. (If no gearshift or change in engine speed is made 
within 5 seconds of such a signal, cruise control will be deactivated.) 


41 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



System Deactivation 

System is deactivated in the same manner as conventional/previous cruise control sys¬ 
tems: 

• Brake pedal actuation • Active DSC intervention 

• Deactivation of DSC • Deactivation by the driver 

• Activation of DTC • Speed is reduced below 20 km/h 

• In automatic transmissions: selection of "N" 

• In manual gearboxes: excessively long clutching operation (approx. 4 sec) 

Display for monitored vehicle does not light up, the vehicle remains below the set 
speed and does not accelerate further 

Causes: 

- On sharp bends, the vehicle's speed will be controlled in such a way that lateral 
acceleration is no more than 4.0 m/s 2 to maintain driving comfort. 

- Rain, snow and fog absorb radar waves. 

This will significantly reduce the range of the ACC sensor. 

Lens Heating 

The lens of the ACC sensor is made of plastic. The built-in lens heating ensures better 
availability of the Active Cruise Control option in winter weather conditions. 

The lens heating is activated by the ACC sensor. The heating is controlled via a pulse 
width modulated signal (PWM signal). The heating coil is integrated into the lens of the 
ACC sensor. 

The lens heating is only activated within a certain ambient temperature range (approx. 
+5°C to -5°C). This is because: Only at temperatures around zero is snow wet or moist. 

At temperatures well below this, snow will be dry. To prevent snow from thawing on the 
lens and creating an artificial coating, the heating is switched off below a certain ambient 
temperature. The current ambient temperature value is transmitted by the instrument 
cluster. 

Conditions for activation: 

• Engine ON 

• ACC ON 

• Ambient temperature between -5°C and +5°C 


42 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Safety Cutout: 

• Temperature in ACC sensor over 50°C (measured by interior temperature sensor in 
ACC sensor control module) 

• Voltage greater than 16 volts 

The safety cutout shuts down the lens heating. The Active Cruise Control option 
remains activated (No fault memory entry). 

Monitoring: 

• The lens heating is monitored for open and short circuits in the heating coil. 

• If the monitoring reports a fault, the Active Cruise Control option will be shut down. 
(Fault memory entry) 

• Display for monitored vehicle does not light up, the vehicle remains below the set 
speed and does not accelerate further. 

Causes: 

On sharp bends, the vehicle's speed will be controlled in such a way that lateral 
acceleration is no more than 4.0 m/s 2 to maintain driving comfort. 

Rain, snow and fog absorb radar waves. 

This will significantly reduce the range of the ACC sensor. 

Low-Voltage Cutout and High-Voltage Protection 

The ACC sensor works with an operating voltage of 9 to 16 volts. 

Low-Voltage Cutout: 

If the on-board supply voltage drops below about 6.5 volts, the ACC sensor will per¬ 
form a low voltage cutout and a fault memory entry will be stored. 

A function block will be made when the on-board supply voltage drops below 9 
volts. 

The ACC sensor will be reactivated when the on-board supply voltage exceeds 9.8 
volts again. 


43 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Self-Diagnosis and Compensation 

External forces may change the alignment of the ACC sensor. A horizontal change leads 
to function limitations. (Function limitations encountered are, e.g.: Reaction to vehicles in 
the next lane or late reaction to vehicles in the same lane). 

Self-diagnosis allows the ACC sensor to compensate for minor horizontal adjustments of 
up to 1°. 

If a horizontal adjustment of more than 1 ° is detected, the Active Cruise Control option 
will be deactivated and a fault will be stored in the fault memory. A Check-Control mes¬ 
sage will be issued. 


44 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 




Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


1. What is ACC and what function does it provide? 


2. On what vehicles is ACC available? 


3. What is the difference between 1st and 2nd generation ACC systems? 


4. What is the range of the ACC sensor? 


5. When changing lanes with turn signal active how does ACC react? 


45 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



























Active Front Steering (AFS) 


The Active Front Steering (AFS) system varies the steering gear ratio from direct to indi¬ 
rect and vice versa as a function of the vehicle's speed. Active Steering offers the fol¬ 
lowing advantages: 

• Direct steering (reduced gear ratio) with no more than minimal movements of the 
steering wheel at the low end of the speed range. 

• More indirect steering (increased gear ratio) at higher speeds in conjunction with 
enhanced driving 

stability. 

It would not be possible to provide the benefits offered by AFS with a conventional 
steering system, as there would inevitably be a need to compromise: 

• Steering cannot be too direct as otherwise it would be overly sensitive when the 
vehicle is travelling at high speed, however direct steering is significantly more 
desirable for low speeds or when parking. 

With AFS there is no need to compromise since the steering directness varies with 
speed, which results in three major benefits/enhancements: 

• Agility 

• Comfort 

• Safety 

With the introduction of the E90, Active Front Steering (AFS) becomes available as an 
option for the 3 Series. 



46 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 





Benefits of AFS 


Enhanced Agility 

Up to about midway through the speed range (approx. 100 km/h), the directness of the 
steering means that the driver perceives the vehicle as more agile and easier to handle, 
plus there is no loss in feedback from the road surface right through the steering wheel. 

Example: A driver who has to avoid an unexpected obstacle has much better control, 
plus significantly enhanced steering precision and reguires less work at the 
steering wheel. 

Enhanced Comfort 

Current BMW models without AFS need more than three full turns of the steering wheel 
in order for the wheels to complete the arc from full lock in one direction to full lock in the 
other. 

When the vehicle is travelling at low speed, AFS reduces this to less than two full turns of 
the steering wheel in order to go from lock to lock.The advantage with AFS: 

The driver's task is easier when turning corners in city traffic or when maneuvering into 
parking slots where space is at a premium. On twisty roads such as mountain passes, 
the reduced steering angle means that the driver's hands remain in the ideal position on 
the wheel. There is no longer any need for the driver to feed the wheel through his or her 
hands, or to cross hands in a tight bend. The multifunction buttons on the steering 
wheel and the paddles for the seguential manual transmission (SMG) are always perfectly 
positioned relative to the driver's hands, regardless of the driving situation. 

Enhanced Safety 

A completely different set of conditions apply when the vehicle is travelling at high speed: 

With the assistance of indirect steering there is increased stability when travelling straight 
ahead at high speeds (such as on highways) compared with conventional steering. At 
the same time, the yaw-rate control is in the position to stabilize the vehicle by correcting 
the steering angle when the vehicle is oversteering. 

This supports the Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) function. 

Like conventional systems, BMW's Active Steering features a steering column with a per¬ 
manent connection from the steering wheel to the front wheels . The mechanical link 
ensures the operability of the steering system at all times, even in the event of disruption 
to or the complete failure of the system. The mechanical steering linkage, is essential in 
sustaining the authentic "feeling of steering" as perceived by the driver. True steer-by¬ 
wire systems are intrinsically unable to simulate the realism of this feedback from the road 
to the driver. 


47 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 




Functions 


The AFS system available on the E90 is similar to the system available on the E60, E63 
& E64, with some additional functions. 

Standard Functions of AFS 
Variable Steering Ratio 

The steering ratio is dependent on the steering wheel angle and the vehicle speed 

• More maneuverability and agility at lower and mid-range speeds 

• Improved comfort when maneuvering in and out of parking spaces and other 
maneuvering (less gripping) 

• Increased monitoring and safety during dynamic steering maneuvers (hands firmly 
on the steering wheel) 

• Stable straightline stability at high speeds 

Linked with Servotronic 

AFS linked with Servotronic and an ECO valve for hydraulic delivery 

Linked with DSC 

Guaranteed vehicle stability in every road situation, also restricted intervention via the 
steering intervention. 

• Stabilization intervention dependent on the driver's steering action 

Optimum support of the driver while maintaining steering "accuracy" 

• Stabilization on all road surface traction levels (coefficients of friction) 

• Early stabilization due to "more comfortable" steering intervention 

Reduction and postponement of DSC brake interventions 

New Functions with E90 
Variable Steering Coding 

Two different "variable steering tuning" curves for standard and sport suspensions in the 
E90 (coded at the factory model/option specific) 

Additional Yaw Rate Sensor 

Two yaw rate sensors in one housing- utilization of a DSC sensor with 2 yaw rate and 2 
lateral acceleration sensors (redundancy) 

DTC Switch 

When DSC is switched off, the driving stabilization function (yaw-rate control and yaw 
moment compensation) is also deactivated. The variable steering-gear ratio always 
remains active. 


48 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Yaw Moment Compensation 

With conventional systems, the driver has to actively steer the vehicle in a straight line if 
the brakes are applied on a road surface with non-uniform traction levels ("1-split"). In this 
situation countersteering keeps the vehicle in its track and shorten the braking distances. 


On the E90, equipped with the Active Front Steering (AFS) option and brakes are applied 
on a road surface with non-uniform traction levels ("1-split"), which results in the build-up 
of a moment/rotation about the vertical axis (yaw moment) rendering the vehicle unstable. 



In this situation DSC in conjunction with AFS actuates active steering actions in order 
stabilize the vehicle and shorten the braking distance, by building up a counter 
moment/rotation (by counter steering) in the opposite direction which cancels the previ¬ 
ously created yaw moment. 



The function is accomplished by allowing the DSC control module to calculate the yaw 
rate plus interpret information from the front steering angle sensor. The DSC control 
module transmits the information to the AFS control module which establishes the yaw- 
moment compensation correction angle needed for stabilization, counter steering. 

The braking distance is shortened because higher braking pressure differences at the 
rear axle are possible with yaw rate compensation via the steering. ABS on its own would 
set significantly lower pressure than is actually possible at wheels on a high coefficient of 
friction ("select low") and thus create a longer braking distance in this situation. 


49 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 





















Components of AFS System 




The sensors utilized by the Active Front Steering system are: 

Motor-Position Sensor 

The motor-position sensor registers the rotor position of the electric servomotor (angle of 
rotation). The motor position is communicated to the AFS control module. 

Total Steering-Angle Sensor and Steering Angle Sensor 

The total steering angle sensor captures the steering angle that the Active Front Steering 
produces at the steering box (total steering angle- angle at steering pinion). As far as its 
function is concerned, the total steering angle sensor corresponds to the steering angle 
sensor in a conventional steering system. 

The steering angle sensor in the steering column switch cluster(SZL) captures the angle 
to which the driver turns the steering wheel. Both signals are needed by the AFS control 
module. 

• The steering angle sensor is an optical sensor on the E90. 

Both sensors are connected to the F-CAN in order to transmit data to the AFS and DSC 
modules. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

DSC Module 

2 

AFS Module 

3 

Steering Angle Sensor 
in SZL 

4 

Total Steering Angle 
Sensor (LWS) 

5 

DSC Sensor 


50 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 





DSC Sensor 

The DSC sensor on vehicles equipped with active steering utilizes 2 yaw rate sensor ele¬ 
ments to transmit redundant signals capturing the rate of yaw (rotation about the vertical 
axis) and lateral acceleration to the AFS module via the chassis CAN (F-CAN). 



The control modules involved with the AFS system are: 

Active Front Steering (AFS) Control Module 

The AFS control unit computes the nominal values for the electric servomotor of the 
planetary gearbox with override function. 

Junction Box Electronics (JBE) 

The Junction Box Electronics (JBE) forms the interface between the PT-CAN and the 
K-CAN (signals for instrument cluster) and provides a pass through for F-CAN. 

Moreover, the AFS control module receives its power supply from the electrical distribu¬ 
tion center in the junction box. 

Dynamic Stability Control (DSC) 

The DSC control module and the AFS control module are interconnected by the F-CAN 
(chassis CAN). The signals supplied by the DSC control module include the Road speed 
signal. 

Digital Engine Electronics (DME/ECM) 

The engine control module sends the signal indicating that the engine is running to the 
AFS control unit via the PT-CAN bus. The AFS control unit notifies the engine control of 
the approximate drive torque of the power-steering pump. 


51 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 




Car Access System 

The vehicle is authenticated by the AFS control unit and the CAS control unit via the K- 
CAN / PT-CAN (vehicle identification numbers compared). Moreover, the CAS control 
unit transmits the wake-up signal for the PT-CAN. 

The actuators driven by the Active Steering system are as follows: 

Planetary Gearbox 

The planetary gearbox with override function uses the electric servomotor to generate the 
resulting total steering angle at the front wheels. 

Hydraulic Steering with Servotronic Valve 

The conventional hydraulic steering provides the power-steering assistance. 

"Servotronic" (= speed dependent power-assisted steering) is part of the Active Steering 
option. 

ECO Valve in the Power-Steering Pump 

A vehicle fitted with the "Active Steering" option has a controlled-output power-steering 
pump controlled by AFS. 

Warning Light and Check Control 

The dedicated-function warning light in the instrument cluster lights up to indicate a fault 
in the Active Steering. 

At the same time a Check-Control message is shown in the LCD display. The text for the 
Check-Control message can be called up in the Central Information Display (CID). 


52 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



System Activation 

Preconditions for activation for Active Front Steering are: 

• Terminal 15 ON 

• The engine must be running 

Steering-wheel position and the position of the steered wheels are synchronized as soon 
as the engine is running. This ensures that the positions of the steering wheel and the 
road wheels match if, for example, the steering wheel was moved while the vehicle was at 
a standstill with the ignition switched OFF. 

Note: The synchronization procedure can cause the steering-wheel or the vehi¬ 
cle's front wheels to move. Movements of the steering wheel or the vehi¬ 
cle's front wheels might be perceptible while synchronization is in 
progress. 

Synchronization also occurs while the vehicle is on the move, but the 
process is extremely slow and virtually imperceptible. 

General System Information 
Track Setting 

Track has to be reset after work on the steering. The procedure for adjusting track on a 
vehicle with Active Front Steering (total steering angle sensor) is not the same as that for 
a vehicle with a conventional power-assisted steering system. 

Important: It is essential to follow the instructions in the Repair Instructions. 

Power Supply 

The Active Steering must be initialized again after the battery has been disconnected. To 
do this, proceed as follows: 

• Start the engine (the "Active Steering inactive" Check-Control message appears) 

• First turn the steering wheel as far as it will go counter clockwise and then as far as it 
will go clockwise 

or 

• Alternatively the vehicle can be driven at about 30 to 40 km/h 

• Turn off the engine and switch off terminal 15 

• Start the engine and the Active Front Steering and all its functions are operational 

• Clear the Fault Memory of the AFS module 


53 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



Calibrating the Steering Angle Sensors 

If the steering column switch cluster (SZL) is exchanged or reprogrammed, or if the steer¬ 
ing box is exchanged: The steering-angle sensors must be recalibrated (offset). The 
motor-position sensor (angle) in the AFS control unit is initialized. 

The total steering angle sensor on the steering box is calibrated relative to the center 
position of the steering rack by the manufacturer. 

Radio-Reception Interference 

Note: Be sure to secure the shield of the electric servomotor. Failure to connect 
the shield (3 phases of the electric servomotor) to the protective housing 
of the AFS module, will almost certainly impair radio reception as a result 
of interference. 

Servotronic Valve 

If a fault occurs (when de-energized, for example) the Servotronic valve switches to the 
characteristic for high speeds. Steering assistance is reduced accordingly. 


54 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 



1 . 



Classroom Exercise - Review Questions 


What is AFS? 


2. What advantages/benefits does AFS provide? 


3. Where is the AFS module located? 


4. What is different with AFS regarding the E90? 


5. What function does the Junction Box provide for AFS? 


6. What is special about the DSC sensor and where is it located? 


55 

E90 Dynamic Driving Systems 





























