Table of Contents 

E90 Climate Control 

Subject Page 

Introduction .5 

New System Components and Features .5 

IHKA System Circuit Diagram .6 

Electrical System Components .8 

Control Units.8 

A/C Control and Operating Unit (IHKA) .8 

Digital Motor Electronics (DME) Control Unit .9 

Junction Box (JB).9 

Roof Control Panel (FZD) .9 

Car Access System (CAS) .10 

Car Communication Computer (CCC).10 

Central Information Display.10 

Center Console Switch Cluster (SZM).10 

Sensors.11 

Interior Temperature Sensor.11 

Evaporator Temperature Sensor .11 

Ambient/Outside Temperature Sensor.11 

Ventilation Temperature Sensors.11 

Solar Sensor .11 

Refrigerant Pressure Sensor .12 

AUC II Sensor.12 

Condensation Sensor .13 

Front Stratification Adjustment Thumbwheel.13 

Rear Stratification Adjustment Thumbwheel.13 

Outputs.14 

Stepper Motors.14 

Blower and Blower Output Stage .15 

Compressor Valve.15 

Rear Window Defogger.16 

Seat Heating .16 

Water Valves .16 

Electric Water Pump .17 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 04/05 



































Subject Page 

Non-Electrical Components.18 

Refrigerant Circuit .18 

Heating Circuit.18 

Air Cleaner/Microfilter.18 

Principles of Operation.19 

Temperature Control.19 

Evaporator Control.20 

Air Distribution Setting .20 

Airflow Control .21 

Sunlight Adaptation (Solar Sensor) .21 

MAX Cooling.21 

Residual Heat (REST).22 

Defrost Function .23 

AUTO Function .23 

Heated Rear Window .23 

Defrosting Phase (1st heating period) .23 

Pulsing .23 

2nd Heating Period .23 

OFF .23 

Air-recirculation Mode.24 

Automatic Air-recirculation Control.24 

Condensation Sensor Function .25 

Service Information.26 

Exchanging Flap Motor .26 

Running in A/C Compressor.26 

Microfilter .27 





























Subject 


Page 



Climate Control 


Model: E90 

Production: From Start of Production 

IBIICTIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Be familiar with the differences in IHKA features between the E46 and E90 

• Know the general location of electric components of the system 

• Understand what interfaces are needed for system operation 

• Understand why the auxiliary water pump has been eliminated. 


4 

E90 Climate Control 


Introduction 


The E90 is equipped with an integrated automatic climate control system (IHKA) as 
standard. It supplies the needs for a very competitive market segment and allows the 
vehicle occupants the latest in climate control functionality with an optional Drive inter¬ 
face that reduces the number of primary controls on the panel. 

New System Components and Features 

• The IHKA system used is a dual zone climate control system allowing the 
passenger and passenger to control individual temperature settings. 

• Residual heat (rest) function. 

• Condensation sensor interface 

• New bus system (LIN) for control of the stepper motors. 

• New stepper motors 

• Seat heating control 

• New Interfaces (JB, FZD, SZM, CON) 

• Clutchless A/C compressor 



Integrated automatic climate control (IHKA) 


5 

E90 Climate Control 






IHKA System Circuit Diagram 



E90 Climate Control 


8 















































































































































































































































Legend for IHKA System Circuit Diagram 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear blend/stratification motor 

22 

Pressure sensor 

2 

Alternator 

23 

Center console switch cluster (SZM) 

3 

Digital motor electronics (DME) 

24 

Water valve 

D 

Electric water pump 

25 

Outside temperature sensor 

5 

Engine cooling fan 

26 

Auxiliary water pump (not for US) 

6 

Ventilation motor 

27 

Evaporator temperature sensor 

7 

Front blend/stratification motor 

28 

Footwell temperature sensor 

8 

Car communication computer (CCC) 

29 

Blocking circuit (filter) 

9 

Condensation sensor 

30 

Rear window defogger 

10 

AUC II sensor 

31 

Blocking circuit (filter) 

11 

Fresh air/recirculation motor 

32 

Ventilation temperature sensor 

12 

Mix air flap motor, left 

33 

Solar sensor (1 -channel) 

13 

Defrost flap 

34 

Seat heating element, left 

14 

Footwell flap motor 

35 

Seat heating element, right 

15 

Central information display (CID) 

36 

Blower motor and final stage 

16 

Roof function center (FZD) 

37 

Instrument Cluster 

17 

Junction Box Electronics Control Module (JBE) 

38 

Outside temperature sensor 

18 

Seat heater button, left 

39 

Driver’s seat module 

19 

A/C compressor valve 

40 

Seat heating module (passenger) 

20 

Seat heater button, right 

41 

Mix air flap motor, right 

21 

Controller 




























































































Electrical System Components 


Control Units 

A/C Control and Operating Unit (IHKA) 

As before, the control and operating unit is the control center of the heating and air 
conditioning system. It is the point where all the necessary sensor data is processed and 
the reguired settings can be entered. 

A new feature of the control module is that it no longer directly controls all functions and 
components but rather makes use of other control units for this purpose (distributed 
functions). 

The IHKA panel is directly responsible for the following: 

• SZM switch input 

• Solar sensor input 

• Receives the rear stratification knob (rheostat) signal 

• Receives ventilation, footwell, and evaporator temperature sensor signals 
The IHKA panel indirectly receives 

• Condensation sensor signal via the K-CAN. 

The signal path is: 

Condensation sensor => FZD => K-CAN => IHKA 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Windshield Air Distribution 

7 

Front Windshield Defrost Program 

2 

Face Vent Air Distribution 

8 

Compressor Request 

3 

Footwell Air Distribution 

9 

Rear Window Request 

4 

Automatic Program Select Button 

10 

MAX A/C Program 

5 

Blower Motor Control 

11 

Temperature Control Knob Left/Right 

6 

Recirculation Control 

12 

REST Program 


8 

E90 Climate Control 
















Digital Motor Electronics (DME) Control Unit 

The DME control unit performs the following functions: 

• Actuates the Engine cooling fan for cooling of the condenser. 

• Interfaces with the IHKA control unit via the bus network for the compressor release 
signal. 

• Interfaces with the IHKA control unit for operation of the engine’s electric water 
pump for the residual heat feature. 

Junction Box (JB) 

The junction box is extremely important to the IHKA system. 

It is responsible for the following functions: 

• Output signal for seat heating. 

The signal path is: 

SZM => ribbon cable => IHKA => K-CAN=> JBE => SHM/SMFA 

• Rear window defogger 
The signal path is: 

IHKA => K-CAN => JBE (relay) => Rear window defogger filters/grid 

• Blower motor operating voltage 

• Refrigerant control valve (in compressor) 

The signal path is: 

IHKA => K-CAN => JBE => Operating voltage for valve 

• Gateway to the PT-CAN for bi-directional communication between the 
IHKA and DME 

The signal path is: 

IHKA <=> K-CAN <=> JBE <=> PT-CAN <=> DME 

• Receives the rear stratification knob (rheostat) signal 

• Receives refrigerant pressure sensor signal 
The signal path is: 

Pressure sensor => JBE => K-CAN => IHKA 

• Receives AUC sensor signal 
The signal path is: 

AUC sensor => JBE => K-CAN => IHKA 

• Splice point for the ambient air temperature sensor 
The signal path is: 

Ambient air temperature sensor-> hardwire => through JB => IKE 

Roof Control Panel (FZD) 

The roof control panel is used to relay the condensation sensor signal to the IHKA. It 
takes the signal from the condensation sensor and places it on the K-CAN. 


9 

E90 Climate Control 



Car Access System (CAS) 

The CAS assigns a personal identification code to every remote control. The CAS trans¬ 
fers the personal identification code to the IHKA control unit via the K-CAN. 

The ID code “Key-based settings” (Key Memory) are stored in the IHKA control unit. 

When the vehicle is unlocked, the remote control unit used is recognized. The settings 
stored for this unit are called up and executed. While entering the sleep mode (run-down 
period), the current settings are stored for the remote control unit in use at that time. 

Car Communication Computer (CCC) 

If the vehicle is eguipped with a navigation system, the signals from the controller for 
selecting the menus and submenus are processed in the CCC. 

To actuate the CID (Central Information Display), the red-green-blue signals from the 
graphics processor are converted into Low Voltage Differential Signalling (LVDS) digital 
signals. 

Central Information Display 

The following control and display functions are selected and activated with the controller 
in the CID (Central Information Display): 

• Air distribution setting - The defrost flaps, ventilation flaps and footwell flaps can be 

individually set in the air distribution submenu. 

• Automatic mode - The intensity of the IHKA can be set in the automatic mode 

submenu. In other words, the automatic influence of the cli¬ 
mate conditions outside the vehicle on the air volume and 
the opening angle of the flaps can be set to one of three dif¬ 
ferent settings (low, medium, high). 

Center Console Switch Cluster (SZM) 

The center console switch cluster (SZM) is connected by means of a 14-wire ribbon 
cable directly to the IHKA control module. The commands from the SZM are then 
transmitted via K-CAN to the corresponding systems. 

The A/C control and operating unit is also responsible for activation of the LEDs for 
function and backlighting. 



10 

E90 Climate Control 



Sensors 


Interior Temperature Sensor 

The interior temperature sensor is mounted on the IHKA panel. It is used by the IHKA 
control module to achieve the desired cabin temperature. 

To aid the flow of air being sampled by the system, there is a small puller type electrical 
fan (non-replaceable) on the back of the IHKA. 

Evaporator Temperature Sensor 

The evaporator temperature sensor, mounted close to the evaporator, also transfers its 
information directly via cable to the IHKA control module. 

Ambient/Outside Temperature Sensor 

The outside temperature value is sent to the IHKA control module from the instrument 
cluster via the K-CAN. 

The outside temperature sensor signal is hardwire to the instrument cluster. The wiring 
uses the junction box as a splice. 

Ventilation Temperature Sensors 

The system utilizes a total of three NTC type ventilation temperature sensors directly 
wired to the IHKA control module. They are: 

• Stratified Temperature Sensor 

• Ventilation Temperature Sensor 

• Footwell Temperature Sensor 

Solar Sensor 

The system is eguipped with a single zone solar sensor. It is connected directly to the 
IHKA control module via hard wire. 

The solar sensor is mounted on the center of the dashboard cover next to the windshield. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Center Channel Speaker & Vent 

2 

Solar Sensor 


11 

E90 Climate Control 






Refrigerant Pressure Sensor 

The refrigerant pressure sensor is located in the pressure line between the condenser 
and the evaporator. The output of the A/C compressor is reduced by a request from 
the the IHKA control unit to the JBE in the event of excessively high or low refrigerant 
pressure. 

The junction box provides power to the refrigerant pressure sensor. The data are evaluat¬ 
ed in the junction box electronics. The evaluated data are transmitted to the IHKA control 
unit via the body CAN (K-CAN). 

AUC II Sensor 

The AUC II sensor is controlled and powered by the junction box. The junction box 
collects the data from the AUC II sensor and transfers it to the IHKA control module via 
the K-CAN where the data is then processed. 

The AUC sensor has the ability to detect: 

• Carbon Monoxide (CO) 

• Hydrocarbons (HC) 

• Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx gasses). 

The AUC II sensor is mounted in the IHKA filter housing on the bulkhead. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

AUC II Sensor 



12 

E90 Climate Control 





Condensation Sensor 

The condensation sensor is controlled and powered by the roof module (FZD). The 
sensor data are transferred via the K-CAN to the control and operating unit where they 
are evaluated. The IHKA control module receives all information sent from the FZD con¬ 
trol module via the K-CAN spliced through the junction box. 

The condensation sensor is mounted under the rain light sensor (RLS) on the mirror base. 
Other names for the condensation sensor are Mist, Fogging, and Humidity sensor. 


When moisture is detected by the Condensation Sensor, the following occurs: 


• Defroster Flaps open further 

• Blower speed is increased 

• Temperature increases 


• Fresh Air Flaps open 100% 

• Footwell Flaps are closed 

• Evap Temp threshold goes to minimum 



si) *) 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Sensor Electronics 

2 

3 Pin Connector 

3 

Moisture Measuring Cell 

4 

Well for Laser Adjusted Resistors 


Note: Similar to previous systems, the condensation sensor value is ignored 
unless the IHKA panel is running in the automatic mode. 


Front Stratification Adjustment Thumbwheel 

The front adjustment thumbwheel is part of the DSC/DTC/Hazard switch cluster. 

The thumbwheel signal is wired directly to the IHKA control unit as an analog/varying 
voltage signal. The IHKA panel sends the specific position signal to the front mixing flap 
motor via the LIN bus. 

Rear Stratification Adjustment Thumbwheel 

The rear adjustment thumbwheels is located to the right of the rear center vent 

The thumbwheel signal is wired directly to the JBE control unit as an analog/varying 
voltage signal. The JBE converts this signal into a digital signal over the K-CAN to the 
IHKA control unit which then sends the specific position signal to the rear mixing flap 
motor via the LIN bus. 


13 

E90 Climate Control 













Outputs 


Stepper Motors 

The IHKA system utilizes eight stepper motors that are wired in series for climate control 
operation. The IHKA control module operates the stepper motors via the LIN-bus. 

The eight stepper motors used are for: 

• Defroster Flaps 

• Fresh/Recirculating Air Flap 

• Ventilation Flaps 

• Rear Blending/Stratification Flap 

• Right Air Mixing Flap 

• Front Blending/Stratification Flap 

• Left Air Mixing Flap 

• Footwell Flaps 



0 0 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stepper Motor, Air Mixing Flap, Left 

2 

Stepper Motor, Air Blending, Front 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Stepper Motor, Ventilation Flap 

2 

Stepper Motor, Defroster Flap 

3 

Stepper Motor Air Mixing Flap, Right 

4 

Stepper Motor, Fresh / Recirculating Air 

5 

Stepper Motor, Air Blending, Rear 

6 

Stepper Motor, Footwell 


Note: • All eight stepper motors can be replaced without removing the 
dashboard nor A/C housing. 

• Seven of the eight stepper motors used are identical (same part 
number). A different stepper motor is used only for the fresh 
air/recirculation motor. See the Service Information section. 

14 

E90 Climate Control 

























Blower and Blower Output Stage 

The blower and blower output stage are mounted in the air conditioning housing behind 
the glovebox. 

The blower output stage is activated via pulse-width modulation by the IHKA control 
module. This connection is spliced through the junction box. The operating power for 
the blower motor is supplied by the junction box. 

The signal path is: 

IHKA => through JB (not processed just spliced) => Final stage => Blower Motor 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Blower Motor 

2 

Output/Final Stage 

3 

Junction Box Electronics 


Compressor Valve 

A clutchless compressor similar to the one used in E60/65 is used. The compressor has 
a swash plate that can vary the amount of compression on the refrigerant. 

The compressor valve is controlled and powered by the junction box. Activation reguests 
are sent via the K-CAN from the IHKA control module. 

The signal path is: 

IHKA => K-CAN => JBE => Refrigerant valve 


15 

E90 Climate Control 







Rear Window Defogger 

The rear window defogger is also controlled and powered by the junction box. The 
reguest is sent to the junction box from the IHKA control module via the K-CAN. 

The signal path is: 

IHKA => K-CAN => JBE (relay) => Rear window defogger filters/grid 

Seat Heating 

The seat heating is controlled and powered by the junction box. Reguest for set heating 
activation is initiated from the SZM directly to the IHKA control module and transmitted 
via K-CAN to the junction box. 

The signal path is: 

SZM => ribbon cable => IHKA => K-CAN=> JBE => SHM/SMFA 


® 1 

,1111 

BUTT 

® 

SZM 


K-CAN 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

IHKA 

2 

Center Console Switching Center (SZM) 

3 

Junction Box Electronincs Control Module 
(JBE) 

4 

Seat Heating Module/ Driver's Seat Module 


Water Valve 

A single water valve is used to control the amount of heat sent to the heater core. 

To control the temperature desire by the dual zone climate control system, mixing flaps 
are used. 

The water valve is sprung open and pulse width modulated closed by the JBE. 

The signal path is: 

IHKA => K-CAN => JBE => Water valve 


16 

E90 Climate Control 


















Electric Water Pump 

The E90 does not utilize an auxiliary water pump as other BMW’s, thanks to the N52 
engine’s cooling system. 

The N52 engine is equipped with an electronically controlled water pump. There are 
many advantages to this setup. One advantage is decreased warmup time for the engine. 

When the residual heat (REST) function is activated on the E90, the IHKA control unit 
interfaces with the DME control module to activate the electric water pump. The water 
pump allows hot/warm coolant to flow through the heater core and warm up the passen¬ 
ger cabin. 



Note: More information on the N52 engine’s cooling system benefits can be 
found in the training material for ST501 - New Engine Technology. 


17 

E90 Climate Control 


Non-Electrical Components 


Refrigerant Circuit 

The refrigerant circuit consists of the A/C compressor, expansion valve, evaporator, 
and condenser. 

The new features on the system are: 

• Aluminum lines and the arrangement of the filler connections 

• The receiver-drier (with replaceable desiccant) is integrated in the condenser 

• The compressor has no clutch. It is controlled by the IHKA logic through the JBE. 

• The expansion valve is accessible from the engine compartment. 

Heating Circuit 

The heated water is pumped out of the engine via an electric water pump through the 
water valve to the heater core (heat exchanger). From here, the water is routed back to 
the engine and engine thermostat. 

An auxiliary water pump is not needed in the vehicle due to the electric water pump 
used by the engine. This electric water pump can satisfy the needs of the heating circuit 
during idle/low engine RPMs and for the REST function. 

Air Cleaner/Microfilter 

The E90 is eguipped with a carbon activated microfilter which is accessible from the 
engine compartment. 

Once the cover has been removed from the bulkhead, the filter can be easily replaced or 
cleaned. The filter change is indicated via the CBS. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Air cleaner housing with filter 


18 

E90 Climate Control 









Principles of Operation 


The IHKA comprises the following functions: 

• Temperature control 

• Evaporator control 

• Air distribution setting 

• Airflow control 

• Sunlight adaptation (solar sensor) 

• MAX cooling 

• Residual heat 

• Defrost function 

• AUTO function 

• Heated rear window 

• OFF 

• Air recirculation mode 

• Automatic air-recirculation control 

• Condensation sensor program 

Temperature Control 

The temperature for the best possible interior climate is regulated with a mixer flap in the 
heater/air conditioner. 

The air-mass flow is fed through the evaporator. As this happens, the air-mass flow is 
cooled and dried (providing the air-conditioning system is switched on). The mixer flap 
then feeds the air-mass flow completely or in part over the heating system heat exchang¬ 
er and the electric auxiliary heater (depending on the desired temperature value set at 
the IHKA control panel). The airflows are subseguently mixed again. The air-mass flow is 
then fed through the ventilation flaps and into the vehicle interior. 

The temperature inside the vehicle is controlled by means of a master controller. 

Control is based on the nominal values set and the calculated actual value (the nominal 
values are set with 2 temperature selector knobs. The actual value is calculated from the 
temperatures measured by the interior temperature sensor and the footwell temperature 
sensor). 


19 

E90 Climate Control 





The lead parameter is calculated from the comparison between the actual value for the 
interior temperature and the corrected nominal value (calculated from temperature 
request, interior temperature and ambient temperature). Compared to the set specifica¬ 
tion, the interior temperature is raised in the cold so that a comfortable level is achieved 
even at negative temperatures, despite the temperature setting being unchanged. 

The ambient temperature is transmitted to the IHKA control unit via the K-CAN. 

The separate temperature setting for the driver's side and the front-passenger side 
makes 2 mixer flaps necessary. 

Evaporator Control 

The evaporator temperature is regulated by means of the evaporator temperature sensor 
and the expansion valve. The evaporator temperature is set to the predefined specifica¬ 
tion of 2°C. Lower temperatures are not possible due to the risk of icing. 

if the function gradual evaporator control is encoded, the nominal value for the evaporator 
temperature will be calculated between 2°C and 7°C. The specification depends on the 
ambient temperature, the ventilation temperature and the refrigerant pressure. A variable 
evaporator control reduces dehumidification. This reduces the risk of mucous mem¬ 
branes drying out. 

Air Distribution Setting 

For the best possible operation of the air distribution, it is important for the manually 
adjustable air vents to be open. 

Occupants have the possibility of allowing the air distribution to be decided by the auto¬ 
matic program (AUTO button). 

Alternatively, individual, personal settings are possible through manual selection (defrost, 
ventilation, footwell). 

If the vehicle is equipped with navigation/CCC, it is also possible to make a fine adjust¬ 
ment via the CID (Central Information Display) in the submenu Air distribution. 

Compared to manual selection, fine adjustment offers the additional possibility of further 
individualization of the air distribution. 


20 

E90 Climate Control 



Airflow Control 

The airflow control is dependent on the following settings and control actions: 

• Manual blower setting 

• Automatic blower and flap setting - The automatic blower and flap functions 
are activated when the AUTO button is pressed: 

• Dynamic pressure compensation - The air volume at the air inlet grills increases dis¬ 
proportionately with increasing road speed. This effect is compensated for by 

the opening angle of the fresh-air flap being reduced as speed increases (dynamic 
pressure compensation). 

The opening angle is regulated according to the programming. 

• Blower control - If necessary, the power management system will assign priority 
levels to reduce the blower output (via K-CAN). 

• Effect of terminal 50 - When the engine is being started (terminal 50 ON), the 
electric auxiliary heater and blower are switched OFF to reduce the load on the 
vehicle battery. 

Sunlight Adaptation (Solar Sensor) 

How the solar sensor affects the IHKA regulation on the driver's side and on the front- 
passenger side is not programmed separately. 

The following functions are modified when automatic mode is activated (depending on 
the intensity of sunlight): 

• Blower output is increased or reduced 

• Desired temperature value is increased or reduced 

MAX Cooling 

The MAX button makes it possible for the user to select maximum cooling with just one 
press of a button at the IHKA controls. 

When the MAX button is pressed, all functions, including the defrost function, are deacti¬ 
vated. The air conditioning function is activated (if it was not already activated) and 
defined settings are selected, (example: temperature control Is deactivated, ventilation 
flaps are fully opened) 


21 

E90 Climate Control 



Residual Heat (REST) 

The residual-heat function allows the heat from the engine to be used to heat up the 
vehicle interior when the engine is not running (e.g. during a stop at a level crossing). 
The residual-heat function is only possible for a certain run-down period (15 minutes 
from terminal 15 OFF). The DME is signaled to activate the electric water pump via the 
bus system to circulate the coolant. 

Switch-on conditions: 

• Terminal 15 OFF 

and 

• Run-down period active (up to 15 minutes after terminal 15 OFF) 
and 

• REST button in IHKA controls ON 
and 

• Ambient temperature below 25°C 
and 

• Engine temperature at some point above 60°C 
and 

• On-board supply voltage over 11.4 volts 


Conditions for switching off: 

• Terminal 15 ON 

or 

• Residual heat ON (15 minutes) expired 
or 

• REST button in IHKA control panel OFF 
or 

• OFF condition activated with residual heat active (terminal R) 
or 

• Prompt from power management to switch off auxiliary consumers 
or 

• On-board supply voltage less than 11 volts 


22 

E90 Climate Control 



Defrost Function 


When the defrost function is activated, the defroster flap (on the inside in front of the 
windscreen) is opened fully. The fresh-air/air-recirculation flaps move to the fresh air posi¬ 
tion. All other flaps are closed. The blower is run up to maximum output. 

AUTO Function 

When this button is pressed, all IHKA functions are set to automatic mode. If one or more 
automatically controlled functions are manually set, automatic control for the functions 
concerned will be cancelled. 

All other functions remain automatically controlled. 

Heated Rear Window 

The heated rear window is switched on when the button in the IHKA control panel is 
pressed. The function indicator lamp in the button lights up. 

The heated rear window is switched off by pressing the button again or automatically 
after the heating time has expired. 

Defrosting Phase (1st heating period) 

When terminal 15 is switched ON , the first time the system is switched on, the time 
span for the heated rear window is defined as follows: 

• Ambient temperature down to -15°C: Heating period: 10 minutes 

• Ambient temperature below 15°C: Heating period: 17 minutes 

Pulsing 

After the defrosting phase, the heating phase (25 minutes with pulsed heat output 
(on-off cycle: 40 seconds ON, 80 seconds OFF). 

The function indicator lamp in the button is off during pulsing. 

2nd Heating Period 

After the 1st heating period has expired, each subseguenttime the button is pressed 
will cause the heated rear window to be switched on for a further 30 minutes 
(defrosting phase). 

After the 2nd heating period has expired, output is again pulsed. 

OFF 

The IHKA control panel is switched off when the blower speed is set to 0 (The control 
panel/control unit continues to run in the background.) 


23 

E90 Climate Control 



Air-recirculation Mode 


In air-recirculation mode, the flow of outside air can be stopped to prevent pollution 
from entering the vehicle, e.g. in traffic congestion. Air inside the vehicle is continually 
recirculated. 

To make sure that there is a sufficient supply of fresh air, air-recirculation mode is only 
available for a limited time (30 minutes air recirculation -> 30 seconds partial fresh air -> 
30 minutes air recirculation -> etc.) 

Automatic Air-recirculation Control 

If the AUC II sensor detects an increased level of pollutants in the environment from 
spark-ignition and diesel engines, the IHKA control unitwill automatically switch to air- 
recirculation mode. 

To make sure there is still an adeguate supply of fresh air, air recirculation is only 
available for a limited time: 

• At ambient temperatures less than 0°C: 

2 minute recirculated air mode -> 20 seconds fresh air mode -> 2 minute 
recirculated air mode -> etc. 

• At ambient temperatures from 0°C to 6°C: 

3 minute recirculated air mode -> 20 seconds fresh air mode -> 3 minute 
recirculated air mode -> etc. 

• Operation without a/c function at ambient temperatures greater than 6°C: 

4 minute recirculated air mode -> 20 seconds fresh air mode -> 4 minute 
recirculated air mode -> etc. 

• Operation with a/c function at ambient temperatures greater than 6°C: 

12 minute recirculated air mode -> 20 seconds fresh air mode -> 12 minute 
recirculated air mode -> etc. 

When the engine is started and the AUC function activated, fresh-air mode is always 
selected for approx. 40 seconds due to the warming phase of the AUC sensor. 


24 

E90 Climate Control 



Condensation Sensor Function 

The following conditions must be satisfied for the condensation sensor to operate: 

• The engine must be running 

• The IHKA must be in automatic mode 

The IHKA control unit evaluates the condensation sensor signal (humidity). If condensa¬ 
tion on the windscreen is imminent, the following measures are initiated in sequence to 
prevent condensation from forming: 

• Open defrost flaps further 

• Switch from air-recirculation/AUC/automatic air-recirculation mode to partial fresh-air 
mode 

• Switch from partially fresh air in air-recirculation/AUC/automatic air-recirculation mode 
to fresh air 

• Increase blower air volume 

• Reduce air volume for the footwell 

• Increase desired temperature value 

If one measure proves to be ineffective, the next measure is initiated. 

Once successful, the measures previously performed are reversed step-by-step in 
reverse order. 


25 

E90 Climate Control 



Service Information 


Exchanging Flap Motor 

After the exchange of a flap motor, the flap motor must be re-addressed. The new 
address will be triggered by the diagnosis software via: 

Service Functions => Body => Heating and Air Conditioning => re-address motors 

The flap motor will automatically receive the address from the IHKA control unit. The 
control unit will recognize the correct address from the order of flap motors. 

Because of this, care should be taken during the exchange the each flap motor is con¬ 
nected in the correct order to the correct connector. 

The correct order for the stepper motors is: 

1. Defroster flap 

2. Fresh/Recirculating air flap 

3. Ventilation flap 

4. Rear blending/stratification flap 

5. Right air mixing flap 

6. Front blending/stratification flap 

7. Left air mixing flap 

8. Footwell flap 

Note: Flap motors are wired in series. Each flap motor has a measuring resis¬ 
tance of approx. 1 ohm. Each flap motor is connected to its predecessor 
via this measuring resistance. For this reason, troubleshooting must be 
performed in the order stipulated in the schematic circuit diagram. 

Running in A/C Compressor 

If the A/C compressor has been replaced or if the refrigerant circuit has been recharged, 
the A/C compressor must be placed in the “running in” mode. Running in is needed to 
make sure that adequate lubrication (oil distribution) is available. 

The A/C compressor must be run in the specified engine speed range during running in. 
The oil added by the manufacturer is then mixed with the liquid refrigerant. 

Running in will automatically be aborted if the engine speed exceeds the specified 
engine speed range. Running in must then be repeated in full. 

Note: When the IHKA is programmed it is automatically placed in the running 
in mode. This mode should be cancelled or finished before handing over 
the vehicle to the customer to avoid confusion or inconvenience (no 
compressor activation is possible when at low rpm). 

26 

E90 Climate Control 




Microfilter 

The wear level of the microfilter is monitored by the IHKA control unit. 

To do this, the control unit uses a calculation model (algorithm) to simulate the condition 
of the microfilter from the following factors: 

• Outside temperature 

• Signal from rain/light sensor (IHKA only, otherwise default value) 

• Signal from solar sensor (IHKA only) 

• Blower voltage 

• Air conditions (recognized from frequent or infrequent use of air recirculation) 

• Vehicle road speed 

• Service interval display (SIA) timer 

The IHKA control unit forwards the following data to the cluster via the K-CAN: 

• Odometer reading 

• Microfilter availability in percent 

• Time remaining until next service 


27 

E90 Climate Control 



