Table of Contents 


E 61 Sport Wagon 

Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

Dimensions.5 

Suspension.6 

Air Suspension.6 

xDrive with DSC8+.8 

xDrive .9 

DXC8+ .9 

System Circuit Diagram .10 

System Components .13 

ATC 300 Transfer Case.14 

Adjusting Levers.16 

Servomotor with Motor Position Sensor .16 

Coding Resistor .17 

Transfer Case Electronic Control Unit .17 

DXC8+ Control Unit.18 

Wheel Speed Sensor.18 

DSC Sensor.19 

Bus Overview .19 

Principles of Operation.20 

Power Flow .20 

DSC/DXC8+ Control Unit .21 

Transfer Case (VGSG) Control Unit.21 

Transfer Case Control .22 

Tire Tolerance Logic.23 

Pilot Control.24 

Traction Control / Driving Dynamics Control.26 

Limp Home Operation.27 

Dynamic Stability Control .28 

ASC-X/ADB-X.28 

Hill Decent Control (HDC).29 

Dry Braking .30 

Brake Standby.31 

Automatic Soft Stop .32 

Fading Compensation.33 

Drive-off Assistant .34 


Initial Print Date: 03/05 


Revision Date: 04/05 






































Subject Page 

Service Information.36 

Towing .36 

Oil, Transfer Case, and Clutch Monitoring.36 

Diagnosis .37 

Programming (flashing).37 

Warning Indicator Lamps .37 

Body.40 

Rear Doors .42 

Panoramic Glass Sunroof.42 

System Components.43 

Multi Drive Sunroof Control Module.43 

Drive Motors .44 

Power Supply and K-CAN Interface.45 

Wind Deflector .45 

System Operation.45 

Floating Headliner .49 

Wind Deflector .49 

Service .50 

Initialization.50 

Anti-Trapping Protection.50 

Interior .51 

Luggage Compartment.51 

Luggage Compartment Roller Cover.53 

Headliner .55 

Seats.56 

Front Seats .56 

Rear Seats.56 

Rear Hatch .58 

Automatic Rear Hatch (HKL).61 

System Components.62 

Hydraulic System .62 

Angle Hall Sensor.63 

System Operation.64 

Opening and Closing Rear Hatch.64 

Operating Rear Hatch Buttons on Outside/Inside.64 

Activation Via Remote Control Services (FBD).64 

Secondary or Emergency Operation .64 

Adjusting Opening Height of the Tailgate .65 

General Vehicle Electrical Systems.66 

Bus System .66 

Car Communication Computer.67 

Antenna Systems .68 

Tail Light Cluster .69 

Control Unit Locations in Luggage Compartment .71 















































E61 Sport Wagon 

Model: 530xiT 
Production: From April 2005 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Know the differences between the E60 and E61 

• Know the location of various components in the E61 


3 

E61 Sport Wagon 




Introduction 


The E61 is a Touring car based on the E60. This participant's manual mainly deals with 
differences from the E60 and are of interest for service. 

The E61 will be produced as of April of 2005 for the US market. It will be introduced as 
a 2006 530xiT model. 

New for the E60/61 will be: 

• New generation engines in both the six cylinder variants (N52) and the eight 
cylinder variant (N62MU). 

• All wheel drive capabilities with the xDrive transfer case only on six cylinder variants. 
(525xi, 530xi, 530xiT) 

• Hydraulically controlled lifting and lowering of rear tailgate (E61 only) 

• ARS will not be available on any all wheel drive (AWD) vehicle. 

• SMG will NOT be available on an AWD vehicle. 

• AFS will NOT be available on an AWD vehicle. 

All models are equipped as standard with a 6-speed manual gearbox. A 6-speed 
automatic transmission with Steptronic is available on request. 



4 

E61 Sport Wagon 











Dimensions 


The E61 has grown significantly compared to the E60. This increase in size is quite 
apparent in the interior: more head and shoulder clearance and a good 4 centimeters 
more knee space for rear passengers. 


in mm 

E61 

E39/2 

Difference 

Vehicle length 

4843 

4805 

+ 38 

Vehicle width 

2026 

1981 

+ 45 

Body width 

1846 

1800 

+ 46 

Vehicle height (curb 

1491 

1445 

+ 46 

weight with roof antenna) 





5 

E61 Sport Wagon 








Suspension 


The E61 features an all-aluminium chassis as already introduced on the E60. A variant 
of the integral link rear axle IV has been developed for the Touring that makes for a com¬ 
pletely flat luggage compartment floor while providing a very large through-load space. 
The 530xiT is equipped with an automatic self-levelling suspension provided by air sus¬ 
pension at the rear axle as standard. 

Air Suspension 

The air spring installed in the E61 is similar in operation to the system installed in the 
E65. 

The advantages of an air spring on the rear axle can be felt particularly in vehicles with 
high payload (such as a sport wagon) as mainly the axle load at the rear axle changes 
when loading and unloading the car. 

With a conventional steel spring, the change in the axle load affects not only the ride 
height but also the vibration and suspension geometry. 

There would also be a change in the camber of the rear axle wheels at high payload - 
this would result in increased load at the inner shoulders of the tires which in turn would 
mean reduced load bearing capacity of the tires. 

The air springs and dampers are supported independently on the floor pan of the car 
body. 



Rear Air Suspension 


6 

E61 Sport Wagon 




In previous air suspension systems the air supply unit was located in the luggage com¬ 
partment are under the spare tire. For the first time, the air supply system (LVA) on the 
E61 is not located in the vehicle interior but rather on the underbody between the spare 
wheel well and battery box. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Pressure accumulator 
with compressor 

2 

Valve block 


Location of air supply system 


Since the air required to raise the vehicle can no longer be drawn from the vehicle interior, 
air must be taken via a filter from a protected area. The area between the wheel arch pan¬ 
eling of the rear right wheel is used for this purpose. 



Location of air filter for LVA 


7 

E61 Sport Wagon 



















xDrive with DSC8+ 


From 04/2005, the BMW 5 Series wagon and sedan (optional) will have all wheel drive 
capability utilizing the tried and tested all-wheel drive system xDrive of the X3 and X5. 

The innovative all-wheel xDrive is a system for controlling and regulating the “infinitely” 
variable drive torque distribution over the front and rear axle. The xDrive uses the system 
functions of the DSC to positively influence the vehicle handling by specifically distribut¬ 
ing the power in the event of understeer or oversteer. 

With the controlled multi-disc clutch in connection with the xDrive it is now possible to 
resolve the conflict between traction and vehicle handling. 

This is been achieved in that the xDrive does not predefine the torque distribution by a 
fixed transmission ratio as is the case with the previous systems. Instead, distribution of 
the drive torque is dependent on the clutch lockup torque of the controlled multi-disc 
clutch in the transfer case and on the transmitted torque at the front and rear axle. 

Driver Benefits 

In addition to the previous functions, a series of additional safety and comfort functions 
will now be available to the driver with the introduction of the DXC8+ in the E60/E61. 

The expanded DSC8+ functions include: 

• Dry braking 

• Brake standby 

• Automatic soft-stop 

• Fading warning and assistance 

• Drive-off assistant 

• Hill descent control HDC 

Besides the outstanding chassis characteristics of the BMW 5 Series, the all wheel drive 
system offers traction advantages not only on snow and ice but also on unsurfaced 
roads. 


Note: Because many system components and functions and are shared 
between the xDrive and DSC8+ system, they will be discussed 
together in this section. 


8 

E61 Sport Wagon 





xDrive 


The innovative xDrive four-wheel drive is a system that controls and regulates the distrib¬ 
ution of driving torque to the front and rear axles. The measured variables of DSC are 
used by xDrive but are also influenced by modified handling performance. 

The multi-disc clutch is the heart of the xDrive. By using the controlled multi-disc clutch, 
it is possible to resolve the conflict between traction and handling performance. 

This is achieved through the fact that torque distribution is not determined by a fixed gear 
ratio in the xDrive as was the case in the previous systems. Instead, the distribution of dri¬ 
ving torque is dependent on the locking torque of the controlled multi-disc clutch in the 
transfer case and on the transferable torque to the front and rear axles. 

DXC8+ 

The DXC8+ system adds features to the DSC8 system already in use in the E60 sedan 
and combines features used in other DXC systems (E53/83). Due to the mechanical 
composition of the xDrive system, the programming for DSC regulation has also been 
changed. 

Present DSC8 functions: 

• ABS Anti-lock Braking System 

• ADB Automatic Differential Brake 

• EBV Electronic Braking Force Distribution 

• CBC Cornering Brake Control 

Present DXC functions: 

• TCC Transfer Case Control 
(control of multi-disc clutch in transfer case) 

• ASC-X Automatic Stability Control X 
(special function for all-wheel drive vehicles) 

• ADB-X Automatic Differential Brake X 
(special function for all-wheel drive vehicles) 

• HDC Hill Decent Control 

New DSC/DXC8+ functions 

• Dry braking 

• Automatic soft stop 

• Drive-off assistant 

• Hill descent control HDC 


• Brake standby 

• Fading assistance 

• Trailer stabilization control 


• ASC Automatic Stability Control 

• DSC Dynamic Stability Control 

• DBC Dynamic Brake Control 

• MSR Engine Drag Torque Control 


9 

E61 Sport Wagon 



System Circuit Diagram 



- X 






10 

E61 Sport Wagon 




































































































































































































System Circuit Diagram Legend 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Instrument cluster 

2 

Outside temperature sensor 

3 

Safety and gateway module (SGM) 

4 

Steering column switch cluster (SZL) 
with HDC button 

5 

Electronic transmission control module (EGS) 

6 

Transfer case control unit (VGSG) 

7 

Temperature sensor 

8 

Electronic motor, actuator drive 

9 

Coding resistor 

10 

Motor position sensor 

11 

Accelerator pedal module (FPM) - (not for US) 

12 

Digital motor electronics (DME) control unit 

13 

Wheel speed sensor, front right 

14 

Handbrake switch 

15 

Dynamic traction control (DXC8+) 

16 

Wheel speed sensor, rear right 

17 

Brake wear sensor, rear right 

18 

Wheel speed sensor, rear left 

19 

DSC button 

20 

Center console switching center (SZM) 

21 

Controller (CON) 

22 

Brake light switch (BLS) 

23 

Brake wear sensor, front left 

24 

Brake fluid level sensor 

25 

Wheel speed sensor, front left 

26 

CCC or M-ASK 

27 

Central information display 

28 

Yaw rate/longitudinal/transverse acceleration sensor (Y-sensor-2) 

29 

Rain light sensor (RLS) 

30 

Car Access System (CAS) 


11 

E61 Sport Wagon 

































































2 

>1 Sport Wagon 



System Components 

The xDrive/DXC8+ system is composed of the following major components: 

• ATC 300 transfer case 

• Adjusting levers 

• Servomotor with motor position and temperature sensor 

• Coding/classification resistor 

• Transfer case control unit 

• DXC8+ control unit 

• Wheel speed sensor 


13 

E61 Sport Wagon 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Oil Pan lead through 

4 

Propeller shaft to front axle 

2 

Right drive shaft, front 

5 

Front axle differential 

3 

Transfer case 

6 

Left drive shaft, front 
























ATC 300 Transfer Case 

The transfer case ATC 300 (Active Torque Control) is used on the E60/E61. 

In view of the restricted package space of the transmission tunnel in the BMW 5 Series, it 
was not possible to adopt the transfer case from the BMW X3 (ACT400) with the same 
torque rating. 

On the BMW 5 Series it was not possible to drive the forward power flow diagonally as is 
the case on the X3 with a chain, but rather it is necessary to divert it L-shaped with the 
aid of spur gears (pinions), resulting in a modified design of the transfer case. 

The actuator drive and the actuation of the control lever were also modified. The clutch 
package remains unchanged. The forward connection is provided by a bolted on drive 
shaft. 

The flange of the ATC transfer case is the same for automatic and manual transmissions. 



ATC 300 Transfer Case 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Propeller shaft to front axle 

8 

Clutch housing 

2 

Drive flange to front axle 

9 

Output flange to rear axle 

3 

Control cam 

10 

Propeller shaft to rear axle 

4 

Transfer case 

11 

Disc package 

5 

Idler gear 

12 

Actuator drive 

6 

Drive gear 

13 

Drive pinion 

7 

Control lever 

14 

Output gear 


14 

E61 Sport Wagon 




























The ATC 300 is installed in the E61 and E60 all wheel drive models. The ATC 400 is 
installed in the E83 and the ATC 500 in the E53 MU. 

The ATC 300 differs from the other transfer cases because it is gear driven not chain 
driven. The basic functions and operations remain unchanged. 

The difference between the transfer cases are: 

• ATC 400 & 500 are chain driven vs. ATC 300 which is gear driven 

• ATC 300 & 400 uses a four bolt flange to connect to the front propeller shaft vs. 
ATC 500 which uses a splined connection 

• ATC 500 utilizes one more disc in the multi-disc clutch than the ATC 300 & 400 

• ATC 500 has 19mm greater length between the input shaft and the output shaft to 
the front axle than the ATC 400. (the ATC 300 uses gears not a chain) 


ATC 500 Transfer Case 





Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Input from manual / automatic transmission 

5 

Clutch discs 

2 

Output to rear axle prop, shaft 

6 

Adjusting levers with ball ramp 

3 

Output to front axle prop, shaft 

7 

Chain 

4 

Servomotor 

8 

Disc cam 


15 

E61 Sport Wagon 































Adjusting Levers 

The actuator drive unit operates such that the drive pinion rotates and engages via the 
gearing in the control cam. In turn, the control cam is rotated and the control lever 
pressed apart. 

The rotary motion is converted into an axial force by the ball ramps in the control lever. 
The axial force that compresses the disc package in the multi-disc clutch is proportional 
to the transmitted torque of the multi-disc clutch. 

The position of the control lever is infinitely variable and allows exact regulation of the 
control cam by the actuator drive unit. 



Servomotor with Motor Position Sensor 

The actuator drive unit is a DC motor with worm drive. It also features a Hall sensor that 
serves the purpose of determining the position and the adjustment speed of the motor 
shaft. The position of the motor shaft determines the closing rate of the multi-disc clutch. 


There is also a temperature sensor installed in the motor that signals the temperature to 
the transfer case control unit (VGSG). A temperature model is calculated in the VGSG for 
the purpose of protecting the motor from overload. For this purpose, the maximum clos¬ 
ing rate is reduced in various stages. 


If these measures are not sufficient to protect the motor from overload, the control is 
interrupted and the clutch completely opened so that only rear axle drive is now possible. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Magnetic ring 

2 

Motor position sensor (Hall sensor) 


16 

E61 Sport Wagon 









Coding Resistor 

Because of mechanical tolerances in production, the characteristic curve of the multi-disc 
clutch locking torque varies slightly. 

Once the actual locking torque has been measured on the clutch test bench, a resistor is 
attached to the servomotor; the resistor's value is a reference to the locking torque char¬ 
acteristic. 


Each time the engine is started, the transfer case control unit measures the resistance 
value once and the optimum program map for the transfer case fitted is selected. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Drive pinion 

2 

Electric motor 

3 

Coding resistor 

4 

Actuator drive housing 


Transfer Case Electronic Control Unit 

The transfer case control unit (VGSG) is on CAN-bus. 


Depending on the vehicle, the module is installed in the following location: 

• E60/61 - under the rug toward of the passenger’s front seat 

• E83 (X3) - under the rear floor panel of the cargo compartment trim 

• E53 (X5) - under the rear bench on the left side 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Kick guard 

2 

Transfer case control unit 

3 

Connector 


17 

E61 Sport Wagon 























DXC8+ Control Unit 

The DXC8+ control unit is installed in the engine compartment essentially consists of 
three components: 

• Add-on control unit 

• Valve block with integrated pressure sensors 

• Pump motor 

The newly developed changeover valves permit even more exact control in the low pres¬ 
sure range, resulting in the following advantages: 

• Reduction of control noise 

• Improvement in control quality and control comfort 

• Improvement in automatic brake intervention by the active/dynamic cruise control 
ACC/DCC 

• Improvement in the control accuracy of the HDC function 

• Realization of additional brake functions 

Wheel Speed Sensor 

Active wheel speed sensors with an integrated evaluator circuit are used together with 
the xDrive. 

The active wheel speed sensors require a power supply for their operation. The output 
signal is sent as a data protocol based on the pulse-width modulation method (PWM). 
The PWM signal is used for the purpose of determining the road speed. The pulse width 
contains additional information relating to the direction of rotation, standstill detection, 
installation position detection, and air gap reserve to the sensor ring, (example : sends 
one pulse every 0.75 s when the wheel is stationary) 

The direction of rotation is determined by the internal signal offset of three correspond¬ 
ingly arranged Hall-effect elements in the sensor. 





18 

E61 Sport Wagon 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Sensor ring 

2 

Sensor-IC with Hall sensor 

3 

Sensor housing 









DSC Sensor 

The DSC sensor (Y-sensor 2) is installed under the front passenger's seat next to the 
transmission tunnel. 


In addition to the previous yaw rate and transverse acceleration sensor, the DSC sensor 
also contains an additional longitudinal acceleration sensor for the drive-off assistant 
function. 



Index 

Explanation 

X 

Longitudinal axis 

Y 

Transversal axis 

Z 

Vertical axis 

ax 

Longitudinal acceleration 

ay 

Lateral acceleration 

Q 

Yaw rate 


Bus Overview 

The transfer case control unit (VGSG) is on the PT-CAN. VGSG shares information with 
DSC for overall xDrive control and has diagnostic communication. 


SMC 


LM 


SMC 


HKL 


C1D 


SV FA 


SH MPM 


*.. 

SV BF 


5ZM 




Kombi 


SINE 


PDC | 

p:| SHD 



MDS 


DWA 

I 

CON 



RLS 

KBM 



AHM 

1 

CAS2 



5MFA j 

SMBF 



EHC K 

_ 

IHKA 



CCC 

FS M-ASK 


CDC 


HUD 


ULF 


SBSL 


TMFA 


SFZ 


SB FA 


VM 


SOARS* 





TCU 


TOP-HIFI 


SBSR Y SEN 2 


TMBF 


SZL 


WUP 


DXC — 


IBS 


f'" 



Ll 

DME 

VGSG 

f" 

DOE 

EKP — 

f 

t . 


1 

fc 

EGS 


ALBVFA 


ALBVBF 


bJ 


m 


a 


ACC 


| ZH 


D-BUS - - 

* bytefiight 

K-BUSiprolako'.j . ■“ 




MOST 

LIM-Bus 



PT-GAN --- 

F-CAN 

BSD .. 




LoCAN 


Bus Topology Chart of E61 Sport Wagon (530xiT) 


19 

E61 Sport Wagon 






































































































Principles of Operation 


Power Flow 

When the multi-disc clutch in the transfer case is disengaged, no driving torque is trans¬ 
mitted to the front axle. All of the driving torque is then distributed to the rear axle. This is 
because the input shaft (1) is splined providing a permanent connection to the rear axle 
propeller shaft output flange (2). The multi-disc clutch couples the rear axle propeller 
shaft output flange to the front propeller shaft output (3). 

The driving torque on the front axle is increased or decreased by regulating the locking 
pressure of the multi-disc clutch, providing a stepless coupling of the front axle to the 
drivetrain. This depends on driving situations and road conditions. When the multi-disc 
clutch is fully engaged, the front and rear axles turn at the same speed. 

Driving torque distribution (front/rear) is based on available traction at each axle. For 
example, when traction is identical on the front and rear axles and a driver accelerates 
from a stop in first gear at full throttle, the rear axle is capable of sustaining greater driving 
torque as the vehicle weight shifts from the front to the rear. 

Another example is when the front axle is on a high traction surface and the rear axle is on 
ice. In this case, virtually 100% of the available driving torque is transmitted to the front 
axle. Based on available traction, virtually no driving torque can be supported by the rear 
axle . Obviously, when more driving torque is transmitted to the front axle, driving torque 
on the rear axle is proportionally reduced due to lack of traction. 


n 



Color 

Explanation 

Red 

Torque from engine to rear axle 

Green 

Controlled torque to front axle 

Dark Blue 

Rotation to drive multi-disc clutch 


20 

E61 Sport Wagon 







DSC/DXC8+ Control Unit 

As in the earlier DSC control units, there are two microprocessors incorporated in the add 
on DSC8+ control unit. The difference is that in the DSC8 and DSC8+ both processors 
do not calculate the same algorithms but rather one processor is responsible for perform¬ 
ing control and monitoring calculations and checking the plausibility of the wheel speeds. 

There are also two semiconductor relays integrated in the DSC8+ control unit, one for the 
pumpmotorand the other for the solenoid valves. 

On exceeding a road speed of 6 km/h, an electronic self-test is started, during which the 
pump motor and all solenoid valves are briefly actuated. If the brake is operated at a dri¬ 
ving speed of 6 km/h, as may be the case with "two-foot drivers", the self-test will be per¬ 
formed at a speed of 15 km/h. 

The check of the wheel speed signals is already started at a speed of 2.75 km/h. 

In connection with the xDrive, the DXC8+ control unit also undertakes the task of calculat¬ 
ing the lockup torque for the multi-disc clutch in the transfer case. 

The lockup torque is always optimally set and controlled to suit the corresponding driving 
situation. 

The drive torque distribution over the front and rear axles is based on the lockup torque. 
The lockup torque to be set is derived from the pilot control and from a higher-ranking 
traction and vehicle dynamics regulator corresponding to the driving situation. 

The DXC8+ control unit sends the data, concerning the lockup torque, on the PT-CAN to 
the transfer case control unit VGSG. 

Conversely, the transfer case control unit signals the lockup torque actually set as well as 
the load on the transmission fluid, electric motor and multi-disc clutch. 

Transfer Case (VGSG) Control Unit 

The transfer case control unit serves the purpose of regulating the lockup torque of the 
multi-disc clutch in the transfer case and therefore to distribute the drive forces between 
the front and rear axle corresponding to requirements. 

The transfer case control unit receives the necessary torque request from the DXC8+ 
control unit and adjusts the currently required clutch lockup torque accordingly. 

The function required for this task is the transfer case control (TCC). The control and 
power electronics circuitry required for the actuator drive is integrated in the transfer case 
control unit. 

The requirement to set the necessary clutch lockup torque is converted to a correspond¬ 
ing rotary movement of the actuator motor. After turning off the engine, a reference run is 
performed in order to be able to assign a corresponding clutch lockup torque to a defined 
angle setting of the actuator motor, while also taking into account the effects of wear. 

During the course of the reference run, the clutch is fully closed and opened once. The 
power intake is measured at the respective angle setting of the actuator motor during the 


21 

E61 Sport Wagon 



opening and closing operation so as to determine the beginning and end of the clutch 
closing procedure. The angle setting is determined by means of a Hall sensor integrated 
in the actuator motor. 

A clutch and oil wear model is additionally calculated in the transfer case control unit. 

Where necessary, this model limits the lockup torque in order to reduce friction. 

In the event of DSC failure, an emergency strategy for driving the transfer case clutch is 
integrated as a fall-back level in the transfer case control unit in order to maintain all¬ 
wheel drive also in this case. 

Transfer Case Control 

Control of the lockup torque of the multi-disc clutch in the transfer case facilitates infinite¬ 
ly variable coupling of the front axle to the drive train. 

As a result, the drive torque at the front axle can be increased or reduced corresponding 
to the driving situation and the condition of the road. When the torque at the front axle is 
increased, the drive torque at the rear axle is, of course, reduced by this torque. 

The advantages of variable distribution of the drive torque at the front and rear axles are: 

• Optimum utilization of the lateral cornering and wheel peripheral forces applied at 
the front and rear axles. 

• Brake interventions by the DSC are required considerably later, thus increasing over¬ 
all comfort. 

• Compared to a transfer case with fixed transmission ratio (open longitudinal differen¬ 
tial) and DSC, with xDrive the drive torque distribution is consideraby improved in 
connection with greatly differing friction values at the front and rear axles. 

Even when DSC is turned off, TCC is still active to ensure maximum traction and vehicle 
dynamics. 

Permanent all-wheel drive is cancelled to a large extent or completely in only three control 
situations: 

• When negotiating extremely tight corners with little engine torque in order to allow 
speed equalization between the front and rear axle (e.g. parking) 

• At speeds in excess of 180 km/h 

• In extreme understeer driving situations 

The control algorithm of the transfer case clutch control can be described in three main 
modules: 

• Tire tolerance logic 

• Pilot control 

• Traction control/vehicle dynamics control 


22 

E61 Sport Wagon 



Tire Tolerance Logic 

The tire tolerance logic detects different tread circumferences on the front and rear axles. 
This occurs when: 

• Mixed tires are used 

• Space saving spare tire is installed 

• Tires are used that have been worn down to different levels 

Normally, tire circumference deviations result in drivetrain torque bias (unwanted variations). 







Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

nVA 

Wheel speed at front axle 

2 

Identical rolling circumference on both axles 

nHA 

Wheel speed at rear axle 

3 

Front axle circumference less than rear axle 

1 

Different rolling circumferences on front axle 

4 

Rear axle circumference less than front axle 


The tire circumference can fluctuate up to 1 % or more as a result of mixed tires or wear. 
The tire tolerance logic decides depending on the driver's command and driving situation 
whether the slip is to occur in the transfer case clutch or at the contact area between tire 
and road. 

If the slip is permitted in the transfer case clutch, the locking pressure set by the pre-con¬ 
trol is reduced in order to keep the work loss low. In the driving dynamic control situation, 
the clutch is locked slightly more than normal, the four wheel drive is always guaranteed 
when required. 

For maximum xDrive performance, tires (and wheels) of the same diameter should be 
installed on the vehicle. 


23 

E61 Sport Wagon 



























Pilot Control 

The pilot control algorithm reflects the driver's choice and calculates the necessary lock¬ 
up torque as a function of: 

• accelerator pedal value, 

• engine torque, 

• engine speed, 

• vehicle speed, 

• gear and 

• steering angle 

while taking into account the maximum load on the clutch, transfer case and axle drive. 

The clutch is operated with minimum slip during normal vehicle operation, making avail¬ 
able permanent all-wheel drive with a drive torque distribution of 40 % at the front axle 
and 60 % at the rear axle. 

Even in the case of greatly differing frictional values at the front and rear axle, e.g. when 
the rear axle is on a sheet of ice, the pilot control ensures extremely rapid system 
response as illustrated in the graphic below. 

In addition, as opposed to a transfer case with fixed gear ratio (open longitudinal differen¬ 
tial), with xDrive no brake intervention is required at the rear axle in this case as no slip 
can occur. 

In the open longitudinal differential system, the brake is applied on detecting slip at the 
rear axle. Consequently, 62%of the drive torque is applied at the two rear brake discs so 
that only 38%of the drive force is available at the front axle for the purpose of driving off 
the sheet of ice. This takes significantly less time (approx, one/tenth of a second). 


24 

E61 Sport Wagon 




vs 


xDrive 


“Open” Transfer Case 




1 sec 0,1 sec 


Index 

Explanation 

M 

Driving Torque 

M VA 

Driving torque on front axle 

t 

Time 


25 

E61 Sport Wagon 


























































































































































































Traction Control / Driving Dynamics Control 

Traction control monitors the slip conditions on the front and rear axles. The wheel 
speeds, yaw rate and transversal acceleration serve as the input signals. 

The function of traction control/driving dynamics control is to achieve optimum traction 
and to keep the vehicle stable. 

As seen in the following graphic, in the event of an oversteer tendency, the transfer case 
clutch is completely engaged and the maximum supportable driving torque on the front 
axle is transmitted. This helps to “puli’ the front of the vehicle until stability is achieved. 


60 % 



In the event of an understeer tendency, the clutch can be fully disengaged if necessary. 
In this example, the front axle is separated from the drivetrain and the driving torque can 
only be transmitted to the rear axle. This helps to “push” the rear of the vehicle until sta¬ 
bility is achieved. 


60% 



40% 

60% 



26 

E61 Sport Wagon 




Limp Home Operation 

In order to maintain the four wheel drive function for as long as possible even in the event 
of important sensor signal failures or failure of the DSC control unit, a limp home control is 
integrated in the transfer case control unit. This control operates in redundancy to the 
transfer case clutch control in the DSC control unit. The limp home control contains only 
two control functions, pre-control and traction-slip control. 

The wheel speed signals are very important to traction/slip control. Engine signals, 
steering angle and yaw are used predominantly for pre-control. If individual sensor sig¬ 
nals fail, substitute values are calculated and the relevant functions operated with extend¬ 
ed control thresholds. 

This strategy is continued until useful four wheel drive control is no longer possible. In 
this event, the driver is alerted by the DSC/xDrive lamp coming on in the instrument clus¬ 
ter and also by an acoustic warning signal (gong). 

Faulted wheel speed signals on the rear axle are calculated by driving or engine speed 
(remember, the rear wheels are always driven). If the front wheel speed signals fail, the 
values of the rear axle are adopted. Wheel speeds also substitute for a faulty steering 
angle signal. 

Note: On a vehicle equipped with an automatic transmission, when driving 

onto brake analyzers, move the selector lever to the “N” position . On a 
vehicle equipped with a manual transmission, do not press the accelera¬ 
tor pedal once on the brake analyzer. This keeps the transfer case clutch 
open and the vehicle cannot be pulled off the analyzer. 


27 

E61 Sport Wagon 



Dynamic Stability Control 

DXC8+ offers several new features from April 2005 production vehicles. They are: 

• ASC-X/ADB-X 

• Hill descent control HDC 

• Dry braking 

• Brake standby 

• Automatic soft stop 

• Fading assistance 

• Drive-off assistant 

• Trailer stabilization control 

■ ASC-X/ADB-X 

Unlike regular road vehicles, SAVs are also meant to demonstrate satisfactory handling 
characteristics and appropriate traction on unconventional roads. In order to provide opti¬ 
mum propulsion with sufficient cornering stability on both normal roads and other road 
surfaces, Automatic Stability Control X (ASC-X) contains a detection function to distin¬ 
guish between them. 

When off-road terrain is detected, wheel slip threshold is increased to provide sufficient 
traction force with the increased levels of traction loss. 

ASC-X is supplemented by the Automatic Differential Brake (ADB-X) function, which 
applies the brakes to the wheels per axle, for side to side torque transfer. For example, 
when a wheel is spinning on one side (up to the slip setpoint), the brakes are applied to 
that wheel and the driving torque is transferred through the axle differential to the wheel 
with the higher traction. This provides superb capabilities when there are diagonal trac¬ 
tion losses (ie. left front/right rear). 

ADB-X remains active when DSC is deactivated. Furthermore, ADB-X can develop full 
capability because the engine power is not reduced, even during extreme four wheel 
drive operation. Only that wheel which has a low traction receives the brake application. 

The brake disc can overheat with excessive ADB-X intervention with DSC deactivated. In 
this situation, the operation is discontinued at a disc temperature of approx. 700 °C and is 
resumed when this temperature drops below approx. 400 °C. This is a calculation per¬ 
formed by the DSC control unit based on brake application time, pressure, wheel speed, 
etc. 


28 

E61 Sport Wagon 




■ Hill Decent Control (HDC) 

As on previous all wheel drive vehicles in the BMW line, the E61 all-wheel drive also fea¬ 
tures the hill descent control facility for safe vehicle operation on steep downhill inclines. 
The HDC stabilizes the vehicle and prevents the wheels locking. The DXC8+ module 
controls the build-up of braking pressure at all four wheels so that the vehicle drives 
downhill at a speed of approx. 7.5 mph (12 km/h). 

The HDC function is activated in the central information display via the menu: 

Settings => Vehicle settings => HDC 

The HDC ON function can be activated by setting a tick in the menu and deactivated by 
removing the tick. 

Furthermore, the HDC ON/OFF function can be selected with one of the two free but¬ 
tons (asterisk, hash) in the steering wheel button menu. 


< HDC ► 

■ Wd 

ry HDCein 


CD 01-12 *1# Vi+ ,illl 10:16 


Menu HDC ON / Active 


29 

E61 Sport Wagon 





Dry Braking 

The water spray produced in wet conditions coats the brake discs with a water film, caus¬ 
ing delayed response of the brakes. In connection with previous systems it was therefore 
recommended to operate the brakes from time to time. 

The dry braking function is dependent on the position of the wiper switch and therefore 
on the signal of the rain/lights sensor. The brake discs are kept dry by lightly applying the 
brake pads cyclically as required, this achieving improved braking response in wet condi¬ 
tions. 

While doing so, the pressure in the brake system is increased by approx. 1 bar and the 
brake pads are applied for approx. 1.5 seconds. 

Dry braking takes place under following conditions: 

• Driving speed > 70 km/h 

• Continuous wipe operation in stage 1 or 2 

The repeat interval depends on the wiper stage: 

• Continuous wipe stage 1 - 200 s 

• Continuous wipe stage 2 -120 s 

• Generally 90 s as from 09/2005 

This applies only when the driver himself does not apply the brake during this time. 

The driver notices no deceleration or noise. 



Left disc with water film before dry braking Right brake disc after dry braking 


30 

E61 Sport Wagon 




Brake Standby 

Quick release of the accelerator pedal causes the brake pads to be applied against the 
brake disc thus reducing the stopping distance (by approx.. 30 cm/100 km/h) during 
emergency braking. The DSC module builds up slight brake pressure (approx. 2.5 bar) 
temporarily (approx. 0.5 seconds) in order to eliminate the clearance between the brake 
pad and brake disc by applying the brake pads. 

The brake standby function is activated under following conditions: 

• Driving speed > 70 km/h 

• Minimum time between brake application 8 s 

• The brake standby function is not activated in connection with sudden acceleration 
(sports driving style). 

The DME/DDE control unit makes available the signal indicating guick release of the 
accelerator pedal via the PT-CAN. 

The sensitive driver may perceive a slightly harder brake pedal. No delay or noise is dis¬ 
cernible for the driver. 



t[ms] 


Index 

Explanation 

P 

Braking pressure in Bar 

T 

Time in milliseconds 

1 

Pilot pressure applied by driver 

2 

Braking pressure progression with brake standby 

3 

Braking pressure progression without brake standby 


31 

E61 Sport Wagon 











































Automatic Soft Stop 

Due to the transition from sliding friction to static friction on the brake disc, a stopping jolt 
occurs when braking to a standstill where the occupants perceive an increased feeling of 
deceleration. 


When braking lightly (< 25 bar) at constant pressure to bring the vehicle to a halt, the soft 
stop function automatically reduces the braking pressure at the rear axle just before the 
vehicle comes to a stop. This consequently reduces the positive acceleration peak per¬ 
ceived by the occupants by approx. 50% while extending the action time. 

The speed and standstill status are recognized byway of the wheel speed sensors. 



[S] 


Index 

Explanation 

m/s ^ 

Deceleration 

s 

Time in seconds 

Red 

Deceleration without soft stop 

Blue 

Deceleration with soft stop 

-50% 

Reduction of occupant deceleration 


Note: This function is inactive at medium to high deceleration or in the event of 
ABS control in order not to lengthen the stopping distance. 


32 

E61 Sport Wagon 



































Fading Compensation 

High temperatures (> 550°C) can occur at the brake discs when driving downhill over 
long periods or as the result of extreme multiple braking operations (> 80 bar). These 
high temperatures cause a change in the coefficient of friction of the brake pads resulting 
in the braking effect diminishing (fading). 

For this purpose, the temperature of the brake disc is calculated by means of a tempera¬ 
ture model contained in the DXC8+ software. The braking pressure applied by the driver 
is measured by the delivery pressure sensor and compared with the current vehicle 
deceleration (target/actual value). 

When the braking effect diminishes, the fading compensation provides assistance for the 
driver in that pressure is additionally built up by the DSC module. 



Brake Disc with Fading 


33 

E61 Sport Wagon 



Drive-off Assistant 

When negotiating uphill gradients, the drive-off assistant holds the vehicle for a short time 
(approx. 1.5 s) after releasing the brake so that the vehicle drives off comfortably without 
the need to use the handbrake. The braking pressure reguired by the driver to hold the 
vehicle is maintained automatically in the system. 

When driving off, the braking pressure is not reduced before the torque is sufficient for 
the vehicle to drive off. The holding pressure in the brake system (10 to max. 70 bar) is 
dependent on the uphill gradient. 

Uphill gradients are detected by the DSC sensor with the aid of a longitudinal accelera¬ 
tion sensor. 

The function is active both when driving forwards (transmission in Drive) and when 
reversing (transmission in Reverse) on uphill gradients (up to 50 %). 



Drive-off Assistant Function 


34 

E61 Sport Wagon 






35 

E61 Sport Wagon 



Service Information 


Safety Notice!!! 


On a vehicle equipped with an automatic transmission, 
when driving onto brake analyzers, move the selector 
lever to the “N” position . On a vehicle equipped with a manual transmission, 
do not release the clutch pedal once on the brake analyzer. 


This keeps the transfer case clutch open and the vehicle cannot be pulled 
off the analyzer. 


Towing 

Use only a flatbed carrier! 

Oil, Transfer Case, and Clutch Monitoring 
■ Oil 

All xDrive transfer cases use Shell Gear oil part number 83 22 0 306 816. 

There is no scheduled service for the transfer case oil. Oil Monitoring is performed by the 
VTG control module to determine when a service (change) is due. The VTG calculates 
transfer case and clutch wear based on the amount of slip, engagement pressure 
(torque), speed and mileage. 

This calculation accounts for: 

• normal “dry” road driving (Integrator 1) 

• “adverse” road driving (Integrator 2) 

• “other” road extreme driving (Integrator 3) 

Depending on individual vehicle use - driving styles and driving conditions, the transfer 
case oil service interval will vary. 

When a service is due, this will be indicated by a Fault Code and additional details are 
available using the DISplus/ GT1. Service functions provide directions on changing the 
transfer case oil and updating the VTG control module with the necessary reset and 
adaption procedure. This is extremely important for CBS. 

Transfer Case and Clutch 

The transfer case and clutch have separate monitoring characteristics. These values are 
stored as adaptive values in the VGSG control unit and must be transferred to a new con¬ 
trol unit if replaced. 

The value for both can be obtained using the diagnostic software under: 

Control Unit Functions => VTG => Diagnosis requests => Transmission 
Control Unit Functions => VTG => Diagnosis requests => Clutch 


36 

E61 Sport Wagon 



Diagnosis 

Diagnosis is available for fault repairs and service procedures using the DISplus/GT 1. 

The test plan for the VGSG contains valuable information on: 

• Replacing control unit 

• Replacing transfer case 

• Transferring adaptation values 

- Automatic 

- Manual 

• Reading out adaptation values 

Programming (flashing) 

Both the transfer case control unit (VTG) and the DSC control unit are programmable and 
the new control unit(s) must be programmed when replaced. The wear values stored in 
the VTG control module (to be replaced) must be transferred to the replacement VTG. 

Warning Indicator Lamps 

The warning indicator lamps for the xDrive / DSC are found in the instrument cluster as 
shown on the bottom of this page. 



The warning indicator lamps and acoustic signals (gong) are assigned to the xDrive / DSC 
system states of malfunction described on the next two pages. 


37 

E61 Sport Wagon 





Check Control Messages Relating to xDrive / DXC8+ 


Fixed Variable 

indicator indicator 
lamp lamp 

Check control Information in central information display 
message 

DTC 

E 

DSC disabled! You have disabled DSC. Restricted vehicle stability 

while accelerating and cornering. 



DT C enabled, DT C enabled. 

DSC restricted! Dynamic traction control DTC increases forward 

propulsion on unpaved surfaces, however, it 
decreases vehicle stability. 


ABS 

ABS 

(©) 

(©) 

BRAKE 

BRAKE 


DSC failed! 
Drive with 
moderation 


DBC failed. 

No additional braking assistance from DBC in 
emergency braking situations. 

Drive with moderation. 

Have checked by your BMW dealer as soon as 
possible. 



DSC failed! 
Drive with 
moderation 


DSC failed. 

Restricted vehicle stability while accelerating and 
cornering. 

Drive with moderation. 

Have checked by your BMW dealer as soon as 
possible. 



Control systems! Brake and vehicle control systems failed. Reduced 
Drive with braking and vehicle stability. Avoid abrupt braking 

moderation where possible. 

Have checked by nearest BMW dealer. 



ABS 

BRAKE 



Control systems! 
Drive with 
moderation 


Brake pads! 
Replace 


Brake and vehicle control systems failed. Drive 
with moderation, avoid abrupt braking where 
possible. Have checked by nearest BMW dealer. 


The brake pads are worn. 

Have replaced by nearest BMW dealer. 



Brake fluid! 
Stop cautiously 


Brakes too hot! 
Allow to cool 
down 


Brake fluid level too low. Reduced braking 
efficiency. Stop cautiously. Contact nearest BMW 
dealer. 


Brakes too hot 

Critical temperature as a result of permanent 
heavy load. Danger - reduced braking efficiency. 
Allow brakes to cool down. Stop if necessary. 


38 

E61 Sport Wagon 

















Check Control Messages Relating to xDrive / DXC8+ (cont’d) 


Fixed Variable Check control Information in central information display 

indicator indicator message 
lamp lamp 



Brakes 
overheated! 
Allow to cool 
down 

4x4 system and 
DSC failed! 


4x4 system 
defective! 

Drive with 
moderation 

4x4 system, DSC 
and ABS failed! 


Brakes overheated 

Critical temperature exceeded. Braking efficiency 
no longer guaranteed. Stop at the next opportunity 
and allow to cool down substantially. 

4x4 system and DSC failed! Vehicle stability 
restricted. Drive with moderation. Have checked 
by your BMW dealer as soon as possible. 

4x4 system defective 

Vehicle stability restricted. Drive with moderation. 
Have checked by your BMW dealer as soon as 
possible. 

4x4 system, DSC and ABS failed! Vehicle stability 
restricted. Drive with moderation. Have checked 
by your BMW dealer as soon as possible. 



4x4 System, 
DSC, ABS and 
emergency EBV 
failed! 

HDC enabled! 


4x4 System, DSC, ABS and emergency EBV 
failed! Vehicle stability restricted. Drive with 
moderation. Have checked immediately by your 
BMW dealer. 



HDC disabled! 


HDC disabled. 

Hill descent control HDC is disabled at speed 
above 60 km/h (37 mph). 

System can be re-enabled at speed below 35 km/ 
h (22 mph). 



No HDC control! 
Drive slower 


HDC not possible! 

Control range ends at 

35 km/h (22 mph). To use HDC, reduce speed 
accordingly. 



HDC currently 
not available! 


HDC not available. 

Automatic brake intervention interrupted for safety 
reasons as brakes are overheated. 

Shift down and drive carefully in order to reduce 
temperature. 


ABS 

ABS 

(©) 

Drive-off 

Drive-off assistant inactive 

assistant 

Caution, vehicle can roll back! Have checked by 

(©) 

inactive! 

your BMW dealer at next opportunity. 

BRAKE 

BRAKE 





Electronics fault! 
Stop cautiously 


Central vehicle electronics failed. Continued 
journey not possible. Contact nearest BMW 
dealer. 


39 

E61 Sport Wagon 


















Body 


The E60 and the E61 are identical in body structure and design from the front bumper 
to the B-pillar. 





E61 Body Modifications 


40 

E61 Sport Wagon 






















Legend for E61 Body Modifications 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear Left Door 

10 

Side Frame, Right 

2 

Side Frame, Left 

11 

Inner Rear Right Wheel Arch 

3 

Roof Railing 

12 

Outer Rear Right Wheel Arch 

4 

Roof Outer Skin Panel 

13 

Rear Right Door 

5 

Roof Frame Reinforcement, Right 

14 

V-Shaped Tension Strut 

6 

Rear Window Frame 

15 

Floor Pan, Rear 

7 

Right C-Pillar 

16 

Inner Rear Left Wheel Arch 

8 

Right D-Pillar 

17 

Outer Rear Left Wheel Arch 

9 

Cross Member, Rear paneling 

18 

Rear Hatch 


E61 body features: 

• The rear doors have been redesigned for the Touring. 

• The rear hatch was designed similar to the E39 Touring with a separately opening 
rear window. 

• The front/rear floor pans are the same as on the E60 but the rear floor pans are a 
new design. 

• The outer half of the rear wheel arches is the same as on the E60 while the inner 
half is new. 

• The side frames and pillars are the same as on the E60 in the front area and new at 
the rear. 

• The roof frame is the same as on the E60 in the front area but new at the rear. The 
roof frame features additional reinforcement in the area of the C-pillar. 

• The roof outer skin panel is new. 

• To increase the body rigidity, a V-shaped tension strut is fitted on the underbody on 
vehicles equipped with the panoramic glass sunroof (SA 402 All US Models). 


41 

E61 Sport Wagon 













































Rear Doors 

The rear doors on the E61 are the same as the E60 up to the level of the shoulder but 
with variations specific to the Touring: 

• Door inner panel and closing plate are new 

• Modified reinforcement of window frame - C-pillar 

The window system at the rear doors are the same as on the E60 but with the following 
variations specific to the Touring. New features are: 

• Inner window frame cover 

• Outer window frame 

• Window guide rail 

• Outer weatherstrip 

• Windowpanes and their surround 

• Door seals 

Panoramic Glass Sunroof 

The panorama glass sunroof in the E61 is the same as the panorama glass sunroof on 
the E53 and the E83. The functional principle is also the same. 



E61 Panorama Glass Sunroof 


42 

E61 Sport Wagon 








































System Components 

The panorama glass sunroof assembly consists of the following components: 

• Panorama Glass Sunroof control module, MDS 

• 2 Drive Motors 

• 2 Part floating headliner 

• 2 Glass covers 

• Wind deflector 

Multi Drive Sunroof Control Module 

The MDS contains the following components: 

• Control Electronics 

• K-CAN Interface 

• Drive motor Relay 

• Hall Sensor Power Supply 

The Multi Drive Sunroof MDS controls and monitors the electric motors and therefore 
the movement of the panorama glass sunroof. 

The MDS is installed on the carrier behind the glove compartment. 



Control units in the carrier behind the glove compartment 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

CD changer CDC 

4 

Adaptive headlight AHL 

2 

Basic body module KBM 

5 

Multi Drive Sunroof MDS 

3 

Safety and gateway module SGM 

6 

Comfort Access (9/2005) 


43 

E61 Sport Wagon 






























Drive Motors 

The system utilizes two DC motor. One motor is used to drive the glass panels and the 
other is used for the headliner (visor) and wind deflector. 

The hall sensors are integrated in the motors to detect motor revolutions. These signals 
are forwarded to the MDS for analysis. 



Drive Motors 


Floating Headliner 

The floating headliner consists of two parts controlled by a Bowden Cable. 

The headliner is interlocked to the function of the glass roofs. The headliner must be 
opened before the glass sunroof will open. On closing the glass sunroof must be closed 
before the headliner can be closed or 

Double selecting open or close on the switch will allow the glass panels and the headlin¬ 
er to move at the same time. 



44 

E61 Sport Wagon 





Glass Panels 

Two glass covers are installed in the panorama sunroof cassette. Six. bolts secure the 
front glass to the frame and four bolts secure the rear glass. Both the front and rear glass 
panel can tilt, but only the front panel can retract and fully open. 

Power Supply and K-CAN Interface 

The MDS acts as the power supply module for both the sunroof motor and the headliner 
motor. Communication with the rest of the car is through the K-CAN. The MDS receives 
and transmits K-CAN messages. 


Wind Deflector 

The wind deflector is cable operated by the rear (headliner) motor and is regulated by the 
MDS control module by using the vehicles speed signal. 


System Operation 

Operation of the panorama sunroof is similar to the conventional slide/tilt sunroof. It func¬ 
tions both as a tilting sunroof and a slide/tilt sunroof. The rear glass only tilts, the front 
glass slides and tilts. Rear tilt is possible only when the front glass is also tilted.The KBM 
signals the MDS for convenience opening and closing of the panorama glass sunroof. 


The panorama 

• Headliner 

• Headliner 

• Headliner 

• Headliner 

• Headliner 

• Headliner 


glass sunroof is operated as follows: 
and glass sunroof Closed. 

closed, front and rear glass in tilt position (Headliner goes to vent position). 

open, sunroof closed. 

open, sunroof opened manually. 

open, sunroof opened to comfort position (Via one touch opening), 
open, sunroof opened fully (Beyond comfort position). 


45 

E61 Sport Wagon 




Control Button 


Movement 


Panorama Glass Sunroof Positions 


') I 


CTJ 

i 

o 

LLJ 


Manual opening of 
panorama glass sunroof 
by sliding button to first 
detente position 


Floating headliner of glass 
tilt sunroof and slide/tilt 
sunroof are opened until 
the control button is 
released. 









r-1 








Panorama glass sunroof is 
automatically opened to 
the comfort position. 


Automatic opening of 
panorama glass sunroof 
by sliding the button 
beyond the pressure point 
to the second detente 
position 




1 








i 






vt> 


A) Hi 


Panorama glass sunroof is 
automatically opened to 
the comfort position. 


Double-click function 


Automatic opening of 
panorama glass sunroof 
by sliding the button twice 
beyond the pressure point 
to the second detente 
position 





46 

E61 Sport Wagon 


















































































































47 

E61 Sport Wagon 

















































































Control Button 


Movement 


Panorama Glass Sunroof Positions 




rp 


£2 


r 


Manual opening of 
panorama glass sunroof 
by pressing control button 
to first detente position 


Panorama glass sunroof is 
opened to raised position 
until the control button is 
released 


vj ^ 1 ) 



<L> 




r-— - 


—P 


& 






^j\JM 


Ml 

n 


r 


Double-click function 

Automatic opening of 
panorama glass sunroof 
by pressing the button 
beyond the pressure point 
to the second detente 
position 


Panorama glass sunroof is 
fully opened to raised posi¬ 
tion and the floating head¬ 
liner is moved to the vent 
position. 


vV & > 1 ) 





^) 




) 






ITS 


4 

o 

LU 


After opening panorama 
glass sunroof via one 
touch, the sunroof may be 
opened fully (rather than 
the comfort position) by 
sliding the control button 
to the first detente and 
holding. 


Front glass of panorama 
sunroof will move from 
comfort position to fully 
open position. 







1 

■i 



► l 







. 

< 





0 


48 

E61 Sport Wagon 


























































































Floating Headliner 
Opening 

On opening the front part of the headliner moves over the rear part of the floating headlin¬ 
er. The special feature of the floating headliner is that it can be opened fully without the 
sunroof being open or tilted. 

Vent Mode 

When the panorama glass sunroof is moved into the tilt position, the floating headliner is 
moved into the vent position. 

The vent position reduces the suction effect at high road speeds. 


Vent Mode 


Wind Deflector 

The wind deflector is regulated according to road speed. When the sunroof is opened the 
wind deflector goes from the down position to the intermediate position. It remains in this 
position until road speed is seen by the MDS. Then the wind deflector is placed in the 
extended position. At roads speeds greater than 140km/h (84mph) it is retracted back to 
the intermediate position. If the road speed drops below lOOkm/h (62 mph), the wind 
deflector is again raised. 


Down Position 


Intermediate Position 


Extended Position 


49 

E61 Sport Wagon 


















Service 


Initialization 

Initialization must be performed on the panorama glass sunroof anytime the MDS looses 
positioning of the glass panels or the headliner or if the any component of the sunroof 
assembly is replaced. 

The control button is pressed and held in the position to tilt the sunroof. Initialization 
begins approximately 15 seconds after pressing the button. The initialization process may 
take over 2 minutes to perform. 

Note: The control button MUST be held in the tilt position during the entire 
initialization process. Failure to hold the button will result in improper 
initialization. 

During initialization the panorama sunroof will operate as follows: 

• Both sunroof panels enter tilt position(Headliners enter Vent Mode) 

• Both Headliners open 

• Both sunroof panels lower 

• The front sunroof panel opens then closes 

• Both Headliners close 

Anti-Trapping Protection 

Both the covers and the floating headliners are fitted with anti-trap protection. If the MDS 
detects something in the path, the appropriate motor is stopped and activated in the 
reverse direction. 

Service Notes 

The motors may be replaced individually. An initialization procedure is reguired after 
replacing one or both of the motors 

The MDS control unit my be replaced separately. It must although be coded before 
initializing. 


50 

E61 Sport Wagon 




Interior 


The interior trim and upholstery of the E61 has largely been adopted from the E60. Due 
to the body changes, the interior trim and upholstery from the B-pillar has been adapted 
to the Touring. 

From April 2005 production the interior of the vehicle will be equipped with upgraded soft 
paint surfaces and air conditioning control knobs in “ruthenium finish”. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Fresh air grill in “ruthenium finish” 

2 

Chrome finish IHKA Rotary Knobs 


Luggage Compartment 

The load area is flat with the rear seat backrests folded down. 4 lashing eyes are fitted as 
standard on the floor of the luggage compartment. 

The vehicle tool kit is located in a utility box on the left-hand frame side member. 

The lockable luggage compartment floor can be raised and with the aid of gas spring 
struts (similar to the hood) remains in the required position until it is pressed down again. 


A variable storage area for small parts is provided under the luggage compartment floor. 
Located below this is the spare wheel or a further storage area (35 liters) if the vehicle is 
equipped with run-flat tires. 



Luggage Compartment, Floor Partly Raised 


51 

E61 Sport Wagon 




















































Luggage Compartment Trim Panels 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Luggage compartment floor 

8 

Storage tray, luggage compartment floor 

2 

Cross member cover 

9 

Partitions 

3 

Shoulder trim panel, right 

10 

Luggage compartment sill cover 

4 

Rear right cover 

11 

Luggage compartment flap, left 

5 

Luggage compartment panel, right 

12 

Luggage compartment trim panel,left 

6 

Luggage compartment flap, right 

13 

Shoulder trim panel, left 

7 

Trim panel for luggage compartment well 

14 

Rear left cover 


52 

E61 Sport Wagon 






























Luggage Compartment Roller Cover 

The partition net is integrated in the standard luggage compartment roller cover (similar to 
E39/2). The luggage compartment roller cover is attached at the D-pillars. It can be 
removed and, with the rear seat backrest folded down, attached to this backrest. 
Depending on where the roller cover is fastened, the partition net can be attached at the 
support elements in the headliner (behind B-pillar or C-pillar). 



Fastening points for luggage compartment roller cover/net partition 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Luggage compartment roller cover, bottom position 

2 

Luggage compartment roller cover, top position 

3 

Net partition fastening point at C-pillars 

4 

Net partition fastening point at B-pillars 


53 

E61 Sport Wagon 













Luggage Compartment Roller Cover Lock Mechanism 

The load area cover motors in the D-pillars are driven by the KBM for approx. 1.5 sec¬ 
onds when the rear hatch or rear window is opened. 

The release pins are pulled back via a gear drive and the luggage compartment roller 
cover attached to the D-pillars is released. The roller cover slide upwards in the guide, 
due to the return force of spring loaded roller cover. This makes it possible to convenient¬ 
ly load and unload the luggage compartment. 

The roller cover does not retract automatically. The cover has to be pushed back until 
automatically locked at the lock pin. 




Lock mechanism of luggage compartment roller cover 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Load area cover motors 

2 

D-pillar trim panel 

3 

Guide 

4 

Locking pin 


54 

E61 Sport Wagon 



























Headliner 

The headliner has been modified for the panoramic sunroof and the extended length of 
the E61 rear end. 

The C-pillar cover is divided in two sections to accommodate the head airbag AITS II. 



Headliner 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Headliner 

6 

Speaker cover 

2 

Net partition attachment point, front 

7 

DWA (behind headliner) 

3 

Rear compartment light 

8 

D-pillar cover 

4 

Cover for ultrasonic interior movement detector 

9 

C-pillar cover, rear 

5 

Net partition attachment point, front 

10 

C-pillar cover, front 


55 

E61 Sport Wagon 




































Front Seats 

The front seats in the E61 are identical to those of the E60. 

Rear Seats 

The rear seats are always offered with the fold down capabilities as standard. The seat 
backrest can be folded down completely or at a 60:40 ratio. The wider part of the back¬ 
rest is located behind the driver's seat. The ski bag and the center three-point seat belt 
are integrated in the wider part of the seat backrest. 

Seat heating for the rear seats is available as an option only in conjunction with a cold 
weather package and leather seats. The ski bag can be completely removed to facilitate 
easy cleaning. 

The rear headrests (also the center headrest) can be adjusted manually and are identical 
to those of the E60. The center headrest as well as two cup holders and an oddments 
tray are integrated in the center armrest (similar to E46/3). 

ISOFIX for the rear seats is also included as standard equipment. 

The seat backrests are released by means of an operating handle in the recess on the 
upper edge of the backrest.The released seat backrest is indicated by a red warning 
zone. The red warning zone disappears again into the recess when the backrest is folded 
back and locked correctly. 


The rear seat backrests have two lock positions and are not adjustable. 



Releasing Seat Backrest 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Backrest Unlatched Indicator 


56 

E61 Sport Wagon 









The backs of the seat backrests are covered with carpet material (colour same as panel¬ 
ing in luggage compartment). 

2 holders are provided on the back of the backrests, to which the luggage compartment 
roller cover can be fastened when the backrests are folded down. The partition net can 
be pulled out from here and attached to the front retaining fixtures in the headliner. 



Rear seats 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

40% backrest 

2 

Middle 3-point seat belt 

3 

60% backrest 

4 

Center armrest 

5 

Bench seat (one-piece) 

6 

Side section (fixed) 


57 

E61 Sport Wagon 
















Rear Hatch 


The rear hatch is made from steel. As on the E39/2 and E46/3, the rear window can be 
opened separately. In the event of an electrical fault, the rear hatch can be released from 
the luggage compartment by unclipping the cover from the tailgate and pulling an emer¬ 
gency release tab. 



Emergency Release of Rear Hatch 


The rear window and rear hatch are connected to the body by means of hinges. 

The rear hatch and rear window are screw-mounted on the respective hinges. The rear 
window can be adjusted to the level of the rear hatch by placing shims (0.5 mm, 1 mm 
and 2 mm) under the securing nuts. 

The height levels of the rear hatch and rear windows are adjusted together with respect 
to the vehicle body. 


58 

E61 Sport Wagon 




Rear Hatch Hinge (Magnified View Shows Left Hinge) 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear hatch hinge mounting on body 

2 

Hinged bracket for rear hatch 

3 

Rear window wiring harness 

4 

Hinged bracket for rear window 

5 

Rear window mounting on hinge 

6 

Rear hatch wiring harness 


59 

E61 Sport Wagon 


































Rear Window 

As on the E39 Touring, the rear window can be opened independent of the rear hatch. 
The rear window is released from the outside by pressing the button on the rear window 
wiper. The rear window is locked by the central locking. 

The opened rear window is held in position by a high tension spring on the hinge. 

The rear window consists of green tempered safety glass with a thickness of approx. 5.0 
mm with no sheet metal frame surround. The edge of the window features screen 
print/dots. 

The center brake light is integrated in the rear spoiler. The water jet for the rear window is 
located in the center of the third brake light. The rear spoiler also contains the antenna 
amplifier with the antenna diversity module and the AM/FM4 antenna. 

The FM1 - FM3 antennas are integrated in the electrically heated defoggerzone on the 
rear window. 




Rear Window Opened Rear Tailgate Opened 

Rear Window Wiper 

The rear window wiper concept and rear window lock are the same as on the E46/3. The 
functions of the rear window wiper are controlled by the KBM. 


60 

E61 Sport Wagon 




















Automatic Rear Hatch (HKL) 


Automatic Tailgate Lift is available on vehicles ordered with the premium package option. 
This allows the tailgate to be raised and lowered automatically with the aid of a hydraulic 
actuator. The rear hatch lift is similar to the HKL system used on the rear trunk lid on the 
E65/66. 


Automatic rear hatch operation is controlled by the rear hatch lift (HKL). The rear hatch lift 
(HKL) operated together with the KBM and CAS installed as standard. 

The rear hatch lift is not active while driving but only when the vehicle is stationary. 



e? 

Block diagram HKL 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear hatch button (in driver's footwell) 

8 

Rear hatch lift HKL 

2 

Car access system CAS 

9 

Hall sensor (angle sensor) 

3 

Basic body module KBM 

10 

Rear hatch button (on inside of rear hatch) 

4 

Terminal 30 (40 A fuse-protected) 

11 

Rear hatch button (on outside of rear hatch) 

5 

Electric motor for hydraulic pump 

12 

Antenna amplifier, FBD receiver 

6 

Hydraulic valve 

13 

FBD antenna 

7 

Ground connection (terminal 31) 




61 

E61 Sport Wagon 































































































System Components 

The HKL system is made up of the following components: 

• Electric motor for the hydraulic pump 

• Hydraulic valve, 

• Angle Hall sensor 

• Control buttons 

- Rear hatch button on inside of rear hatch 

- Rear hatch button on outside of rear hatch 

- Rear hatch button on inside of vehicle 

- Rear hatch button on vehicle key 

Hydraulic System 

The hydraulic system is self-bleeding and maintenance-free. The hydraulic unit is located 
on the driver’s side of the luggage compartment behind the audio system amplifier. 



Overview of 


# 

Hydraulic System for Opening Rear Hatch 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hall sensor (angle sensor) 

3 

Hydraulic lines 

2 

Hydraulic cylinder 

4 

Hydraulic unit 


62 

E61 Sport Wagon 

















The hydraulic components in the system are: 

• Hydraulic unit with hydraulic pump 

• Hydraulic cylinder 

• Hydraulic lines 

The hydraulic pump in the hydraulic unit is driven by an electric motor that operates in 
two directions. The two operating directions are realized by a relay circuit in the HKL 
control module. 

A repeat inhibit is included in the software to prevent overheating of the pump motor 
during frequent operation of the automatic rear hatch. The repeat inhibit is triggered after 
2 minutes of continuous operation and is deactivated again after a cooling-down phase 
of 6 minutes. 

A proportional valve is included in the hydraulic circuit. When not activated, the valve is 
open, i.e. the pressure in the hydraulic system is at the lowest level. This setting also 
enables the closing/opening of the rear hatch in case of system malfunction. When the 
valve is activated, the aperture becomes smaller and the pressure in the hydraulic system 
increases. The hydraulic cylinder is operated (piston or rod end depending on direction of 
rotation of the hydraulic pump) and the rear hatch is raised or lowered. 

Angle Hall Sensor 

An angle Hall sensor is used for detecting the position of the rear hatch or detecting the 
opening angle of the rear hatch. A voltage value is output dependent on the opening 
angle of the rear hatch. 

The angle Hall sensor produces an analog linear voltage signal back to the HKL control 
module for tailgate status. 




Angle Hall Sensor 


Angle Hall Sensor (mounted) 


63 

E61 Sport Wagon 





System Operation 

Opening and Closing Rear Hatch 

The following options are available for opening/closing the rear hatch: 

• Outside rear hatch button 

• Inside rear hatch button (rear hatch opened) 

• Rear hatch button on radio remote control key 

• Pull down or raise rear hatch at recessed handgrip in rear hatch trim panel 

• Rear hatch button in vehicle interior (not yet realized at series production launch) 

Operating Rear Hatch Buttons on Outside/Inside 

The rear hatch can be opened, stopped or closed by pressing the rear hatch button 
on the outside (just above the license plate) or inside (on tailgate sill trim with the rear 
hatch open). 

The rear hatch can also be stopped or activated in any opened position. The buttons 
need only be pressed once to initiate activation up to the respective end position (rear 
hatch opened or closed). The drive stops automatically at the end positions. 

The direction the rear hatch moves changes every second time the button is pressed: 
Example: Press tailgate button to unlock and raise tailgate 

While the tailgate is being raised, press the button - the tailgate stops 

Pressing the button again will cause the tailgate to reverse direction and 
now lower... and so on 

Activation Via Remote Control Services (FBD) 

The rear hatch can be opened via key remote control (rear hatch button on key). The rear 
hatch button on the vehicle key must be pressed for longer than 1.6 seconds to open the 
rear hatch. The rear hatch opens completely (even when the button is subsequently 
released). The 1.6 second time delay is programmed in to avoid unwanted tailgate opera¬ 
tion while for example placing key in a pocket/purse. 

Secondary or Emergency Operation 

In the event of the automatic function failing, the rear hatch can be opened and closed in 
the same way as a conventional, manually operated rear hatch without the need for addi¬ 
tional measures. 

The force required for this purpose is slightly higher than required for the rear hatch sup¬ 
ported purely by the gas spring strut. 

Note: After being opened manually, the rear hatch should be opened and 
closed twice with the hydraulic system. This operation will bleed any 
air out of the hydraulic system. 


64 

E61 Sport Wagon 




Adjusting Opening Height of the Tailgate 

The opening height of the tailgate can be varied by using the vehicle settings menu in the 
iDrive system. 

To access this setting select: 

Vehicle Settings => Door Locks => Tailgate 
The height adjustment can be changed by rotating the iDrive controller. 


Tailgate Minimum Opening Height Tailgate Maximum Opening Height 




65 

E61 Sport Wagon 









General Vehicle Electrical Systems 

Bus System 

The following changes have been implemented from April 2005 production: 

• Addition of HKL (E61 only) 

• Addition of EHC (E61 only) 

• Replacement of SHD for MDS (E61 only) 

• Lamp Module (LM) is on the PT-CAN 

• Elimination of the AHL control unit 


SMC 


SMC 


SINE 


lI 






* 



LM 


RJ 


HKL CID 



FS 


CCC 

M-ASK 


Kombi 


SHD 


MDS 


CDC 


HUD 


SBSL 


TMFA 


SFZ 


SB FA 


DWA 


CON 



VM 


SOARS* 





TCU 


TOP-HIFI 


ULF 


SBSR Y_SEN_2 


TMBF 


SZL 


WUP 


SMFA SMBF 


ZH 


Ml 619) 


EHC 


F 


DHKA 


DXC 


VGSG 


EKP 


ALBVFA 


ALBVBF 


IBS 

i. 


DME 

DDE 


Jl 


EGS 


ACC 


D-Bus 

byteffight 

K-Bus (proloko*] . 

K-GAN 

MOST 

LIN-Bus 

PT-CAN - 

F-CAN 

BSD ■ ■ ■ * 



LoCAN 


E61 Bus Overview 


66 

E61 Sport Wagon 





































































Car Communication Computer 


The navigation system Professional now features a bird's-eye view or perspective map. 

The icon baron the left-hand side is a new feature. By selecting the corresponding icons, 
it is now possible to activate functions such as "start/end route guidance" or "change 
route criteria" out of the map view. 


The functions that can be selected through the icons are listed in the following table. 





Navigation Menu With Bird's-eye View and Icon Bar 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Arrow pointing towards destination's the crow flies) 

2 

Voice announcements ON/OFF 

3 

Start/end route guidance 

4 

Select destination on map 

5 

Display information 

6 

Change map view 

7 

Change route criteria 

8 

Select traffic information 

9 

Perspective map presentation 


67 

E61 Sport Wagon 





































Antenna Systems 

The heating conductor and antenna structures for 3 FM antennas are located on the 
inside of the rear window. Stranded wires are used to connect the antenna structures of 
the rear window. 

AM reception is enabled with the aid of the AM sensor in the rear spoiler. A conductor of 
the split AM sensor is additionally used as a fourth FM antenna or FBD antenna. The AM 
sensor consists of two stranded wire conductors with lengths optimized for AM recep¬ 
tion. The diversity components are connected by means of a 3-pin ELO plug. 

The HBL interference suppression filter suppresses interference on the supply line of the 
third brake light (HBL) and of the rear window button line. 

The rear window is powered via a rejecter circuit on the right-hand side of the rear window. 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear window defogger with 
integrated FM antennas 1-3 

7 

Rejecter circuit, ground (filter) 

2 

Compensator 

8 

HBL suppression filter (for brake light) 

3 

Rejecter circuit, ground (filter) 

9 

TV antenna 2 (Not for US) 

4 

AM/FM4/FBD antenna 

10 

TV amplifier (Not for US) 

5 

Antenna amplifier with antenna diversity module 

11 

Telephone emergency call antenna 

6 

Roof antenna (telephone, GPS, SDARS) 




68 

E61 Sport Wagon 


























Tail Light Cluster 

The tail light cluster is a split unit. One part is located in the side panel and the other in 
the rear hatch. The tail lights are divided in 6 sections. 



Tail light cluster 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Direction Indicator light 

5 

Tail light/brake light 

2 

Two-stage brake light 

6 

Tail light/brake light 

3 

Reversing light 

7 

Side marker light 

4 

Rear Deflector 




Light 

Quantity 

Operating voltage 

Output at 12 V 

Tail light/brake light 

2 

6V/13.5 V 

21 W 

21 W 

Tail light/brake light 

2 

6 V/1 3.5V 

21 W 

21 W 

Third brake light 

1 

System voltage 

0.5 W 

Reversing light 

2 

13.5 V 

16 W 

Direction indicators 

2 

13.5 V 

21 W 

Rear fog light 

2 

13.5 V 

16 W 


69 

E61 Sport Wagon 

























Replacing Reversing Light 

The nut (2) must first be undone in order to replace the lamp bulbs for the reversing light. 
The holder is loosened a little and the complete unit can be detached from the rear 
hatch. Release the catch and remove the bulb carrier plate. When installing, ensure the 
seal is positioned correctly. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Bracket 

2 

Nut 

3 

Seal 

4 

Bulb Carrier Plate 

5 

Latch 


70 

E61 Sport Wagon 



















Control Unit Locations in Luggage Compartment 



Control Units in Luggage Compartment, Left 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

TV antenna amplifier, left (not for US) 

3 

Top-HiFi amplifier, Top-HiFi 

2 

MOST fibre optics connector 

4 

Video module VM (not for US) 



Control Units in Luggage Compartment, Right 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

TV antenna amplifier, right (not for US) 

3 

Rear power distribution box 

2 

Telephone emergency call antenna 

4 

Intelligent battery sensor (IBS) 


71 


E61 Sport Wagon 

























Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Micro-power module MPM 

6 

Relay, rear window wiper (not for US) 

2 

Rear hatch lift HKL 

7 

Relay, compressor for air suspension 

3 

Trailer module AHM 

8 

Load-shedding relay, electronic ampere control 

4 

Park distance control PDC 

9 

Relay, automatic soft-close 

5 

Electronic ride height control EHC 




72 

E61 Sport Wagon 





































