Table of Contents 
E70 Introduction 


Subject Page 

NewX5 SAV .3 

Technical Comparisons (E53 vs E70) .5 

Technical Data.6 

E70 Body Overview .8 

Repair Solution.11 

Frontal Impact.12 

Side Impact.14 

Rigidity.15 

Pedestrian Protection .16 

Side Panel M odule .17 

Alignment of the Side Panel with the Hood .17 

Changing the Light Source.17 

Front End .18 

Cast Aluminum Spring Support.20 

High-strength Materials.21 

Leak-tightness.22 

Driving Through Water.22 

ShowerTest.22 

Dust-tightness.22 

Customer Benefit.22 

Panorama Glass Sunroof.23 

Front Seats .24 

Partially electric basic seat for driver and front passenger .24 

Fully electric basic seat for driver and front passenger.24 

Sports seat for driver and front passenger.25 

Front Luxury Seats.26 

Active Seat Ventilation (Front Seat - option).26 

Rear Seats.28 

Basic Variant (with 2 rows of seats).28 

3rd Row Seating (optional) .29 

2nd Row of Seats (in conjunction with 3rd row of seats).29 

3rd Row of Seats .30 

CenterConsole .31 

DoorTrim.32 

Glove Box .34 

Roller S unblind (Rear Doors).34 

Luggage Compartment .36 

Tailgate .40 

Modified Wedge System .40 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 Revision Date: 










































Introduction 


Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

■MICTIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to 

• Understand changes to the X5 body 

• Understand E70 pedestrian protection system 


2 

E70 Introduction 


NewX5 SAV 


Since the firstX5 SAV, the world has been anxiously awaiting the successorto the E53. 
The E70 marks the second generation of the X5 and includes many new features and 
functions not available in the previous X5. 

As one would expect, the new E70 raises the standard forthe SAV driving experience. 
The propulsion forthe new SAV is provided by new 6-cylinder and V-8 engines with 
more performance than the previous power units. 



Since the introduction of the original X5 (E53), there have been more than 580,000 units 
produced, half of which (240,000) have been sold in the U.S. market. The new X5 
continues the tradition of a luxury appointed, premium SAV. The E70 interior combines 
sophisticated materials with innovative options and class leading technology. 

The overall ground clearance has been increased and there is a new front suspension to 
complementthe BMW patented integral IV rear suspension. The BMW active steering 
system has been added forthe first time on a X-drive equipped vehicle. There is also an 
optional "Adaptive Drive" package which combines Active Roll Stabilization (ARS) and 
Electronic Damping Control (EDC) for improved ride quality and handling. The new EDC 
system features the world debut of FlexRay, a new high speed data transmission system 
developed with the leadership of BMW and a major consortium of development 
companies. 


3 

E70 Introduction 




The highlights of the new E70 X5 include: 

• Weight optimized body shell with improved torsional stiffness 

• Standard Runflat tires 

• Active Steering 

• Adaptive Drive package (EDC and ARS) 

• New 6-speed gearbox with electronic gear selector 

• Full time AWD - X-drive technology 

• Improved powerand efficiency with new engines - N52B30O1 and N62B4801 

• Larger interior with 3rd row seating (up to 7 seats) 

• Optional Head-up display 

• New i-Drive control concept with six programmable keys 

• Exclusive interior with innovative options 

• Improved handling and driving dynamics 



4 

E70 Introduction 



















Technical Comparisons (E53 vs E70) 

The E70 represents the logical development of the proportions of the E53. The vehicle's 
external dimensions are biggerthan those of the E53.The wheelbase has been length¬ 
ened significantly, making the E70 appear more stable and lending it a sovereign 
presence. 




Specification 

E70 

E53 

Unladen weight (kg) 

2,125 

2,095 

Length (mm) 

4,854 

4,667 

Width (mm) 

2,197 

2,180 

Height (mm) 

1,766 

1,707 

Wheelbase (mm) 

2,933 

2,820 

Track width, front (mm) 

1,644 

1,576 

Track width, rear (mm) 

1,650 

1,576 


5 

E70 Introduction 




































































































































Technical Data 


Specification 

units 

X5 3.0iSAV 

N52B3001 

X5 4.8i 

N62B4801 

Number of doors/seats 


5/5 

5/5 

Vehicle length/width/height, unladen 

mm 

4,854/1,933/1,728 

4,854/1,933/1,728 

Wheelbase/turning circle 

mm/m 

2,933/12.8 

2,933/12.8 

Track width, front/rear 

mm 

1,644/1,650 

1,644/1,650 

Load volume (DIN 70020) 

Itrs. 

602-1,692 

602-1,692 

Fuel tank capacity 

Itrs 

85 

85 

Unladen weight (DIN/EU) 

kg 

2,085/2,160 

2,215/2,290 

Permissible total weight/payload 

kg 



Permissible front/rear axle load 

kg 

1,240/1,525 

1,350/1,545 

Permissible trailer load 
braked 12%/8% 

kg 

2,300/2,700 

2,300/2,700 

Permissible trailer load, 
un- braked/roof load 

kg 

750/100 

750/100 

Engine type/number of cylinders 


6-cylinder in-line 

V-8 engine 

Valves/cylinder 


4 

4 

Engine management system 


MSV80 

ME9.2.3 

Engine displacement 

cm^ 

2,996 

4,799 

Engine output/RPM 

bhp 

260 @6600 

350 @ 6300 

Torque/RPM 

Nm 

315 @ 3000 

460 @ 3500 

Compression ratio 


10.7 to 1 

10.5 to 1 

Fuel type 


RON 91-98 

RON 91-98 

Transmission type (auto) 


GA6HP19TU 

GA6HP26TU 

Final drive ratio 


4.44 

3.91 


6 

E70 Introduction 

















































































Specification 

units 

X5 3.0i SAV 

N52B30O1 

X5 4.8i 

N62B4801 

Steering type/ratio 


Rack and pinion/variable 

Rack and pinion/variable 

Front brakes-diameter/thickness 

mm 

Disc 332/30 

Disc 365/36 

Rear brakes-diameter/thickness 

mm 

320/20 

345/24 

Air resistance (coefficient of drag) 

cd 

0.341 

0.351 

Top speed (electronically limited) 


130 

150 

Front tires 


255/55 R18 H XL RSC 

255/55 R18 H XL RSC 

Reartires 


255/55 R18 H XL RSC 

255/55 R18 H XL RSC 

Front rims 


8.5J x 18 LM 

8.5J x 18 LM 

Rear rims 


8.5J x 18 LM 

8.5J x 18 LM 

Battery/location 

Ah 

70/luggage comp 

70/luggage comp 

Alternator 

A/W 

150/2,100 

185/2,590 

Ground clearance 

mm 

215 

215 

Overhang, front/rear 

mm 

859/1,062 

859/1,062 

Width (mirrorto mirror) 

mm 

2,197 

2,197 

Rim offset 

mm 

46 

46 

Nose weight 

kg 

120 

120 


7 

E70 Introduction 

































































E70 Body Overview 


The E70 bodyshell has a number of technical highlights. For example, the B-pillar 
consists of tailor rolled blanks, which are hotformed and enable a high-strength weight 
saving of 2 kg per vehicle. 

This also increases performance in a crash. The torsional strength has been increased 
from 23,500 Nm/° (E53) to 27,000 Nm/° (E70). The bodyshell played a key role in 
achieving a rating of 5 stars in the NCAP crash test. Many reinforcements were made to 
the front end, Bpillarand rear end. This involved using high strength steels. 



Legend to graphic on next page. 


8 

E70 Introduction 


1 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

DX54D,DX56D, HC180BD,HC180YD 

7 

HC680C,HC540X 

2 

HC220BD,HC220YD 

8 

22M nB5 

3 

HC260BD,HC260YD 

9 

AIMg3M n, AIMg4,5M nO,4AC46000, AIM gSi 
AIMgO,4Sil,2, AISilOMgMn 

4 

HC300BD 

10 

Plastics 

5 

HC380LAD 

11 

Other metals 

6 

HC420LAD 




9 

E70 Introduction 




















The body structure is designed in line with the Euro NCAP front impact test, the Euro 
NCAP pole test and the UNCAP side impact test as well as the IIHS side impact and 
high-speed rear impact tests in the USA. 

Wherever possible, all situations occurring outside of legal requirements, and intended to 
ensure the protection of the passengers have been taken into consideration. 

In an impact at up to 15 km/h, the body structure remains undamaged. The separating 
cuts for repair are outside the B-pillar. To prevent corrosion, the sill beam is dried. 


10 

E70 Introduction 







At the front end, a sheet metal shell design modeled on the E53 has been used, but with 
a cast aluminum spring support. The advantages of this construction, in addition to the 
weight saving of 7-8 kg, include the smaller dimensions and the improved force input 
through different thicknesses and rib distribution. 

In addition, the sheet metal shell design is easierto repair, as individual components can 
be replaced. 



Repair Solution 

• Planned solution modeled on the E60 

• The punched rivet connections are drilled out, and then a blind rivet is used per 
punched rivet connection 

• Repair adhesive: Betamate BM 2096 

• Ensure corrosion protection (PVC coating). 


11 

E70 Introduction 




Frontal Impact 

In terms of passive safety, the developers of the E70 focused on developing an extremely 
stable passenger cell, which offers the passengers a greater level of safety in a crash at 
high speeds. 

This was achieved by distributing the forces exerted on the structure over the engine 
bracket and chassis to the passenger cell through several load paths, in orderto keep the 
load peaks low in the individual carrier structures. 

Specifically, this means the consistent use of the lead path from the wheel to the sill 
beam and distribution of the engine bracket loads to the A-pillar, sill beam and end-to- 
end side member structures. 

Regardless of the type of front impact, it was attempted to move the wheel in a straight 
line backwards to the sill beam. This results in a massive load path from the 
barrier/object hit through the wheel to the sill beam, which has been provided with a 
strong additional profile for this purpose (attachment of lateral side members). 

The engine bracket loads are routed from the bulkhead through the carrier support on the 
lower bulkhead and the tunnel coverto both the A-pillar and the respective other side of 
the vehicle. In addition, the carrier support on the lower bulkhead is also braced at the 
back by the closing plate on the tunnel. 

The connection between the engine bracket and the transmission carrier represents yet 
another load path. This means profiles that were required anyway have been optimally 
incorporated in achieving and increasing the performance. 



12 

E70 Introduction 


TKM-1153 



















To keep the load on the bulkhead and thus the height of the bulkhead intrusion generally 
low, the engine bracket has been designed so that it buckles in a specific place and 
triggers a deformation path. Loads that are routed through the wheel arch carrier 
supports to the bodyshell are distributed to the A-pillarand through the wheel arch carrier 
support reinforcement to the sill beam. 

This reduces the impact on the A-pillar and minimizes backwards movement. 

This design ensures, on the one hand, that the doors can still be opened even after high 
crash loads, and, on the other hand, prevents the doors from opening independently 
following overloading during the crash. 

The end-to-end side members beneath the floorpan make a significant contribution to 
the stability of the passenger cell. The bodyshell has been coordinated with the bumper 
system in such a way that the loads occurring during low speed crashes are completely 
absorbed by the bumper system. 

As soon as a critical crash speed is exceeded, the engine bracket begins to deform from 
the front. This behavior is the prerequisite for low repair costs. 


13 

E70 Introduction 



Side Impact 

In side impacts too, the bodyshell helps provide optimum protection of the passengers 
against injury. This is achieved by the precisely coordinated behavior of the sheet metal 
structure and the restraint system. The design of the E70 allows the B-pillarto remain as 
straight as possible in every tested load case and to penetrate the vehicle uniformly. 

The loads that occur are at their highest in the center of the B-pillar. To cope with this 
and yet not dispense with the idea of lightweight construction, the B-pillar reinforcement, 
which significantly influences the crash functionality, has been produced from a high- 
strength material which also exhibits a much higher wall thickness in the middle area than 
at the top and bottom ends due to the rolling process. 

The rest of the load is then distributed through the vehicle's cross-member structures. 
Thus, loads that occur above the base plate are routed to the opposite side of the vehicle 
from the impact side via the seat cross-members. Beneath the base plate, various other 
cross members perform this same function. 

In the roof area the same role is performed by the roof mirror or, on the panorama roof 
version, the roof system with its stiff side members and cross-members. 



14 

E70 Introduction 






Rigidity 

It was also possible to significantly improve 
the rigidity of the vehicle while still satisfy¬ 
ing the notion of lightweight construction 
by using the deep-lying wheel arch carrier 
supports, which are deflected to the 
center of the vehicle and have a rigid 
connection to the engine bracket. 

Another potential for increasing torsional 
strength was realized by connecting the 
wheel arch carrier support with the 
bumper cross member via the diagonal 
supports. This means the torsional 
strength of the entire front end of the E70 
has been improved through new carrier 
processes, without requiring more compo¬ 
nents or adding weight. 

It was also possible to significantly improve 
the rigidity by using a closed torsion ring 
around the D-pillar. 

The torsion ring essentially consists of the 
following components: rear roof brace, Ca¬ 
pillar, lateral side members and the cross¬ 
members in the base plate area. 

Another feature used to increase the 
torsional strength is the load-sharing, 
wedged tailgate. 

By applying tension to the hatch between 
the D-pillars, the hatch shell, with its pro¬ 
files, increases the rigidity. 



15 

E70 Introduction 


Pedestrian Protection 

In the E70, various measures have been taken towards pedestrian protection. 

1. The aluminum bonnet has a flexible design in case of head impact. 

2. The bonnet hinges have a disengaging mechanism in the direction of impact 

3. The module carrier of the side panel module is made of plastic and is very flexible in 
the direction of impact. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hood 

3 

Side panel module 

2 

Hood Hinge 




16 

E70 Introduction 










Side Panel Module 


The side panel module consists of the plastic side panel and the plastic module carrier. 
In addition, the side panel module also contains the washertank, the front headlight, the 
fog lamp, the auxiliary turn signal light, the wheel arch cover and the wheel arch finisher. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Auxiliary turn signal 

5 

Front headlight 

2 

Washertank 

6 

Front fog lamp 

3 

Module carrier 

7 

Washer pump 

4 

Side panel module support 




Alignment of the S ide Panel with the Hood 

The eccentric cam sets the position of the side panel between the side panel and the 
module carrier. 

Changing the Light Source 

The light source of the front headlight is changed through the engine compartment. 

To do this, insert your hand between the ribs of the module carrier and remove the cover 
from the headlight housing. The light source of the fog light is changed by first removing 
the side grill on the decorative strip. Through these openings, you can now reach in to 
change the light source. 


17 

E70 Introduction 













Front End 


The bodyshell structure has been lowered and the resulting space filled in with a plastic 
carrier structure (module carrier) with a plastic side panel. This separates the "soft" 
requirements of design and pedestrian protection from the "hard" requirements of rigidity, 
stability, high and low-speed crash performance. 



The lower wheel arch carrier support creates a space which is filled with a plastic module 
carrier. This module carrier holds various components: 

• Plastic side panel 

• Plastic module carrier 

• Water tank 

• Front headlight 

• Front fog lamp 

• Auxiliary turn signal light 

• Wheel arch cover 

• Wheel arch trim. 


18 

E70 Introduction 



Side Panel Module 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Auxiliary turn signal 

5 

Front headlight 

2 

Washer tank 

6 

Front fog lamp 

3 

Module carrier 

7 

Washer pump 

4 

Side panel module support 




19 

E70 Introduction 
















Cast Aluminum Spring Support 

The cast aluminum spring support of the 
E70 is distinguished primarily by the 
following features: 

• Lower weight through intelligent light¬ 
weight construction 

• Improved driving dynamics through 
increased rigidity 

• Fewer components and thus lower 
production costs. 

With the E70 a cast aluminum spring sup¬ 
port has been used in the carfront end, for 
the first time in the X-series. The cast alu¬ 
minum spring support absorbs the chassis 
forces and directs them to the body. 

Both the spring strut and the upper transverse link are attached to the spring support. 
This requires the component to be extremely rigid. 

This rigidity is achieved through improved material distribution, by only clustering material 
where it is necessary. The spring support thus makes a significant contribution to the 
driving characteristics, as it supports static and dynamic wheel forces. 

Since the casting construction method makes it possible to integrate many individual 
functions and components into a single part, this design is significantly more compact 
than the conventional shell-type design and helps reduce the weight. 

• Weight reduction of approximately 50% through lightweight construction using cast 
aluminum compared with conventional sheet metal design 

• Extra space compared with conventional sheet metal construction: 80 mm shorter 
front end 

• Functional design through specific local reinforcements; contribution to lightweight 
construction; robustness ofthe construction 

• Integration of various brackets for mounting assemblies, etc. in the component. 


20 

E70 Introduction 




The spring support is connected to the 
neighboring steel parts with a rivet and 
adhesive construction (e.g. longitudinal 
engine bracket). 

This construction reduces the weight and 
makes it possible to use fewer parts 
(no additional metal bracket). 

Despite this, the body is more stable with 
greater torsional strength and local rigidity 
is increased. 

This has a positive impact on improving 
driving dynamics. 

On the E53, this support was not made of 
aluminum, but ratherfrom a conventional 
metal shell construction. 

High-strength Materials 

Compared with its predecessor, the E70 
body plays a significant role in achieving 
the functional crash requirements through 
the consistent use of an innovative 
lightweight construction and the use of 
new materials technologies. 

In the chassis/body interface area, diecast 
aluminum was used to achieve stability 
and rigidity requirements. In the structure 
parts, micro-alloyed and dual phase steels 
were used for the respective front and rear 
impact requirements. 

The B-pillar reinforcement has been 
designed in hot-formed BTR material in 
orderto meet the side impact requirements. 



21 

E70 Introduction 


Leak-tightness 

The vehicle's leak-tightness against water, dust and gas affects the passenger compart¬ 
ment, luggage compartment, engine compartment and all sensitive components and 
assemblies. 

Driving Through Water 

When driving through water at high speeds, skidpan tests have shown that with water 
levels of up to 80 mm water shock does not cause any damage to the underbody area, to 
the body parts orto the front and rear aprons. 

When driving through water at low speeds, tests have shown that with water levels of up 
to 500 mm no water leaks into the passenger compartment or luggage compartment and 
that operating safety, in particular of all engine functions, is guaranteed. 

ShowerTest 

In the so-called "showertest", the numerous environmental conditions exerted on the 
vehicle during storage, transportation and operation are re-enacted. This includes, for 
example, sprinkling underairstream conditions,tropical rain, flooding and the US carwash 
test. 

Dust-tightness 

With this check, the vehicle is driven for around 20 km at a maximum speed of between 
30 km/h and 80 km/h on a dusty road. The ideal conditions are a very hot, dry climate 
with wind speeds of less than 18 km/h. 

This check is used to ascertain how well seals on moving parts preventthe penetration of 
dust, how much dust can enterthrough the ventilation system and how much dust can 
settle on external surfaces and in the engine compartment. 

Customer Benefit 

Protection of the body and its attachment parts against corrosion and preventing water 
and dust from entering the vehicle interior are key requirements of the complete vehicle, 
as every customer will notice if they are not fulfilled. 

At SOP, the E53 only offers 6 years' warranty against rust damage, while the E70 offers a 
12 year warranty against rust damage. 


22 

E70 Introduction 



Panorama Glass Sunroof 


By increasing the glass surface area when compared with the conventional sliding sun¬ 
roof by approximately 140%, the panorama glass sunroof improves the sense of space 
felt by the front, and for the first time, the rear passengers. 

The use of two movable roof panel headliners means that when the panorama roof is 
closed, the noise level inside the car is comparable to that of a car with a normal roof. 

With the roof open, a controlled net wind deflector ensures an acceptable background 
noise level at all driving speeds. The panorama roof is an internally operating slide/tilt 
sunroof with two glass lids and two roof panel headliners. 



The glass lids, roof panel headliners and wind deflector are fully electric and are 
addressed by the standard BMW sliding sunroof operations logic through a switch 
integrated in the FZD. 

• Open roof - Pull switch backwards 

• Close roof - Push switch forwards 

• Roof in ventilation setting - lift switch upwards. 

The direction of operation corresponds to the direction in which the component moves, 
and is thus easily comprehensible forthe customer. 

The speed-controlled net wind deflector offers two different adjustment heights which 
counteract the possible interference noise (low frequency "whining" at approximately 70 
km/h or high frequency "hissing" from approximately 120 km/h). 

The 50mm wide ventilation gap is at the front. The wind deflector is also moved by the 
sliding sunroof motor by means of a sophisticated mechanism. This means a further drive 
is not necessary (weight advantage). Between the outer roof panel and the glass lid, a 
special process means it is possible to achieve a gap of just 5.8 mm. 

23 

E70 Introduction 


Front Seats 

The following seat variants are offered forthe E70: 

• Fully electric basic seat 

• M ultifunction seat 

• Sports seat 

All seat variants have an integrated side airbag and a belt tensioner. The partially electric 
basic seat is operated by an operating lever and a switch on the seat, and the additional 
functions of the option are controlled via the switch center. 

The remaining three seat variants are operated via a control switch in conjunction with 
the control unit on the seat. 

Fully electric basic seat for driver and front passenger 

In addition to the functions of the partially electric basic seat, the fully electric basic seat 
also has: 

• electric forward / back adjustment of the seat 

• electric base cushion tilt adjustment (driver and front passenger) 

• memory function (for driver) 

• electric head restraint height adjustment. 


24 

E70 Introduction 



In addition to the options forthe partially electric basic seat, the following additional 
options are also available forthe driver and front passenger: 

• seat heating 

• lumbar support (height-adjustable). 

• ISO FIX front passenger's seat with key switch forfront passenger's airbag. 

Sports seat for driver and front passenger 

• electric forward / back adjustment of the seat 

• electric seat height adjustment 

• electric backrest angle adjustment 

• electric base cushion tilt adjustment 

• electric head restraint height adjustment 

• manual head restraint angle adjustment 

• manual depth adjustment of the seat 

• memory function (driver's seat only). 

Possible options forthe sports seat (driver and front passenger): 

• seat heating 

• lumbar support (height-adjustable). 

• ISO FIX front passenger's seat with key switch forfront passenger's airbag. 


25 

E70 Introduction 



Front Luxury Seats 

In addition to the functions of the fully electric basic seat, the multifunction seat also has 

• electric backrest-head adjustment 

• pneumatic lumbar support depth and height adjustment 

• electric head restraint height adjustment 

• luxury head restraint with manual lateral adjustment ("rest head restraint") 

• pyrotechnic active head restraint (from 09/08) 

• electric seat back width adjustment 

• electric depth adjustment of the seat 

• memory function for driver and front passenger. 

Possible options (driver and front passenger): 

• four-circuit seat heating 

• active seat 

• active seat ventilation including, seat heating. 

Active Seat Ventilation (Front Seat - option) 

This system ensures: 

• optimum seat climate 

• less sweat formation between seat and occupant. 

The improved cushion and cover design and active ventilation of the seats increases the 
climate-physiological well-being of the passengers. It is actuated via a control switch in 
the switch cluster. The indicator for activation is a blue LED. 

This option is only available in conjunction with the electrically adjustable front luxury 
option and the seat heating option for driver and front passenger. 

Active seat ventilation is split into the following components: 

• perforated cover in Nasca leather 

• seat heating 

• interlay knitted fabric for optimum air distribution 

• nine axial fans (4 in the backrest, 5 in the seat). 

Fans integrated in the foam part distribute the air inside the car across the seat and 
through the air permeable interlay of the seat heating and the perforated leather cover to 
the passenger/seat bearing surface. The seat heating is automatically activated by the 
seat control device and prevents the occupant from over-cooling. 

26 

E70 Introduction 



Sweat formation in the area between the occupant and the seat surface is avoided, as the 
humidity of the occupant is transported away. The seat climate is improved and prevents 
the driverfrom becoming tired. 



27 

E70 Introduction 



Rear Seats 


It was possible to reconcile the requirements for a larger passenger compartment (rear 
leg room, larger luggage compartment) and the desire for a 3rd row of seats in the 
vehicle's basic design. 

By increasing the leg room in the 2nd row of seats by approximately 40mm and the 
length of the luggage compartment by approximately 100 mm, the most part of the 
increase in vehicle length is of benefit inside the vehicle and makes it possible to offer a 
3rd row of seats. 

The seat systems of the E70 are consistently differentiated in 2 directions: 

• Series production: 5-seater 

• Option: 3rd row of seats with adjustable rear seats and fully collapsible 3rd row of 
seats in the luggage compartment. 

Thus, forthe first time, BMW is offering a larger transport capacity for up to 7 people. 

Basic Variant (with 2 rows of seats) 

This is a full foam seat with backrest and seat separation and a torso angle of 27° +/-1 0 . 
The separation ratio is 60/40. The backrest is unlocked via a handle on the backrest. 
The folding center arm rest contains a rigidly integrated, height-optimized head restraint 
and cup holder. 

The outer head restraints on the rear seats are manually adjustable. An insert block in 
each detent prevents the head restraints from dropping in the event of a crash. 

Option: 

• seat heating (three-stage switch, heat output as on E38; only in conjunction with 
front seat heating). 



28 

E70 Introduction 


3rd Row Seating (optional) 

This option is only available as ordered during production. A retrofitting option is not 
planned. 



2nd Row of Seats (in conjunction with 3rd row of seats) 

With this option, forward / back adjustment of the seat by 80 mm and a four-stage (12 °) 
backrest angle adjustment are possible. The Compact Fold function means the row of 
seats can be folded fully flat in the luggage floor. When the handle is activated, the seat 
backrest folds forwards and the seat cushion is lowered. 

With the additional Easy Entry function, a lever is activated to unlock the rear edge of the 
seat so that it folds forward as a whole, in order to enable easier access to the 3rd row of 
seats. If the row of seats is not locked properly, an indicator appears in the instrument 
cluster. 

The slightly shorter folding center armrest also contains the cup holder, while the head 
restraint is located in the backrest. 


29 

E70 Introduction 




3rd Row of Seats 

The 3rd row of seats is integrated into the luggage compartment. The seats can be fully 
recessed, individually if desired, to obtain a level luggage compartment floor. 

The ventilation or heater and 2 cup holders are integrated in the center console (in cold 
countries, these are included in the 3rd row of seats option, otherwise they come as an 
additional option), the arm rests are in the outside wall trim. 

On the C-pillarthere are recessed handles, which make it particularly easy for shorter 
people or children to climb in. Very good functional efficiency in terms of individual seat 
adjustments. Improved passenger compartment space/leg room in conjunction with the 
3rd row of seats. The 3rd row of seats is ideal for people up to 160 cm tall. 




30 

E70 Introduction 


TKQ 611 xP 


Center Console 


The new butterfly lid system offers better operating convenience, as when one lid is 
opened, the other can simultaneously be used as an armrest. 

• Butterfly lid for storage tray in center console 

• Accentuation with decor strips 

• Large cup holder. 

The center console contains the iDrive button, the electric gear selection switch, the 
switch for the hand brake and a small storage tray. In addition, there are concealed cup 
holders with a storage tray or ashtray and a cigarette lighter as well as the storage tray 
underthe butterfly lid. 

The ventilation grill forthe rear area and, optionally, the screen forthe rear seat 
entertainment system are also integrated into the center console. The roomy storage tray 
in the center console has an audio Aux-ln socket as standard, for connecting an external 
audio device (e.g. MP3 player), and a storage package with lighting and 12 V socket can 
also be integrated as an option. 

A telephone with upwards folding eject box is also available as an option. 

• Butterfly lid 

The two lids can be opened separately at the push of a button. The buttons are located 
on the front of the console, each directly to the right or left beneath the lid. The lid opens 
automatically with a spring, eitherfrom the centerto the left orto the right respectively. 
The lids are closed manually, also separately. 

• Cup holder and storage tray/smoker pack - In the front part of the center console 
there is a 2 compartment tray, covered by sliding rolls. These meet in the middle 
and can be opened to the front or back with two small handles. In the front area, 
there is a storage tray or, optionally, an ashtray with a cigarette lighter (smoker pack). 
In the rear part there are two large cup holders. 


31 

E70 Introduction 



DoorTrim 



The doortrim has the following features: 

• 2-part decor strip for high-quality appearance 

• Leathertrim handle (option: Nevada leather and option: Nappa exclusive leather), 
basic: soft paint; Handle bracket in 2-component technology. 

• Ambient lighting in the door handle and in the door pocket (option) 

• Handle shell for driver's door. The new handle shell in the driver's door has improved 
the ergonomics. The arrangement of the door switch clusterfor operating the 
powerwindows, forexample, is significantly improved. The new ambient lighting 
(option) gives a better impression of space at night. 

• Doorhandle and decorstrip - Both components form one unit within the capping. 
There are no visible screw connections. 

• Ambient lighting (option) 

Indirect lighting, as soon as the driving light is switched on, by LED on rear door 
handle and strip light in door pocket in Bernstein colortone. 


32 

E70 Introduction 




• Trim options - Capping always black (laminated with PVCPP film) with 2-part decor 
strip (top: aluminum, painted plastic or real wood; bottom, decor strip: pearlescent 
chrome), doorhandle lever: pearlescent chrome, decor strip with central cover, 
softpad, door pull shell, handle: 4 variants of material for center cover (standard: fab¬ 
ric; Option: Nevada leather, artificial leather, Nappa exclusive leather), 3 variants of 
softpad (standard: artificial leather; Option: Nevada leather, Nappa exclusive leather), 
4 world colors (beige, tobacco, grey, black), decor strip laminated with PVC-PP film. 
Handle, see above 

2 variants of loudspeakerfinisher strip (number and variants depend on option and 
country) for front mid-range speaker, rear mid-range speakers and tweeters: 
expanded metal, metal-effect plastic. Tweeter cover only in expanded metal. 

The new design focuses on quality, variety and functional efficiency. In addition, the 
customer has more design options through the new 2-part strip. The ambient lighting 
creates a more pleasant atmosphere, and access to the control panel is made easier. 


33 

E70 Introduction 



Glove Box 

The glove box has also been further developed in comparison to the E53. 

• Better position 

• Greater volume 

• Easierto open and close 

There are two lids for opening and closing the glove box. It locks automatically when the 
vehicle is locked. The volume of the glove box is bigger, as the airbag has been moved 
closerto the windshield. The new position makes it easierto look into, easierto access 
and allows for better storage. The glove box no longer has its own lock cylinder. 

As an option, a multimedia changer or a CD changer are offered, which are fitted in the 
left hand area. When open, the glove box is illuminated. The on-board folder can be 
accommodated in the glove box. 

Both lids are opened via a button on the left next to the glove box. This is located under 
the center grill, integrated in the right-hand end of the lower accent strip. The lids are 
coupled with each other, they automatically open upwards or downwards at the push of a 
button thanks to the integrated electronics. 

They are closed manually. The link between them means it is only necessary to push 
one of the two lids. They are automatically locked when the vehicle is closed. The view 
into and access to the glove box is improved due to its higher position. The glove box 
also offers a larger volume for storing various objects. It is easierto keep tidy. 

The glove box in the E70 offers greater security in the event of a break-in, as it can only 
be opened in conjunction with normal unlocking of the vehicle. There is significantly 
better access to the CD/DVD changer in comparison with the E53. 

Rollers unblind (Rear Doors) 

The roller sunblind is available as a partforthe rear door windows. It is operated manually 
in a simple process. The roller sunblind offers protection from the sun's rays and camou¬ 
flage of the rear area from outside. The position is either fully closed or fully open. 

The roller sunblind covers the retractable and fixed side windows in the rear door. 


34 

E70 Introduction 




Luggage Compartment 

Compared with the E53, the E70 offers the following advantages: 

• Larger load volume 

• Improved functional efficiency 

• Extensive additional storage options. 

The design and size of the luggage compartment have been significantly improved 
compared with the E53. The design of the two-part tailgate has been retained and 
improved. 

The use of run flat tires as standard means a spare wheel is no longer necessary 
(emergency wheel on 5-seater available as an option). This means the "lift over" height 
has been lowered, and generous storage spaces created underthe flat luggage compart¬ 
ment floor (not with emergency wheel option). 

The luggage floor is opened with the help of a gas spring. The 3rd row of seats option 
can be fully recessed into the luggage compartment floor. The optional storage package 
includes useful items such as lashing rails with 4 adjustable lashing eyes, a lockable 
luggage compartment floor, as well as stowage nets, bag hooks, a light for the storage 
compartment in the center console and anti-slip inserts in the front door pockets. 

Instead of the luggage compartment cover, it is possible to fit a combi-roller with 
additional integrated load-area separating net behind the 2nd row of seats. 

If the 2nd row of seats is folded, a loose net can be fitted to protect against loads behind 
the 1st row of seats. This is available as a special accessory. The options can be 
combined entirely according to owner specification, except for combining the 3rd row of 
seats and the emergency wheel. 


36 

E70 Introduction 




Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hatch for access to change bulb, hazard warning 
triangle, and control units. Storage option 
depending on equipment level 

3 

Large storage tray. Not in conjunction with 
emergency wheel option/3rd row of seats option 

2 

Storage tray 




37 

E70 Introduction 












Index 

Explanation 

1 

Storage shelf 

2 

On-board tool kit 

3 

Installation area for control units: 

Hi-fi amplifier,TCU, reversing camera etc. 


38 

E70 Introduction 













Specifications 

E70 

E53 (w/o levelling system) 

Liftover height (mm) 

769 

803 

Garage dimensions, open tailgate 

1,879 

1,869 

Tailgate storage shelf dimensions 

2,124 

2,083 

Largest luggage compartment width 

1,258 

1,250 

Smallest width between wheel arches 

1,098 

1,065 

Height of the load area 

863 

845 

Width of the load area 

1,114 

1,180 

Load volume 

589 

510 

Same with 3rd row seats 

516 


Load volume, maximum 

1,680 

1,550 


Improved practicality and variability. Thanks to the integrated gas spring, it is easy to load 
the additional storage space, as the luggage floor can be opened with one hand and little 
effort. 

In general, the storage space is therefore easily accessible. The load volume has 
increased by 79 liters or 130 liters compared with the E53. 


39 

E70 Introduction 



































Tailgate 


Modified Wedge System 

The tailgate of the E70 is split in two in exactly the same way as the tailgate on the E53. 
However, the wedge system is differentfrom that of the E53. This wedge system was 
copied from the E61 and must be adjusted correctly. 

It is important to note that there must be a system or initial stress between the wedge 
and the limit position in order to guarantee the full effectiveness of the system. 

This adjustment can be carried out from inside with the tailgate closed. However, it can 
also be carried out from outside with the tailgate open. 

As the tailgate is relatively heavy, a combination of gas springs and barrel springs is used 
to ensure operating convenience (spindle system). The hinges forthe lower hatch can be 
separated at the lower part of the hinge. 



40 

E70 Introduction 






The lowertailgate is no longer unlocked electrically as on the E53, but mechanically via a 
release lever. The automatic soft-close on the tailgate above is not integrated into the 
lock as on the E53, but is designed as an automatic soft-close clamping bracket. 


41 

E70 Introduction 


TK05-1152 


