Table of Contents 

E70 Car Access System 3 (CAS 3) 

Subject Page 

Car Access System 3.3 

History of the Car Access System .3 

IPO Car Access System 3 (CAS 3) .4 

System Circuit Diagram - CAS 3 .6 

Functional Overview .8 

Terminal Control .9 

Terminal Control (in Comfort Access).9 

Electronic Vehicle Immobilizer 3 (EWS 3).10 

Electronic Vehicle Immobilizer4.10 

Design of EWS 4 .10 

Start Enable through EWS .11 

Data Transmission .12 

Secret Key.12 

Gearbox Enable .13 

Start Value Matching .13 

Emergency Release .13 

Vehicle Data Storage.14 

Data for Condition-based Service.14 

Manual Update of CBS Data .14 

Manual Update of Fault Memory Data.14 

Control Unit Replacement.15 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 


Revision Date: 
























Car Access System 3 


Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

■MICTIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand the operation ofthe Car Access System (CAS3) in the E70 

• Locate and identify CAS components in the E70 


2 

E70 Car Access System 3 


Car Access System 3 


The Car Access System now features the 3rd generation of control units. The electronic 
vehicle immobilized (EWS 4) is also used in connection with the Car Access System 3. 
The previous functions of the electronic vehicle immobilizer 3 have been retained. 

The Car Access System 3 can therefore be operated togetherwith the electronic vehicle 
immobilizer 3 or4. The digital motor electronics and the Car Access System 3 are 
incorporated in the overall electronic vehicle immobilizer system in the E70. 

In addition, the electronic transmission control is used as a further immobilizer in the 
E70. The electronic vehicle immobilized improves the antitheft properties of the 
vehicle. A longer cryptic code is used forthe data exchange. 

The cryptic code provides the enable to start the engine. The Car Access System 3 is 
backwards compatible with the Car Access System 2. This means the functions of the 
Car Access System 2 are also included in the Car Access System 3. 

The electronic vehicle immobilizer3 orthe electronic vehicle immobilizer4 is used 
depending on the engine installed and the associated digital engine management. 

The table below shows the assignment of the engine managementto the respective 
electronic vehicle immobilizer. 


Vehicle 

Launch Date 

Engine 

Engine 

Management 

EWS function 

E70 

10/06 

N62B4801 

ME9.2.3 

EWS 3 

E70 

10/6 

N52B30O1 

MSV80 

EWS 4 


History of the Car Access System 

The Car Access System was used forthe firsttime in the E65 (03/2002). It has 
undergone continuous further development and has been successively introduced 
in various BMW models. 

The models include: 

• E66 as from 09/2003 

• E60 as from 03/2003 

• E63 as from 09/2003 

• E61 as from 04/2004 

• E64 as from 04/2004 

• E90 as from 03/2005 

• E91 as from 09/2005. 

• E60 M 5 as from 03/2005 

• E63 M 6 as from 03/2005 


3 

E70 Car Access System 3 






















IPO Car Access System 3 (CAS 3) 



The Car Access System 3 (2) is responsible forterminal control. For instance "Terminal 
15 ON" is made available to the intelligent battery sensor (4). The terminal status, e.g. 
"Terminal R ON/terminal R OFF", can be selected with the START-STOP button (11). 

The Car Access System 3 provides the start enable for the starter (5) in connection with 
the digital motor electronics 3 and the brake light switch (13). 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hood contact switch 

10 

Telematics Control Unit 

2 

Car Access System 3 

11 

START-STOP button 

3 

Digital Motor Electronics 

12 

Central Lock Button 

4 

Intelligent Battery Sensor 

13 

Brake Light Switch 

5 

Starter 

14 

Dynamic Stability Control 

6 

J unction BoxControl Unit 

CAS-bus 

CAS-bus 

7 

Identification Transmitter 

K-CAN 

Body-CAN 

8 

Terminal 15 

PT-CAN 

Powertrain-CAN 

9 

Electronic Outer Door Handle Module 




4 

E70 Car Access System 3 






































System Circuit Diagram - CAS 3 



6 

E70 Car Access System 3 








































































Legend for System Circuit Diagram - CAS 3 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

i — 1 

Car Access System 3 

KL15_3 

Terminal 15 (output 3) 

2 

Electronic Transmission Control Module 

KL15 Wup 

Terminal 15 (wake-up) 

3 

Hood contact switch 

KL30 

Terminal 30 

4 

Dynamic Stability Control 

KL30g 

Terminal 15 (switched) 

5 

Digital M otor E lectronics 

KL30g_f 

Terminal 15 (switched, fault) 

6 

J unction Box Control Unit 

KL50L 

Terminal 50 load 

7 

Footwell Module (FRM) 

KL54 

Signal, brake light switch 

8 

Central-lock button/hazard warning switch 

KL54T 

Signal, brake light switch 

9 

Comfort Access (CA) 

CAS-bus 

CAS-bus 

10 

Remote control receiver in diversity module 

D-CAN 

Diagnosis CAN 

11 

START-STOP button 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

12 

Holder 

PT-CAN 

Powertrain CAN 

13 

Brake Light Switch (BLS) 

A S 
START 

Start/Start termination DME 

KLR 

Terminal R 

FBD 

Remote control services 

KLR 

ACSM 

Terminal R, Advanced Crash Safety 
Management 

WUP 

FBD 

Wake-up, remote control services 

KL15_1 

Terminal 15 (output 1) 

EWS 3 

Electronic Vehicle Immobilizer 3 

KL15_2 

Terminal 15 (output 2) 

EWS 4 

Electronic Vehicle Immobilizer4 


7 

E70 Car Access System 3 











































































Functional Overview 

The Car Access System 3 is responsible for many functions, including the masterforthe 
following functions: 

• Central locking 

• Powerwindows 

• Panoramic glass roof 

• Comfort Access 

The Car Access System 3 enables or interrupts the execution of the aforementioned 
functions. 


The control units which execute the functions are: 

J unction Box control unit 

Central Locking 

Footwell Module 

PowerWindows 

Roof Functions Center 

Panoramic Glass Roof 

Comfort Access 

Comfort Access 


Furtherfunctions are integrated in the Car Access System 3. 
They are: 

• Terminal control 

• Electronic vehicle immobilized 

• Vehicle data storage 


8 

E70 Car Access System 3 













Terminal Control 

The remote control must be inserted and locked in its slot in orderto activate terminal 
control. The vehicle then automatically receives the terminal status "terminal R ON." 
The terminals can now be changed with the START-STOP button in the following order: 

• Terminal 15 

• Terminal R 

• Terminal 30 

• Terminal R 

• Terminal 15 

Note: This order is only possible when the brake pedal has not been pressed 
on automatic transmission vehicles. As soon as the brake pedal is 
pressed, the engine will start the next time the START-STOP button is 
pressed. 

Terminal Control (in Comfort Access) 

On vehicles equipped with Comfort Access, the identification transmitter need only be 
located in the vehicle interior and need not be inserted in the holder. The identification 
transmitter is detected by the antennas in the vehicle interior. Provided the vehicle was 
left in a correct manner, the terminal selection will start with the status "terminal 30". 
Provided the brake pedal has not been pressed, it is now possible to switch through 
the terminals one afterthe other by pressing the START-STOP button. 


9 

E70 Car Access System 3 



Electronic Vehicle lmmobilizer3 (EWS 3) 


The familiarfunctions of the previous electronic vehicle immobilizer 3 have been retained. 
The Car Access System 3 is integrated in the system network via the K-CAN. The vehi¬ 
cle key data are read into the Car Access System 3 via the key slot. 

Pin 20 is used in connection with the Car Access System 3. The enable code is 
signalled to the digital motor management via this pin. 

The Car Access System 3 contains the start relay that is activated by means of an 
integrated circuit. The integrated circuit is informed via a separate line (A_S_Start) that the 
digital engine electronics is ready to start. Furthermore, the start procedure is terminated 
via the A_S_Start line if the engine does not start up because, for example, there is a fault 
in the PT-CAN system. Data transmission is unidirectional. 

Electronic Vehicle Immobilized 

The electronic vehicle immobilizer 4 is an immobilizer system that prevents unauthorized 
engine start. It was used forthe first time in the Car Access System 3 in the E92. 

The electronic vehicle immobilizer4 uses a new, modern encryption system. A 128 bit 
long secret key is assigned to each vehicle and stored in the BMW database. This secret 
key is known only to BMW. The secret key is programmed and locked in the Car Access 
System 3 and in the digital engine management. 

Once entered in the control unit, the secret key can no longer be changed, deleted or 
read. This therefore means that each control unit is assigned to a specific vehicle. 

The electronic vehicle immobilizer 4 operates with bidirectional and redundant data 
transmission. The K-CAN (CAN protocol) and CAS-bus (K-bus protocol) are used forthis 
purpose. 

Pin 30 of the Car Access System 3 serves as the connection to the CAS-bus. 

The redundant data transmission enables operation of the electronic vehicle immobilizer 
even if a bus system fails due to a defect. 

Design of EWS 4 

The vehicle immobilizer consists of the identification transmitter which identifies itself to 
the vehicle and therefore to the Car Access System 3. The Car Access System 3 
exchanges data via the CAS-bus with the digital motor electronics and thus cancels the 
immobilizerfunction. 

The software forthe electronic vehicle immobilizeras well as the enable forthe starter is 
resident in the CAS 3. The digital engine management is responsible for issuing the 
enable forthe ignition and fuel injection. 

The gearboxfunctions are enabled by the electronic transmission control. The remote 
control or the identification transmitter must be identified as matching the vehicle before 
the electronic vehicle immobilizer issues the start enable. This already takes place before 
a vehicle is unlocked. 

10 

E70 Car Access System 3 



A renewed check (authentication) must be performed as soon as an attempt is made to 
start the engine. The check establishes whetherthe remote control matches the vehicle 
or the identification transmitter is located in the vehicle interior. 

The vehicle can be started if the check is successful. Authentication starts with the 
status "Terminal 15 ON". 

Note: The start enable can be given only by a remote control matching the 
vehicle ora suitable identification transmitter. 

Start Enable through EWS 

The start procedure is enabled by means of a special request and response procedure 
known as challenge-response. As from "Terminal 15 ON", the digital engine 
management sends an encrypted random numberto the CAS 3. The digital engine 
management generates the random number in a random number generator. 


CAS-Bus 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Car Access System 3 

4 

J unction Box Control Unit 

2 

Digital Motor Electronic 

5 

Key Slot 

3 

Electronic Transmission Control 

6 

START-STOP Button 


11 

E70 Car Access System 3 

















From this random numbertogether with its secret key, the Car Access System calculates 
a response and sends it to the digital engine management. In the meantime, the digital 
engine management calculates the expected response from the random number with its 
secret key. 

The Car Access System 3 and the digital engine management use the same secret key 
and algorithm for the calculation. The electronic vehicle immobilizer is cancelled if the 
value which the CAS 3 sends to the digital engine management agrees with the value 
calculated by the engine management. 

The engine can now be started. 

Note: As from "Terminal 15 ON", a cyclic query (challenge-response) is per¬ 
formed as long as the engine is notyet running. A fault code is entered 
in the CAS 3 if there is no query from the digital engine management 
approximately 10 seconds after the start of the request. 

Data Transmission 

Data transmission is redundant via the bus systems. The signal from the digital engine 
management reaches the CAS 3 via the K-CAN and the CAS-bus. The digital engine 
management, however, is connected to the PT-CAN. Forthis reason, the signal is sent 
via the gateway of the junction box control unit to the K-CAN. The runtime ofthe signals 
via the bus systems is of no significance as the signal that reaches the digital engine 
management first is used forthe electronic vehicle immobilizer. 

The authentication is repeated in response to following events: 

• Transmission and response time exceeded 

• Transmission problems 

• Response with the secret security code incorrect 

(e.g. incorrect secret key due to control unit from another vehicle). 

Secret Key 

The control units are assigned a secret key on the assembly line. This secret key is 
generated from a random number. The secret key is valid fora pair of control units and 
linked to the specific vehicle. This means that one pair of control units receives the same 
secret key. Once the secret key has been entered, the control unit is locked. From this 
point on, the control unit is permanently tied to this secret key and the vehicle. 

The CAS 3 and the digital motor electronics form one pair of control units. 

Note: Since the control units are assigned to the specific vehicle, replacement 
with a unit from another vehicle is not possible. When replacing a con¬ 
trol unit, the new control unit must be ordered from BMW. Matching of 
the control units to each other is no longer necessary. 


12 

E70 Car Access System 3 



Gearbox Enable 


The enable is based on a procedure similarto that used forEWS 3. As from "Terminal 
15 ON", the CAS 3 sends encrypted individual codes to the electronic transmission 
control. The electronic transmission control deciphers and checks these individual 
codes. If the check is successful, the gearbox control unitwill enable the gearbox 
functions. 

The electronic gearbox control unit forms a pair of control units togetherwith the CAS 3. 

Start Value Matching 

A start value matching procedure between the CAS 3 and the electronic transmission 
control is performed on the assembly line. As part of this procedure, the CAS 3 transfers 
in encrypted form an individual code to the electronic transmission control. 

Consequently, the electronic transmission control knows the individual code and can 
check whetherthe gearbox functions can be enabled. 


Emergency Release 

The parking lock cannot be released in the 
event of a defect or data transmission error. 
Forthis reason, the E70 features a mechanical 
emergency release facility for the parking lock. 
A handle forthe emergency release of the 
parking lock is located in the luggage com¬ 
partment. 

This handle must be plugged in underthe left 
cup holder, turned through 90° and pushed 
down. The gearbox is released as soon as the 
handle has been locked in position. 

The vehicle can now be towed but not driven. 

Note: The handle must remain locked in 
position while the vehicle is being 
towed. The parking lock will 
engage if the handle is removed 
while the vehicle is being towed. 
This could cause an accident in 
unfavorable towing situations. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Turn Handle 

2 

Push Handle 


13 

E70 Car Access System 3 







Vehicle Data Storage 

The Car Access System 3 stores the following vehicle data: 

• Personal Profile, the Car Access System 3 stores data forthe Personal Profile 

• Vehicle order, the vehicle order is stored in the footwell module 

• Redundant data storage for instrument cluster 

• Data for condition-based service CBS 

• Authentication for diagnosis access to vehicle 

Data for Condition-based Service 

The data for condition-based service are stored and transferred to the remote control. 
This data can be read out via the key readerfor service purposes. The data forthe 
condition-based service are updated during vehicle operation. 

The data in the fault code memory are also updated during vehicle operation. 

The conditions are: 

• "Terminal 15 ON", Speed above 50 km/h and below 30 km/h 

• The data are updated after covering a distance of 10 km and at a speed below 30 
km/h. 

Manual Update of CBS Data 

The procedure for transferring current data to the remote control during servicing is as 
follows: 

• Insert remote control in its holder 

• Press and hold center-lock button and select "terminal 15 ON" with the START- 
STOP button. 

• After 15 s the CBS data will have been transferred to the remote control. 

• Read out remote control. 

Manual Update of Fault Memory Data 

The procedure for transferring current data to the remote control during servicing is as 
follows: 

• Press and hold center-lock button 

• Insert remote control in its holder 

• Select "Terminal 15 ON" with the START-STOP button 

• The fault code memory data are transferred to the remote control after 15 seconds. 

• Read out remote control. 

14 

E70 Car Access System 3 



Control Unit Replacement 

A defect in the control units belonging to the EWS represents a challenge forthe Service 
technician. Since a defective control unit cannot be replaced by control units from other 
vehicles particular care is necessary when performing the diagnostic procedure. 

A defective control unit can be ordered through spare part channels. However, it is 
importantto bear in mind that the digital engine management and the CAS 3 were 
supplied already coded to the vehicle. 

This has the advantage that only the control unit is replaced and the matching procedure 
with the electronic vehicle immobilizer is not necessary. There is no point in ordering a 
control unit to be kept in stock as the secret key is assigned to the control unit and the 
vehicle. 

A matching procedure is necessary forthe electronic transmission control after 
replacement. As part of this procedure, the CAS 3 transfers the individual code to the 
electronic transmission control. 

Note:The matching procedure can take several minutes. 


15 

E70 Car Access System 3 




