Table of Contents 

E70 Comfort Access 

Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

System Overview .5 

Input/Output .5 

System Circuit Diagram .6 

System Components.8 

Control Unit.8 

Control Elements.9 

ID Transmitter.9 

Voltage M onitoring .9 

Data for Conditioned Based Service.9 

Antennas for Comfort Access.10 

Antenna Installation Locations.10 

Exterior Antennas.10 

Interior Antennas .10 

Luggage Compartment Antenna .10 

Outside Door Handle Electronics Module .11 

Sensors .11 

Capacitive Sensor 1.11 

Capacitive Sensor2.11 

Outside DoorHandle Hall Sensor.11 

Door Locks .12 

Principles of Operation.13 

Function Sequence.13 

Passive Entry .13 

Signal Path for Comfort Access.14 

Unlocking Sequence .15 

Passive Entry for UpperTailgate .15 

Passive Go .15 

Issuing Start Enable.15 

Passive Exit.16 

Locking Procedure.16 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 


Revision Date: 


































Subject Page 

Special Functions .17 

Two ID transmitters Remain Inside the Vehicle .17 

The ID Transmitter Inside the Luggage Compartment.17 

Starting Engine without ID Transmitter .17 

Check Control M essage,Terminal 15 .18 

Unintentional Wake-up Function.18 

Locking with Engine Running.18 










Comfort Access 


Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

IBIICT1WIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the Comfort Access system in the E70 X5 

• Locate all the components used in the system 


3 

E70 Comfort Access 



Introduction 

Using Comfort Access the customer can unlock and open the vehicle without active use 
of the ID transmitter. It is unimportant how the customer wishes to access the vehicle. It 
is important that the ID transmitter be located in the vehicle's immediate vicinity (approxi¬ 
mately. 2m). It is sufficient to have the ID transmitter somewhere on your person. 

Comfort Access was first introduced on the E65 (03/2002). The system was then gradu¬ 
ally introduced on different BMW models. 

These models are: 

• E87 from 09/2004 

• E90 from 03/2005 

• E60 from 09/2005 

• E61 from 09/2005 

• E63 from 09/2005 

• E64 from 09/2005 

• E91 from 09/2005 

• E92 from 05/2006. 

Comfort Access is available on the E70 from SOP (Start of Production). 

The benefits of Comfort Access are: 

• High level of convenience when unlocking and locking the vehicle 

• Q uick and easy access to the vehicle 

• Easy engine start/shutdown 

• Maximum comfort for the driver 

• No more annoying hunting for keys. 

The system is based on the Comfort Access on the E90/E91. Inserting a hand into the 
handle recess of the outside door handle unlocks and then opens the vehicle. The vehi¬ 
cle is locked by touching the sensitive area of the outside doorhandle. 

Forvehicles fitted with Soft Close Automatic, the Soft Close Automatic drive fully closes 
the vehicle door. The sensitive area can then be used to lock the vehicle. 

To allow the engine to start, an ID transmitter must be located in the vehicle interior. This 
being the case, when the START-STOP button is pressed, the engine starts and the 
vehicle is ready for use. 


4 

E70 Comfort Access 





System Overview 

Input/Output 


i 



4a 



o 


8 

4. 


7 

5i 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Driver's door lock cylinder 

7 

Interior antenna x5 

2 

Lock with door contact x 4 

8 

Outside doorhandle electronics module 

3 

Footwell module FRM 

9 

START-STOP button 

4 

Car Access System 3 CAS 3 

10 

ID transmitter 

5 

J unction box control unitj B 

K-CAN 

BodyCAN 

6 

Comfort access CA 

CAS-Bus 

CAS-bus (K-bus protocol) 



5 

E70 Comfort Access 










































System Circuit Diagram 



6 

E70 Comfort Access 



































































Legend for System Circuit Diagram 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Driver's door lock cylinder, Outside door handle 
electronics 

10 

Rear window with antenna for remote 
control functionality 

2 

Footwell module FRM 

11 

Luggage compartment antenna 

3 

Car Access System 3 CAS 3 

12 

Rear driver's side outside 
door handle electronics 

4 

J unction box control unitj B 

13 

ID transmitter slot 

5 

Front-passenger outside door handle electronics 

14 

START-STOP button 

6 

Passenger-side outside doorhandle electronics 
inside 

15 

Front interior antenna 

7 

Luggage compartment antenna 

16 

Rear interior antenna 

8 

Comfort access CA 

17 

F B D antenna amplifier in diversity module 

9 

Luggage compartment antenna 
outside tailgate area 




7 

E70 Comfort Access 







System Components 

Control Unit 

The Comfort Access control unit is located at the rear right ofthe luggage compartment. 

Comfort Access controls the transmit antennas for the exterior and interior. 

The signals from the outside doorhandle electronics modules are read in and trans¬ 
ferred via the CAS bus to the Car Access System 3. 


1 2 3 4 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Comfort Access 

4 

Vertical Dynamic Management 

2 

Trailer module 

5 

Electronic ride-height control 

3 

Park Distance Control 




8 

E70 Comfort Access 















Control Elements 


ID Transmitter 

The ID transmitter for Comfort Access must be actuated by means of a radio signal. The 
ID transmitter is therefore equipped with a receiver for the coded 125 kHz radio signal 
that is transmitted by the outside doorhandle electronics module. The radio signal 
enables the ID transmitterto register with the vehicle (authentication). 

Forthis purpose, the ID transmitter emits a coded 868 MHz high-frequency signal to 
enable identification of the ID transmitter as being valid and belonging to the vehicle. 

The ID transmitter is exclusively responsible for use of Comfort Access. 

The ID transmitter for Comfort Access has a battery, representing the externally identifi¬ 
able difference compared to the remote control which features an integrated recharge¬ 
able battery. The service life of the battery in the ID transmitter is about 2 years. 


Voltage Monitoring 

The ID transmitter monitors its own battery voltage. 

The battery voltage is monitored in 2 stages. 

The first stage signals to the Car Access System 3 that 
the battery is flat. In response, the Car Access System 3 
generates a check control message.The check control 
message informs the customerthatthe battery needs to 
be changed. 



If the battery is not changed, the voltage monitoring 
facility switches to the second stage. This means that 
the data in the ID transmitter are saved. The ID transmit¬ 
ter is then set "inoperable". 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

U nlock button for mechanical key 

2 

Battery compartment 


Data for Conditioned Based Service 

When terminal status "terminal 15 ON" is selected, data forthe Conditioned Based 
Service is transferred to the ID transmitter using the interior antennas. The ID transmitter 
then confirms that the transmission was received. 


9 

E70 Comfort Access 











Antennas for C omfort Access 

Nine antennas are built in for Comfort Access. 

Four of these can be found in the outside doorhandle electronics modules and five in 
the vehicle interior/luggage compartment. 

The antennas forthe exterior and interior are inductive antennas and have a ferrite core 
The antenna transmission frequency is 125 kHz. All messages that are sent via the 
antennas are encrypted. 

Antenna Installation Locations 
Exterior Antennas 

The exterior antennas are installed in the following locations on the E70: 

• Front and rear driver's side outside doorhandle electronics 

• Front and rear passenger-side outside doorhandle electronics 
The antenna characteristic gives 2m of coverage around the vehicle. 

Interior Antennas 

The interior antennas are installed in the following locations on the E70: 

• Passenger compartment, front 

• Passenger compartment, center 

• Luggage compartment, left and right 

• Luggage compartment, nearto the load edge, middle. 

The antenna characteristic is spherical. The entire vehicle interior is covered by the 
front and middle antennas. 

Luggage Compartment Antenna 

The luggage compartment antennas are of the same design as the interior antennas. 
The antenna characteristic is configured so that the antennas in the luggage compart¬ 
ment coverthat whole area. 


Interior Antenna 



10 

E70 Comfort Access 


Outside Door Handle Electronics Module 


The outside door handle is connected to terminal 30g and works inside a voltage range 
of 9 V to 16 V. 

The outside door handle electronics module is connected to the vehicle via the CAS bus 
thus making available the information from the capacitive sensors and the Hall sensor. 

With the aid of the 3 sensors, the electronic outside door handle module detects the 
status of the outside doorhandle. Each change in the status of the outside doorhandle 
module triggers the corresponding function. 

These functions are: 

• Trigger pulse by inserting a hand into the handle recess of the outside door handle; 
Capacitive sensor 1 

• Unlock request by pulling the outside door handle; Hall sensor 

• Lock request by touching the sensitive area on the outside doorhandle; Capacitive 
sensor2 

Sensors 

To protect the battery, the outside doorhandle electronics module switches off the 
capacitive sensors forthe driver's side after 192 hours when the vehicle is at rest. The 
passenger-side capacitive sensors are switched off after 72 hours. 

Capacitive Sensor 1 

A pulse is generated when a hand is inserted into the handle recess of the outside door 
handle.The pulse wakes up the electronic circuitry in the outside door handle. 

If the vehicle is in sleep mode, the electronics module will wake up the Comfort Access 
and Car Access System 3. This involves the outside doorhandle electronics module 
sending out a wake-up signal via the CAS-bus. 

Comfort Access permanently switches on the remote control receiver in orderto receive 
the data sent from the ID transmitter. 

Capacitive Sensor2 

Touching the sensitive area generates a signal from the capacitive sensor 2 until contact 
ceases. The electronic module in the outside door handle sends the request via the CAS 
bus.The request is to lock the vehicle. 

Outside Door Handle Hall Sensor 

The Hall sensor is a backup system for capacitive sensor 1. After 192 hours, the outside 
doorhandle electronics in the driver's door enter sleep mode. This period begins when 
the vehicle is locked or unlocked. The Hall sensor remains operational fora longer period. 

Sleep mode reduces the power consumption of the outside doorhandle electronics by 
switching off the capacitive sensors. By pulling twice on the outside doorhandle (two Hall 
sensor status changes) the vehicle is unlocked. 


11 

E70 Comfort Access 



Note: Both outside doorhandle electronics modules on the passenger-side 
and the rear outside door handle electronics module on the driver's side 
switch off afteronly 72 hours. 

Door Locks 

The capacitive sensor 1 initiates the vehicle unlocking procedure. 

The door locks are equipped with an additional spring to ensure the vehicle can be 
opened fast enough. The spring exerts pretension on the central locking drive unitforthe 
unlocking procedure. The door is already unlocked before an attempt is made to open it 
with the outside door handle. 

Note: If pulled very fast, however, it may be necessary to pull the outside door 
handle a second time in orderto open the door. 


12 

E70 Comfort Access 



Principles of Operation 


Comfort Access is divided into the following functions: 

• Passive entry 

• Passive go 

• Passive exit 

Comfort Access enables the central locking by allowing keyless 
access to the vehicle. 

The ID transmitter is an essential component of Comfort Access. 

The ID transmitter comprises all remote control functionality, mean 
ing that it can be used in exactly the same way as a remote control 

Function Sequence 

The ID transmitter sends out a coded signal as soon as the unlock or lock button is 
pressed. 

The signal from the ID transmitter is demodulated and conditioned in the remote control 
receiver.This signal is also used bythe Car Access System 3. 

The ID transmitter can also be used to open the tailgate separately. For further informa¬ 
tion, see the following chapter "Passive Entry for upper tailgate". 

Passive Entry 

The graphic in the next page shows the functional principle of "Passive entry". 

Passive entry enables access to the vehicle without operating the ID transmitter (remote 
control). The vehicle in sleep mode is woken with a valid ID transmitter (remote control). 
Comfort Access is activated by grasping the outside doorhandle. 



13 

E70 Comfort Access 








Signal Path for Comfort Access 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Outside door handle electronics module TAGE 

5 

Car Access System 3 CAS 3 

2 

ID transmitter 

6 

Comfort access CA 

3 

Rear window antenna 

CAS bus 

CAS bus 

4 

Remote control receiver in diversity module 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 


Note: The ID transmitter comprises the remote control function and is used 
solely for Comfort Access. 

For Comfort Access to work, the ID transmitter must be activated by 
the vehicle via radio signal so it can register (be authenticated) with 
the vehicle. This makes it possible to unlock the vehicle without 
actively using the ID transmitter. 


14 

E70 Comfort Access 
































Unlocking Sequence 

The capacitive sensor 1 in the outside door handle electronics module recognizes that 
the handle has been grasped and activates the transmit antenna. The transmit antenna 
sends a 125 kHz signal to the ID transmitter.The signal contains the authentication 
request. 

The ID transmitter sends a high-frequency signal of 868 M Hz to the remote control 
receiverto obtain authentication. 

The Car Access System 3 checks the authentication of the ID transmitter. 

Following successful authentication, the Car Access System 3 issues an approval to 
unlock the vehicle and initiates the vehicle unlocking procedure. The junction box control 
unit executes the unlocking procedure. 

Passive Entry for UpperTailgate 

An authentication check also takes place before opening the uppertailgate.The junction 
box control unit evaluates the status of the outside tailgate button. Pressing the outside 
tailgate button changes its status. 

The change in status is transmitted via the K-CAN. 

The Comfort Access control unit prompts the ID transmitterto register and obtain 
authentication from the vehicle. This prompt is sent by the antenna in the rear of the 
vehicle. 

After successful authentication, the tailgate can be unlocked and opened with the 
outside tailgate button. 

Passive Go 

The Passive Go function makes it possible to start the vehicle without the ID transmitter 
inserted in its holder. 

Issuing Start Enable 

Authorization to start the engine is only given when there is an ID transmitter in the vehi¬ 
cle. Three seconds afterthe door has been opened the Car Access System 3 begins its 
search fora valid ID transmitter. The Car Access System 3 requests the Comfort Access 
control unit to prompt for identification of a valid ID transmitter. 

The Comfort Access control unit sends the request via the interior antennas. 

The ID transmitter responds using a high frequency range (868 M Hz). If the ID transmitter 
is authenticated, the Car Access System 3 grants permission forthe engine to be started. 

Note: The electronic immobilizer gives its own approval forthe engine to be 
started. This approval can only come when terminal 15 is selected. 


15 

E70 Comfort Access 


Passive Exit 


The Passive Exit function makes it possible to lock the vehicle without actively using the 
ID transmitter. 

Locking Procedure 

Afterthe vehicle door has been closed, the locking procedure is started by touching the 
sensitive area on the outside door handle. The outside door handle electronics module 
sends the request to unlock the vehicle via the CAS bus to the Comfort Access system. 

Comfort Access checks via the outside antennas whetherthere is a valid ID transmitter in 
the vicinity of the outside doorhandle (transmission range of the outside doorhandle 
antennas). 

The ID transmitter is instructed to send an authentication signal. 

In turn, the identification sensor sends encrypted data via the high-frequency link to the 
remote control receiver. 

The Car Access System 3 checks whetherthe ID transmitter is valid. 

On successful completion of the check, the Car Access System 3 issues the enable to 
engage the central locking drive and initiates locking. 

The junction box control unit activates the central locking drive units. 


16 

E70 Comfort Access 



Special Functions 

The Comfort Access additionally features the special functions described in the following 
that are determined by the actions of the vehicle user. 

Two ID transmitters Remain Inside the Vehicle 

Using the interior antennas, the Car Access System 3 detects whether there is a valid ID 
transmitter in the vehicle. 

If the Car Access System 3 detects a valid ID transmitter in the vehicle interior and the 
vehicle is locked by means of another valid ID transmitter (located outside), the ID trans¬ 
mitter located in the vehicle interior is set to "invalid". 

For Comfort Access purposes, this ID transmitter is considered as no longer belonging to 
the vehicle until the vehicle is unlocked again. 

Note: The "invalid" status only applies to the functions of Comfort Access. The 
remote control functions are still available. 

The ID Transmitter Inside the Luggage Compartment 

On closing the tailgate, if an ID transmitter is located either in the luggage compartment 
or the vehicle interior when the vehicle is locked, the tailgate is immediately reopened 
automatically. An audible and visual signal draws the customer's attention to the fact that 
the ID transmitter has been left in the luggage compartment or vehicle interior. 

The Comfort Access control unit starts searching, prompted by the Car Access System 
3, using the vehicle interior antennas and luggage compartment antennas. 

If a valid ID transmitter is detected, the Car Access System 3 will not issue the enable for 
locking the tailgate. 

The tailgate cannot be closed before the ID transmitter has been removed and is located 
outside the vehicle interior or luggage compartment. 

Note: The tailgate can only be reopened when Comfort Access cannot find a 
valid ID transmitter in the vicinity of the vehicle. 

Starting Engine without ID Transmitter 

This function allows the vehicle to be restarted within 10 seconds afterthe "Engine OFF" 
switch has been activated, even if the ID transmitter is not detected. This function is 
intended for cases where, for example, the ID transmitter is not detected due to high fre¬ 
quency interference. 


17 

E70 Comfort Access 



Check Control Message, Terminal 15 

Comfort Access enables terminal selection without the ID transmitter being inserted in its 
holder. It is possible that terminal 15 is selected by pressing the START-STOP button. A 
corresponding check control message is shown in the instrument cluster after the door is 
opened. An audible signal also sounds. 

Note: The battery may be discharged if the driver ignores the warnings and 
locks the vehicle. 

Unintentional Wake-up Function 

The vehicle cannot be woken simply by someone gripping the outside door handle. A 
valid ID transmitter must be detected in the vicinity of the vehicle. 

Locking with Engine Running 

The vehicle can also be unlocked with the engine running if the engine was started with 
Passive Go. When leaving the vehicle, the ID transmitter should also be taken and the 
vehicle locked from the outside. 


18 

E70 Comfort Access 



