Table of Contents 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 

Introduction .3 

Operating Concept .3 

System Overview .4 

Inputs/Outputs .4 

System Circuit Diagram .5 

System Components.7 

Mechanical Components .7 

Electrical Components.7 

Control Units.8 

Car Access System 3.8 

Footwell Module .8 

Roof Function Center.8 

Panorama Glass Sunroof Motor.8 

Principles of Operation.9 

Reading Operation Requests .10 

Panorama Glass Sunroof Button .10 

Remote Control/ldentification Transmitter.10 

Driver's Door Lock Cylinder.10 

Outside Door Handle.10 

Motor Control.11 

Anti-Trapping.11 

Blocking Protection.11 

Thermal Protection .11 

Panic M ode.12 

Load Deactivation .12 

Terminal 58g.12 

Opening/Closing the Panorama Glass Sunroof .13 

Service Information.16 

Initialization .16 

Initialization with the Button .16 

Interruption in Power Supply.17 

Clearing the Initialization .17 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 


Revision Date: 



































Panorama Glass Sunroof 


Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

■MICTIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Understand and be able to explain the panorama sunroof in the E70 

• Initialize the panorama sunroof 


2 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 


Introduction 


The panorama glass sunroof can be ordered as a stand alone option (402) or comes 
with the premium package option on the E70. A number of control units participate in 
the operation of the panorama glass sunroof. 

The roof function center controls and monitors the motor of the panorama glass sunroof. 

The roof function center (FZD) is, for example, linked with the Car Access System CAS 
3, which enables or disables operation of the panorama glass sunroof. 

The footwell module FRM supplies the signal from the door contacts. The junction box 
control unit provides the power supply forthe motors via the terminal 30g relay. 

The Dynamic Stability Control provides the road speed signal. 

Operating Concept 

The panorama glass sunroof operating button has three directions of movement. In 
addition to the manual and overpress functions, the button has a double-click function 
into the three movement directions. 

In the double-click function the button is actuated twice within a short time into the 
overpress position ortilt position. 

This allows the customerto have the panorama glass sunroof opened and closed auto¬ 
matically from any position of the sunroof and its blind. 

When the panorama glass sunroof is in motion, its movement can be stopped by operat¬ 
ing the button again. 


3 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 




System Overview 

Inputs/Outputs 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Panorama glass sunroof motors 

8 

J unction Box control unitj B 

2 

Roof function center 

9 

Identification transmitter 

3 

Driver's door lock cylinder 

10 

Car Access System 3 CAS 3 

4 

Door contacts (4x) in the vehicle doors 

11 

Driver's side and passenger side 
outside doorhandles 

5 

Footwell module FRM 

12 

Comfort Access 

6 

DSC sensor 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

7 

Dynamic stability control 

PT-CAN 

Powertrain CAN 


The button in the roof function center (2) is used to open, close and tilt the panorama 
glass sunroof. 

The roof function center controls and monitors the operation of the motors (l)forthe 
panorama glass sunroof. 

4 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 


































System Circuit Diagram 


2 




t) 


K-CAU 


KJ W 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Button for panorama glass sunroof 

2 

Roof function center FZD 

3 

Motor, panorama glass sunroof 

4 

Motor, panorama glass sunroof 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

Kl. 15 

Terminal 15 

KI.30 

Terminal 30 

Kl. 58g 

Terminal 58 switched 


K-CAN signals at the roof function center 

In/out 

Information 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

Vehicle speed 

Rotational speed sensor > Dynamic 
Stability Control 

Release the wind deflector 

In 

Outside temper¬ 
ature 

0 utside temperature sensor > instru¬ 
ment cluster 

Value used in determining the thermal protec¬ 
tion for the panorama glass sunroof motors 

In 

Panorama glass 
sunroof release 

Car Access System 3 > 
roof function center 

Release signal for operation of the panorama 
glass sunroof 

In 

Terminal 50 sta¬ 
tus 

Car Access System 3 > 
roof function center 

Interruption of the adjustment procedure for the 
panorama glass sunroof 

In 

Comfort opening 

Identification sensor/remote control > 
Car Access System 3 

Comfort opening of the panorama glass sun¬ 
roof 

In 

Comfort opening 

Driver's door lock cylinder >footwell 
module 

Comfort opening of the panorama glass sun¬ 
roof 

In 

Comfort closing 

Identification sensor/remote control > 
Car Access System 3 

Comfort closing of the panorama glass sunroof 

In 

Comfort closing 

Driver's door lock cylinder >footwell 
module 

Comfort closing of the panorama glass sunroof 

In 

Comfort closing 

Outside door handle > 

Comfort Access 

Comfort closing of the panorama glass sunroof 

Out 

Anti-trapping 

protection 

deactivated 

Roof function center > 
instrument cluster 

Anti-trapping protection function indicator 
deactivated 


5 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 






































































Comfort opening and comfort closing can be operated from the identification 
transmitter/remote control or via the lock cylinder in the driver's door. This is done by 
holding down the locking/unlocking button until the panorama glass sunroof is 
closed/opened. 

The lock cylinder operates in a similarfashion.The mechanical key must be held in the 
locking/unlocking position until the panorama glass sunroof is closed/opened. 

The panorama glass sunroof can be closed by touching the sensitive area on the outside 
door handle. The sensitive area must be touched until the panorama glass sunroof is 
closed. 


6 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 



System Components 


The panorama glass sunroof in the E70 comprises mechanical and electrical compo¬ 
nents. 

Mechanical Components 

• Glass roofs 

• Blind 

• Panorama glass sunroof cassette 

• Wind deflector 

Electrical Components 

• Button 

• Control units 

- Car Access System 3 

- Footwell module 

- Rooffunction center 

• Panorama glass sunroof motors. 

The following graphic shows all the electrical components of the panorama glass sun¬ 
roof system together with the appropriate control units and control elements. 



L 





— i i > II 



4 

H. O 

LU 1 

L_J 

[1 —.- 


hJ) 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Car Access System 3 

3 

J unction box control unit 

2 

Footwell module 

4 

Rooffunction center 


7 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 














Control Units 


Car Access System 3 

The Car Access System 3 issues the release signal forthe panorama glass sunroof. 

M ovement is prevented during the engine starting phase by sending the "Terminal 50 
ON" status. This means that there is more energy available from the battery forthe starter 
to start the engine. 

Footwell Module 

The footwell module makes available the status of the door contacts and the driver's door 
lock cylinder. 

The footwell module also supplies the roof function centerwith information concerning 
the "Terminal 58g ON" status. 

Roof Function Center 

The roof function center contains the complete functions of the panorama glass sunroof. 
The roof function center is always 

installed in connection with the panorama glass sunroof. 

The relays required to drive the panorama glass sunroof motors are integrated in the roof 
function center. 

Panorama Glass Sunroof Motor 

One motorforthe panorama glass sunroof has two Hall sensors. 

The Hall sensors are located on the motor shaft and are offset against one another by 
90°. 

When the motor is running, this results in two temporally offset Hall signals that are 
used to registerthe direction of rotation of the motor and forthe anti-trapping protection 
function. 

The motor is new, but functionally identical to its predecessors. The visible difference is 
that its casing is made of plastic. 

Note Two motors are fitted to move the panorama glass sunroof. 


8 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 



Principles of Operation 

The roof function center receives signals from the other control units forthe functions of 
the panorama glass sunroof. 

The executing control unit is the roof function center. It controls the panorama glass 
sunroof motor on demand and at the same time monitors the motor's rotation. 

The following functions of the panorama glass sunroof are built in the roof function center: 

• Reading operation requests 

• Controlling the panorama glass sunroof motors 

• Opening/closing the panorama glass sunroof and blind 

• Anti-trapping protection function 

• Blocking protection 

• Panic mode 

• Load cut-out during start procedure 

• Terminal 58g 

• Initialization 



9 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 





Reading Operation Requests 

Panorama glass sunroof operation may be requested through the following controls: 

• Panorama glass sunroof button 

• Remote control/identification transmitter 

• Driver's door lock cylinder 

• Outside doorhandle in Comfort Access 

Panorama Glass Sunroof Button 

The button forthe panorama glass sunroof is located in the roof function center. 

When operated, the button sends a low signal to the electronic module that drives the 
panorama glass sunroof motor corresponding to the button selection. 

The LED (locating lamp) of the button in the roof function center is supplied from the 
"Terminal 58g ON" terminal status. 

Remote Control/ldentification Transmitter 

The convenient opening/closing function is initiated by pressing the button on the remote 
control/identification transmitter. 

Driver's Door Lock Cylinder 

The convenient opening/closing function is triggered by turning and holding the mechani¬ 
cal key orthe spare key in the open/close position in the driver's door lock barrel. 

Outside Door Handle 

Comfort closing can only be triggered using the outside doorhandle with Comfort 
Access. 

The sensitive area must be touched fora long time to launch the comfort closing 
process. 

Only then will the rooffunction center execute the comfort closing. Releasing the sensi¬ 
tive area interrupts the comfort closing. 


10 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 



Motor Control 


When the roof function center receives a request forthe panorama glass sunroof, it con¬ 
trols the integrated relay. The panorama glass sunroof motor is supplied with power 
through the relay. 

The relay contacts are monitored by the roof function centerto ensure that perfect con¬ 
trol of the motor and the panorama glass sunroof is achieved. In addition, the motor 
speed is calculated and the direction of the motor's rotation is detected from the pulses 
of the Hall sensors. 

The distance the panorama glass sunroof must cover during the opening or closing pro¬ 
cedure is defined in the roof function center. The panorama glass sunroof motor gener¬ 
ates a certain number of pulses within this distance and therefore recognizes the end 
positions ofthe panorama glass sunroof. 

Anti-Trapping 

Both the glass roofs and the floating blinds are equipped with an indirect anti-trapping 
protection function. The indirect anti-trapping protection function operates on the basis of 
the power consumption ofthe panorama glass sunroof motor. 

If the roof function center detects a trapping situation, the corresponding motor is 
stopped and controlled in the opposite direction. This opens the glass roof or blind again 
(approximately 20 cm) and releases the obstruction. 

Blocking Protection 

If the pulses from the Hall sensors drop out for more than 500 ms during an opening or 
closing operation, the roof function center detects a blockage. 

The power supply to the motor is switched off. 

Thermal Protection 

The thermal protection forthe panorama glass sunroof motor is calculated in the roof 
function center. To this end, a temperature sensor is mounted on the board in the roof 
function centerto measure the ambient temperature. 

The roof function center calculates the current temperature ofthe motor by applying the 
running time ofthe panorama glass sunroof motor. 

The warm-up and cool-down periods are stored in a temperature model in the roof func¬ 
tion center. 

The current temperature is stored in the memory before the roof function center passes 
into sleep mode. The motor temperature is made equal to the ambient temperature when 
the vehicle is started again. 


11 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 



Panic Mode 


The panorama glass sunroof is closed with maximum closing force in panic mode. Panic 
mode is triggered by pressing and holding, reversing, releasing and pressing and holding 
the panorama glass sunroof button again. 

A valid release signal from Car Access System 3 is the precondition forthe execution of 
the emergency closing function. 

It is necessary to release and press the button again, as the first time the button is 
pressed the anti-trapping protection function is still active.The panorama glass sunroof 
closes with maximum force as a result of the second press within a short time. 

It is possible to activate panic mode up to a vehicle speed of 16 km/h. Panic mode can 
be activated from both the tilt position (approximately 100 ms) and from the open position 
(approximately 1 s). 

Load Deactivation 

Operation of the panorama glass sunroof is aborted/interrupted during the vehicle start 
procedure. Operation of the panorama glass sunroof can resume on completion of the 
starting procedure. 

The Car Access System 3 retracts the release signal to operate the panorama glass sun¬ 
roof during the vehicle starting procedure. The Car Access System 3 issues the release 
signal again on completion ofthe starting procedure. 

Terminal 58g 

When the exterior lights are switched on, the footwell module sends this information via 
theK-CAN. 

The roof function center receives this information and adopts the set value forthe instru¬ 
ment lighting. 

The LED in the button forthe panorama glass sunroof is controlled by a pulse-width 
modulated signal from the roof function center. This achieves a constant brightness ofthe 
LED even underfluctuating system voltage conditions. 


12 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 



Opening/Closing the Panorama Glass Sunroof 

The button can be moved to two engaged positions in the opening and closing direc¬ 
tions. In the first engaged position, a movement is initiated which is only executed for as 
long as the button is being pressed. 

Control functions 

• Opening blind only 

• Opening blind and glass roof (to comfort position) 

• Glass roof tilt position and blind ventilation position 

• Closing glass roof only 

• Closing glass roof and blind 

• Closing blind only with glass roofs already closed. 

All control functions are also available as one touch control functions (comfort functions). 

The one-touch control function is reached by pressing the button again to the second 
engaged position in the direction required for the panorama glass sunroof. 

The one-touch control function provides automatic opening or closing of the panorama 
glass sunroofs. 

Directions of Movement 

Initial state: 

Both glass roofs and both blinds closed. 

Opening Blinds 

Press "OPEN" 1 x 

• Signal from switch to roof function center 

• The roof function center controls the rear motor as long as the button is pressed or 
until the blind is fully opened. 

• Rear motor opens both blinds 

• The glass roofs remain closed 


13 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 




Opening Blinds (one-touch control function) 

Press "OPEN" 1 x 

• Signal from switch to roof function center 

• Roof function center activates rear motor 

• Rear motor opens both blinds 

• The glass roofs remain closed 

Opening Blinds and Glass Roof 

Press "OPEN" 2 x(double-clickfunction) 

• Signal from switch to roof function center 

• Roof function center first activates the rear motor 

• Rear motor opens both blinds 

• The roof function center controls the front motor after a time, from a short distance 
from the blind. 

• Front motor opens front glass roof 

• Rear motor raises wind deflector 

Tilt Position 

Press "TILT" 1 x 

• Signal from switch to control unit 

• Roof function center activates both motors 

• Front motor tilts both glass roofs 

• Rear motor moves both blinds forwards into the gap position (ventilation position). 

Closing Glass Roofs 

Press "CLOSE" 1 x 

• Signal from switch to roof function center 

• The roof function center controls the front motor as long as the button is pressed or 
until the glass roofs are fully closed. 

• Front motor closes both glass roofs 

Closing the Glass Roofs (one-touch control function) 

Press "CLOSE" 1 x past the first stop 

• Signal from switch to roof function center 

• Roof function center activates front motor 

• Front motor closes both glass roofs 


14 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 



Closing Glass Roofs and Blind 

Press "CLOSE" 2 x(double-clickfunction) 

• Signal from switch to roof function center 

• Roof function center first activates the front motor 

• Front motor closes both glass roofs 

• The roof function center controls the rear motor after a time, from a short distance 
from the glass roof. 

• Rear motor closes both blinds and releases the wind deflector so that the glass roof 
can press it down. 

Closing the Blinds 

(only possible if glass roofs are already closed) 

Press "CLOSE" 1 x 

• Signal from switch to roof function center 

• Roof function center activates rear motor 

• Rear motor closes both blinds 

Wind Deflectorwith Roof Open 

The roof function center receives a speed signal from the Dynamic Stability Control. 

The roof function center controls the rear motor to release the wind deflector from a road 
speed of 180 km/h. Consequently, the wind deflector is depressed into a lower position. 

Note: The motoronly runs lightly, the blinds do not move. 

ComfortOpening 

The panorama glass sunroof can be opened by extended actuation of the unlock button 
with the remote control/identification sensor or with the mechanical key in the open direc¬ 
tion. 

Note: The movement of the window risers must be completed before comfort 
opening ofthe panorama glass sunroof can start. 

Comfort Closing 

The panorama glass sunroof can be closed by extended actuation ofthe lock button with 
the remote control/identification sensor or with the mechanical key in the close direction. 

If the vehicle is equipped with Comfort Access, comfort closing can be started by touch¬ 
ing the sensitive outside surface. 


15 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 



Service Information 


Initialization 

Initialization of the panorama glass sunroof involves the following procedures that are 
necessary to ensure complete operation of the panorama glass sunroof: 

• Normalization 

Normalization means locating the mechanical end position at the stop forthe tilt 
position. This position is stored and is used in calculating the remaining end posi¬ 
tions forthe panorama glass sunroof. 

• Learning the characteristic curve 

The learning procedure registers the closing force necessary for each direction of 
the panorama glass sunroof and stores this value. 

Complete functionality of the panorama glass sunroof can be guaranteed only by full 
initialization. 

The initialization procedure can be initiated with the button forthe panorama glass 
sunroof or via the diagnosis system. 

Initialization with the Button 

Initialization is performed as follows: 

• Press and hold control button in sunroof tilt direction M ove both glass roofs into the 
tilt position and both blinds into the ventilation position 

• After approximately 15 seconds the initialization run starts in the tilt direction and 
stores the end position 

• The panorama glass sunroof is closed after 5 seconds in the tilt position 

• The panorama glass sunroof is then opened and the end position stored. 

Note: The control button must remain pressed during the entire initialization 
procedure. The initialization procedure must be repeated if the button 
is released. 

Initialization takes approximately 120 seconds. 


16 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 




Interruption in Power Supply 

An interruption in the power supply does not require a new normalization. The initializa¬ 
tion is invalidated if the power supply is interrupted during the initialization or during oper¬ 
ation. A new initialization will then be necessary. 

C learing the Initialization 

Initialization is cleared underthe following circumstances: 

• Failure of the powersupply during initialization 

• Hall sensorfault detected 

• Position implausible 

• Certain calls in the diagnostics 

• Changed vehicle coding 

• Coding data faulty 


17 

E70 Panorama Glass Sunroof 




