Table of Contents 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 

Subject Page 

Introduction .3 

System Overview .4 

System Circuit Diagram .4 

System Components.6 

Sensor System.7 

Steering Angle Sensor.7 

Code Disc .7 

Optical Sensor.7 

LED and FiberOptics Unit.8 

Line Camera .8 

Steering Column Switches .8 

Function .8 

Steering Column Stalk.10 

High Beam/Direction Indicator Switch.10 

Cruise Control .10 

Wiper Switch .10 

Coil Spring Assembly.11 

Locking.11 

Steering Wheel Heating.11 

Principles of Operation.13 

Detecting Steering Angle and Speed .13 

Relative Steering Angle (±180°) .13 

Absolute Steering Angle.13 

Steering Wheel Rotation Information .13 

Detecting the Controls in the M ultifunction Steering Wheel .15 

Detecting the Signals ofthe Steering Column Switches .15 

Direction Indicator/High Beam Switch .15 

Wiper Switch.15 

Cruise Control Switch .15 

Signal Flow.16 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 


Revision Date: 

































Steering Column Switch Cluster 

Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 





After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Explain the technology used for the stalk levers 

• Understand and identify the different components used in the SZL 


2 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 




Introduction 


A steering column switch cluster SZL is used on the E70 that can detect the steering 
angle and the settings of the steering column switches for wiper, direction indicator light 
and cruise control by means of optical sensors. 

In addition to the optical sensors, buttons based on switching-mat technology are used 
for the buttons on the multifunction steering wheel and various buttons on the steering 
column stalks. The voltage signals are read by the steering column switch cluster. 

The information from the switches and steering angle sensor are in part processed in 
the steering column switch cluster and transferred to other systems via the F-CAN. A 
part of the information is forwarded directly to other control units. 

Note: In terms of design and function, the steering column switch cluster 
essentially corresponds to the steering column switch clusteron the 
E 90. A new feature is the electronic steering wheel module that is 
responsible for controlling the steering wheel heating. 



3 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 












System Overview 

System Circuit Diagram 







4 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 
























































































































































Legend for System Circuit Diagram 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Horn switch 

17 

Footwell module FRM 

2 

Multifunction steering wheel 

18 

Control unit for steering column switch cluster 

3 

2-stage driver airbag 

19 

Instrument cluster KO M B1 

4 

Temperature sensor for steering wheel heating 

BC 

On-board computer 

5 

Electronic steering wheel module 

F-CAN 

Chassis CAN 

6 

Steering wheel heating 

FL 

High beam 

7 

Steering wheel 

FRAL 

Direction indicator light, left 

8 

Horn 

FRAR 

Direction indicator light, right 

9 

Horn relay 

Kl. 30 

Terminal 30 

10 

J unction box control unit 

Kl. 30g 

Terminal 30 switched 

11 

Coil spring assembly 

Kl. 31 

Terminal 31 

12 

Housing of steering column switch cluster 

Kl. 58g 

Terminal 58g 

13 

Advanced crash safety module ACSM 

LWS 

Steering angle sensor 

14 

Steering column switch, wipers 

Power 

Down 

Command from the IHKA control unit to shut 
down or reduce the electronic steering wheel 

module 

15 

Steering column switch, cruise control 

WUP 

Wake-up line 

16 

Steering column switch, direction indicator lights 




5 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 



































































System Components 

The steering column switch cluster SZL consists of the following components: 

• Electronic steering column switch cluster module 

• Steering angle sensor 

• Steering column switch, cruise control 

• Steering column switch, direction indicator stalk 

• Steering column switch, wipers 

• Coil spring assembly 

The steering column switch cluster SZL can only be replaced as a complete unit. The 
coil spring assembly is fitted on the steering column switch cluster. The coil spring 
assembly can be removed and individually replaced. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Steering column switch, direction indicator stalk 

2 

Steering column switch, cruise control 

3 

Code disc 

4 

Steering column switch cluster with optical sensor 

5 

Steering column wiper stalk with buttons for rain/driving lights/solar sensor 


The electronic steering column switch cluster module contains a processor, the power 
supply and following interfaces: 

• F-CAN 

• Optical switches 

• Electrical switches 

The optical sensorfor measuring the steering angle is integrated in the pc-board of the 
control unit. 


6 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 


















Sensor System 


Steering Angle Sensor 

The steering angle sensor is designed as a contactless, 
optical angle measuring system. 

The system consists of a code disc and an optical 
sensor.The code disc is connected via a drive element 
directly to the steering wheel. 

The code disc turns within the optical sensor when the 
steering wheel is moved. 

Code Disc 

The code disc is died black and features a line pattern. This pattern consists of two con¬ 
tinuous lines on the outside and inside ofthe code disc. 

Broken lines are located between the two continuous lines at a defined spacing with 
respect to each other. These lines represent the digital area ofthe sensor. The digital 
code changes every 2°. 

The obliquely arranged lines in the outer area represent the analog area ofthe sensor. 

These lines permit exact measurement (0.1°) ofthe steering angle. 

The steering angle sensor detects the steering angle setting ofthe steering wheel and is 
evaluated in the SZL.The information is mainly required by the DSC control unit. 

Optical Sensor 

The optical sensor is designed as follows. 




Index 

Explanation 

1 

Fiber Optics Unit 

2 

Code Disc 

3 

Steering Column 

4 

Line Camera 

5 

Output: Conversion to Electrical Signals 

6 

PC-Board 

7 

LED 


7 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 






























LED and FiberOptics Unit 

The task of the LED in connection with the fiber optics unit is to project light from the top 
onto the code disc. The LED is soldered directly to the pc-board ofthe SZL.The fiber 
optics unit is secured to the pc-board by means of two screws. Together, the LED with 
the fiber optics unit and line camera make up the optical sensor. 


Line Camera 

The line camera is located underthe code disc.The line camera converts optical signals 
that penetrate through the code disc into electrical signals. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Line Camera 

2 

FiberOptics Unit 


Steering Column Switches 

The positions of all steering column stalks are determined optically. The steering column 
stalks are mounted such that they can be swivelled and run in a curved path at the lower 
end ofthe stalk to define the switching characteristics in the respective positions. The 
advantage of optical acquisition ofthe stalk position is that it is possible to precisely 
determine the pressure point. The spring force ofthe microswitch need not be taken into 
account when defining the stalk force required for switching. 

Function 

Depending on the type of steering column stalk, there are three orfour LEDs on the out¬ 
side and one optical receiver (light dependent resistor LDR) on the inside ofthe steering 
column housing ofthe steering column stalk. A shutter is provided on the steering col¬ 
umn stalk which, when in rest position, is located between the center LED and the LDR. 
As a result, the shutter blanks out the light ofthe center LED when in rest position. 

As soon as the steering column stalk is moved, the shutter moves up or down. One of 
the outer LEDs is now covered. The LEDs are never activated together but always 
clocked one afterthe other. In this way, the electronic SZL module can detect which LED 
is currently blanked out. The function can be monitored by measuring the current at the 
LED. 

The buttons and thumbwheels in the steering column switches are realized by means of 
buttons based on switching mat technology. The resulting voltage signals are either rout¬ 
ed to the SZL and distributed to the corresponding control units (wiper switch - junction 
box control unit) or forwarded directly to other control units. 


8 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 






The functional principle of the optical sensors of the steering column switches is repre¬ 
sented in simplified form in the graphics below. As the result of vertical movement, the 
upper diode is blanked out then followed by the center diode. In actual fact, both the hori¬ 
zontal as well as the vertical stalk movement is detected. 


Steering Column Stalk in Rest Position 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Steering column stalk 

5-7 

LED 

2 

Pivot point of steering column stalk 

8 

Cover 

3 

Retaining fixture 

9 

Light-dependent resistor (LDR) 

4 

Conductor 





Steering Column Stalk in Operated Position 


9 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 





























Steering Column Stalk 

High Beam/Direction Indicator Switch 

The steering column stalk features the buttons for the on-board computer and the rocker 
switch for scrolling through the menus of the on-board computer. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

On-Board Computer Button 

2 

Rocker Switch 


Cruise Control 

The steering column stalk contains the button for the cruise control. The set speed value 
can be changed by pushing the stalk forward or pulling it back. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rocker Switch 

2 

Button fro RLSS 


Wiper Switch 

The steering column stalk contains the button for switching the automatic wipe function 
ON/OFF with the rain/driving lights/solar sensor. 

The sensitivity of the rain/driving lights/solar sensor or the automatic interval can be set 
with the rocker switch. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Cruise Control Button 



10 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 


















Coil Spring Assembly 


The coil spring assembly can be replaced only as a complete unit. The task of the coil 
spring is to transmit the following electrical signals from and to the multifunction steering 
wheel: 

• Activation of driver airbag 

• Control buttons SMG (being prepared) 

• Multifunction buttons 

• Horn 

• Steering wheel heating 



Locking 

To avoid damaging the coil spring assembly, it must be set to the correct position when 
dismantling the steering wheel and coil spring assembly. 

The front wheels and steering wheel must be set to the straight-ahead position as the 
prerequisite for disassembly. 

During disassembly of the steering wheel, the load on the lock pin of the coil spring 
assembly is relieved and the pin can lock in the straight ahead position. 

When the steering wheel is reinstalled, this arrangement ensures that the coil spring is 
not damaged when the steering wheel is turned to full left and right lock. 


Steering Wheel Heating 


The steering wheel heating is controlled by the electronic steering wheel module. The 
electronic steering wheel module is accommodated in the steering wheel. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Steering Wheel Heating Button 

2 

Electronic Steering Wheel Button 


11 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 













The steering wheel heating is activated by means of a switch on the steering wheel. The 
switch is connected directly to the electronic steering wheel module. The power is sup¬ 
plied via two dedicated connections. 

To prevent overloading the electrical system, the function can be deactivated by the IHKA 
by means of a power-down connection. 



Standard Steering Wheel Sport Steering Wheel 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Steering Wheel Heating Indicator Light 

2 

Steering Wheel Heating Button 


12 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 
















Principles of Operation 


The functions of the steering column switch cluster are: 

• Detecting switching signals in the steering column switches 

• Detecting steering angle and steering speed 

• Detecting the controls in the multifunction steering wheel 

• Sending and receiving information to/from the interlinked control units 

Detecting Steering Angle and Speed 

The steering column switch cluster must detect the steering angle and steering speed 
information as the basis for calculating various functions in the DSC. 

Further information such as the absolute steering angle or the steering wheel rotation 
information is calculated. A steering angle of - 1807+180° is detected. 

An LED and fiber optics unit illuminate the code disc from above. Due to the pattern on 
the code disc, the light from above reaches the bottom only in certain areas where the 
light beams hit the line camera. 

The line camera converts the line signals into electrical signals and transfers them to the 
steering column switch cluster. 

Relative Steering Angle (±180°) 

The relative steering angle indicates the angle position of the steering wheel. The infor¬ 
mation relating to the relative steering angle is always retained even when power to the 
control unit is disconnected. Renewed zero point adjustment is necessary only afterthe 
steering column switch cluster has been replaced. This requirement also applies when 
replacing the DSC or performing repairs on the steering/steering column systems. 

Absolute Steering Angle 

The absolute steering angle is a calculation based on the relative steering angle and 
steering wheel rotation information.The absolute and relative steering angles are 
defined during zero point adjustment of the steering column switch cluster. The SZL 
detects each position of the steering wheel over the entire steering lock range. 

The precondition for the zero point adjustment is that the wheels and steering wheel are 
set in the straight-ahead position. 

Steering Wheel Rotation Information 

The steering wheel rotation information indicates the turn position of the steering wheel. 

The steering wheel rotation information is determined automatically by a virtual calcula¬ 
tion model. 

If lost, e.g. if power to the SZL is disconnected, this information must be taught-in again. 


13 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 




Section of Code Disc 



The code disc rotates dependent on the 
steering wheel angle setting.The pattern on 
the code disc changes in steps of 2°. A resolution 
of 0.1° can be achieved forthe steering angle sen¬ 
sor by evaluating the linear track. 



The pattern on the code disc changes as the 
disc continues to turn.The light passes through 
the code disc into other areas. 


Optical Sensor 



The light beams hit the line camera. The light pulses 
are converted to electrical pulses in the line sensor. 



The position of the light beams is displaced. The line 
camera detects the light beams in other areas and 
transfers the information to the SZL. 


The steering column switch cluster uses data from the speed sensors of the front wheels 
forthe calculation. The SZL assumes the vehicle is driving straightahead at constant 
speeds and therefore detects its zero position. The minimum speed necessary for this 
purpose is 20 km/h.This process need not be initialized via the BMW diagnosis system. 
The SZL automatically determines the steering wheel rotation information as soon as the 
vehicle exceeds the minimum speed. 

Problems may occur in calculating the steering wheel rotation information under unfavor¬ 
able road conditions (icy road surfaces). The DSC sends a corresponding check control 
message in this case. 


14 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 


























































Detecting the Controls in the Multifunction Steering Wheel 

The voltage signals of the buttons on the multifunction steering wheel are routed via the 
coil spring to the steering column switch cluster. The SZL evaluates the voltage signals 
and sends the information to the corresponding control units. 

The connections of the Steptronic switches, horn and of the driver airbag are wired 
directly via the coil spring to the corresponding control units. This information is therefore 
not evaluated in the SZL. 

Detecting the Signals of the Steering Column Switches 

Optical switches are used in connection with the steering column stalks on the E70. 
Optical sensors detect the stalk position and make this information available to the steer¬ 
ing column switch cluster. Buttons based on switching mat technology are located in the 
heads of the steering column switches. They transfer voltage signals corresponding to 
the switch position to the steering column switch cluster SZL. 

Note: The operating procedure and the resulting functions are described in the 
Owner's Handbook. 

Direction Indicator/High Beam Switch 

The signals of the direction indicator and high beam switch are monitored by the SZL 
and transferred via three voltage-coded lines to the footwell module. Only information 
relating to the switch positions is transmitted. 

The signals of the on-board computer button and the rocker switch are transferred via a 
line from the SZL to the instrument cluster. 

The functions in the respective switch positions are defined in the control units. 

Wiper Switch 

The signals of the wiper switch are calculated directly in the steering column switch clus¬ 
ter and transferred via the F-CAN to the DSC and to the junction box. 

Cruise Control Switch 

The signals from the cruise control switch are routed via the F-CAN to the DSC and fur- 
thervia the PT-CAN to the DM E/DDE. The functions are calculated in the engine man¬ 
agement. 

The signals for the dynamic cruise control DCC or active cruise control ACC systems are 
made available to the longitudinal dynamics management LDM. Data are sent via the F- 
CAN to the DSC. From the DSC, the data are placed on the PT-CAN making them avail¬ 
able to the longitudinal dynamics management. 


15 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 



Signal Flow 

The acquired and calculated data of the steering column switch cluster are mainly trans¬ 
ferred via the F-CAN to the corresponding control units. 

The information fordiagnosis is therefore also transferred via the F-CAN to the DSC.The 
DSC establishes the communication interface with the BMW diagnosis system. 

The steering column switch cluster cannot be addressed directly via the BMW diagnosis 
system. 

The DSC must be encoded after replacing the steering column switch cluster. The DSC 
transfers the coding to the steering column switch cluster. 


16 

E70 Steering Column Switch Cluster 



