Table of Contents 

E70 Exterior Lighting 

Subject Page 

Introduction .5 

System Overview .6 

IPO - Exterior Lighting.6 

System Components.10 

Bi-Xenon Headlights.11 

Daytime Driving Light .11 

Rear Light Cluster.13 

Design.13 

Tail Lights.14 

Side Marker Lights.14 

Rear Reflectors .14 

Lights Control Panel .14 

Sensors .15 

Ride-Height.15 

Brake Pedal Switch .15 

Rain/Driving Lights/Solar Sensor .15 

Principles of Operation.16 

Side Lights .18 

Low Beam Headlight .18 

High Beam .18 

Automatic Driving Lights Control.19 

Fog Light.20 

Direction Indicator Lights.20 

One-Touch Indicating.20 

Hazard Warning Lights .21 

In Connection with Alarm Triggered .21 

Visual and Audible Indicators .21 

Visual FeedbackThrough the Central Locking.21 

Tail Light/License Plate Light.22 

Brake Light .22 

Substitute Lighting.22 

Brake Force Display.22 

Reversing Light .22 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 


Revision Date: 




































Subject Page 

Rear Fog Lights.23 

Parking Lights.23 

Special Features .24 

Bi-Xenon Headlight .24 

Daytime Driving Lights .24 

Welcome Light.24 

Delayed Switch-Off Home Lights .25 

Headlight-Range Adjustment .25 

Lamp M onitoring.25 

Cold M onitoring .25 

Hot Monitoring .25 

Visual Alarm .26 

Anti-Theft Alarm System.26 

Crash Telegram.26 

Terminal 15 OFF .26 

Emergency Operating Mode.26 

Service Information.27 

Lights in the Front Area.27 

Lights in the Rear Area .27 
























3 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Exterior Lighting 


Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

■MICTIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to 
• Explain the exterior lighting system 


4 

E70 Exterior Lighting 


Introduction 


The exterior lighting in the E70 is based on the exterior lighting system implemented in 
the E90. 

The E70 features the welcome light, making the vehicle even more customer-friendly. 

The exterior lighting system is switched on for approximately. 20 seconds when the vehi¬ 
cle is unlocked. This has the advantage of locating the vehicle more easily under unfa¬ 
vorable light conditions. 

A further feature is the daytime driving light that can be activated or deactivated via the 
Personal Profile. 

The following graphic shows where the control units responsible forthe exterior lighting 
are located in the E70. 

Control Units forthe Exterior Lighting 

4 1 } , 2 ) / 3 ) - 


^ $ 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Dynamic stability control 

5 

Advanced crash safety management 

2 

Rain/driving lights/solar sensor* 

6 

Steering column switch cluster 

3 

Roof functions center 

7 

Car Access System 3 

4 

Vertical dynamics management* 

8 

Footwell module 


* Components installed depending on equipment configuration 


5 

E70 Exterior Lighting 


















System Overview 

The input/output diagram provides a quick overview of the exterior lighting. It also shows 
which input or output signals are used forthe exterior lighting functions. 

IPO - Exterior Lighting 



a • 


2 



6 

E70 Exterior Lighting 






























Legend for IPO - Exterior Lighting 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

D 

Footwell module FRM 

9 

Sensors, vertical dynamics management 

2 

Front lighting 

10 

Rear lighting 

3 

Trailer module 

11 

Flazard warning switch 

D 

J unction box control unit 

12 

Steering column switch cluster 

5 

Car Access System 3 

13 

Lights control panel 

6 

Identification transmitter 

14 

Door contact 

7 

Rain/driving lights/solar sensor in mirror base 

PT-CAN 

Powertrain CAN 

8 

Brake light switch BLS 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 


K-CAN signals at the footwell module 

In/out 

Information 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

Crash signal 

Crash sensor >advanced crash safe¬ 
ty management 

Interior lighting ON, hazard warning lights ON, 
terminal 58g ON 

In 

Status, trailer 
module 

Trailer socket outlet > trailer module 

Trailer lighting 

Out 

Direction indi¬ 
cator 

Steering column stalk direction indi¬ 
cator > trailer module 

Direction indicator ON 


7 

E70 Exterior Lighting 
























































Schematic Circuit Diagram 



tt 



■■ T -h 

© 

© 

© 

© 

© 


^ 3 ) 


< 1 ) 


© 


^ © 


© & 




© © vlV 


& © © 


© 

© 


© 


8 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



































































































































Legend for Schematic Circuit Diagram 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

i—1 

Main headlight, left 

11 

Rear light cluster, left in tailgate 

2 

Front fog light, left 

12 

Tail light, left 

3 

Frontfog light, right 

13 

Ride-height sensors, rear 

4 

M ain headlight, right 

14 

Lights control panel 

5 

Rear light cluster, right 

15 

Ride-height sensors, front 

6 

Rear light cluster, right in tailgate 

16 

Footwell module FRM 

7 

Raised brake light 

17 

Signals via F-CAN 

8 

license plate light, right 

F-CAN 

Chassis CAN 

9 

Filter with rejector circuit, raised brake light 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

10 

license plate light, left 

KL 30 

Terminal 30 


K-CAN signals at the footwell module 

In/out 

Information 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

Crash signal 

Crash sensor > 

advanced crash safety management 

Interior lighting ON, hazard warning 
lights ON, terminal 58g ON 

In 

Status, 
trailer module 

Trailer socket outlet > 
trailer module 

Trailer lighting 

Out 

Direction 

indicator 

Steering column stalk direction indicator 
> trailer module 

Direction indicator ON 


F-CAN signals at the footwell module 

In/out 

Information 

Source/sink 

Function 

In 

Vehicle Ride 

Height 

Sensor, vertical dynamics management > 
footwell module 

Adaptation of headlight range 


The range of the headlights is adapted dynamically to the respective vehicle statuses 
based on the signals from the ride-height sensors. The vehicle statuses include, for 
example, braking or accelerating as well as various load conditions. 

On vehicles equipped with vertical dynamics management, the footwell module receives 
the ride-height information via the F-CAN. 


9 

E70 Exterior Lighting 









































































System Components 


The following system components are installed forthe exterior lighting: 

• Control units 

- The footwell module contains the complete functionality to control and monitor 
the exterior lighting. 

- Roof functions center with integrated ultrasonic interior protection (motion sensor) 
Providing signal, e.g. forvisual alarm or visual feedback of Anti-theft alarm system 

- Car Access System 3 providing signal, e.g. forvisual feedback of central locking 
system 

- Advanced crash safety management providing signal, e.g. triggered by crash 

• Headlights 

- Low beam/high beam headlights 

- Fog lights 

• Direction indicator lights 

• Direction indicator light repeaters 

• Rear light clusters in vehicle body and tailgate 

- Tail light 

- Brake light 

- Rearfog light 

- Reversing light 

- Direction indicator lights 

• Lights control panel 

• Steering column switch cluster 

- Steering column stalk, high beam/headlightflasher 

- Steering column stalk, direction indicator lights 

- Steering column stalk, wiper with button for automatic driving lights control 

• Sensors 

• Center-lock button 


10 

E70 Exterior Lighting 




Bi-Xenon Headlights 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Side Light/Daytime Driving Light 

2 

Side Light 

3 

Low bean/high beam/headlight 
flasher 

4 

Direction indicator light 


Daytime Driving Light 

The daytime driving light is produced bythe inner and outercorona ring.The innercham- 
berofthe bi-xenon headlight is used forthe daytime driving light. 

The inner corona ring is illuminated from behind. The reflector is designed to ensure that 
the light mainly illuminates the corona ring. There is a darkened shutter in the middle of 
the corona ring that blanks off the forward light from the reflector. 

Lightfrom the same headlight chamber is coupled in two fiber optics cables and fed to 
the outercorona ring. 

The outercorona ring functions as a light guide. The inner corona ring is brighterthan the 
outercorona ring in daytime driving lights mode. 


11 

E70 Exterior Lighting 















The footwell module decreases the daytime driving lights as soon as the side lights or 
low beam lights are switched on. Consequently, both corona rings of the daytime driving 
light are now used forthe side lights. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Side Light Ring 

2 

Light Guide 

3 

Side Light Ring 

4 

Bulb 

5 

Cover 


12 

E70 Exterior Lighting 

























Rear Light Cluster 


Design 

The rear light cluster of the E70 is based on a split design. One part is integrated in the 
body and the other in the uppertailgate.The two parts form the complete rear light clus¬ 
ter. The rear light in the body section has four chambers. Almost every chamber, with the 
exception of the tail light LED, is equipped with a 21 W bulb. 

The following chambers are equipped with a 16 W bulb. 

• Reversing lights 16 W 

• Brake force display 16 W 

• Brake light chamber 2 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Tail Light 

5 

Brake Light 

2 

Brake Light 

6 

Tail Light 

3 

Direction Indicator Light 

7 

Brake Force Display 

4 

Reversing Light 




The rear light in the tailgate has 2 chambers. One chamber is forthe rearfog light while 
the other chamber is used forthe tail light. 

The direction indicator light is red. The light cover is also red. 

The direction indicator light cover for versions outside the US is light red. The orange 
colorforthe direction indicator light is achieved by means of a light filter. 


13 

E70 Exterior Lighting 


















Tail Lights 

The tail lights of the E 70 are equipped with LEDs. The light from 4 LEDs is routed 
through fiber optics conductors. The fiber optics conductors distribute the light uniformly. 

Side Marker Lights 

The US version of the E70 has reflecting side marker lights at the front. They are located 
in the side apron. The reflective side marker lights at the rear are integrated in the tail light 
clusters in the US version. 

The active side marker lights in the US version is generated by the dimmed front direc¬ 
tion indicator lights. 

Rear Reflectors 

The rear reflectors are located in the bumper. 

Lights Control Panel 

The lights control panel features following controls as standard: 

• Light switch for side lights and low beam 

• Manual headlight-range adjustment 

The light control panel contains additional controls corresponding to the scope of option¬ 
al extras. 

The additional controls are: 

• Automatic driving lights control 

• Fog light button 

• Head-up display button 


14 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Sensors 


Ride-Height 

One ride-height sensor is mounted on both the front and the rear axle. The signals of the 
ride-height sensors are used forthe headlight-range adjustment LWR.The footwell mod¬ 
ule directly evaluates the ride-height sensors. 

Note: If the vehicle is equipped with vertical dynamics management, the 

footwell module receives the information forthe headlight range adjust¬ 
ment via the F-CAN. 

Brake Pedal Switch 

The signal of the brake pedal switch is used forthe headlight-range adjustment (LWR). 
The Car Access System 3 supplies the voltage forthe brake pedal switch. 

Rain/Driving Lights/Solar Sensor 

The rain/driving lights/solar sensor provides the signal for switching on the driving lights 
as from a defined light level. 


15 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Principles of Operation 


The functions of the exterior light system are integrated in thefootwell module. 

These lighting functions are: 

• Side lights 

• Low beam headlight 

• High beam 

- Headlight flasher 

• Fog light 

• Direction indicator light 

- Hazard warning light 

• Tail light/license plate light 

• Brake light 

- Brake force display 

• Reversing light 

• Rearfog light (Europe version only) 

• Parking light 

• Welcome light 

• Daytime driving light 

With the exception of the raised brake light, the footwell module supplies all light func¬ 
tions with a pulse width-modulated signal. This ensures a constant brightness level of 
the exterior lighting. 

Note: The LEDs (e.g. raised brake lightortail light)the bi-xenon headlightare 
not controlled but rather activated at 100% pulse width. 


16 

E70 Exterior Lighting 





In addition to the standard light functions, further special functions for the exterior lighting 
are integrated in the footwell module: 

• Bi-xenon headlight 

• Headlight-range adjustment 

• Lamp monitoring 

- Cold monitoring with lights "OFF" 

- Hot monitoring with lights "ON" 

• Delayed switch-off home lights 

• Daytime driving lights 

• Visual alarm 

- Anti-theft alarm system 

- Crash telegram 

• Special case at "terminal 15 OFF" 

• Emergency operating mode 

• Adaptive headlight 

Note: The adaptive headlight is described in the Product Information "Adaptive 
headlights E70".The description ofthe adaptive headlights includes the 
turn-off light. 

The exterior lighting system is switched on via the light switch. 


Example ofthe lights control panel in the E70 





1 1) 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Fog lights 

2 

Head-up display button 

3 

Light switch 

4 

Dimmer, instrument lighting 


17 

E70 Exterior Lighting 








Side Lights 

The light switch in the light control unit must be turned to switch position 1 to switch on 
the side lights. 

The following lamps are activated together with switching on the side lights: 

• Corona rings on halogen headlight 

• Daytime driving light corona rings, dimmed on bi-xenon headlight 

• Tail lights 

• Left/right license plate light 

• Terminal 58 switched 

Low Beam Headlight 

To switch on the low beam headlights, the light switch in the lights control panel must 
be turned to low beam headlight (switch position 2). 

The following lights are activated when the low beam headlights are switched on. 

• Bi-xenon lamp on bi-xenon headlamp 

After turning off the engine, the side lights stay on although the light switch is in switch 
position 2. The side lights are switched off automatically as the driver's door is opened. 

Note: Leaving the side light switched on can drain the vehicle battery. 

High Beam 

The high beam headlight is switched on underfollowing conditions: 

• Terminal 15 ON and 

• Light switch in low beam position and 

• Steering column switch for high beam ON 

The headlight flasher in connection with halogen headlights is activated by pulling on 
the steering column stalk. The function is operative as from terminal 30 ON. 

Note: The headlightflasherfunction is now also possible in connection with 
bi-xenon headlights. The previously separate high beam lamp in the 
bi-xenon headlamp is therefore no longer required. 


18 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Automatic Driving Lights Control 

The following conditions must apply forthe driving lights (low beam) to be switched on: 

• Light switch in automatic driving light control position and 

• Status "Terminal 15 ON" and 

• Rain/driving lights/solar sensor signals darkness 

The footwell module switches on the low beam light if the signal from the rain/driving 
lights/solar sensorfails due to a defect. 

The low beam lights are switched on together with the side lights by the automatic dri¬ 
ving lights control system as soon as the rain/driving lights/solar sensor detects a certain 
level of ambient brightness. The signal is sent from the rain/driving lights/solar sensor via 
the LIN-bus to the roof functions center. 

The roof functions center routes the signal via the K-CAN to the footwell module. In turn, 
the footwell module evaluates the signal and switches on the driving lights. 

The driving lights switched on by the automatic driving lights control system can be 
switched off with the light switch or by means of the rain/driving lights/solar sensor. 

The side lights can also remain on after "Terminal R OFF" because they were switched 
on by the automatic driving lights control function. The side lights are switched off auto¬ 
matically after opening the driver's door. 

If a different door is used to exit the vehicle, the side lights will be switched off when the 
vehicle is locked. 

Note: The rain/driving lights/solar sensor now also contains the solar sensor. 

It performs the solarsensorfunction forthe air conditioning system. A 
detailed description of the rain/driving lights/solar sensorcan be found 
in the Product Information "Wiper/Washer System E70". 


19 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Fog Light 

Switching fog lights ON/OFF 

The fog lights can be switched on underfollowing conditions: 

• Terminal 15 ON and 

• Light switch in side lights or low beam light ON or automatic driving lights control 
position and 

• Fog light button pressed 

The fog lights are switched off by pressing the button again. When switched on, the fog 
lights can also be switched off by turning the light switch to the "Lights OFF" position. 

The fog lights can be switched on again when the light switch is set to the side lights, 
low beam or automatic driving lights control position. 

Direction Indicator Lights 

The front and rear direction indicator light as well as the side direction indicator repeaters 
can be switched on as from terminal RON. 

They are operated by means of the switch on the steering column switch cluster. The 
steering column switch is an optical switch. 

An exact description of the steering column stalk can be found in the Product Information 
"Steering column switch cluster E70". 

A defective lamp bulb in the front or rear direction indicator lights causes the remaining 
direction indicator lights to flash at double the rate. 

A defective lamp bulb in the front direction indicator repeaters has no influence on the 
flashing rate of the direction indicator lights. 

The side direction indicator repeaters are equipped with LEDs (Light Emitting Diodes). 
The complete direction indicator repeater must be replaced if defective. 

One-Touch Indicating 

The direction indicator lights are activated three times in connection with one-touch indi¬ 
cating. In the personal profile it is possible to reduce the one-touch indicating function to 
flash once byway of coding. 


20 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Hazard Warning Lights 


The hazard warning lights are switched on by pressing the hazard warning switch. As a 
result, all direction indicator lights are activated simultaneously and the indicator in the 
hazard warning switch flashes in time. 

The steering column switch has priority if it is moved in left or right direction while the 
hazard warning lights are active. The hazard warning function resumes afterterminal R 
OFF or cancelling the direction indicator. 

The hazard warning lights have priority when the direction indicator lights forturning left 
or right are switched on and the hazard warning switch is pressed. 


i 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Hazard Warning Switch 


In Connection with Alarm Triggered 

Thefootwell module receives the request forthe hazard warning lights via the K-CAN. 
The signal is sent by the ultrasonic passenger compartment protection system. 

The alarm time forthe hazard warning lights is 6 minutes provided the Anti-theft alarm 
system is not switched off. The hazard warning light switch is blanked out during the 
alarm and therefore does not flash together with the lights. 

Note: The ultrasonic passenger compartment sensor is completely integrated 
in the roof functions center, both in terms of hardware and software. 

Visual and Audible Indicators 

The instrument cluster provides visual and audible indication of the turn signals. The 
footwell module informs the instrument cluster via the K-CAN to activate the acoustic 
generator and the indicator lights together with the direction indicator lights. 

The visual/audible indicator in the instrument cluster switches off if the vehicle is locked 
with the central locking while the hazard warning light function is active. 

Visual FeedbackThrough the Central Locking 

The visual feedback is set at the factory. The direction indicator lights flash when the cen¬ 
tral locking is activated. The Car Access System 3 makes available the signal necessary 
forthis purpose via the K-CAN. 

The visual feedback can be deactivated in the personal profile. 


21 

E70 Exterior Lighting 






Tail Light/License Plate Light 

As from terminal 30, the light switch can be used to switch on the tail lights together with 
the license plate lights. 

The lamp bulbs in the brake light chambers are used as a substitute function forthe tail 
light. 

The 21 W lamp bulbs are dimmed by means of a PWM signal forthe substitute tail light 
function. 

Brake operation has priority overthe substitute function. 

Brake Light 

As from "Terminal RON", the brake lights can be switched on by activating the brake 
light switch. 

The Car Access System 3 powers the brake light switch with a 5 V voltage. 

Substitute Lighting 

The brake force display (two-stage brake light) assumes the substitute function forthe 
outer brake light. 

Note: Both chambers are used forthe brake light in the US version. No 
substitute function is provided in the event of the bulb failing. 

Brake Force Display 

The brake force display is fitted on standard on the E70. 

The following conditions must be met for operation of the brake force display: 

• Driving speed > 5 km/h 

• Brake deceleration above 5 m/s 2 

• Control intervention of the antilock braking system 

Reversing Light 

The reversing light can be switched on as from "Terminal 15 ON". The footwell module 
receives the signal via the K-CAN.The electronic transmission control unit makes avail¬ 
able this signal. On manual transmission vehicles, the footwell module receives the signal 
from the reverse gear switch. 

When the vehicle is in trailertowing mode, the reversing light of the trailer is additionally 
activated via the trailer module. 


22 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Rear Fog Lights 

As from "Terminal 15 ON", the button forthe rearfog lights can be pressed to switch on 
the rearfog lights. 

The following conditions must apply forthis purpose: 

• Terminal 15 ON and 

• Low beam headlight ON orfog lights ON and 

• Button for rearfog lights pressed. 

The fog lights are switched off by pressing the button again. 

When switched on, the rearfog lights can also be switched off by turning the light switch 
to the "Lights OFF" position. 

Note: The rearfog lights are not switched on in trailer towing mode. 

Parking Lights 

The parking lights are switched on with the steering column switch as from "Terminal R 
OFF" and detected by the footwell module via the K-CAN. 

Forthe parking lightfunction, the footwell module activates the front side light and the tail 
light in the lower chamber of the rear light cluster. 

The steering column switch forthe parking lights responds with a slight delay when 
switched. This prevents the parking lights being switched on by mistake, e.g. by knocking 
against the steering column switch while getting out of the car. 


23 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Special Features 


Bi-Xenon Headlight 

In connection with the bi-xenon headlights, the shutterforthe low beam light is activated 
by the "high beam ON" signal thus enabling the high beam light. 

High beam is also used forthe headlight flasherfunction so that the additional halogen 
headlight (as previously installed) is no longer necessary. 

The free chamber in the headlight is used forthe daytime driving light. The daytime dri¬ 
ving light is produced by the inner and outer corona ring. 

Daytime Driving Lights 

The light switch must be in position "0" in orderto activate the daytime driving lights. If 
the vehicle is equipped with the automatic driving lights control option, the daytime dri¬ 
ving lights are also switched on when the light switch is set to position "A". 

The daytime driving lights function is country specific and is activated as from "Terminal 
15 ON". The daytime driving lights can be deactivated/activated via the personal profile. 

After "Terminal R OFF", the daytime driving lights are only switched off after the driver's 
door has been opened. If the vehicle is exited through another door, the daytime driving 
lights are switched off when the vehicle is locked. 

Note: The daytime driving lights cannot be deactivated in the personal profile 
in the US version. 

Welcome Light 

The light switch must not be in position "0" or "1" in orderto activate the welcome light. 
Furthermore, the parking lights or side lights must also not be activated.The welcome 
light is switched on as soon as the vehicle is unlocked. Forthis purpose, the Car Access 
System 3 makes available the status of the central locking system via the K-CAN. 

Thefootwell module receives the "Unlock vehicle" status and switches on the exterior 
lighting for approximately. 20 seconds. The ON time can be set to up to 60 seconds via 
the personal profile. While switched on, the welcome light can be deactivated with the 
"Terminal RON" status. 

The following light units are activated: 

• Tail lights • Corona rings 

• Side markers • Interior lighting 

• Courtesy lighting 


24 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Delayed Switch-Off Home Lights 

The E70 is equipped with the delayed switch off home lights as standard. The lights can 
be switched on via the steering column switch for high beam as from lights OFF. 

The switch-on time is set at the factory to 40 s and can be set between 0 and 240 s in 
the "Personal Profile". 

The low beam, side lights and tail lights are switched on when the home lights function is 
active. 

Headlight- Range Adjustment 

The E70 is equipped with a manual headlight range adjustment system as standard. To 
comply with legal requirements, a dynamic headlight-range adjustment system is 
installed in connection with the bi-xenon headlights option. The dynamic headlight range 
adjustment ensures that the oncoming traffic is not dazzled. 

Lamp Monitoring 

Thefootwell monitors all lamps of the exterior lighting system both when switched on 
and when switched off.The monitoring function starts as from "Terminal 15 ON". 

Cold Monitoring 

Cold monitoring is based on measuring the current of the individual lamp outputs. The 
current pulse used for measurement purposes is so short that the lamps are not illumi¬ 
nated. The footwell module evaluates the individual lamp outputs to establish whether 
there is a line break ora lamp bulb is defective. 

The number of current pulses is increased significantly during the first 4 s after "Terminal 
15 ON", to check whether the lamps are in working order before setting off. This function 
is referred to as the pre-drive check. 

The number of pulses is then reduced afterthe pre-drive check. Power is then applied to 
the lamps every 1.5 minutes. 

The raised brake light and tail lights are not included in the cold monitoring function. The 
LEDs of the brake lights ortail lights react too fast to the current pulse and would conse¬ 
quently light up. This also applies to the rear direction indicator lights as the side direction 
indicator repeaters are connected together with the rear direction indicator lights. 

The bi-xenon headlight is also not included in the cold monitoring. Legal regulations pro¬ 
hibit the current pulse to the bi-xenon headlight. 

Hot Monitoring 

Hot monitoring is based on measuring the current of the individual lamp outputs. The 
lamp current is used to detect an overload or interruption (break). 


25 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Visual Alarm 


Anti-Theft Alarm System 

The footwell module enables the Anti-theft alarm system to triggerthe visual alarm via 
the direction indicator lights. 

The Anti-theft system receives the signal forthe visual alarm via the K-CAN. 

A detailed description can be found in the Product Information "Anti-theft Alarm System 
E70". 

Crash Telegram 

The footwell module switches on the hazard warning lights and the interior lighting when 
the advanced crash safety management sends a crash telegram. The hazard warning 
lights can be switched off with the hazard warning light switch. 

The light in the hazard warning light switch is switched off by pressing the light switch to 
"Lights OFF" position or by means of the rocker switch on the steering column stalk. 

Terminal 15 OFF 

The exterior lighting is switched off if "Terminal 15 ON" fails during vehicle operation or 
terminal 15 is inadvertently deactivated by pressing the START-STOP button. 

The low beam headlight remains switched on in orderto maintain road safety in this situ¬ 
ation. When the vehicle speed drops below 20 km/h, the low beam light is also switched 
off after a delay of approximately 30 seconds. 

Emergency Operating Mode 

Emergency operating mode is assumed if a defect occurs in the software of the footwell 
module causing failure of the entire exterior lighting system. In this case, the tail lights and 
the raised brake light are activated.This function is active as from "Terminal 15 ON". 


26 

E70 Exterior Lighting 



Service Information 


Lights in the Front Area 

The headlights are accessible through the engine compartment. The headlights are fit¬ 
ted with a service cover. The light source can be replaced after removing the service 
cover. 

The fog lights are accessible from the outside through the ventilation openings. The 
bulbs forthe fog lights can be replaced after removing the ventilation grille. 


Lights in the Rear Area 

The lights in the rear area are accessible through the opened tailgate. It is necessary 
to remove the service cover in the trim panel of the tailgate. 


The bulbs can then be replaced. The lamps in the body section can be accessed by 
removing the cover. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Access from Luggage 
Compartment 

2 

Access from Tailgate 


27 

E70 Exterior Lighting 











