Table of Contents 

E70 Park Distance Control (PDC) 

Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

Park Distance Control .4 

Input/Output - Park Distance Control.5 

System Circuit Diagram - Park Distance Control.6 

Functions.8 

Functional Principle ofthe Ultrasonic Sensors.8 

Send M ode.8 

Receive Mode.9 

Function Activation .9 

Automatic Activation .9 

Automatic Deactivation.9 

Manual Activation .10 

Distance Signalling .10 

Audible Distance Signalling.10 

Front Detection Range .11 

Rear Detection Range.11 

Audio System .11 

Visual Distance Signalling .12 

Trailer Mode .13 

Rear-view Camera .13 

System Components.14 

Ultrasonic Sensors .14 

Greater Range .14 

Optimized Design .14 

Wiring harness, front ultrasonic sensors .16 

Wiring harness, rear ultrasonic sensors .16 

Powersupply of ultrasonic sensors.16 

Park Distance Control with Eight Channels.16 

Park Distance Control Functions .17 

Service Information.18 

Diagnosis.18 

System Limits.18 

Cleaning the Ultrasonic Sensors .19 

System Error.19 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 


Revision Date: 





































Subject 


Page 



Park Distance Control 


Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

iBiiimyis 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the operation of the Park Distance Control on the E70. 

• Diagnose the PDC on the E70. 


3 

E70 Park Distance Control 


Introduction 


Park Distance Control 

The Park Distance Control (PDC) is a distance warning system that provides both visual 
and audible information on the distance to the nearest obstacle when parking and driving 
out of spaces. 

The park distance control is optionally available in the E70. 

The distance to the next obstacle is measured by means of four ultrasonic sensors in the 
rear bumper and four ultrasonic sensors in the front bumper. The distance is signalled 
audibly via the speakers in the rear and front area of the vehicle. The frequency of the 
signal increases as the distance to the obstacle decreases. 

A continuous signal is output in very close proximity to obstacles (about 30 cm). 

The distance signalling is shown in graphic form on the central information display CID. 

The park distance control can be switched on and off by means of a button in the center 
console switch clusterSZM. 

The following changes/new features have been implemented compared to the 
predecessor models: 

• New converter and new control unit 

• Visual representation of distance to obstacle 

• Audible signalling through radio speakers 



4 

E70 Park Distance Control 










Input/Output - Park Distance Control 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Park distance control 

6 

Gear selector lever 

2 

Central information display CID 

7 

Wheel speed sensor 

3 

Speaker 

8 

Park distance control button 

4 

Controller 

9 

Reartransducer (ultrasonic sensor) 

5 

Trailer module 

10 

F rant transducer (ultrasonic sensor) 


With the aid of the controller (4), representation of the park distance control (1) can be set 
on the central information display (2). The trailer module (5) informs the park distance 
control whether a trailer is hitched to the vehicle in orderto deactivate the reartransduc- 
ers (9). Park distance control is activated on engaging reverse gear with the gear selector 
lever (6). The park distance control can be switched on/off with the button (8). 
Corresponding to the setting of the park distance control system, the driver can be 
informed both acoustically (3) and visually (2) of the distance to the nearest obstacle while 
parking/ maneuvering .The audible information is always available when the park distance 
control is activated. 


5 

E70 Park Distance Control 






















System Circuit Diagram - Park Distance Control 




6 

E70 Park Distance Control 





























































































































Legend for System Circuit Diagram - Park Distance Control 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

D 

Front left transducer (ultrasonic 
sensor) 

12 

Speaker, rear driver's side 

2 

F rant center left transducer 

13 

Speaker, front driver's side 

3 

F rant center left transducer 

14 

Central information display CID 

D 

Front right transducer 

15 

Car communication computer* 

5 

Speaker, front passenger's side 

16 

Centerconsole switch cluster 

6 

Speaker, rear passenger's side 

17 

PDC button 

7 

Park distance control PDC 

18 

Integrated automatic climate control 
IHKA 

8 

Rear right transducer 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

9 

Rear center right transducer 

KL15 

Terminal 15 

10 

Rear center left transducer 

LVDS 

Low voltage differential signal 

11 

Rear left transducer 




K-CAN Signals at Park Distance Control 


In/Out 

Information 

Source 

Function 

In 

Vehicle speed 
signal 

Rotation rate sensor >dynamic 
stability control function-box 
ECU instrument cluster 

Deactivation of park distance 
control as from 12mph/20 km/h 

In 

Distance signal 

Rotation rate sensor > dynamic 
stability control >junction-box 

E C U > i nstru me nt c 1 uster 

Deactivation of park distance 
control after distance of 50 m 

In 

Outside 

temperature 

Outside temperature 
sensor > instrument cluster 

Temperature is one of the refer¬ 
ence variables for calculating dis¬ 
tance 

In 

Trailer 

Trailer socket towing hitch 
>trailer module 

Rear park distance control deac¬ 
tivated when trailer is connected 

In 

Reverse gear 
status 

Gear selector lever > electronic 
transmission control 

Park distance control ON, with 
reverse gear engaged 

Out 

Check control message 

Park distance control 

Display of CC message 


7 

E70 Park Distance Control 


















































Functions 


Functional Principle of the Ultrasonic Sensors 

Operation ofthe ultrasonic sensors is based on the echo-sounding principle. 

Short ultrasonic pulses are sent out by the ultrasonic sensor, reflected from objects in the 
vicinity and received again by the ultrasonic sensor. 

The ultrasonic sensor sends the period of time required between sending the ultrasonic 
pulse and receiving the first echo to the park distance control module which, in turn, cal¬ 
culates the distance to the nearest object from this period of time. 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Ultrasonic sensor connection 

4 

Outer diaphragm 

2 

Ultrasonic sensor electronics 

5 

Ultrasonic waves 

3 

Piezo-ceramic element 

6 

Obstacle/wall 


Send Mode 

The ultrasonic sensor behaves as a "speaker" in send mode. 

At about 40 kHz to 50 kHz, the selected ultrasonic frequency is outside the range in 
which people, pets and domestic animals are not adversely affected. 

The electronics ofthe ultrasonic sensor produces electrical pulses to set the Piezo¬ 
ceramic element in motion (conversion of electrical energy to mechanical energy). 

The Piezo-ceramic element is located on the inside ofthe outer diaphragm. The outer 
diaphragm vibrates in line with the resonance frequency and produces ultrasonic waves. 
The short pulse sequences hit an obstacle and are bounced back (reflected). 


8 

E70 Park Distance Control 


























Receive Mode 

The ultrasonic sensor behaves as a "microphone" in receive mode. 

Afterthe outer diaphragm has settled (about 1 ms), the ultrasonic sensor receives the 
ultrasonic waves reflected by the obstacle. Vibrations are induced in the outer diaphragm 
and Piezo-ceramic element which transfer the electrical pulses to the electronic ultrason¬ 
ic sensor module. 

The electrical measured signal is digitized and sent to the park distance control. The data 
are processed in the park distance control module and the distance to the obstacle cal¬ 
culated. 

The echo propagation time is calculated from the start time of sending the signal and 
from the time of the incoming echo. Based on the known ultrasonic speed in air, the echo 
propagation time is a measure for the distance to the obstacle. 

Function Activation 

The park distance control performs a system test after switching on the ignition. The park 
distance control is ready for operation afterthe system test has been successfully com¬ 
pleted. Any system faults are indicated in the form of check control messages in the 
instrument cluster and central information display. 

Automatic Activation 

The park distance control is activated automatically by engaging reverse gear. Activation 
takes place with a delay of about 1 second. This delay prevents unintentional activation of 
the park distance control when passing through the R-position when changing the drive 
range. 

On vehicles equipped with a central information display, it is possible to select whether 
the distance to the obstacle is to be indicated visually. 

Automatic Deactivation 

The front and rear park distance control remains active after disengaging reverse gear. 
Automatic deactivation of the park distance control is initiated under following conditions: 

• Vehicle speed greaterthan 12 mph/20 kmh 

• Distance greaterthan 50 m 


9 

E70 Park Distance Control 



Manual Activation 


The park distance control can be switched on 
or off by pressing thePDC button (2). 
Illumination of the function indicator (1) in the 
PDC button indicates that the park distance 
control and therefore the distance recognition 
function is active. 

Manual activation of the function is possible 
only up to a road speed of about 
12 mph / 20 kmh. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Function indicator 

2 

PDC button 


Note: The signal from the PDC button is evaluated by the integrated automatic 
climate control.The integrated automatic climate control sends the sig¬ 
nal via the K-CAN to the park distance control. 

Distance Signalling 

The distance between the vehicle and an obstacle is always signalled audibly. The repre¬ 
sentation can be additionally activated on the central information display showing a 
schematic representation of the vehicle and the obstacles. 

Audible Distance Signalling 

Corresponding to the vehicle equipment, the distance is signalled audibly through the 
speakers of the audio system. 

The signal frequency changes corresponding to the distance of the vehicle to the obsta¬ 
cle. The shorterthe distance of the vehicle from the obstacle the fasterthe tone 
sequence. A continuous tone is output at a distance below about 30 cm. 

As the vehicle moves away from the obstacle, the audible signal is immediately switched 
off as soon as the distance changes by more than 10 cm. This tolerance range is neces¬ 
sary to ensure that small changes in distance (<10 cm) do not result in deactivation of the 
audible signal. 


10 

E70 Park Distance Control 









To avoid irritating the driver, the signal tone of the park distance control (outer ultrasonic 
sensor(s)) is switched off after about 3 seconds when driving very close to and along 

a wall. The prerequisite is that the distance is outside the continuous tone range 
(> 30 cm). The audible signal is sounded again on approaching this range. 

Front Detection Range 

The detection range forthe audible warning at the front is: 

• Left/right about 60cm 

• Centerabout 70cm 

Rear Detection Range 

The detection range forthe audible warning at the rear is: 

• Left/right about 60cm 

• Centerabout 150cm 

Audio System 

The audio system (car communication computer) receives the signals via the K-CAN 
from the park distance control forthe purpose of audible distance signalling. The audio 
system processes the signals, after which the audible signal forthe speakers is generat¬ 
ed. Parallel to this, the distance is shown visually on the central information display. 

Note: Signal processing takes place in the CHAMP if no carcommunication 
computer is installed. 

In orderto better locate small obstacles as well as obstacles located only on one side of 
the vehicle, only the speaker installed on the corresponding side of the vehicle is activat¬ 
ed when the obstacle is detected by an outer ultrasonic sensor. 

This function to distinguish between left and right can be disabled by way of coding. The 
obstacle closest to the vehicle is indicated. The mid-range speakers on the left and right 
are activated as soon as a centrally positioned ultrasonic sensor detects an object. 

The audible signal is not output simultaneously at the front and rear. If the distance of the 
obstacles to the front and rear of the vehicle is below about 30cm, the audible signal is 
output alternately at the front and rear at 1 second intervals. 


11 

E70 Park Distance Control 



Visual Distance Signalling 

In the E70, the distance to an obstacle can also be indicated visually.The visual display 
can be permanently switched on or off by means of the controllerforthe central informa¬ 
tion display.The audible indication always remains active. 



The park distance control is shown in the central information display when visual distance 
signalling and park distance control have been activated. 

The visual distance signalling indicates obstacles earlierthan the audible signalling. The 
acquisition range is up to 250 cm. The vehicle and the obstacles are shown in a top view. 

The grey background represents the monitored area.The obstacles in this area are 
shown in green, yellow and red corresponding to the distance from the vehicle. 

The audio system receives the distance information between the ultrasonic sensors and 
the obstacle from the park distance control via K-CAN and generates the corresponding 
graphic representation. 

The central information display outputs the information and superimposes this represen¬ 
tation on the central information display. 

The previous display is shown automatically in the central information display when the 
park distance control is switched off. The display ranges at the front/rear are identical and 
shown in the following table. 

Distance from obstacle in cm 


Green 

>100 

>100 

Yellow 

50 tolOO 

50tolOO 

Red 

<50 

<50 


12 

E70 Park Distance Control 
















Trailer Mode 

When pulling a trailer, the trailer module informs the park distance control via the K-CAN 
that a trailer is hitched to the vehicle. The park distance control deactivates the ultrasonic 
sensors forthe rear area of the vehicle. 

Note: The park distance control receives the information thatthe trailer is 
hitched to the vehicle only when the trailer lighting is connected. 

Rear-view Camera 

The rear-view camera can be combined with the data made available by the park distance 
control. For instance, obstacles detected by the park distance control can be shown in 
the real image of the rear-view camera. 

The image is shown on the central information display. The image of the rear-view cam¬ 
era is optional and can be switched overto the central information display. This function 
can be set by means of the controller. The audible park distance control remains active. 

More detailed information on changeoverfunctions and possible representations can be 
found in the Product Information "Rear-view camera E70". 


13 

E70 Park Distance Control 



System Components 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

J unction-box ECU 

2 

Park distance control 

3 

Central information display 


Ultrasonic Sensors 

The ultrasonic sensors fitted in the E70 offer new product advantages such as greater 
range and optimized design. 

Greater Range 

The range of the new ultrasonic sensors is about 250 cm. The entire range of the ultra¬ 
sonic sensors is used for visual distance signalling. The ultrasonic sensors are reduced 
to a range of minimum 150 cm for acoustic distance signalling. 

Optimized Design 

The new ultrasonic sensors are about 50% shorterthan the previous ultrasonic sensor 
and have a smaller diaphragm (important for design). The smaller diaphragm has been 
made possible by new design methods. 

The diaphragm is no longer decoupled from the bumpertrim in the ultrasonic sensor 
itself but rather it is now decoupled by means of a de-coupling ring. 


14 

E70 Park Distance Control 















The installation of the De-coupling ring is essential and ensures trouble-free operation. 
The transmission and reception quality may be reduced if no or an incorrect De-coupling 
ring is fitted. In addition, the park distance control can trigger a continuous tone although 
there is no obstacle in the detection range of the ultrasonic sensor. The De-coupling ring 
does not serve as a seal. 


1 I 2 l 3 ) 4 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Outer diaphragm 

3 

Connection socket 

2 

Sensor housing 

4 

De-coupling ring 


The ultrasonic sensors can amplify the echo signals and convert them into digital signals. 
A bidirectional data line is used for transmitting data to the park distance control. Forthis 
reason, all ultrasonic sensors are connected by means of a 3-pin waterproof plug con¬ 
nection to the wiring harness. 

Electrically and mechanically, all ultrasonic sensors are of identical design. Adaptation to 
the respective bumper is achieved by way of variant encoding. These data are specific to 
the type and vehicle and depend on the installation location. 

To ensure the ultrasonic sensors can be used universally, the corresponding data are sent 
from the park distance control module to the ultrasonic sensors every time the park dis¬ 
tance control is activated. 

This means the ultrasonic sensors of one vehicle can be interchanged as part of a trou¬ 
bleshooting procedure. 


15 

E70 Park Distance Control 











Wiring harness, front ultrasonic sensors 

The wiring harness is one-piece from the control unit up to the bumper, where the wiring 
harness is split and connected to the individual ultrasonic sensors. 

Wiring harness, rear ultrasonic sensors 

The wiring harness is one-piece from the control unit up to the bumper, where the wiring 
harness is split and connected to the individual ultrasonic sensors. 

Power supply of ultrasonic sensors 

The positive connection and ground connection are routed individually up to the bumper. 
The power supply is split in the bumper and routed to the ultrasonic sensors. 

Park Distance Control with Eight Channels 

The control unitforthe park distance control in the E70 is an 8-channel system. 
Activation of the audible and visual distance signalling is dependent on the audio system. 

The park distance control unit is installed on the rear right in the luggage compartment. 
The park distance control unit has three connectors forthe version with four sensors for 
the front and foursensors forthe rear area of the vehicle 


16 

E70 Park Distance Control 



Park Distance Control Module 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Connection, bus 

2 

Connection, rear sensors 

3 

Connection, front sensors 


Park Distance Control Functions 

The main functions of the park distance control are: 

• To activate the ultrasonic sensors 

• To evaluate the received echo pulses 

• To output the signals for audible and visual driver information 

• Bus communication 

The park distance control additionally monitors correct operation of all ultrasonic sensors. 
In the event of a fault, the corresponding message is indicated to the driver (check control 
message) and the fault code is stored in the fault code memory. The park distance con¬ 
trol (control unit) is constantly operational as from "Terminal 15 ON" even if the function is 
not active. 


17 

E70 Park Distance Control 










Service Information 


Diagnosis 

The ultrasonic sensors must be clean and free of ice to ensure effective operation. 
Check following points before performing the diagnostic procedure: 

• Check mechanical condition of ultrasonic sensors. Make sure that the ultrasonic 
sensors are fitted correctly in their retaining fixtures and are free of dirt, ice and 
snow. A reoccurring fault symptom is that the customer complains about the con¬ 
tinuous tone in the park distance control but the system operates correctly in the 
workshop. This problem is caused by ice or dirt on the sensors. 

• During troubleshooting, there must be no objects closerthan 40 cm from the 
detection range of the ultrasonic sensors. 

• Ensure the De-coupling element is fitted correctly on the ultrasonic sensor. 
Otherwise problems may be encountered in transmitting and receiving signals. 

The park distance control unit monitors the following system components for breaks 
(open circuit) or short-circuits and if problems occur corresponding fault codes are 
stored in the fault code memory: 

• Data lines to the ultrasonic sensors 

• Power supply of the ultrasonic sensors 

System Limits 

The park distance control cannot replace the driver's own estimation of the distance to 
obstacles. Sensors also have a "dead" zone in which objects can no longer be detected. 
Detection of objects can come up against the physical limits of ultrasonic measurement 
when the ultrasonic waves are not or poorly reflected, e.g. thin objects. Low objects 
already indicated can "disappear" again before a continuous tone is sounded (a high 
curb stone). Loud sources of noise outside and within the vehicle can drown out the sig¬ 
nal tone of the park distance control. The driver therefore remains responsible for esti¬ 
mating obstacles even in vehicles equipped with park distance control. 


18 

E70 Park Distance Control 




The park distance control can trigger a warning underthe following conditions even 
though there is no obstacle in the detection range: 

• Ultrasonic sensor not fitted correctly in its retaining fixture 

• In heavy rain 

• Ultrasonic sensors dirty or iced up 

• Ultrasonic sensors covered in snow 

• Exhaust gasses 

• Echo pulses caused by the natural surroundings, like extremely rough road surface 
or grass 

• In large, rectangular rooms with smooth walls, like in underground parking garages 
(superimposition of reflected echo pulses) 

• Fault triggered by connected towing hitch or of unevenly fitted cap on ball head of 
towing hitch. 

Cleaning the Ultrasonic Sensors 

The ultrasonic sensors must be clean and free of ice to ensure effective operation. When 
washing the vehicle with a high pressure washer, do not direct the spray continuously at 
the ultrasonic sensors and maintain a minimum distance of 10 cm. 

System Error 

A check control message is shown in the instrument cluster and in the central informa¬ 
tion display to indicate a fault in the park distance control. 

This symbol appears in the instrument cluster. 

In addition, the following text appears in the status line of the 
central information display: 

• "PDC failed" 

• The following text can be selected in the "Check control messages" sub-menu of 
the "BMW Service" menu. 

• "Park Distance Control (PDC) failed. Have the problem checked by yourBM W dealer 
as soon as possible." 



19 

E70 Park Distance Control 





