Table of Contents 

E70 Rear-view Camera (RFK) 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

Rear-view Camera .3 

Input/Output .4 

Rear-view Camera System Schematic .5 

Rear-view Camera System with Video Module Schematic .6 

K-CAN Signals at Rear-view Camera Control Unit .8 

Functions.9 

Basic Functions of the Rear-view Camera System .9 

Image Reproduction Functions.9 

Lens Coverage Alignment.10 

Electronic Image Equalization.10 

View of Image Section .11 

Virtual Camera Pan .11 

Camera Pan as a Function of Speed.12 

Additional Functions of the Rear-view Camera System.12 

Assistance Graphics in Camera Image.12 

Lane Help Lines .13 

Turning Circle Lines.13 

Obstacle Markings .14 

Zoom ofTowing Hitch.15 

Personal Profile.15 

System Activation .16 

Automatic System Activation.16 

System Deactivation.16 

Automatic or Indirect System Activation.16 

Deactivation by Vehicle User.16 

Permanent System Deactivation .16 

Rear-view Camera Design .17 

Location or Rear-view Camera .18 

Mounting in the Tailgate.18 

Temperature-controlled Lens Thawing.18 

Service Information.19 

Calibration of the Rear-view Camera .19 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 


Revision Date: 




































Rear-view Camera 


Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 



After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the functions of the E70 Rear-view camera. 

• Diagnose and Service components and functions of the 
E70 Rear-view camera. 


2 

E70 Rear-view Camera 




Introduction 


Rear-view Camera 

The Rear-view camera system (RFK) serves to assist the driver when driving into/out 
of parking spaces and maneuvering. 

As well as showing a high-quality wide-angle image of the area behind the vehicle, the 
system contains a series of additional customerfunctions. 

The system is located in the tailgate. The Rear-view camera is located offset to the right 
of vehicle center in the tailgate strip handle. 

The Rear-view camera is activated automatically together with the park distance control 
by engaging reverse gear or manually by pressing the parking button. A wide angle color 
image of the area behind the vehicle is shown on the central screen. The electronic 
equalizer ensures natural perspectives in the image. Driver assistance graphics in the 
image show the calculated space requirement for parking into spaces and maneuvering 
referred to the current steering wheel position thus assisting the driver when parking into 
spaces. The shaded obstacle markings in the real camera image that are based on the 
ultrasonic sensor system help the driver (in addition to the PDC warning tone) to pay par¬ 
ticular attention to obstacles and confined areas when parking into spaces and maneu¬ 
vering. Selection menus on the central information display allow for interactive changes 
to the system settings. Automatic activation of the system can also be disabled in these 
menus. Following activation after opening the vehicle, the rear-view camera is not avail¬ 
able before the navigation display is operational. 

Range of Rear-view Camera 



3 


E70 Rear-view Camera 


















Input/Output 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear-view camera system 

2 

Carcommunication computer 

3 

Central information display 

K-CAN 

BodyCAN 

MOST 

Media Oriented System Transport 


The rear-view camera is controlled by means of the K-CAN and MOST bus systems 
while the CCC acts as the gateway. The video signal is transmitted via a separate video 
link (CVBS, RGB)to the car communication computer. From there, the existing LVDS 
connection is used. 


4 

E70 Rear-view Camera 
































Rear-view Camera System Schematic 



6 

E70 Rear-view Camera 



































































































Legend for Rear-view Camera System Schematic 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Central information display 

2 

Car communication computer 

3 

Center console switch cluster 

4 

Automatic climate control 

5 

Rear-view camera 

6 

Video module 

K-CAN 

BodyCAN 

LVDS 

LVDS data line 

FBAS 

CVBS line 

MOST 

Media Oriented System Transport 

KL 30g 

Terminal 30g 


7 

E70 Rear-view Camera 



























K-CAN Signals at Rear-view Camera Control Unit 


In/Out 

Signal 

Source 

Function 

In 

PDC signals 

PDC sensors 

PDC control unit 

Information for superimposing 
distance graphics 

In 

PDC button 

PDC button in center console 

Air conditioning control unit 

Activation and deactivation of 
the Rear-view camera system 

In 

Road speed 

Wheel speed sensors 

DSC control unit 

Deactivation of Rear-view cam¬ 
era system from a speed of 20 
km/h in forward driving 
Differentiation, forward 
driving/reversing 

In 

Configuration 

Controller 

Head unit(Champ/CCC) 

Configuration of displays and 
functions of Rear-view camera 
system 

In 

Steering wheel angle 

Steering angle sensor 
Steering column switch cluster 

Adaptation of lane help lines to 
the steer angle 

In 

Vehicle inclination 

Ride-height sensor 

Footwell module/VDM 

Adaptation of lane help lines to 
vehicle inclination 

In 

Outside temperature 

Outside temperature sensor 
instrument cluster 

Defrosting of rear-view camera 

lens 

In 

Distance travelled 

Wheel-speed sensors 

DSC control unit 

Rear-view camera system 
switches off display after a dis¬ 
tance of 50 m in forward 

direction 

In 

Tailgate 

Contact, tailgate 

CAS control unit 

No lane help lines are superim¬ 
posed when the tailgate is open 

Out 

CC messages 

Head unit(Champ/CCC) 

> C ID control unit 

CC messages are forwarded to 
the existing head unit 


8 

E70 Rear-view Camera 
















































Functions 


Basic Functions of the Rear-view Camera System 

The basic function of the rear-view camera system is to record optically a wide-angle 
view (about 120°) of the area behind the vehicle. The image is recorded via the lens in 
the rear-view camera system and then transmitted in electronically conditioned form to 
the car communication computer (CCC). 

The video picture is transmitted via a video interface (CVBS, RGB). Communication for 
controlling the system in the entire vehicle and connection to the overall-bus system are 
effected via a K-CAN interface. 

In addition, the rear-view camera system serves to show further assorted assistance 
information in the form of superimposed overlays (graphics and text) in the output signal 
(superimposed with the real camera picture). 

Image Reproduction Functions 

The rear-view camera system 
shows the view of the area 
behind the vehicle with a hori¬ 
zontal aperture angle of 120° 
on the central information dis¬ 
play. The view can be shown 
on the navigation display in 
two modes: 




9 

E70 Rear-view Camera 















































Lens C overage Alignment 

The entire coverage area of the rear-view camera system ranges from the bumper at the 
bottom up to an angle of 10° from the horizontal at the top. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rear-view camera system 

2 

Coverage range 

3 

Horizontal 

4 

Maximum possible upward coverage range (10° upward from the horizontal) 

5 

Rear bumper 


Electronic Image Equalization 


The rear-view camera features an electronic image equalizer.The equalizer serves the 
purpose of correcting the distortions in vertical and horizontal correction caused by the 
principle of the wide-angle lens. The equalization algorithm must be such that the sec¬ 
ondary effects such as information loss in the form of blurred edges as well as distortion 
that occurs as part of the equalization process are minimized. 

The aim is to achieve the most realistic representation of the view of the area behind the 
vehicle that can be unmistakably interpreted by the driver 


10 

E70 Rear-view Camera 





















View of Image Section 

The Rear-view camera system always provides a view of a certain section of the overall 
image. This makes it possible to adapt to the external conditions of the vehicle. If the vehi¬ 
cle is parked on uneven ground so that it is not straight, the Rear-view camera system 
can adapt the video image corresponding to the incoming information. 

This function is required for realizing the functions described in the following: 

• Virtual camera pan 

• Image adaptation to vehicle inclination 

• Software-based system calibration 

Virtual Camera Pan 

Different areas are shown on the screen in vertical direction depending on the driving 
speed. 


The bottom area of the 
image (from the bumper up 
to the horizontal) is shown 
when rear-view at slow 
speed (up to about 3mph) 



Increasingly only the upper 
area of the image (from 
about lm distance from the 
vehicle up to a minimum 
angle of 10° above the hori¬ 
zontal) is shown on the 
screen when rear-view at 
faster speed (more than 3 
mph) 



11 

E70 Rear-view Camera 


































Camera Pan as a Function of Speed 

The camera pans virtually without the camera moving mechanically. This function gives 
the driver a view of the area behind the vehicle adapted to the current speed. When dri¬ 
ving at slow speed, the area very close to the rear of the vehicle is shown so that every 
detail can be recognized. At speeds above 3 mph,the upper section of the image is 
shown to provide an extended view. 



Additional Functions of the Rear-view Camera System 


Assistance Graphics in Camera Image 

Assistance graphics are superimposed on the camera image to help the driver to park 
into spaces and maneuver. 


The following assistance graphics can be superimposed 

• Lane help lines 

• Turning circle lines 

• Obstacle markings 

• Zoom of towing hitch 



Note: The brightness can be adjusted orthe image completely switched off 


12 

E70 Rear-view Camera 
























Lane Help Lines 

The lane help lines are used to show the predicted path of the vehicle and therefore the 
required maneuvering space depending on the current position of the steering wheel. 
The lane help lines are deactivated automatically when driving in forward direction. 



Turning Circle Lines 

The turning circle lines mark the minimum possible vehicle turning circle. These marks 
remain superimposed on the image also when driving in forward direction. 




E70 Rear-view Camera 
























Only the relevant turning circle line is shown as soon as the driver turns the steering 
wheel. The opposite turning circle line is blanked out depending on the steering lock and 
is no longer shown at full lock. 



Obstacle Markings 

Obstacle markings shown in the real camera image are partly transparent overlays true to 
scale of the obstacle detected by the P DC. The obstacle distribution in the area behind 
the vehicle is shown as a 3D graphic. Its form, position and color depend on the distance 
to each of the four P DC sensors in the bumper. Through corresponding visualization with 
form and color, the way the obstacle markings are represented gives the driver a spatial 
perspective of the obstacle distribution about the area behind the vehicle. The view corre¬ 
sponds to the virtual PDC view. 




E70 Rear-view Camera 


























Personal Profile 

The settings last made by each user are stored in the Rear-view camera system and 
retrieved after corresponding identification. The following setting options can be stored in 
the rear-view camera depending on the vehicle key. 

• Display format (full image, main window as well as permanently switch on/off camera 
image) 

• Lane help lines (ON/OFF) 

• Turning circle lines (ON/OFF) 

• Obstacle markings (ON/OFF) 

• Camera pan (ON/OFF) 

• Image brightness (brightness value) 


15 

E70 Rear-view Camera 




System Activation 

System activation by driverThe Rear-view camera system can be activated by the driver 
by pressing the parking aid button (PDC button) as from terminal 15. The system can no 
longer be activated at a speed higherthan 12 mph 

Automatic System Activation 

Initially, the Rear-view camera system is ready to send data after engaging reverse gear 
(identification by CAN messages) and then sends an enquiry to the CCC. In response, 
the CCC gives the authorization to output the video signal. The rear-view camera video 
signal is output only after receiving this authorization. 

A corresponding error message is sent in the form of a CC message in the event of the 
Rear-view camera system not being available. 


System Deactivation 

Automatic or Indirect System Activation. 

The rear-view camera is deactivated automatically in response to the following conditions: 

• After exceeding a certain preset speed Vmax- forward (about 12 mph) as well as 

• A preset distance (about 50m) when driving in forward direction. 

Deactivation by Vehicle User 

Deactivation by vehicle user (while image from the rear-view camera is shown on the 
CID) by: 

• Operating iDrive (pop-up menu) 

• Pressing the PDC button 

The rear-view camera is activated again when reverse gear is engaged. 

Permanent System Deactivation 

The rear-view camera can be permanently deactivated in the 5th menu. 


16 

E70 Rear-view Camera 



Rear-view Camera Design 


The rear-view camera is based on a CMOS sensor (Complementary Metal Oxide 
Semiconductor sensor) adapted for use in the vehicle with an integrated image process¬ 
ing unit for full-digital processing of the raw sensor data (up to 110 Mbits/s). The electron¬ 
ic circuitry is designed as a two-processor system. The image processing takes place in 
the electronic module. The following processing steps are executed: 

• Histogram control - brightness and color adaptation to various exposure scenarios 

• Image equalization - compensation of lens effects 

• Superimposition of driver assistance line and camera pan 

• Calibration functions 

The tasks of bus communication, flash and boot routines and other standard applications 
are implemented in a separate microprocessor. 

The lens with the 2.0 shutter is made up of 6 glass lenses. 

It contains an automatically controlled heating element to de-ice the lens in winter. The 
heating element is largely controlled infinitely variable with a PWM control. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Processorfor bus communication, flash and boot routines 

2 

Processorforall image conditioning functions 

3 

CMOS image sensor 

4 

Heater 

5 

Lens 

6 

Power supply and bus link connector 

7 

Signal output connector 


17 

E70 Rear-view Camera 










































































































Location or Rear-view C amera 


The Rear-view camera system is installed on the right in the tailgate next to the tailgate 
lock. Tailgate seal A rubber seal seals off the housing of the rear-view camera from the 
tailgate. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Tailgate handle 

2 

Rear-view camera seal 

3 

Rear-view camera lens 


Mounting in the Tailgate 

The rear-view camera is installed from the rear of the tailgate and secured to the housing 
by means of two screws. 

Temperature-controlled Lens Thawing 

In freezing conditions, the camera lens is heated and thawed automatically to keep it free 
of snow and ice. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Mounting screw 

2 

Connector, white (power supply 
and bus connection) 

3 

Mounting screw 

4 

Connector, black (video signal) 


18 

E70 Rear-view Camera 

























Service Information 


Calibration of the Rear-view Camera 

Note: In orderto maintain the accuracy of the rear-view camera, a calibration 
procedure must followed as perthe latest BMW Service information 
found inTIS or on the GT-1. 



E70 Rear-view Camera 




