Table of Contents 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System (DWA) 

Subject Page 

Introduction.3 

Anti-theft Alarm System.3 

Alarm System Diagram.4 

Functions.6 

Overview .6 

Arming the Anti-theft Alarm System.6 

Deactivating Tilt Alarm Sensor and Ultrasonic Passenger 
Compartment Protection System (interior movement detector) ... .7 

Disarming the Anti-theft Alarm System .7 

Unlocking the Luggage Compartment.7 

Forced Disarming .7 

No Crosswise Operation .8 

Feedback from Anti-theft Alarm System.8 

Feedback via DWA LED .8 

Feedback Via Blinking Lights .9 

Feedback Via Emergency Current Siren .9 

Comfort Access.9 

Alarm Trigger .10 

Door Contacts.10 

Trunk Lid Contact .10 

Hood .10 

Ultrasonic Passenger Compartment Protection .11 

Tilt Alarm Sensor .12 

Self-monitoring of Emergency Current Siren .12 

Line Monitoring - DWA Bus.12 

Alarm Output.13 

Audible Alarm .13 

Visual Alarm.13 

Autarkic Alarm.13 

Panic M ode .14 

Alarm Termination.14 

Diagnosis.15 

Alarm M emory, Ultrasonic Passenger Compartment Protection . .15 
Alarm M emory, Emergency Current Siren.15 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 


Revision Date: 


































Anti-theft Alarm System 


Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

■MICIWIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the operation of the Anti-theft Alarm System on the E70. 

• Identify the different functions related to the Anti-theft Alarm System 
on the E70. 

• Identify the individual components that operate the Alarm System. 

• Diagnose and repairthe Anti-theft Alarm System on the E70. 


2 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 


Introduction 


Anti-theft Alarm System 

The anti-theft alarm system (DWA) is available as standard equipment. The task of the 
anti-theft alarm system is to indicate unauthorized access to the vehicle by emitting an 
alarm.The alarm can be triggered both audibly and visually. To do this, however, the 
alarm system must be armed. When activated, the alarm monitors the entire vehicle 
interior. 

In addition, the alarm system monitors the engine compartment and the vehicle's rest 
position. In orderthat nothing can be stolen from the luggage compartment, the alarm 
system monitors the tailgate. 

The alarm also indicates if the vehicle has been tampered with like cutting the feed line 
to the emergency siren. 

The anti-theft alarm system is based on the E90. However, the alarm system's ultrasonic 
passenger-compartment sensor is located fully in the roof function center. 

The ultrasonic signal passes into the inside of vehicle through openings in the grill ofthe 
roof function center. The emergency power siren with tilt alarm sensor is located nearthe 
front wheel arch. 


3 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 




Alarm System Diagram 







4 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 


TE06CWW 






































































Alarm System Diagram Legend 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

D 

Emergency power siren with 
integrated tilt alarm sensor SINE 

11 

Door contact, rear driver's side 

2 

Bonnet contact 

12 

Door contact, driver's door 

3 

J unction box control unitj B 

13 

Footwell module FRM 

D 

Door contact, passenger's door 

14 

Anti-theft alarm system DWALED 

5 

Door contact, rear passenger's side 

15 

Roof function center FZD with ultrasonic passe 
ger compartment sensor US IS 

6 

Tailgate soft-close automatic relay 

16 

Car Access System 3 CAS3 

7 

Tailgate soft-close automatic drive 

DWA- 

Bus 

DWA bus (K bus protocol) 

8 

Outer rear hatch button 

K-CAN 

CAN body 

9 

Tailgate central locking system 

KL30 

Terminal 30 

10 

Trunk lid contact 




Door contacts (4, 5,11,12 Hall sensors) are monitored by the footwell module (13). As 
soon as the status of a Hall sensor changes, the ultrasonic passenger-compartment sen¬ 
sor (15) receives this change via the K-CAN. If the anti-theft alarm system is armed, an 
alarm is triggered. 

The engine-bonnet contact (2) is monitored by the Car Access System 3 (16). If the sta¬ 
tus changes, an alarm is also triggered. 

Opening the tailgate is monitored by the junction box control unit (3). If the status of the 
boot-lid contact (10) changes, this also triggers an alarm. 


5 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 












































Functions 


Overview 

When armed, the anti-theft alarm system in the E70 monitors the whole vehicle. The 
doors, hood and trunk lid, emergency current siren, the vehicle interior and the DWA bus 
are mainly monitored. 

Note: The anti-theft alarm system can be armed or disarmed at terminal 30. 

It is not possible to arm the anti-theft alarm system at terminal R or 
terminal 15. 

Arming the Anti-theft Alarm System 

The anti-theft alarm system is armed when the vehicle is centrally locked. Arming can be 
triggered by the following components: 

• Driver's door lock Cylinder 

• Remote control/ID transmitter (only with Comfort Access) 

• Outside door handle with Comfort Access (sensitive surface) 

Afterthe vehicle has been centrally locked, the emergency power siren is first armed 
together with the tilt alarm sensor. All door contacts, the hood contact and the trunk-lid 
contact are then set for plausibility detection. Once the contacts are set, they are then 
linked to the vehicle monitoring system by the anti-theft alarm system. 

The tilt alarm sensor and the ultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor must be adjust¬ 
ed to the vehicle each time that the vehicle is centrally locked. This is called initializing. 
The tilt alarm sensor delivers information on the vehicle's rest position. If this value is 
plausible, the tilt alarm sensor is included in the vehicle monitoring process. 

The anti-theft alarm system's ultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor captures infor¬ 
mation on the interior of the passenger compartment. It therefore takes a little time 
before the ultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor can actively be used forthe anti¬ 
theft alarm system. The ultrasonic passenger compartment sensor is switched to 
'armed' about 20s afterthe contacts have been linked to the alarm system. 


6 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 




Deactivating Tilt Alarm Sensorand Ultrasonic Passenger Compartment 
Protection System (interior movement detector) 

It is advisable to deactivate the tilt alarm sensorand ultrasonic passenger compartment 
protection system in the following situations: 

• Vehicle in tilt-type duplex garage 

• Vehicle on ship transport 

• Vehicle on car transporter 

• People or animals in vehicle 

Deactivation takes place after central locking or comfort closing by locking the vehicle 
again within 10s. To acknowledge, the alarm system LED is lit for 2 seconds. 

Note: Thetiltalarm sensororultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor 
can be permanently deactivated by way of coding. 

Disarming the Anti-theft Alarm System 

The anti-theft alarm system is disarmed by the "unlock" or "selective unlock" central 
locking functions. An audible and/orvisual signal can be output in connection with dis¬ 
arming corresponding to the country-specific version. 

If an alarm was triggered during the time when the anti-theft alarm system was armed, 
the alarm system LED flashes for 5 minutes. If the system is disarmed during the alarm, 
the action is not acknowledged but ratherthe alarm is terminated. 

Unlocking the Luggage Compartment 

Thetiltalarm sensorand ultrasonic passenger-compartment protection system are 
blanked out if the luggage compartment is unlocked and opened on an armed vehicle. 
New vehicle rest positions could occur as a result of loading the vehicle. Initialization for 
the ultrasonic passenger-compartment protection system and the tilt alarm sensor 
restarts 3 seconds after closing the tailgate. 

Forced Disarming 

The anti-theft alarm system is armed when a person remains in the vehicle and sets the 
vehicle central arrest function via the remote control. If the remote control is inserted into 
its slot, the Car Access System 3 recognizes this and forwards information to the anti¬ 
theft alarm system. The anti-theft alarm system is compulsorily disarmed. 

Note: The Car Access System 3 sends a "locked" message via the K-CAN 
and the anti-theft alarm system is compulsorily disarmed. 


7 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 



No C rosswise Operation 

If crosswise operation is not implemented, an alarm is triggered when the anti-theft alarm 
system is disarmed. 

This applies to arming with the remote control and disarming via the lock barrel in the dri¬ 
ver's door. The footwell module detects that the driver's door has been unlocked with the 
lock cylinder and makes this information available via the K-C AN. 

The Car Access System 3 detects the unlock status by the driver's door lock cylinder, 
however, it does not unlock the vehicle. The anti-theft alarm system remains armed and 
triggers the alarm when the driver's door is opened. 

This function is coded in the Car Access System 3. 

Feedback from Anti-theft Alarm System 

When arming, the anti-theft alarm system provides feedback only when all doors, the 
hood and the trunk lid have been closed. This acknowledgement can be visual or audible. 
For example, the anti-theft alarm system LEDs orthe hazard warning lights are activated 
by way of visual acknowledgement.The emergency powersiren is activated by way of 
audible acknowledgement. 

Feedbackvia DWA LED 

The DWA LED serves as an indicator showing the status of the anti-theft alarm system. 
The roof functions center supplies the DWA LED with signals from the ultrasonic passen¬ 
ger compartment sensor. 


DWA status 

DWA LED 

Disarmed 

OFF 

Activated 

ON 

Armed but not all contacts closed 

Blinks for 10 s then continues flashing 

Ultrasonic passenger-compartment/tilt alarm sensorOFF 

Lights up for 2 s and then remains on 

Alarm triggered 

Flashes rapidly for 5 minutes and then remains on 

Disarming 

Goes off 

Disarming after alarm 

B links for 5 minutes or is interrupted when "remote con¬ 
trol inserted" 


Note: When blinking,the DWA LED is driven at a frequency of 0.5 Hz.The 
switch-on time is 60 ms.When the DWALED flashes, it is activated ata 
frequency of 2 Hz. 


8 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 




FeedbackVia Blinking Lights 

Visual feedback in response to arming and disarming via the blinking lights serves as an 
indicatorforthe vehicle user. The feedback is coded specifically to the country and/or 
vehicle. 


DWA status 

Signal of hazard warning lights 

Arming 

Hazard warning lights flash once 

Disarming 

Hazard warning lights flash twice 

Arming with doors open ortrunk lid open 

The hazard warning lights do notflash until the last door 
ortrunk lid has been locked 

Disarming after alarm 

Hazard warning lights flash four times at 
double frequency 


Feedback Via E mergency C urrent S iren 

Audible feedback during the arming and disarming procedure for the vehicle user is 
coded country-specific. 


DWA status 

Signal of emergency currentsiren 

Arming 

Signal tone sound once 

Disarming 

Signal tone sounds twice 

Arming with doors open ortrunk lid open 

No signal tone, sounds only after closing the 
last door ortrunk lid 


Comfort Access 

It is possible to place the ID transmitter in the luggage compartment when the vehicle is 
locked and the luggage compartment open. On closing the luggage compartment, the 
trunk lid is automatically opened again in orderto avoid locking the ID transmitter in the 
luggage compartment. In addition to automatically opening the trunk lid, the anti-theft 
alarm system outputs an audible warning.The warning comprises a triple double-tone of 
the emergency current siren. 


9 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 




Alarm Trigger 

The anti-theft alarm system can be triggered by the following components: 

• Door contacts 

• Trunk lid contact 

• Bonnet contact 

• Ultrasonic passenger-compartment protection 

• Emergency power siren with integrated tilt alarm sensor 

Door Contacts 

The status of the door contacts is evaluated by the footwell module and signalled to the 
ultrasonic passenger-compartment protection system. The status of the individual door 
contacts is included in the vehicle monitoring system 6 s afterthe status signal "door 
closed" is issued. This means that an alarm can be triggered via a doorthat is already 
closed even if another door contact is still open. 

Trunk Lid Contact 

The status of the boot lid contact is evaluated by the junction box control unit and sig¬ 
nalled to the ultrasonic passenger-compartment protection system. When the tailgate is 
closed, the junction box control unit receives a low signal (about 0 V). Initially, signals from 
the boot lid contact, ultrasonic passenger compartment sensor and tilt alarm sensor are 
hidden out when the boot lid is unlocked and the anti-theft alarm system is armed. The 
signals are also blanked out when the boot lid is unlocked with the remote control with 
the anti-theft alarm system armed. The boot lid contact is readopted into the vehicle 
monitoring system 6 s after closing the tail gate. The initialization procedure forthe ultra¬ 
sonic passenger-compartment sensor and tilt alarm sensor is started if another door or 
the boot lid is no longer open. 

Because ofthe manipulation prevention system, unlocking the luggage compartment 
with the aid ofthe mechanical key when the DWA is armed will cause an alarm to be trig¬ 
gered. 

Hood 

The status ofthe engine-bonnet contact is evaluated by the Car Access System 3 and 
signalled to the ultrasonic passenger compartment protection system. The status ofthe 
engine-bonnet contact is included in the vehicle monitoring system table 6 s afterthe 
status signal "bonnet closed" is issued. If not connected, the Car Access System 3 inter¬ 
prets the bonnet contact as closed. When the engine bonnet is closed, the Car Access 
System 3 receives a low signal (about 0 V). 


10 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 



Ultrasonic Passenger Compartment Protection 

The ultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor captures and evaluates movements in the 
vehicle interior. Initialization of the ultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor is started 
3 s after closing the engine bonnet, tailgate and the last door. 

The ultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor is operational 20 s afterthe start of initial¬ 
ization and is included in the vehicle monitoring system. The ultrasonic passenger com¬ 
partment sensor has been integrated into the roof function center. The roof function cen¬ 
ter is connected to the K-CAN and DWA bus. 



Ultrasonic Passenger Compartment Protection 



Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Front of roof function center 

4 

Ultrasonic sensor 

2 

Exit openings of ultrasonic sensors 

5 

Roof function center connector 

3 

Funnel for ultrasonic sensors 

6 

Rear of roof function center 


11 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 


























Tilt Alarm Sensor 

The tilt alarm sensor registers the vehicle rest position when it is armed and detects 
changes in the position, like jacking up the vehicle. The tilt alarm sensor is integrated in 
the emergency current siren. 

Initialization of the tilt alarm sensor is started 3 s after closing all doors and flaps. The tilt 
alarm sensor is operational 30 s after initialization and is included in the vehicle monitor¬ 
ing system. If the tilt alarm sensor detects vehicle movement, a corresponding signal is 
sent to the ultrasonic passenger-compartment protection system. The anti-theft alarm 
system decides whetherthe movement is sufficient to trigger an alarm. 

To ensure a false alarm is not triggered as the result of the vehicle rocking, the angle val¬ 
ues forthe longitudinal and transverse axis are determined every 90 ms. An alarm is trig¬ 
gered only if the vehicle remains in an inclined position for longerthan about 1.5 s. 

Self-monitoring of Emergency Current Siren 

A self-monitoring facility that is activated immediately afterthe anti-theft alarm system 
has been armed is implemented in the emergency current siren. The emergency current 
siren monitors its own power supply and detects overvoltage, low voltage and line break 
(open-circuit). 

If anyone attempts to manually interfere with the emergency power siren or its supply 
leads, the emergency power siren will trigger an alarm. At the same time, it reports this 
alarm to the ultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor regardless of whetherthe DWA 
bus has been affected. 

Line Monitoring - DWA Bus 

The ultrasonic passenger-compartment protection system and the emergency current 
siren are connected via the DWA bus. Immediately after arming the anti-theft alarm sys¬ 
tem, the DWA bus is monitored cyclically every 1.5 seconds. 

The anti-theft alarm system sends a line monitoring request on the DWA bus to the 
emergency current siren. The emergency power siren must respond within 100 ms. If no 
response is received, the anti-theft alarm system triggers an alarm. The line monitoring 
facility is also active while the alarm is triggered. 

The anti-theft alarm system in the roof function center measures the system voltage. The 
line monitoring facility is switched off at a system voltage below 9 V. This avoids false 
alarms. 


12 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 



Alarm Output 

If an alarm criterion is fulfilled with the anti-theft alarm system armed, the alarm is output 
(triggered) audibly and/or visually corresponding to the country-specific coding. 

Audible Alarm 

The emergency power siren receives a signal via 
the DWA bus when the ultrasonic passenger- 
compartment sensortriggers an alarm. It is 
installed in the front left wheel arch. The emer¬ 
gency current siren confirms receipt of the alarm 
request and triggers the audible alarm. 

If the alarm request is not confirmed, the anti¬ 
theft alarm system will repeat the alarm request 
up to eight times. 

Depending on the country-specific coding of the 
emergency current siren, an intermittent or inter¬ 
val tone is generated.The audible alarm is inter¬ 
rupted immediately and without feedback when 
the anti-theft alarm system is disarmed. 

Visual Alarm 

Depending on the country-specific version, the following components of the outer 
lighting system can be activated forthe visual alarm: 

• Direction indicator lights 

• Low beam headlight 

• High beam headlight. 

When the anti-theft alarm system triggers an audible alarm, a visual alarm is simultane¬ 
ously triggered for 5 minutes. The anti-theft alarm system sends the "flash" request via 
the K-CAN to the footwell module. In turn, the footwell module activates the components 
of the exterior lighting system. 

The visual alarm cannot be extended by repeated alarm triggering.The visible alarm is 
terminated immediately and without feedback when the anti-theft alarm system is dis¬ 
armed. 

Autarkic Alarm 

The emergency current cycle triggers the autarkic alarm if its lines are tampered with. If 
the DWA bus is also cut through, the ultrasonic passenger-compartment sensor detects 
this situation by the absence of the reply from the emergency current siren. In turn, the 
ultrasonic passenger-compartment protection system triggers the visual alarm. 



13 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 


Panic Mode 

Panic mode is an opportunity to attract attention by triggering an alarm, e.g. when under 
threat from the outside or in the event of an accident. 

Panic mode is initiated by pressing the boot lid button on the remote control/ID transmit¬ 
ter. The button must be pressed for longer than 2.5 s irrespective of whether the anti¬ 
theft alarm system is armed or not. 

The alarm is terminated by pressing any button on the remote control/ID transmitter. 
Panic mode is not stored. On completion of panic mode, the anti-theft alarm system 
assumes the setting that was selected priorto panic mode. 

Alarm Termination 

An alarm triggered fortest purposes or inadvertently can be terminated by disarming the 
anti-theft alarm system or by inserting the remote control/ID transmitter into its holder. 
The alarm is terminated immediately. No audible orvisual feedback is output. 

Note : Panic mode is at present only coded in US vehicles. 


Procedure 

Explanation 

Feedback 

Activate/deactivate feedback tone. 

Alarm tone 

Modulated tone 

Audible alarm duration 
(independent alarm) 

30 seconds 

Visual alarm 

Hazard warning lights: All country-specific versions 

High beam headlight 

Personalization pac ages 
taking into account the 
respective countries 

Anti-theft alarm system feedback, visual and audible tilt alarm sensor 
active/not active 

No anti-theft alarm function in distribution mode Partly disarmed anti¬ 
theft alarm function in hotel setting 

Others 

Extension of referencing time, tilt alarm sensor 

Termination of line monitoring at 9 V 


14 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 






Diagnosis 

All information is stored in the non-volatile alarm memory. 

Alarm Memory, Ultrasonic Passenger Compartment Protection 

The alarm memory of the ultrasonic passenger compartment protection system stores all 
alarms apart from the autarkic alarm. The alarm memory contains the following informa¬ 
tion: 

• Cause of alarm trigger 

• Subsequent alarm triggers 

• Date 

• Time 

• Ambient conditions 

- Outside temperature 

- Window position 

- Sunroof position 

- Heating 

An alarm history is formed from the beginning to the end of the alarm. The manner in 
which the alarm is ended is also defined. The alarm can be terminated by disarming it or 
by allowing it to run its course. The last 10 alarms are stored in the alarm memory. 

Alarm Memory, Emergency Current Siren 

The alarm memory in the emergency current siren stores only the data of the autarkic 
alarms. The last five autarkic alarms are stored. 


Note: Autarkic alarm is a function of the siren that protects it against being 
tampered with.Oncethe siren receives the "arm" signal from the DWA 
module (FZD), it then will constantly monitorthe DWA-Bus, Power, and 
Ground. If one of these is tampered with, such as disconnection, the 
siren automatically activates .This activation is not stored in the alarm 
memory when connected to the DISplus orGTl. It is completely indepen¬ 
dent of the DWA module.This is why it is called autarkic. It means inde¬ 
pendent or stand alone. 


15 

E70 Anti-theft Alarm System 



