Table of Contents 


E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module (ACSM) 


Subject Page 

Introduction .4 

Advanced Crash Safety M odule ACSM .4 

Schematic Circuit Diagram ACSM E70.6 

Functions.8 

Basic Tasks of ACSM .8 

Crash-Relevant Functions .8 

Evaluating the SensorSignals.9 

Detecting a Crash and Determining the Triggering Times 

and the Order.10 

Triggering the Output Stages of the Firing Circuits .10 

Outputting the Crash Telegram .11 

Crash Entries .11 

Emergency Call Functions.12 

Automatic Emergency Call .12 

Breakdown Call .12 

Manual Emergency Call.12 

Rollover Protection System .13 

Rollover Detection.13 

Functional Principle of the Yaw Rate Sensor.15 

Seat Position Detection .16 

System Monitoring Functions.16 

System Self-test (pre-drive check).16 

Cyclic M onitoring.17 

Indication of System Operability .17 

Fault Indication and Fault Storage .17 

Fault Output (diagnosis).17 

Seat Belt Reminder Function .17 

Deactivation of SBR Function.19 

Deactivation of Passenger Airbags.19 

Passenger Airbag OFF Light.19 

0C3 Mat .20 


Initial Print Date: 10/06 


Revision Date: 

































Subject Page 

System Components.22 

Crash Safety M odule .22 

Sensors and Switches .23 

B-Pillar Satellite.23 

Digital Data Transmission by Means of Current Interface.24 

Up-Front Sensors.24 

Door Pressure Sensors .24 

OC3 Mat .25 

Emergency Call Button .25 

Seat-Belt Buckle Switches.25 

Actuators.26 

Front Airbag, Driver.27 

Front Airbag, Passenger.27 

Curtain Airbag .28 

Side Airbag .29 

Front Seat Belt Pretensioner.29 

Adaptive Seat Belt Force Limiter.30 

Adaptive Seat Belt Force Limiter Positive Engagement.30 

Adaptive Seat Belt Force Limiter Non-Positive Engagement .31 

Safety Battery Terminal .31 

Service Information.32 

General Safety Regulations.32 

Crash Safety M odule .32 

B-pillarSatellite .32 



























Advanced Crash Safety Module 


Model: E70 

Production: From Start of Production 

IBIICT1UIS 

After completion of this module you will be able to: 

• Describe the different functions of the ACSM on the E70. 

• Identify the components that comprise the ACSM ontheE70. 

• Diagnose functions of the ACSM system on the E 70. 

• Service components on the ACSM system used on the E70. 


3 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 



Introduction 


Advanced Crash Safety Module ACSM 

The safety system ACSM is used in the E70.The task of ACSM is to detect accident 
situations critical forthe vehicle occupants and to activate the necessary restraint sys¬ 
tems selectively corresponding to the crash severity. 

The crash safety module performs internal diagnosis and monitors all inputs and out¬ 
puts. Any faults that may occur are stored nonvolatile in the 
crash safety module and indicated to the driver by way 
of the airbag indicator lamp in the instrument cluster. 

Communication with other control units in the 
vehicle's system network takes place via the K- 
CAN and the F-CAN. 

In the event of a crash, a K-bus telegram is trans¬ 
mitted (provided a telephone is installed) via an 
additional separate data line to the Telematics 
Control Unit (TCU) and the emergency call trig¬ 
gered (depending on national version). 

It is possible to encode the crash safety module via the K- 

CAN. Diagnosis of the crash safety module takes place via the diagnosis 

CAN to the gateway that is located in the J unction-box ECU on the E70. 



4 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 










F-CAN Signals atACSM Control Unit 


In/Out 

Signal 

Source 

Function 

IN 

Vehicle Speed 

Wheel Speed Sensors 

Dynamic Stability Control DSC 

Information for recognizing possible 
rollover situation 

IN 

YAW Rate 

Dynamic Stability Control DSC 

Information for recognizing possible 
rollover situation 

IN 

Steering angle 

Steering angle sensor 

Steering column switch cluster 

Information for recognizing possible 
rollover situation 


5 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 









Schematic Circuit Diagram ACSM E70 



6 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 





















































































































































































































Index 

Explanation 

1 

Up-front sensor, left 

2 

Head airbag, front passenger's side 

3 

Footwell module FRM 

4 

Instrument cluster 

5 

Car Access System (CAS) 

6 

J unction-box ECU 

7 

Switch for passenger airbag deactivation 

8 

Up-front sensor, right 

9 

Head airbag, driver's side 

10 

Door pressure sensor, right 

11 

F rant passenger airbag, 2-stage 

12 

Adaptive seat belt force limiter, right 

13 

ACSM ECU 

14 

Front passenger's seat 

15 

B - pillar satellite, right 

16 

Safety battery terminal 

17 

Main power connection to starter and alternator 

18 

Ground 

19 

Telephone 

20 

Seat belt pretensioner, left 

21 

Seat belt pretensioner, right 

22 

Side airbag, right 

23 

Side airbag, left 

24 

Anchor-fitting pretensioner 

25 

Seat occupancy detector 

26 

Power supply, seat occupancy detector 

27 

Seat occupancy detector (SBE for EU), front passenger 

28 

Seat occupancy detector (SBE forEU), driver 

29 

Seat belt buckle switch, driver 

30 

Seat belt buckle switch, front passenger 

31 

Ground point 

32 

Driver's seat 

33 

B-pillar satellite, left 

34 

Adaptive seat belt force limiter, left 

35 

Door pressure sensor, left 

36 

Driver's airbag, two-stage 

37 

Steering column switch cluster SZL 

38 

Indicator lamp for passenger airbag deactivation 

K-CAN 

Body CAN 

K-Bus 

Body Bus 

KL R 

Terminal R 


7 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 






















































































Functions 


Basic Tasks of ACS M 

The task of advanced crash safety module is to evaluate permanently all the sensor sig¬ 
nals in orderto identify a crash situation. As a result of the sensor signals and their evalu¬ 
ation, the crash safety module identifies the direction of the crash and the severity of the 
impact. 

Also included is information on the occupants and whetherthey have their seat belts 
fastened or not. From this information, measures are taken to selectively trigger the nec¬ 
essary restraint systems. The ACSM monitors itself at all times and indicates that the 
system is in standby mode by the airbag indicator lamp briefly going out after every "igni¬ 
tion ON" status. If a fault occurs during operation, it is indicated by the airbag indicator 
lamp and is additionally stored in the fault code memory. This fault code memory can be 
read out for diagnostic purposes. 

In the event of a crash, this is communicated to the other users in the bus-system net 
work by way of a bus telegram. The relevant control units respond to this telegram by 
executing their own activities. 

These activities include: 

• Opening the central-locking system 

• Activating the hazard warning flashers 

• Switching on the interior lights 

• Deactivating the fuel pump 

• Switching off the alternator 

• Automatic emergency call 

Anotherfunction of ACSM is the seat belt reminderfunction, which uses optical and 
acoustic signals to remind the driver and front passengerto fasten their seat belts. 

C rash- Relevant Functions 

The crash safety module mustfulfill the following crash-relevant functions: 

• Evaluating the sensor signals 

• Detecting a crash and determining the triggering times and the order 

• Triggering the output stages of the firing circuits 

• Output of a crash telegram for other users in the communication system network 


8 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 





Crash entries 
Emergency call functions 
Driver's seat position recognition 


Evaluating the SensorSignals 

The crash safety module incorporates a longitudinal acceleration sensor and a transverse 
acceleration sensor. The sensors serve to detect and verify front-end, side-on and rear- 
end crashes. 

The crash safety module additionally contains a sensorfor rollover detection. This func¬ 
tion has been adopted from the E64 and activates the curtain airbag and the seat belt 
pretensioners in the E70. 

Satellites are installed at the B-pillars. T he satellites each consist of a longitudinal acceler¬ 
ation sensor and a transverse acceleration sensor. 

Together with the transverse acceleration sensor in the crash safety module, the trans¬ 
verse acceleration sensors serve to detect side-on crashes. 

Together with the longitudinal acceleration sensor in the crash safety module, the longitu¬ 
dinal acceleration sensors serve to detect front-end and rear-end crashes. 


Sensors in the E70 









9 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 












The acceleration sensors measure the positive acceleration (+) and the negative acceler¬ 
ation (- / deceleration) in the X and Y directions. 

The resultant from the xand y signals is the definitive factor in determining the direction 
of the impact. 

Note: US vehicles have additional up-front sensors and door pressure sensors. 

Detecting a C rash and Determining theTriggering Times and the Order 

The crash safety module uses the values transmitted by the sensors to determine the 
direction and severity of the crash. 

The threshold values of two independent sensors must be detected simultaneously in 
orderto detect a crash. In the case of a front end crash, for example, the acceleration val¬ 
ues from the B-pillar satellite and from the longitudinal-acceleration sensor must be 
detected in the crash safety module. 

Based on the crash severity and direction, an algorithm determines the triggering (firing) 
points and the order of the restraint systems to be activated. 

Triggering the Output Stages of the Firing Circuits 

The firing-circuit output stages are only triggered if the corresponding thresholds are 
detected by two different sensors simultaneously, for example the B-pillar satellite and the 
crash safety module. 

From "Terminal RON" the crash safety module is supplied with power by the Car Access 
System CAS and is ready for operation on completion of the system selftest. The firing 
capacitors, which also serve as an energy reserve, are charged up by a switching con¬ 
troller. The firing capacitors provide the firing energy in the event of a crash even if the 
power supply is interrupted as the result of the crash. 

The output stages of the firing circuits consist of a high-side and a low-side power circuit 
breaker. The high-side power circuit-breaker controls the firing voltage, while the low-side 
power circuit-breaker switches to ground. The output stages of the firing circuits are con¬ 
trolled by the microprocessor. 

The high-side and low-side power circuit breakers also serve the purpose of checking the 
firing circuits during the system self-test. 


10 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 



Outputting the C rash Telegram 

In the event of a crash involving triggering of the restraint systems, the crash safety 
module sends a crash telegram to the users in the bus-system network. As a result, 
the respective control units perform the following functions corresponding to the crash 
severity: 


Function 

ECU 

S hut down electric fuel pump (as from 6-cylinder and 
diesel engines) 

Electric fuel pump (EKP) module 

Shutdown electric fuel pump on 4-cylinder engines 

DM E 

Switch off alternator 

DM E 

Open central locking 

J unction-box ECU 

Switch on hazard warning lights 

Footwell module 

Switch on interior lights 

Footwell module 

M ake emergency call 

Telematics control unit 


Crash Entries 

In the event of a crash where one or more actuators are triggered, a crash entry is stored 
in a non-erasable memory. After three crash entries, a non-erasable fault entry is stored in 
the fault memory with the instruction to replace the crash safety module. 

The three crash entries could also be stored during the course of an accident. Each 
crash entry is assigned a system time. The control unit remains capable of firing even 
afterthree crash entries. 

The crash entries cannot be erased and serve the purpose of subsequent device diagno¬ 
sis. A maximum of three crash entries can be stored. The control unit must then be 
replaced. 


11 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 




Emergency Call Functions 

A manual and an automatic emergency call is provided as standard on US vehicles. 
Furthermore, the driver has the option of activating a breakdown call. Irrespective of 
whetherthe customer orders a telephone or not, each vehicle is equipped with a telemat¬ 
ics control unitTCU, a telephone antenna, a hands-free kit as well as a GPS antenna for 
determining position. 

Automatic Emergency Call 

The crash safety module sends a crash telegram to theTCU in the event of a crash of 
corresponding crash severity. TheTCU places an emergency call, which at the same time 
contains the location of the vehicle. 

Parallel to this, attempts are made to set up a voice connection with the vehicle occu¬ 
pants to obtain more information on the accident (severity of the accident, number of 
injured) so that further rescue operations can be initiated. 

Breakdown Call 


The breakdown-call button in the E70 ora menu button in the central information display 
is used to establish a connection with the BMW Emergency Service in the relevant coun¬ 
try. 


Manual Emergency Call 


The emergency-call button is located 
in the roof console. The emergency- 
call button is connected directly to the 
TCU. Pressing the emergency-call 
buttons establishes a voice connec¬ 
tion with the relevant country provider. 
The voice connection is indicated by 
a flashing LED in the switch. 




Emergency call button in roof functions center E70 


12 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 




Rollover Protection System 

The rollover protection system is an important instrument for improving occupant protec¬ 
tion in the event of the vehicle rolling over. The seat belt pretensioners and the curtain 
airbags are triggered in response to corresponding crash severity. 

There are different factors which can cause a carto overturn or roll over. The most com¬ 
mon causes are: 

• The vehicle leaves the road. One side of the vehicle digs into a roadside ditch and 
the vehicle rolls over. 

• The car hits a ramp (a crash barrier) on one side. The car rotates about its longitudi¬ 
nal axis as a result of the high angular velocity. 

• The car skids sideways off the road surface and buries itself with its wheels in the 
soft soil. The kinetic energy could be sufficient to upend and overturn the car. 

• The car skids sideways off the road into the curb and is upended. 

The crucial factors which determine whetherthe car overturns are not just the angle but 
also the angular velocity at which the car is set into the roll. All these vehicle movements 
can also occur after a front-end, side-on or rear-end crash. 

Rollover Detection 

The module incorporates a special sensor system for detecting rollover situations. 
Besides the two sensors for longitudinal (x-axis) and transverse acceleration (y-axis), there 
is a yaw-rate sensor and a Low-g sensorforthe z-axis and for the y-axis. In addition to its 
own measured values, the crash safety module constantly receives information from the 
DSC relating to the current driving characteristics of the vehicle. This information serves 
to meet the demanding requirements relating to the triggering times. 

The longitudinal and transverse acceleration sensors registerthe positive and negative 
vehicle acceleration in a measuring range of O-lOOg. They serve to detect elevated accel¬ 
eration and deceleration in a crash. 

The two Low-g sensors have a narrow measuring range from 0-2g and can precisely 
detect low levels of acceleration and deceleration when, for example, the vehicle skids lat¬ 
erally off the road and buries itself with its wheels in the soft soil. 


13 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 



Crash Detection E70 





T 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

Crash safety module 

6 

Curtain airbag, front passenger 

2 

Rollover sensor 

7 

Dynamic stability control DSC 

3 

Low-g-sensors (z-/y-axis) 

8 

Seat belt pretensioner, driver 

4 

Longitudinal and transverse acceleration sensors 

9 

Curtain airbag, driver 

5 

Seat belt pretensioner, front passenger 

10 

Safety battery terminal 


The sensors provide a voltage as measured variable. This voltage is a measure forthe 
acceleration and is converted directly into digital signals in the sensor. The digital values 
are sent to the processor in the crash safety module for evaluation. The processor evalu¬ 
ates the signals from the longitudinal and transverse acceleration sensors and the two 
Low-g sensors. The signals of the yaw rate sensor are also included in the calculation. 
The results are compared with the stored algorithm. If the processor detects that a 
rollover situation is imminent, it will triggerthe seat belt pretensioners and the curtain 
airbags. 


14 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 































Functional Principle of the Yaw Rate Sensor 

A yaw rate sensor is used for detecting rollover situations. The yaw rate sensor has a 
comblike structure. It consists of a fixed comb structure (3) and a rotational oscillator (2) 
with amoving comb structure. Together, the comb structures form a capacitor. The rota¬ 
tional oscillator is fitted on bearings on a shaft (1) in its center. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Rotational axis 

2 

Rotational oscillator 

3 

Fixed comb structure 


When the vehicle is in a horizontal position, the rotational oscillator turns within the comb 
structure and detects the change of direction (left/right). If the vehicle is brought into a tilt¬ 
ing position (on a slope), the rotational oscillator is moved out of the comb structure.S 

This causes a change in capacity, which in turn creates a change in voltage proportional 
to the deflection of the rotational oscillator in the mV range, which is evaluated as the 
measured variable. 

The voltage change is directly related to the angle and, in the same way, the speed of the 
voltage change is directly related to the angle velocity.The angle and the angle velocity 
are the measurements used for the algorithm calculation. 

The voltage values are directly converted into digital values in the yaw rate sensor and 
sent to the main processorfor evaluation. 


15 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 









Seat Position Detection 

Adaptive or intelligent restraint systems are developed with the aim of optimizing the pro¬ 
tection offered by the restraint system under changing conditions. Besides the crash 
severity, the seated position and posture of the occupant are important factors in calculat¬ 
ing the triggering procedures. 

A seat position recognition facility is used on the driver's side in the E70 forthe purpose 
of distinguishing persons in terms of their body size. The task of the seat position recog¬ 
nition facility is to distinguish between a relatively small person and a normal sized person 
within the forward/backward adjustment range of the seat. This recognition function is a 
further technical feature designed to increase occupant safety. The characteristics of the 
adaptive seat belt force limiter is correspondingly adapted to the driver's seat position. 

In accordance with US legislation (FM VSS208) a facility for recognizing the size of per¬ 
sons must be provided on the driver's seat. This size recognition facility is based on the 
adjustment range of the forward/backward seat adjustment facility. On the E 70, the exact 
position is determined by the actuator motor in the driver's seat. 

A detailed description of the functional principle of the position detection system can be 
found in the Product Information "Seats" 


System Monitoring Functions 


The crash safety module must execute the following system monitoring functions: 


System self-test (pre-drive check) 
Cyclic monitoring 
Indication of system operability 
Fault indication and fault storage 
Fault output (diagnosis) 

Seat belt reminderfunction 


• Deactivation of passenger airbags 

System Self-test (pre-drive check) 

ACSM performs a system self-test as from 
"Terminal R ON". The airbag indicator lamp is 
activated for about. 5 s during the system self¬ 
test. 

When the system self-test is concluded and no 
fault has been found, the airbag indicator lamp 
goes out and the system is ready for operation. 



16 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 


TEW *4 794 




Cyclic Monitoring 

Once the system self-test has been successfully concluded and the system is ready for 
operation, a cyclic monitoring procedure is performed forfault monitoring purposes. 

Cyclic monitoring serves the purpose of internal diagnosis of the ECU and the overall 
airbag system. Cyclic monitoring is carried out for as long as the system is at 
"Terminal R ON". 

Indication of System Operability 

ACSM system operability is indicated by the airbag indicator lamp going out in the instru¬ 
ment cluster. 

Fault Indication and Fault Storage 

The crash safety module has a non-volatile fault memory. The airbag indicator lamp indi¬ 
cates any entry in the fault memory. 

A distinction is made between internal and external faults when entering the fault code. 
Events such as triggering of the airbag or seat belt pretensioner are also stored in the 
fault memory. 

Note: The entry of a triggered restraint system in the fault memory does not 
mean that the restraint system was defective in the crash situation, 
rather it only means that the restraint system is not available for further 
triggering. 

Fault Output (diagnosis) 

With the aid of the diagnostic tools (DIS plus, GT1), the fault memory can be read out 
via the diagnosis interface. After rectifying the faults or after replacing the triggered 
components, the fault memory can be cleared with the diagnosis command "Clearfault 
memory". 

Seat Belt Reminder Function 

All vehicles with ACSM have a Seat Belt Reminderfunction (SBR) as standard.The SBR 
function detects whetherthe driver and front passenger have fastened their seat belts. If 
not, a corresponding indicator reminds them to fasten their seat belt. Both seat belt buck¬ 
le switches are monitored separately. 

If the seat belt is not worn orthe seat belt is unbuckled while driving at a speed in excess 
of about. 8 km/h, a corresponding audible and visual warning is given. 


17 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 



The seat belt warning is given by: 

• Fixed seat belt indicator lamp (seat belt symbol) 

• Variable seat belt indicator lamp (Check Control message) 

• Audible warning provided by the gong 

• Check control text message on vehicles with central information display 

Note: If with terminal 15 the seat belt contact on the driver's side is not closed, 
an audible warning is triggered and the seat belt warning lamp activated 
for 6 seconds. 

The SBR function is subdivided into two phases. 

The first phase is the initialization, monitoring and warning begin with the vehicle station- 
ary.The gong is additionally activated intermittently for maximum 90 s or until the seat 
belt is fastened. At the same time, the check control indicator is activated with the vari¬ 
able indicator lamp with the seat belt 
warning symbol for max. 23 s. On vehi¬ 
cles with the central information dis¬ 
play, a text message "Fasten seat belt" 
is additionally displayed. 

If the driver/front passenger does not 
fasten their seat belt within this period 
of time, the variable indicator lamp and 
the text message will go out after 23 s 
and the gong will switch off after 90 s. 

The fixed seat belt indicator lamp in the 
instrument cluster remains on until the 
seat belt is fastened. 

The second phase involves monitoring while driving, i.e. the system monitors whetherthe 
occupants have their seat belts fastened during vehicle operation.If the front passenger 
seat is detected as occupied, the front passenger switch must also detect that the pas¬ 
senger seat belt is fastened so as not to trigger a warning. A visual and audible warning is 
triggered 15 s after unbuckling the seat belt while driving. The gong is activated intermit¬ 
tently for maximum 90 s or until the seat belt is fastened again. At the same time, the vari¬ 
able indicator lamp with the seat belt warning symbol is activated for max. 23 s.The fixed 
indicator lamp remains active until the seat belt is fastened again. On vehicles with the 
central information display, a text message "Fasten seat belt" is additionally displayed for 
maximum 23 s. 

Note: If a warning was given for more than 90 s, the SBR function is not activat¬ 
ed again until the seat belt has been fastened and unbuckled again. 



18 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 




Deactivation of SBR Function 


The SBR would constantly trigger an alarm customers who predominantly use the vehi¬ 
cle alone and transport objects on the front passenger's seat, like a briefcase, laptop etc. 

For such cases, the customer has the option of having the SBR function disabled in the 
workshop.The SBR function forthe front passengerside can be disabled with the coding 
option. In this case, only the audible warning, check control and text messages if applica¬ 
ble are suppressed. The seat belt mannikin in the instrument cluster remains on. 

Deactivation of Passenger Airbags 

The front and side passenger airbags must be disabled when a child seat is mounted on 
the passenger's side. 

Deactivation and activation of the front passenger airbags is the responsibility of the driver. 

Note: In US vehicles the law requires that a child seat tested to specifications 
(NHTSA FMVSS 208) with a child approximately one year old on the front 
passenger seat be automatically detected and the passengerairbags be 
deactivated. 

When a child restraint system holding a small child tested in accordance with NHTSA 
FMVSS 208 is used, the law in the USA requires that this be automatically detected and 
the front passengerairbags deactivated. In order to meet legislative requirements, the 
step was taken to replace the seat-occupancy detector (SBE) with an intelligent 
Occupant Classification (0C)facility. 

Passenger Airbag OFF Light 

The passenger airbag OFF lamp is located at 
the front of the roof functions center FZD next 
to the interior lights. The passenger airbag OFF 
lamp is activated and lights yellow when the 
passenger's front airbag and the side airbag on 
the passenger's side are deactivated. The 
brightness of this light is controlled by auto¬ 
matic regulation of the display lighting. 



19 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 



0C3 Mat 


The 0C3 mat (Occupant Classification) detects a child seat tested in accordance with 
NHTSA on the basis of the pressure per unit area and disables the passenger airbag. 


The OC3 mat consists of conductors in a pressure-sensitive resistance grid, so-called 
FSR elements (Force Sensitive Resistance).The conductors are connected to the elec¬ 
tronic evaluation unit. 


The FSR elements are wired in such a way 
that they can be sampled individually. When 
The mechanical load on a sensor element 
increases electrical resistance decreases 
and the measurement current changes 
accordingly. 




By analyzing the signals from the individual 
sensors, the analyzer can map the occupan¬ 
cy of the seat surface and identify local con¬ 
centrations of weight. The relationship 
between the areas and the load points indi¬ 
cates whetherthere is a person ora child 
seat holding a small child present. 




OC3 MatE70 


Index 

Explanation 

A 

Surface imprint of a person 

B 

Surface imprint of a child seat 



20 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 





















Block diagram of an 0C3 mat E 70 



U 




® 3 


Index 

Explanation 

Index 

Explanation 

1 

FSR elements 

3 

Electronic evaluation unit 

2 

Output monitoring 

4 

Input monitoring 


The electronic evaluation unit of the 0C3 mat sends a telegram via a separate K-bus to 
the crash safety module. The front passenger airbags (front and side airbags) are disabled 
when a child seat with small child is detected. The crash safety module activates the pas¬ 
senger airbag OFF indicator lamp in the roof functions center. 


Note: The front passenger airbags are not deployed when the front seat is not 
occupied. However, this is not indicated by the Passenger Airbag OFF 
light. 


21 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 
























































System Components 

Crash Safety Module 

The advanced crash safety module essentially comprises the following components: 

• Crash safety module 

• Sensors and switches 

• Actuators 

The crash safety module is located centrally on the transmission tunnel in the vehicle. 
The crash safety module consists of a die cast housing with integrated plug cover. 
The crash safety module contains various sensors: 

• Rollover sensor 

• Low-g sensors 

• Longitudinal and transverse acceleration sensors 



The advanced crash safety module has a comprehensive sensor system. Transverse 
acceleration sensors in the B-pillarand door pressure sensors are used forthe purpose 
of side-on crash detection. The B-pillar satellites also have longitudinal acceleration sen¬ 
sors for front- and rear-end crash detection. 

Note: The crash safety module is located on the transmission tunnel behind 
the hand brake. Various sensors (rollover, Low-g as well as longitudinal 
and transverse acceleration sensors) are integrated in the crash safety 
module and the crash safety module is integrated in the K-C AN. 


22 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 





Sensors and Switches 


In addition to the two sensors in the crash safety module, the system makes further use 
of the following sensors and switches to evaluate the crash severity and the correspond¬ 
ing triggering strategy: 

• B-pillar satellites 

• Up-front sensor 

• Door pressure sensor 

• OC3 Mat 

• Seat belt buckle switches 

• Airbag switch 

• Emergency call button 


The acceleration sensors measure the positive 
acceleration and the negative acceleration 
(deceleration) in the X and Y directions.The 
resultant from the X and Y signals is the defini¬ 
tive factor in determining the direction of the 
impact. 

The B-pillar satellites serve the purpose of 
detecting front-end, side-on and rear-end 
crashes. 

The B-pillar satellites on the left and right are 
of identical design and are allocated by way of 
mechanical coding during installation. 



B-Pillar Satellite 

The B-pillar satellite consists of a longitudinal acceleration sensor and a transverse accel¬ 
eration sensor. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Mounting points 

2 

Mechanical coding 

3 

Connection for cable plug 


Note: Externally, the B-pillar satellites are identical to those on other BMW 
models. It is important to make sure the part number is correct. The 
airbag indicator lamp will come on if the incorrect satellites are 
installed. 


23 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 









Digital Data Transmission by Means of Current Interface 

The recorded acceleration values ofthe micromechanical acceleration sensors are con¬ 
verted in an ASIC (Application Specific Integrated Circuit) into digital signals. With the aid 
of a data telegram, the digital signals are transmitted uni-directionally to the crash safety 
module. 

The signals are transmitted via a current interface, which supplies the electronic circuitry 
with voltage. 

The electronic circuitry receives a voltage level of about. 5-10 mA via the current inter¬ 
face. The level rises at a step of 20 mA when a data telegram is transmitted so that only 
two lines per measurement channel are required. 

The transmitted data are evaluated in the crash safety module. 

Up-Front Sensors 

The up-front sensors in the front end on the 
left and right sides serve to detect a front-end 
crash.They deliverthe initial information on 
the progress and severity ofthe collision to 
the crash safety module. 

Each up-front sensor consists of an accelera¬ 
tion sensorfor recording the 
deceleration/acceleration, a signal conditioner 
and an ASIC for data transmission. 

The measured values are sent in the form of a 
data telegram to the crash safety module and 
are used in the calculation ofthe algorithm. 

The data are transmitted in the same way as 
the B-pillar satellites. 

Door Pressure Sensors 

The door pressure sensors in the front doors 
serve the purpose of verifying the plausibility 
ofthe acceleration signals from the B-pillar 
satellites and the crash safety module during 
side-on crash detection. The door pressure 
sensors are situated in the inner panels ofthe 
frontdoors and measure the increase in pres¬ 
sure within the door in the event of a side-on 
impact. 




24 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 





In the event of a side-on impact with the door, the outer door panel is pressed inward, 
thus reducing the inner doorspace and increasing the pressure.This change in pressure 
is measured by the door pressure sensors. 

The door pressure sensor also includes an electronic module, which digitizes the pres¬ 
sure values and transmits them cyclically to the crash safety module. The data are trans¬ 
mitted in the same way as the B-pillar satellites. 

The pressure values are evaluated in the crash safety module. 


OC3 Mat 

US legislation stipulates that the use of a 
child restraint system conforming to NHTSA 
and holding a small child on the front passen¬ 
ger's seat must be detected automatically 
and the front passenger airbag disabled. 

The OC3 mat can detect an occupied child 
seat tested in accordance with the regulation 
(NHTSA FM VSS 208) on the basis ofthe 
pressure per unit area and disable the pas¬ 
senger airbag (front and side airbag). The 
passenger airbag OFF light comes on when a 
child restraint system tested in accordance 
with NHTSA and holding a small child was 
detected on the front passenger's seat. 

Emergency Call Button 

The emergency-call button is fitted as stan¬ 
dard in US vehicles, even if no telephone has 
been ordered. 

S eat- B elt B uc kle S witc hes 

The seat-belt buckle switches signal whether 
the seat belts are fastened or not. These 
switches transmit signals to the crash safety 
module and are used fortriggering the 
required restraint systems and forthe seat 
belt reminderfunction. 




The seat belt buckle switch is located in the seat belt buckles ofthe driver's and front 
passenger's seat. The seat-belt buckle switch is designed as a two-wire Hall-effect 
switch.The crash safety module powers the Hall switch via a current interface. The cur¬ 
rent intake ofthe switch varies depending on whetherthe seat belt is fastened or not. 
The seat belt buckle switch is permanently monitored as from "Terminal RON". 


25 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 















Actuators 

The crash safety module is responsible for activating the following actuators: 

• Front airbag, 2-stage, driver's side 

• Front airbag, 2-stage, passengerside 

• Head airbag, left and right 

• Left and right side airbag integrated in the back rest of both front seats 

• Seat belt pretensioner, front, left and right 

• Adaptive seat belt force limiter, left and right 

• Safety battery terminal 

The following warning lamps are additionally activated: 

• Airbag indictor lamp 

• Seat belt indicator lamp 

• Passenger airbag OFF light 



26 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 


Front Airbag, Driver 

In conjunction with the seat belt, the driver's front airbag is designed to reduce the risk of 
serious injury to the driver's head orthorax during a head-on collision. The front airbag for 
the driver's side is located in the hub cushion of the steering wheel. The driverfront 
airbag is equipped with a 2-stage inflator assembly. 

The two stages of the airbag are triggered with a time delay depending on the crash 
severity and use of seat belt. The two stages of the inflator assembly facilitate a restraint 
function adapted to the crash severity and consequently reduce additional stress on the 
occupants during the development phase. 





Index 

Explanation 

1 

Connection of firing pellet, first stage 

2 

Connection offiring pellet, second stage 


Front Airbag, Passenger 

Together with the seat belt, the task of the front airbag on the passenger's side is to 
reduce the risk of serious injury to the front passenger during a frontal crash. The 2-stage 
front airbag on the passenger's side is located underthe instrument panel. 

Deployment of the front passenger airbag breaks the instrument panel at defined points 
and opens a flap, which is connected to the instrument panel by means of a fabric strap. 
The passenger airbag opens in the direction of the windshield. The passenger airbag 
emerges in an upward direction and is supported on the windshield and on the instru¬ 
ment panel. 


27 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 









Curtain Airbag 

The well-proven curtain airbag is used as the head protection system in connection with 
the ACSM on the E70. 

The curtain airbag extends from the A-pillarup to the C-pillarand covers the entire side 
section at head level. The curtain airbag inflates between the occupants and side win¬ 
dows or side trim panels. 



In connection with the side airbag in the front seat, it provides optimum protection forthe 
occupants in the event of side impact. 

The curtain airbag reduces the movement of the head and other extremities towards the 
outside during a side crash. This results in lower neck shearforces as well as bending 
moments in the cervical vertebrae. In addition, it also prevents direct head contact with 
the side structure ofthe obstacle. 

The inflator assembly (gas generator) mounted between the B-pillarand C-pillaris trig¬ 
gered in the event of a side crash. The gas flows out ofthe pressure vessel through the 
two gas lances into the curtain airbag. 

Simultaneously filling the curtain airbag at the front and rear ensures the air cushion is 
filled uniformly. 

The head airbag is brought into position because ofthe way the curtain airbag is mount¬ 
ed on the A-pillar and the C-pillar. The curtain airbag extends between the side window 
and side trim panel and the occupants. 

The closed system retains the structural strength and stability ofthe curtain airbag for 
several seconds 


28 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 







Side Airbag 

For many years now, the side airbag has been used at BMW as an important integral part 
in occupants safety and protection systems. The task of the side airbags is to minimize 
the risk of injury to the driver/front passenger in the trunk/torso area in the event of a side 
impact. 

The side airbags mounted in the back rest of the front seats with the aim of achieving 
optimum interiorfunctionality and appealing design in the E70 while also satisfying the 
demanding safety requirements. The task of the side airbags is to minimize the risk of 
injury to the driver/front passenger in the pelvic and trunk/torso area in the event of a side 
impact. 

The side airbag is triggered in response to a 
sufficiently strong pulse from the side. The 
side airbag emerges through the tear seam in 
the backrest and inflates between the door 
and occupant. The air cushion between the 
door and occupant provides controlled damp¬ 
ing and therefore reduces load/strain on the 
occupant. 

Front Seat Belt Pretensioner 



The task of the pyrotechnic seat belt pretensioner is to minimize the seat belt slack in the 
pelvis and shoulder areas in the event of a crash, thus also preventing "submarining", i.e. 
slipping under a slack seat belt. 

The seat belt pretensioners are located on the driver's, front passenger's and left and 
right rear seats. The seat belt pretensioners are fired in the event of a front- or rear-end 
crash. In the E70 they are also activated in the event of an imminent rollover. 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Before triggering 

2 

After triggering 



29 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 






Adaptive Seat Belt Force Limiter 


The pyrotechnic seat belt force limiterforthe driver and front passenger is designed as 
seat belt retractor with adaptive force limitation. The force is changed overfrom a high 
level to a lower level with the aid of a gas generator. This must also be possible during a 
crash in orderto achieve gradual force reduction. 


The kinetic energy of the occupant is 
uniformly reduced overthe duration of 
the crash thanks to optimum matching 
with the airbag, thus achieving lower 
occupant stress values. Adaptive force 
limitation is achieved in that a second 
torsion shaft can be optionally coupled 
or de-coupled by the main torsion shaft, 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Second torsion shaft 

2 

Gearwheel on second torsion shaft 

3 

Pyrotechnic actuator 

4 

Gearwheel on first torsion shaft 

5 

Seat belt reel 




When the two gear wheels are positively 
engaged, the two torsion shafts rotate as 
the result of the force applied by the belt. 
The torque of the two torsion shafts 
counteracts the belt force. 


Adaptive Seat Belt Force Limiter Positive 

The belt force is transmitted through the 
seat belt webbing to the belt reel. 


Engagement 


Index 

Explanation 

1 

Second torsion shaft 

2 

First torsion shaft 

3 

Seat belt reel 


30 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 



















Adaptive Seat Belt Force Limiter Non-Positive Engagement 

When the pyrotechnic actuator is triggered, 
the second torsion shaft shifts upward thus 
disengaging from the first gearwheel. Only 
the first torsion shaft is now subjected to 
the torque of the belt and therefore turns at 
a greater rate. 



Index 

Explanation 

1 

Second torsion shaft 

2 

First torsion shaft 

3 

Seat belt reel 



Safety Battery Terminal 

The safety battery terminal is triggered at different thresh olds when the crash safety 
module detects a front-end, side-on or rear end crash of sufficient severity. The connec¬ 
tion between battery and starter/ alternator cable is then separated by pyrotechnical 
teams. At the same time, the alternator is switched off by means of a crash telegram sent 
to the DM E. The safety battery terminal is located directly at the positive terminal of the 
battery. 


31 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 









Service Information 


General Safety Regulations 

The safety information provided in the repair instructions must be complied with 
whether working on the safety system, particularly on the airbag units and the seat belt 
pretensioners. This requirement applies particularly to disassembly and assembly jobs. 

• Only qualified and specially trained personnel are permitted to perform testing and 
assembly jobs on the safety systems. 

• All work on components of the airbag system must be carried out with the negative 
terminal disconnected. 

• The specified waiting time must be allowed to elapse to discharge the capacitors 
(>30 s) 

• The battery must be completely disconnected when performing electric welding 
work on the vehicle. 

Crash Safety Module 

Crash entries 

In the event of a crash where one or more actuators are triggered, a crash entry is stored 
in a non-erasable memory. Afterthree crash entries, a non-erasable fault entry is stored 
in the fault memory with the instruction to replace the crash safety module. 

Fault entries 

The entry of a triggered restraint system in the fault memory does not mean that the 
restraint system was defective in the crash situation, rather it only means that the 
restraint system is not available for further triggering. 

B - pillar S atellite 

Visually, the B-pillar satellites look like those on other BMW models. However,they trans¬ 
mit different data protocols. It is important to make sure the part number is correct. The 
airbag indicator lamp will come on if the incorrect satellites are installed. 


32 

E70 Advanced Crash Safety Module 




